Public procurement rules exist to ensure best value for the customer (the public) and fair competition for the suppliers, thus creating a healthy market. Breaching those rules to award contracts to cronies, as now officially documented (PPE suppliers with political ties given ‘high-priority’ status, report reveals, 18 November), has at least three adverse effects: first, inadequate or unsuitable products may be purchased; second, public money may be wasted; and third, the market will be discouraged. I note that the government’s initial attempt to block challenge was to claim that the Good Law Project had no “standing” – legal jargon for “none of your business”. But it is indeed the public’s business – faulty procurement wastes our money and may leave NHS staff less well protected, and it damages competition if the market is fixed or appears to be fixed. If the government had provided some argument that the procurements were fair then at least that could have been assessed, but instead it chose to hide the process behind a legal manoeuvre, which I am pleased to see has failed. No wonder the government wishes to cripple the judicial review process.Mike CashmanMilton Keynes, Buckinghamshire • The government’s main defence of its decision to award lucrative contracts in order to source protective equipment at great expense to the taxpayer and profit to its chums, is deceitful and disingenuous. It repeats the word “unprecedented” ad nauseam but the reality is that pandemics occur at least once a century, and this one was predicted as the greatest threat to the health and wealth of the UK as long ago as 2002. Plans were drawn up for a possible influenza pandemic in 2011 and the Cygnus exercise, testing the UK’s pandemic preparedness, occurred in 2016. While the government refuses to publish the Cygnus report, we doctors know that it highlighted a lack of readiness, especially in terms of PPE, ventilators and hospital beds. Not only did the government fail to address these issues, it allowed stocks to dwindle even further between 2016 and 2020, and made inadequate contingency plans for their procurement in the event of a pandemic. The excuse that the emergency nature of the pandemic meant that normal processes couldn’t be followed is simply not credible. There was plenty of warning and time to prepare but they chose not to.Dr Austin ConnorSouthcott, Devon