Ethiopian troops will launch a “final and conclusive” offensive against rebels in the northern region of Tigray before the end of the week, the country’s prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, has said, as fears grow of a major humanitarian crisis. In a series of social media posts on Tuesday, Abiy said that a three-day deadline for rebel troops to surrender had expired, paving the way for a final push on Mekelle, Tigray’s capital. Abiy is under increasing pressure from African countries and international powers to end the two-week conflict, amid concerns that the war will destabilise Ethiopia and the fragile Horn of Africa region. Since he launched military operations in Tigray 13 days ago, hundreds of people have been killed and tens of thousands displaced. As many as 27,000 refugees have arrived in Sudan, with 4,000 more crossing from Ethiopia every day. “This is the largest influx into east Sudan in 20 years. It is very, very sudden. This is a full-scale humanitarian crisis that has unfolded in two weeks,” said Dana Hughes, spokesperson of the United Nations refugee agency in Nairobi. “They are arriving exhausted, scared. They had to flee very quickly, often with just the clothes on their backs. They heard the fighting and just had to go.” The UN is also worried by reports of thousands on the move within Tigray as populations attempt to escape clashes across much of the region. “We are getting reports of large numbers of displaced people. But there is a communications blackout, a lack of fuel and cash … It is a very difficult situation,” Hughes said. At the weekend, Tigrayan forces fired missiles into the neighbouring country of Eritrea in an apparent attempt to internationalise the conflict and force outside intervention to bring it to an end. The UN, the African Union and others have called for talks, but Abiy has resisted, saying the war in Tigray was irreversible and aimed at “enforcing the rule of law”. The Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) topples Colonel Mengistu Haile Mariam, the head of a communist junta that ruled the country from 1974. The coalition group is led by the Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF), guerrilla fighters who marched from their homeland in Ethiopia's north to the capital, Addis Ababa. The EPRDF sweeps to power in poorly contested elections, and the TPLF leader, Meles Zenawi, becomes Ethiopia's prime minister. Tigrayans dominate senior ranks of government. Meles introduces a system that gives the country's main ethnic groups the chance to govern the areas in which they dominate. Though Tigrayans make up about 5% of the population, they benefit disproportionately, other regions complain, as roads and other infrastructure are built in their sparsely populated area. The prime minister dies in office and a successor from another ethnic group is appointed. Divisions break out in the EPRDF over how quickly to pursue political reforms in response to street protests that threaten the coalition's grip. Abiy Ahmed, an Oromo, takes over as prime minister, winning praise at home and abroad for opening up one of Africa's most restrictive political and economic systems. Tigrayans complain they are being persecuted in a crackdown on corruption and past abuses. Former senior military and political officials are put on trial. Abiy is awarded the Nobel peace prize for his peacemaking efforts, which ended two decades of hostility with Eritrea. The TPLF continue to view Eritrea as an enemy. Ethiopia's ruling coalition agrees to form a single party, but the TPLF refuses to merge with three other ethnic-based parties, calling the move rushed and undemocratic. Tigray holds regional elections in defiance of the federal government, which postponed nationwide polls due in August because of Covid-19. Abiy's government says the vote is illegal. The federal government starts to withhold some funds meant for social welfare programmes in Tigray, part of a plan to starve the regional authorities of cash in retaliation for the vote. Abiy sends troops into Tigray, accusing the TPLF of attacking federal troops based in the region. The TPLF accuses Abiy of punishing the region for the September vote. Reuters Diplomats in Addis Ababa say Abiy is determined to oust the leaders of the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPFL), the ruling party in Tigray, and impose a new government before ending the conflict. But military experts believe there is a significant risk that Ethiopian national troops could be drawn into a long and brutal guerrilla war against battle-hardened Tigrayans who are fighting in their mountainous homeland. Ethiopian troops are believed to have taken control of the town of Alamata, six miles into Tigray from Amhara, the neighbouring province that is loyal to the central government and a launchpad for the offensive. Mekelle, the Tigrayan capital, is 110 miles further north through rugged terrain. Tigrayan officials said that fighting was continuing around the town on Tuesday. Witnesses who have recently left Tigray said much of the fighting was taking place in the west of the region, with fierce clashes around the towns of Dansha and Humera, where a garrison of national forces is thought to be under siege by local troops. Observers have been worried by the readiness of Abiy, who won the Nobel peace prize last year, to risk a lengthy civil war against well-armed forces in the region. Though only seven million people live in Tigray out of a total Ethiopian population of 110 million, much of the government troops’ equipment is kept in the province and Tigrayan forces could dig in as the military advanced into the more mountainous terrain towards Mekelle. “I would guess as the Ethiopian army enter the highlands, heavier fighting is likely to start,” Matt Bryden, the founder of Sahan, a Nairobi-based regional thinktank, told Reuters. With communications mostly down and media barred, it is not possible to independently verify assertions made by any side. The exact position of individual military units is also unclear. Tigrayan leaders had accused the government of targeting a sugar factory and a dam. Abiy launched military operations after he accused local authorities of attacking a military camp and attempting to loot military assets. The TPLF denies the charge and has accused the prime minister of concocting the story to justify the offensive. Debretsion Gebremichael, the leader of the TPLF, has called on the UN and African Union to condemn the offensive, accusing federal troops of “waging this war on the people of Tigray” with attacks on civilian infrastructure. “We are not the initiators of this conflict and it is evident that Abiy Ahmed conducted this war as an attempt to consolidate his personal power,” he added. On Tuesday, the Nobel committee said in a statement that it is “deeply concerned” about the situation in Ethiopia, and it called for all parties involved to “end the escalating violence”. Abiy was appointed leader of the ruling coalition of Ethiopia and so prime minister in 2018. Though his sweeping reforms won widespread praise, they have allowed old ethnic and other grievances to surface. The TPLF dominated Ethiopia’s governing coalition for decades before Abiy came to power, and Tigrayan leaders complained of being unfairly targeted in corruption prosecutions, removed from top positions and blamed for the country’s problems. The postponement of national elections owing to the Covid-19 pandemic aggravated tensions and when parliamentarians in Addis Ababa voted to extend officials’ mandates, Tigrayan leaders went ahead with regional elections in September that Abiy’s government deemed illegal.