Elliot Daly 7/10 Had plenty of ball and slipped the leash just before half-time to mark his return with a try. When he doesn’t play England miss his ability to join the line. Jonathan Joseph 7 Showed a willingness to come off his wing, as instructed, and made a couple of arcing breaks – the second teeing up Daly. A shame he was injured. Ollie Lawrence 6 Solid defensively and did the basics well, but little opportunity to show his attacking talents. Will hope for another chance to do so in the coming weeks. Henry Slade 6 Soft hands for Daly’s try but jury remains out on his partnership with Farrell. Scrum-fests are not for him, but still looks more suited to outside-centre. Jonny May 6 Looked for work, if not as much as Joseph, but things didn’t quite go his way. One rogue cross-field kick wasted possession, but kept going till the end. Owen Farrell (capt) 6 Too many early kicks from hand – maybe George Ford’s would have brought a bit more – but the captain ensured his side stuck to the task. Ben Youngs 6 Clever early kick turned the screw. Not quite as sharp as against Italy, but no complaints. Wants to keep going to 2023 and will take some shifting. Ellis Genge 6 Some strong carries and nothing wrong with his set‑piece showing. Loosehead has arguably become England’s strongest position in terms of depth. Jamie George 8 A highly professional showing from one of England’s most consistent performers. A hat-trick from driving mauls and ever reliable at the lineout. Will Stuart 6 Conceded a scrum penalty but can be pleased with his first start against a pack with such a ferocious reputation. Seems comfortable as part of the squad. Charlie Ewels 7 Quietly effective, running a tight ship at the lineout and making his presence felt in numerous driving mauls. Clearly plays a leadership role in the squad. Joe Launchbury 8 Plenty of grunt, as you would expect, continuing his impressive club form on the international stage. He has some engine, coming up with a turnover late on. Maro Itoje 7 A different number but a classic Itoje display. A pest throughout, celebrating every decision, disrupting lineouts and making a mess of Georgia’s attacks. Jack Willis 7 Marked debut with first-half try and trademark turnover. Will always make a couple of mistakes given the way he plays, but a natural at this level. Billy Vunipola 7 Went the distance again and built on his performance against Italy, making considerable headway on the gain line. So important to how this side operate. REPLACEMENTSTom Dunn (for George 65) Got stuck in 6; Mako Vunipola (for Genge 48) 6; Kyle Sinckler (for Stuart 48) Enjoyed the scrummaging challenge 6; Ben Earl (for Willis 47) Bundle of energy 7; Tom Curry (for Ewels 65) 6; Dan Robson (for Youngs 62) Alert to score try 7; Max Malins (for Lawrence 62) First cap, plenty will follow 6; Joe Marchant (for Joseph 38) Solid outing on the wing 6 Lasha Khmaladze 5; Akaki Tabutsadze 6, Giorgi Kveseladze 6, Merab Sharikadze (capt) 6, Sandro Svanidze 5 (Alexander Todua 79); Tedo Abzhandadze 5, Gela Aprasidze 7 (Vasil Lobzhanidze 66); Mikheil Nariashvili 6 (Guram Gogichashvili 47), Shalva Mamukashvili 7 (Jaba Bregvadze 47), Beka Gigashvili 5 (Lekso Kaulashvili 60), Lasha Jaiani 6, Grigor Kerdikoshvili 5 (Giorgi Javakhia 65), Beka Saginadze 6, Giorgi Tkhilaishvili 5 (Tornike Jalagonia 73), Beka Gorgadze 7 (Otar Giorgadze 60)