Donald Trump’s bid to hang on to the White House is promising to end in farce if his campaign’s choice of venue for a crucial press conference is anything to go by. On Saturday morning, as Trump played golf and continued to baselessly accuse the Democrats of stealing the election for Joe Biden, he announced, in a Tweet since deleted, that there would be a “Big press conference” at the Four Seasons in Philadelphia. That was quickly clarified, however. It was not the noted hotel, but Four Seasons Total Landscaping, a suburban business situated between a crematorium and an adult book store on the outskirts of the city. Big press conference today in Philadelphia at Four Seasons Total Landscaping — 11:30am! To clarify, President Trump’s press conference will NOT be held at Four Seasons Hotel Philadelphia. It will be held at Four Seasons Total Landscaping— no relation with the hotel. The Trump campaign has not publicly said whether this was, as it would first appear, a case of mistaken identity. But either way, the press conference, headlined by Trump lawyer Rudy Giuliani, went ahead in the car park of the garden centre. Not unexpectedly, social media embraced this turn of events. Some say the world will end in fire/Others say at Four Seasons Total Landscaping north of the Tacony-Palmyra bridge, near the porn shop The real hero today is whoever answered the phone at Four Seasons Landscaping and offered no clarification whatsoever until it was too late, I salute you, my fellow patriot. I work at Four Seasons Total Landscaping in PA pic.twitter.com/cX6bIMkag8 Many compared the bizarre occasion to something from a political satire such as Thick Of It or Veep. The Trump campaign accidentally booking a press conference at something called Four Seasons Total Landscaping in Philadelphia instead of the Four Seasons hotel they intended is such a perfectly dysfunctional way for this to end. The writers really outdid themselves. pic.twitter.com/ReBGskwOSq I could write jokes for 800 years and I'd never think of something funnier than Trump booking the Four Seasons for his big presser, and it turning out to be the Four Seasons Total Landscaping parking lot between a dildo store and a crematorium. pic.twitter.com/P45HV1daD9 I will watch an 11-part Ken Burns documentary on the Four Seasons Landscaping story. The press conference was also notable for Giuliani, who was describing the forthcoming legal challenges to the result, being told by a reporter that Joe Biden had just been declared the winner of the election. His response: “Don’t be ridiculous.”