Toronto Wolfpack have failed in their bid to be readmitted to Super League in 2021, after clubs overwhelmingly rejected their proposal to return to the top-flight next season. After withdrawing from their debut season in Super League midway through this year due to financial difficulties, the Wolfpack laid out their case to be reinstated next year to clubs at a meeting on Monday. However, eight of the 13 votes, which consisted of the 11 remaining top-flight clubs, the Rugby Football League and Super League, went against Toronto’s proposal. Leeds Rhinos, Catalans Dragons and St Helens were the clubs who voted in favour of the Wolfpack rejoining Super League, while the RFL also used their vote to lend their support. The remaining votes, including Super League themselves, were against, with the exception of Warrington Wolves, who abstained from voting. “Every opportunity has been given to Toronto Wolfpack to provide the assurances our clubs need,” Robert Elstone, the Super League chairman, said. “As part of our comprehensive investigation into this whole subject, Super League appointed an independent committee of sports industry experts, with representation from the RFL, to examine commercial opportunities for rugby league in Canada. “Its findings were unanimous: that operating a team in a fiercely competitive North American sports market was non-strategic and added no material incremental revenue to Super League in the short or medium term.” The Guardian understands that the new ownership’s failure to provide proof of funding at the meeting was a major factor in why the decision went against Toronto, with clubs concerned about the lack of financial clarity. Toronto must now consider whether to apply to rejoin the sport in the lower leagues, which are governed by the RFL, who remain supportive of the Wolfpack project. However, their prospective new owner, Carlo LiVolsi, had warned clubs in recent weeks that if they were not accepted into Super League, he would be hesitant about accepting a demotion. As for Super League, they now have two issues to sort in the days ahead. The most pressing is whether to decide on the way this season is concluded, with a proposal to end the regular season immediately and introduce an extended play-off system on the table. The Guardian understands the chances of that happening are unlikely, but it will be decided on Tuesday: as will the issue of whether Toronto are replaced in Super League in 2021, or whether the competition continues with 11 teams.