Like most things, this annual charity staple won’t feel quite as we know it this year. But the show must go on – and the pandemic means that, sadly, the need has rarely been greater. Mel Giedroyc, Stephen Mangan, Chris Ramsey and the fast-rising Alex Scott co-host: look out for Strictly, EastEnders, University Challenge and Doctor Who-related attractions plus the culmination of a lengthy rickshaw challenge. But will all-year-round children in need ambassador Marcus Rashford bring the house down by making an appearance? Phil Harrison The Swedish actor Ellen Helinder films her older brother Felix in the year leading up to his 30th birthday. Living with a rare condition that reversed his natural development at age 10, he now has the mental age of a toddler and requires constant care. The result is a raw family portrait suffused with love. Graeme Virtue Sadly, the Live Lounge is as close as many of us will get to seeing music in the flesh at the moment. However, it continues to attract big pop names. Tonight, Clara Amfo hears from Jorja Smith and Little Mix. But the biggest draw is Miley Cyrus, who will be previewing songs from her forthcoming album, Plastic Hearts. PH Scotland got its name from the Scotti people, who once dwelt in a valley called Kilmartin Glen. Tonight, our intrepid Highlands hiker drops in on her ancestors, visiting a bronze age tomb and learning how to make a copper axe. Elsewhere, she goes looking for beavers in the lovely Knapdale forest. Ali Catterall The historian Lucy Worsley bursts a few more bubbles as this series continues. This week, the Regency era, much fetishised for romance, military triumphs and clever literary fiction. But there was a darker side: Worsley unveils a story of barely suppressed rebellion and government trickery. PH Going that bit further than your average sideways chatshow (a recent episode saw host Adam Hills undergo a prostate exam on live telly in aid of Stand Up to Cancer), The Last Leg is dependable Friday-night TV. As per, this week sees the team delve into Britain’s reliably chaotic current affairs. Hannah J Davies Jojo Rabbit 11.15am; 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere In the vein of The Producers, Taika Waititi’s comedy makes slapstick fun out of Hitler’s horrors. Roman Griffin Davis is young Jojo who, growing up under the Third Reich, creates an imaginary friend in the Führer (Waititi), turning Adolf into a tantrum-throwing schoolkid. Paul Howlett Golf: The Masters 12.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The second day of the tournament from Augusta. International Rugby Union: Ireland v Wales 6.30pm, Channel 4. The opening Group A match in the Autumn Nations Cup. Under-21s International Football: England v Andorra 7.15pm, BT Sport 2. A Group C match from Molineux.