LabyrinthDavid Greilsammer (Naïve) LabyrinthKhatia Buniatishvili (Sony) Mark Simpson: Geysir; Mozart: ‘Gran Partita’, K361(Orchid Classics) • Two piano recital albums have hit on – snap! – the same title: Labyrinth. The first, by the Israeli-born David Greilsammer (Naïve), links Bach, Beethoven and Janáček with Lully, Ligeti and George Crumb, as well as world premieres by Ofer Pelz and a piano arrangement (by Jonathan Keren) of Jean-Féry Rebel’s Le Chaos. The choices are grouped in threes: the outer pieces by one composer, the middle one a contrast. So two Beethoven bagatelles surround, in explosive opposition, Crumb’s The Magic Circle of Infinity; CPE Bach sparkles between two Satie Danses de travers. At the centre is Granados’s Love and Death, heartfelt and dreamlike. Khatia Buniatishvili’s Labyrinth (Sony) embraces an even broader range of music, from Scarlatti to Chopin to Serge Gainsbourg, Philip Glass and Ennio Morricone, She also makes a point about the way we listen by including Cage’s 4′ 33′′. Mostly the choices are familiar, sometimes given a new twist. Both pianists weave personal and convincing musical stories. Buniatishvili’s feels like a sonorous, late-night playlist, Greilsammer’s a more knotty, daylight-to-dusk encounter. If neither maze provides an exit, each offers welcome aural distraction. • In July this year, socially distanced in Saffron Hall, Essex, top wind players gathered to record an exceptional account of Mozart’s Serenade No 10, K361, ‘Gran Partita’, with the world premiere recording of Geysir (2013), by Mark Simpson (Orchid Classics). Simpson (born 1988), also a virtuoso clarinettist, has scored Geysir for the same forces as Mozart’s masterpiece: pairs of oboes, clarinets, basset horns and bassoons; four horns and double bass. In a single movement, this short, persuasive work builds on two musical ideas from the ‘Gran Partita’, bubbling and boiling towards a climactic eruption, before subsiding back to where it began. It works as an ideal companion piece. This ad hoc group’s Mozart playing is buoyant, nimble, expansive, elegant, witty and muscular: hardly surprising with a lineup that includes Nicholas Daniel (oboe), Amy Harman (bassoon), Ben Goldschneider (horn) and Simpson himself on clarinet. Each detail, accent or ornament, is precise and purposeful. It’s gone straight on to my best albums of the year list. • English National Opera had hoped to have a live audience for its return to the London Coliseum for Mozart’s Requiem. Instead, a concert performance has been filmed for lockdown, conducted by Mark Wigglesworth, with ENO Chorus and Orchestra and soloists Elizabeth Llewellyn, Sarah Connolly, Ed Lyon and Gerald Finley. Tonight, BBC Two, 7pm/ BBC iPlayer.