Pep Guardiola spoke of “unfinished business” at Manchester City after signing a two-year contract extension on Thursday but admitted he would walk away before his deal expires in 2023 if his “fire or desire” fades. Guardiola believes he is perfectly placed at City to continue winning trophies and referred to the club’s support in difficult moments as the main reason for staying beyond this season. He has already been at City for longer than any other club he has managed, having arrived from Bayern Munich in 2016, and negotiations moved swiftly during this international break. “We had long talks this week all together,” Guardiola said. “We put [forward] both sides – to continue or not – and in the end we decided that the best for all of us is to continue because still we have the feeling that there is unfinished business and still there is something to do: continue what we have done in the last years … We won and we won a lot and we won again. “When you become a big club, a big team, I have the feeling that you have to continue to be there for many years. That is the target. What happened this week, I understood what the club wanted and I said: ‘OK, we are going to do it together again.’ I want to win, and we will be judged for this.” Guardiola said the chairman, Khaldoon al-Mubarak, had convinced him the job was not done but that the hierarchy realised a repeat of his success so far is unlikely. “We are agreed to do 100 points or 98 points and win seven or eight titles in two seasons is almost impossible to do again and to win four titles in one season again is almost impossible,” Guardiola said. “We know that, all the club, but that does not we don’t fight for all the titles.” In his five years at City the club have won two Premier League titles, three League Cups and an FA Cup, setting several scoring and point-accumulating records on the way, though it is hardly a secret that Champions League success remains an unachieved ambition. Guardiola won that twice with Barcelona but he could not reach a final in three years in Germany and he has so far failed to negotiate the knockout stages with the English club. A new contract potentially gives him another three attempts to improve on that record, and should he stay until 2023 he will become City’s second longest-serving postwar manager. Seven years would see him overtake Joe Mercer (six years) on the longevity list, though few expect him to get close to Les McDowall’s 13-year tenure in the 1950s and early-1960s. Guardiola said he would leave before his deal expires if his desire dwindles. “I still have the energy, I have the desire to be manager and train with these players and this is the reason why [I am continuing],” he said. “The contract is a piece of paper. The moment this fire or desire recede and I cannot give more and I cannot give the players the best I can to win more titles I will step back. The club will understand.” What an extra two years is almost certain to do is renew City’s interest in reuniting Guardiola with Lionel Messi, who returned from international duty with Argentina this week and complained publicly that he was sick of being blamed for all Barça’s problems. Messi came close to leaving Barcelona in the summer, and City were prominent among potential destinations, and though he agreed to stay for another season few expect him to remain any longer. At 33 Messi is reaching the end of his glittering playing career, though he might reasonably expect to have another two or three years at the top. That timing would fit in perfectly with Guardiola’s newly agreed deal, especially as the player is out of contract at the end of the season.