Derby have parted company with manager Phillip Cocu by mutual agreement, the Championship club have announced. Dutchman Cocu took over as Rams boss during the summer of 2019 following the departure of Frank Lampard to Chelsea. However, Derby have managed just six points this season, and sit bottom of the table. Derby confirmed assistant manager Chris van der Weerden and specialist first-team coach Twan Scheepers have also left their roles. A statement read: “The club would like to place on record its appreciation for the way Phillip and his staff conducted themselves in what were some extremely challenging situations during his tenure. Phillip and his staff helped develop and establish a considerable number of academy players into the first-team squad and Phillip made significant financial contributions and personal efforts towards the club’s community projects during the Covid-19 pandemic, which the club are extremely grateful for. “Derby County wishes to thank Phillip, Chris and Twan for their hard work and dedication over the last 16 months and wish them every success in their future careers. The club will provide further updates when appropriate and will be making no further comment in the meantime.” A new manager will not be appointed until new owners arrive and, until then, a coaching team comprising Wayne Rooney and Liam Rosenior will oversee matters. Rooney, the 35-year-old player-coach, will work alongside Rosenior, who was appointed specialist first-team coach last summer, the goalkeeping coach Shay Given and first-team development coach Justin Walker, who has played a key role in helping several younger players progress into the first team. Derby believe they have a wealth of experience between them and are more than capable of leading the club in the short term. Rooney said: “I am sorry that Phillip and his staff have left the club and want to thank him personally for all his help and encouragement as part of his coaching staff. The most important thing now is to stabilise the club and start moving up the table. I have been asked to be part of the coaching staff to help the team’s preparations for next Saturday’s vital match against Bristol City. The coaches and I will speak with the players on Monday.” Derby are hopeful of the takeover of the club, by a cousin of the Manchester City owner Sheikh Mansour, will be completed by the middle of next week. Sheikh Khaled bin Zayed Al Nehayan’s takeover was approved by the English Football League last week. Sheikh Khaled fronts Bin Zayed International LLC and previously held talks over buying Liverpool and Newcastle, failing with a £350m bid for the latter.