Donald Trump addressed Americans from the White House on Thursday, illegitimately declaring victory in the presidential election for the second time this week. Several US news networks cut their feeds of the 16 minute speech, and numerous Republicans condemned the many falsehoods proclaimed in it. MSNBC halted its live stream of the speech just a few minutes in, with host Brian Williams saying: “Here we are again in the unusual position of not only interrupting the president of the United States but correcting the president of the United States. “It was not rooted in reality – and at this point, where our country is, it’s dangerous.” WATCH: "OK. Here we are again in the unusual position of not only interrupting the president of the United States, but correcting the president of the United States," Brian Williams says on @MSNBC moments into the president's statement tonight. pic.twitter.com/2AliTQuSsr Over on CNBC, Trump’s remarks cut to Shep Smith who said: “What the president of the United States is saying, in large part, is absolutely untrue.” President Trump just spoke at the White House, as key states continue to count votes. Shep has the facts: “What the President of the United States is saying, in large part, is absolutely untrue.” #Election2020 https://t.co/E6DBt6OodD pic.twitter.com/HVa87qUCzB And the Associated Press – which the Guardian relies on to project election results – swiftly clarified that it “has not declared a winner in the presidential race, with several states still too early to call”. The speech came as former Vice-president Joe Biden was ahead in the electoral college and ballots in key states continues to be counted. While many Republicans have avoided commenting on the president’s false claims of victory and undemocratic assertion that votes should not be counted, several did speak out on Thursday night, urging patience as the ballots are counted. Chris Christie became the first major Trump ally to chastise the president for falsely claiming that the election is being stolen from him. “Show us the evidence,” he said on ABC News. “We heard nothing today about evidence.” Chris Christie says it’s Trump’s “right to pursue legal action, but show us the evidence. We heard nothing today about any evidence.”“This kind of thing, all it does is inflame without informing, and we cannot permit inflammation without information.” https://t.co/GwwRl4EUb3 pic.twitter.com/d8EZc9rDIy Paul Mitchell, a Republican congressman of Michigan, said: “Every legal vote should and will be counted – as they always are.” “Anything less harms the integrity of our elections and is dangerous for our democracy,” he said. “Counting every vote is at the heart of democracy,” tweeted Mitt Romney, the senator of Utah and former Republican presidential candidate. “That process is often long and, for those running, frustrating. The votes will be counted.” pic.twitter.com/Y5HjSXstUb Larry Hogan, the Republican governor of Maryland, tweeted there was “no defense for the president’s comments tonight undermining our Democratic process”, while Tom Ridge, the former secretary of homeland security under George W Bush, said the speech “disrespected every single American who figured out a way to safely vote amid a pandemic”. Will Hurd, the Republican congressman of Texas, said: “A sitting president undermining our political process and questioning the legality of the voices of countless Americans without evidence is not only dangerous and wrong, it undermines the very foundation this nation was built upon. Every American should have his or her vote counted.” A sitting president undermining our political process & questioning the legality of the voices of countless Americans without evidence is not only dangerous & wrong, it undermines the very foundation this nation was built upon. Every American should have his or her vote counted. With his remarks from the White House tonight, the President disrespected every single American who figured out a way to safely vote amid a pandemic that has taken 235,000 lives. Not to mention those who are dutifully counting that vote. Absolutely shameful. Yet so predictable. There is no defense for the President’s comments tonight undermining our Democratic process. America is counting the votes, and we must respect the results as we always have before. No election or person is more important than our Democracy. https://t.co/BOO2iaTsEf Joe Biden also responded shortly after the speech, saying, “No one is going to take our democracy from us”, while his running mate Kamala Harris said Trump “is trying to invalidate these ballots”. Meanwhile, CNN’s Anderson Cooper had perhaps the most bruising words of the night: “That is the most powerful person in the world and we see him like an obese turtle on his back, flailing in the hot sun, realizing his time is over.” "That is the most powerful person in the world and we see him like an obese turtle on his back flailing in the hot sun realizing his time is over" - @andersoncooper pic.twitter.com/F2c1HCXUNK