Elliot Daly Will struggle to showcase his talents in a team instructed to kick so much. Ireland not really able to put pressure on him. 6/10 Jonathan Joseph A little frantic at times and did not have as much joy coming off his wing as last time. One shocking kick. 6 Ollie Lawrence Strong early carry brought him into the game after a quiet afternoon against Georgia. No fireworks but no complaints. 6 Henry Slade Looking a touch more comfortable at inside-centre with nice early touches. One delightful pass to Joseph. 7 Jonny May Hadn’t scored for England since February but clambered above Keenan before producing one from his 22 for the scrapbook. 8 Owen Farrell (capt) Poor penalty, taking the man in the air, and again wasted little opportunity to kick. On the money for May’s first, though. 6 Ben Youngs Plenty of kicking, some accurate, some less so. No real opportunity to snipe but one or two wayward passes. 6 Mako Vunipola Got through a huge amount of work and one hit on Stander had teammates yelping in delight. Showed soft hands, too. 8 Jamie George One wayward lineout but another fine showing. Could be heard urging his teammates to target Kelleher and it worked. 7 Kyle Sinckler One offside penalty against but part of a dominant front row. One of his best performances for a while, emptying the tank. 7 Maro Itoje Another exceptional performance. Trademark turnover near his own line with Ireland threatening. 9 Joe Launchbury Has had to bide his time and is playing some of the best rugby of his career and will take some shifting out of this side. 8 Tom Curry He and Underhill have been called kamikaze kids and Duracell bunnies and they lived up to both billings. 8 Sam Underhill Thought he had a try but while it was disallowed, it was typical of his refusal to give Ireland any breathing space. 19 tackles. 7 Billy Vunipola Big turnover near his own line and got through plenty of carries. Ireland’s Leinster forwards will be sick of him. 7 REPLACEMENTS: Tom Dunn (for George, 80) n/a; Ellis Genge (for M Vunipola, 63) Gave away silly penalty 5; Will Stuart (for Sinckler, 69) n/a; Jonny HIll (for Launchbury, 69) n/a; Ben Earl (for Underhill, 63) Defensive effort 7; Dan Robson (for Youngs, 63) Brought verve 6; George Ford (for Lawrence, 69) Kicked well 6; Max Malins (for Joseph, 72) n/a. Hugo Keenan Never looked like winning the contest with May for England’s first try. Generally solid, offered little in attack, though. 5 Keith Earls Nearly wriggled his way to the line in the first half and almost did so again in the second. Elusive in tight spaces. 7 Chris Farrell Bamboozled by May as England wing set off for his second try and was unable to get the ball down when tackled by Slade. 5 Bundee Aki A few hard carries up the middle and was clearly up for the fight. Couldn’t breach resolute England defence, though. 6 James Lowe Eddie Jones had identified him as one to keep an eye on but was largely restricted to kicking off his left foot. Not his game. 6 Ross Byrne Only his second start and couldn’t bring the authority Ireland needed. Forwards didn’t give him loads to work with. 6 Jamison Gibson-Park Showed his class to release Earls, who almost made it to the line. Kicking this much is not playing to his strengths. 5 Cian Healy Ireland’s most experienced forward but not even he could stem the tide. Didn’t make much of a dent in open play, either. 5 Rónan Kelleher Charged down Young’s early box-kick but his lineout badly wobbled after a few verbals from George. A day to forget. 4 Andrew Porter Jones had singled out his scrummaging technique and he came off second-best. Stuck to job well when carrying. 6 Quinn Roux Spoiled a lineout drive by England shortly before half-time. Discipline wasn’t up to the required standard. 6 James Ryan (capt) Made a few silly mistakes that led to penalties, seemingly out of over-exuberance. Outshone by Itoje. 5 CJ Stander Strangely subdued performance. Normally catches the eye with turnovers or a bit of afters but little doing here. 4 Peter O’Mahony Did his best to make a mess of England’s lineout but didn’t have as much impact as he would have liked. In the wars. 7 Caelan Doris Ireland’s top tackler, with nine – which shows how often England kicked. A bright future but couldn’t escape the shackles. 6 REPLACEMENTS: Rob Herring (for Kelleher, 51) Improved lineout 6; Finlay Bealham (for Healy, 65) n/a; Iain Henderson (for Roux, 51) Got stuck in 6; Will Connors (for Stander, 65) n/a; Conor Murray (for Gibson-Park, 51) Plenty of box-kicks 6; Billy Burns (for Byrne, 69) Clever kick 7; Jacob Stockdale (for Keenan, 58) Finally breached defence 7.