You can get cryptic crosswords in the US – but you have to know where to look. As of 1947, you were guaranteed some quality puzzling time if you bought a copy of the weekly news magazine the Nation. Its early cryptics were created by the former cryptanalyst Frank Lewis, who acquired a taste for the British style of puzzle at – where else? – Bletchley Park. And he did not just create its early puzzles: Lewis set weekly for the Nation from 1947 until 2009. In his last couple of years, there was a suggestion that the puzzle appear only fortnightly, but that was swiftly quashed by reader complaints. Following Lewis’s retirement, readers judged a contest to anoint his successor, or rather successors: Joshua Kosman and Henri Picciotto, otherwise known as Trazom and Hot. We met them here not long after their tenancy began. More recently, there was a suggestion that the puzzle appear … not at all. This time, reader response did not save it. The last puzzle appeared on 26 March. Naturally, the pair have not stopped setting – or, as they would term it, “constructing” – which they now do under the banner Out of Left Field. At the Nation, the editorial process was largely out-of-house test-solving, so the chief difference is down to another factor: some of the testers solve on Zoom rather than over breakfast in their diner of old. Perhaps because of that additional time spent indoors, I’ve heard more discussion of cryptics in the American crossword world recently than ever before, in Brian Cimmet and Ryan Hecht’s charming podcast Fill Me In, in blogs such as Stella Zawistowski’s Tough As Nails and in response to some recent cryptic discussion from the New Yorker. Am I fondly imagining this, I asked Picciotto. “It’s anecdotal,” he says, “but we have observed an uptick of interest in cryptics among younger solvers and constructors over the past several months, especially those who spend a lot of time online. “Once they gain more experience, it seems possible that we might see a real boom in cryptics in the US.” If you’re interested in American cryptics, the difference is not just in cultural references. Their wordplay is more rulebound than what you see in, say, many Guardian puzzles. One example is when the solver takes alternate letters from a phrase in a clue to get an answer, as described in our For Beginners series. “‘Regularly’ is readily understood by British solvers to mean ‘every other letter’,” Picciotto tells me, “whether the evens or the odds. That is just not done over here, where convention requires constructors to specify which it is. Likewise, we don’t have the ‘cycling’ clue concept.” Hence the name Out of Left Field; Kosman and Picciotto are on a mission to expand the palette, though as is evident from the clues they suggested when I asked for some favourites from the Nation years, precision is a big deal. Foolish pride: what it is and how it ends (7)Two things an untrustworthy cow will do to avoid being seen (3,3)Historic force sent to attack London Bridge is hurt by a government lawyer (7,6) Answers below. If you’d like to see more, Kosman and Picciotto have unlocked a pair of theme puzzles for us here and here; in the meantime, I notice that a device used more over there than over here is the “letter bank”, explained here. The next agenda item for our semi-serious Crossword Council, perhaps? • The answers to the sample clues are ASININE; LIE LOW and SPANISH ARMADA• And our next offering of Healing Music Recorded in 2020 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen to is from the home of the former home of the puzzles above • My first puzzle collection, The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop and is partially but not predominantly cryptic