Daniel Kitson doesn’t strike you as an everyman. With his unkempt beard, his pyrotechnic turn of phrase and his insistence on doing things his own way (this solo tour among them), he is more of a great British eccentric than a man with the common touch. Telling a story about choking while cycling, he describes himself as “Typhoid Mary with a beard and a backpack”. Even he thinks it reasonable for the kids in his London street to choose him as the victim in a game of truth or dare. With characteristic lateral thinking, the comedian-turned-storyteller is touring Dot. Dot. Dot. to theatres around the UK, the novelty being he’s the only one in the house. “I’m not going to be using any of this,” he gestures at the empty velvet-and-gold Lyceum auditorium on his opening night, as he sits down at a table on the bare stage. The rest of us, limited to the audience capacity of each venue, watch from our screens. Despite his singular approach, Kitson is every bit the voice of the people. As with all his best work, from the romance of Stories for the Wobbly Hearted to the bittersweet C90, this one finds warm and funny layers of humanity in the small details of everyday lives. As he charts the social disruption of the last six pandemic months, he is like a high-velocity Tim Dowling, turning domestic life into inspired insights about being human. His rapid-fire observations are triggered by a long sequence of Post-it notes laid out on the table between him and the camera. He is plaintive one minute, laugh-out loud funny the next. He takes us from the new obsession with hand washing to the return of the Premier League, calling in on empty supermarket shelves, sourdough and #BlackLivesMatter en route. The details are familiar, but the overview gives architectural shape to this strangest of years. In it, he finds our willingness to adjust, our urge to connect and, as he mourns “the forgotten glory of people you love pottering about in the next room”, our deep attachment to the ordinary. It’s tremendous stuff. • Touring until 27 November. Available online.   