The crowd was small at first. But as the night wore on, the numbers grew and so did belief in miracles. In the early hours of 9 November 2016, Donald Trump and family walked into the ballroom of a midtown Manhattan hotel to celebrate one of the greatest political upsets of all time. “Now it is time for America to bind the wounds of division – have to get together,” the new president-elect said. “To all Republicans and Democrats and independents across this nation, I say it is time for us to come together as one united people.” The speech is now all the more striking because, in the view of countless critics, Trump spent the next four years doing precisely the opposite. His norm-busting presidency deepened divisions, poured oil on flames, stress tested institutions to breaking point and rendered truth itself a partisan issue. And on Tuesday, millions of Americans will deliver their verdict in a referendum on Trump’s first term, after a bitterly fought election campaign that has left the nation with even deeper wounds than those exposed four years ago. Trump’s opponent, former vice-president Joe Biden, has left the president trailing in every major national opinion poll since becoming Democrats’ presumptive nominee in April. Biden commands a bigger lead over Trump, nationally and in several crucial battleground states, than the ill-fated Hillary Clinton did at the same stage in 2016. Yet the stunning repudiation of the political establishment that year has left Democrats haunted. There is little sign of complacency in the Biden camp amid the profound uncertainties of an election campaign waged against the backdrop of the coronavirus pandemic, and fears that the incumbent will seek to declare victory prematurely and prevent every vote being counted. As both candidates spent Monday in a final frenzied sprint across battleground states, Trump was in trouble. Past incumbents have successfully made elections about not themselves but their opponents. George W Bush shifted the spotlight to challenger John Kerry. Barack Obama did likewise to Mitt Romney. But this president’s profligate and shambolic campaign could neither escape the pandemic nor find a way to define Biden. It is still all about Trump. On inauguration day in 2017, the property tycoon and reality TV star filed the paperwork to be an official candidate for re-election, earlier than any incumbent in history. The move enabled him to hold rallies paid for by his campaign and raise more than $13m in the first three months of the year. The intention was to lock in a financial and organisational advantage that no Democrat could match. Just over a year later, Trump appointed Brad Parscale, a bearded, 6ft 8in digital guru, as campaign manager. By March 2019, based in flashy headquarters in Arlington, Virginia, the campaign boasted a massive war chest of more than $100m, the backing of the Republican party’s organisational heft, and purportedly the most sophisticated political data operation ever seen. Fast forward to February 2020 and Democrats were still searching for a challenger while their attempt to remove Trump from office in an impeachment trial foundered in the Republican controlled Senate. The president stood in the White House and held aloft a Washington Post front page that declared “Trump acquitted”, oozing confidence that a robust economy would secure his reelection. But by then the Covid-19 pandemic was already raging around the globe. February would prove to be a catastrophically wasted month for America. Trump failed to build a national testing and contract tracing strategy and deliberately downplayed the threat, insisting that the virus would disappear “like a miracle”. Biden, who had limped in fourth and fifth in the Iowa caucuses and New Hampshire primary respectively, had almost dropped out of the race. But he pulled off a spectacular comeback in South Carolina, and went on to win the Democratic primary race. From day one, Biden had cast his candidacy as a “battle for the soul of the nation” against the president. Faced with such high stakes, the party avoided the factional infighting that dogged Clinton’s campaign in 2016, and fell in line behind the moderate 77-year-old presidential nominee. After a long life of personal traumas and political setbacks, the stars had aligned for Biden’s third attempt to run for president. The former senator and vice-president’s wife, Neilia, and baby daughter, Naomi, were killed in a car crash in 1972. His adult son, Beau, died from brain cancer in 2015. After the first two failed runs, he opted not to try again in 2016. But as the 2020 election approached, Biden said he could not stand by. And when the pandemic hit, his message began to resonate more keenly. Coronavirus has now killed more than 225,000 people in the US, infected more than 9 million people, and left millions of others jobless. A staggering 54 million people in the US – ostensibly the richest country in the world – may go hungry by the end of the year, according to Feeding America. In August, Biden told the country that the tragedies in his own past made him the right person at the right time for a grieving, humbled, divided America, his empathy contrasting with Trump’s narcissism on the campaign trail. Biden pledged to restore sanity after four years that made the country an object of ridicule and pity. “We are fearful and we are angry and we are in pain,” Jon Stewart, the satirist and film director, observed in June. “And when I see Biden, past the shtick, I see a guy who knows what loss is. Who knows grief… and what I think in this moment this country needs is a leader of humility that understands that he doesn’t understand.” Biden smashed fundraising records with $365m in August and $383m in September. The Trump campaign, which had a $200m lead when Biden became the presumptive nominee, squandered that advantage by lavishing $800m on everything from Super Bowl ads and lawyers to banner-pulling planes and a car and driver for Parscale, the New York Times reported. In July, Parscale was demoted and replaced by Republican political operative Bill Stepien. Bob Shrum, a Democratic strategist who was an adviser to the Al Gore and John Kerry presidential campaigns, said: “They blew almost a billion dollars before the Republican convention, which is unthinkable. They wasted apparently tons of money cosseting people. The idea that I ever would have asked for a chauffeur-driven car for a presidential campaign is preposterous. It’s been the equivalent of Donald Trump’s casinos. It went belly-up.” Trump’s “base-first” re-election strategy, in which he has attempted to energise his most fervent and radical supporters, has seen him repeatedly deny the severity of the pandemic, stoke racist sentiments and culture war issues, and cast liberals as “socialists’ hell-bent on “a merciless campaign to wipe out our history, defame our heroes, erase our values, and indoctrinate our children”. Trump’s attacks on mail-in voting and his claims – without evidence – of widespread voter fraud have prompted critics from across the political spectrum to accuse the president of spreading disinformation, sewing distrust in key institutions, and harming the democracy he is sworn to protect. But three moments of his own making may go down in history as key mistakes if Trump does not win the White House again. First, on 1 June, security forces chased away peaceful anti-racism protesters with brute force and tear gas outside the White House before Trump staged a photo op, awkwardly clutching a Bible outside a historic church. It was widely viewed as a crass flexing of “law and order” muscles that misjudged the national mood following the police killing of George Floyd, whose death had prompted a national reckoning on racism. Second, Trump offered a disastrous performance in the first debate, interrupting Biden dozens of times and alienating moderate voters who did not like the president’s aggressive style. The Democrat gave a solid and unspectacular show, channeling the frustration of may supporters when he said: “Will you shut up, man?” Third, the president tested positive for Covid-19 in October, a vivid display of chickens coming home to roost. Instead of learning any lessons, he claimed his recovery proved that the virus’s danger is being exaggerated. After three nights in hospital he flew back to the White House, stood on a balcony, puffed out his chest – and took off his mask. At rallies and in interviews, the president continued to trample on his own message. He spread disinformation about Biden’s son Hunter, an effort to repeat the formula that worked against Clinton but failed to gain traction among sceptical media outlets that were once bitten twice shy. Trump nodded and winked at the QAnon conspiracy theory, described as a domestic terror threat by the FBI. He also tried to sow doubt about the legitimacy of the election and threatened to deploy lawyers to challenge the outcome. Trump’s victory in 2016 had convinced him to do it his way again. Rick Gates, deputy campaign chairman four years ago, said: “It’s kind of deja vu. Putting the issues aside for a minute, it’s the same approach he had 2016. As advisers we were all frustrated with some of the things he didn’t say and some of the things he did say that we didn’t feel in the end were going to resonate well with the voters. “But the one thing that I learned in 2016, and I see it every time I turn on the TV and watch him, is his instincts for this stuff are unparalleled. He has a sense of what the people react to, how they react, and he’s able to communicate directly with them through these rallies.” The president has been his own worst enemy in a lot of this. He goes out and he’s counter-programming against himself But Michael Steele, former chairman of the Republican national committee, disagreed. “The president has been his own worst enemy in a lot of this, which I know had frustrated a number of folks on his campaign because he goes out and he’s counter-programming against himself, which is typical Trump,” he said. “The president has yet to make a case for his re-election. He’s had two debates and in neither debate has he done it.” Trump’s 2016 effort was no less volatile or prone to shedding campaign managers but succeeded in finding a narrative thread on trade, immigration (“Build that wall!”) defining his opponent (“Crooked Hillary”) and a resonant brand (“Make America great again”). But this time the novelty had worn off and the media had wised up. The 2020 version invited comparisons with a TV show that has gone on one season too many, run out of ideas and is facing cancellation. Shrum, director of the University of Southern California Dornsife Center for the Political Future, commented: “There is no message discipline. Trump doesn’t want to talk about Covid so what does he do? Stand up and start saying, ‘Covid, Covidl Covid!’. “He seems to go on instinct. Now, his instinct in 2016 hit the moment by a very small margin as he said to these people in the upper midwest, look, your problem is trade and immigration, and he talked all the time about trade and immigration. He’ll mention them occasionally now but they’re not issues in the campaign. He’s been all over the lot.” Opinion polls suggest the verdict of the voters could be damning. Older people and suburban women in particular appear have turned against him. Outspent on TV, his last throw of the dice is to barnstorm the country at a frenzied pace. Trump has held almost twice as many rallies as Biden in the final two weeks of the campaign. The president’s events feature mostly maskless crowds with little physical distancing, where the country’s leading scientists are mocked; Biden’s drive-in rallies are smaller in scale to respect public health guidelines. Republicans are hoping that some old political laws still apply and the candidate who appears to be more energised, and drawing bigger crowds, will have the momentum. But critics describe Trump’s rallies as “super-spreader” events that recklessly put supporters at risk. Biden’s more low key approach helped reduce his potential to make the gaffes for which he is infamous. Instead he was content to allow Trump to dominate the news cycle. Writing for the Politico website, Alex Thompson observed: “Biden has finally learned, at the tender age of 77, to shut up and stay on message (yes, sometimes by staying in his basement). To nearly everyone’s surprise, he has run one of the most disciplined presidential campaigns in recent memory.” Biden has maintained a laser focus on the pandemic, as the worst case increases in recent weeks have in the swing states that will decide the president’s fate. Trump insisted that the country was “rounding the turn”, even as it hit an all-time high of nearly 100,000 cases in a day, and grumbled that the media was obsessed with “Covid, Covid, Covid”. Former president Barack Obama responded at a rally in Florida last week: “What is his closing argument? That people are too focused on Covid. He said this at one of his rallies ‘Covid, Covid, Covid’, he is complaining. He is jealous of Covid’s media coverage.” Tara Setmayer, a former Republican communications director on Capitol Hill, said: “Donald Trump is telling the American people that we’ve turned the corner on Covid at the same time we’re breaking records for daily infections and hospitalisations again. You have the state setting up field hospitals in Wisconsin and Utah and other places in the midwest because of how poorly the Covid response has been handled.” This has been dubbed “the Armageddon election”, the most important in modern times, perhaps in all American history. Democrats warn that another Trump victory would spell the end of democracy. Republicans warn that a Biden victory would mean the end of America, painting a lurid and unlikely picture of violence crime and radical socialism. Anxiety is running high over when the result will be known – and whether Trump will resist it. Biden told a crowd in Philadelphia on Sunday: “Everybody knows who Donald Trump is. Let’s keep showing them who we are. We choose hope over fear. Unity over division. Science over fiction. And yes, truth over lies.”