Ten-man Norwich survived a spirited Stoke comeback to triumph 3-2 and stay top of the Championship. The Finland striker Teemu Pukki scored twice and their Argentinian midfielder Emi Buendía was also on the scoresheet as it looked like the Canaries were cantering to victory. But Buendía was sent off for a second yellow card with 21 minutes remaining and his dismissal provided a lifeline for Stoke to fight their way back into an absorbing contest. Buendía needlessly fouled Nick Powell and Stoke pulled two back in nine minutes through Tyrese Campbell and the substitute Nathan Collins. However Norwich withstood late pressure to cling on for a first away win against Stoke for seven years. Victory also saw Daniel Farke’s side make it seven wins in nine unbeaten games in the league. Junior Stanislas scored twice as Bournemouth kept up their push for an immediate Premier League return with an impressive 2-0 win over Nottingham Forest. He scored early in each half to help Jason Tindall’s men maintain their unbeaten home record this season as Forest’s travel woes continued. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/11/23-53337-gnl.fw.20201123.ic.penalties.mp3 A goal from the striker Ivan Toney gave Brentford a 1-0 victory at Barnsley and extended their unbeaten run to six Championship games. Toney was largely kept quiet throughout the 90 minutes but his effort midway through the second half - his 11th in as many league outings – proved decisive. The victory was Brentford’s first in four outings and moved them within two points of the play-off places. Blackburn secured an emphatic 3-0 victory over 10-man Preston in the Lancashire derby at Deepdale. Goals from Adam Armstrong, Ben Brereton and Tyrhys Dolan secured Rovers their first victory over their rivals in five years. The decisive moment came just before half-time when the Preston defender Joe Rafferty was sent off for fouling Sam Gallagher in the box. Armstrong fired home the subsequent penalty before Blackburn’s lead was doubled by Brereton shortly after the interval. the former Preston youngster Dolan then compounded his former club’s misery with a third in the closing stages. Birmingham’s goalkeeper Neil Etheridge produced an inspired display as his side picked up a point in a 1-1 draw at Luton. The Philippines international made a number of saves to avert a third consecutive defeat in the Championship. Lukas Jutkiewicz had given Blues the lead from the spot but Matty Pearson levelled in the 37th minute for Luton, who recorded a third straight 1-1 draw. Bright Osayi-Samuel inspired QPR to a 3-2 victory over Rotherham. Ilias Chair put Rangers ahead after 20 minutes and they seemed to be in control before Michael Smith’s 38th-minute equaliser – the striker’s first goal since February. But two goals in first-half injury time proved decisive for QPR. Having twice hit the woodwork, Osayi-Samuel scored in fine style and Lyndon Dykes then thumped in a penalty after Dan Barlaser’s handball. Freddie Ladapo pulled a goal back with six minutes remaining but Rangers held out for the win despite some uncomfortable moments in the final stages. Wycombe posted a second successive goalless draw at Adams Park to share the spoils with Huddersfield. The hime side, who held Brentford on Saturday, have now lost just one of their last six games as they continue their improved form after a difficult start to life in their first season in the Championship.