Americans headed to the polls today in one of the most consequential elections in US history. As the night wears on it appears that the country is in for a long and agonising fight for the White House. Here is what we know so far: So far Joe Biden has 224 electoral votes and Donald Trump has 213; a candidate needs 270 electoral votes to win the presidency. Trump has won Florida with its 29 electoral college votes. The other key battleground states of North Carolina, Georgia and Pennsylvania remain too close to call. Biden addressed supporters shortly after Florida was called for Trump, saying, “I believe we’re on track to win this election.” Speaking in Delaware, he said, “We knew this was going to be long,” but “we feel good about where we are.” Moments later Trump tweeted saying “We are up BIG. But they are trying to STEAL the election. We will never let them do it.” Twitter added a misinformation label to the post. Election officials in Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania have said they will not be announcing the winners of their states tonight. There are still millions of votes to be counted but analysts were highlighting the importance of races in Arizona and the three battlegrounds in the midwest, where the vote count is expected to take the longest. Polls have closed in all 50 states and results have been called in 39 states so far. Among the states to have been called so far for Biden include Minnesota, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Maryland, Virginia, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont and Washington State. Those called for Trump include Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Idaho, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, North Dakota, Nebraska, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas and Wyoming. The US is on course to record the highest voter turnout in over a century. More than 101m people voted early: the equivalent of 73% of the total votes cast in 2016, according to the US Elections Project. Experts predict the total turnout could ultimately be as high as 67%. Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden will watch the night unfold in his hometown Wilmington, Delaware. Tonight, before results came in, Biden told reporters he felt “hopeful”, Republican nominee Donald Trump is expected to spend the night at an election viewing party at the White House. Earlier in the evening he told Fox News: “We’re feeling very good.” Nevada’s district court judge agreed to extend hours for some Last Vegas-area polling sites until 8pm PT (11pm ET). It comes after the Trump campaign filed a lawsuit requesting the extension following reports of opening delays due to technical problems. Polls have now closed, but results are not yet out. According to a CNN nationwide exit poll, about a third of voters said the economy was most important to them, around one in five said racial inequality and about one in six said the coronavirus pandemic. National survey AP VoteCast found the electorate’s top concerns were the pandemic and the economy and that around two-thirds of voters were motivated by their view of Trump. Disappointment for the Democrats after Republican incumbent Senator Lindsey Graham was re-elected in South Carolina, beating challenger Jaime Harrison. Democratic Senator Doug Jones lost his seat to Republican Tommy Tuberville. In Colorado, the Democrats picked up their first Senate seat of the night after John Hickenlooper beat Cory Gardner. Democrats need a net gain of four seats to win control of the Senate. Democrats Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Ilhan Omar, Rashida Tlaib and Ayanna Pressley have each won re-election. Democratic House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, has won re-election in California’s 12th Congressional district. Republican Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell has also been re-elected in Kentucky. Pelosi said Democrats have held the House. “Our purpose in this race was to win so that we could protect the Affordable Care Act and that we could crush the virus,” she said. More details soon – follow this story through the night for “at a glance” updates of the key developments …