The UK death toll from coronavirus has risen by 492 – almost 100 more than the previous day’s increase. Wednesday’s total of people who died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19 was the highest since 19 May, when 500 deaths were reported, and was 24% higher than the 392 recorded on Tuesday. This is despite the fact that figures on Tuesdays are often larger because of a delay in reporting deaths over the weekend. The government’s official coronavirus death toll for the UK since the pandemic began is now 47,742. Separate figures published by the UK’s statistics agencies for deaths where Covid-19 has been mentioned on the death certificate, with additional data on deaths that have occurred in recent days, show the number of deaths from Covid to be around 63,000. Dr Yvonne Doyle, medical director of Public Health England, said: “Sadly we know that the trend in deaths will continue to rise over the next few weeks. As the new measures come into place it will take some time for the impact to be seen. New national restrictions are due to come into effect in England on Thursday, after MPs vote on them, and remain in place at least until 2 December. Government say the list is not exhaustive, and other permitted reasons for leaving home may be set out later. People could face fines from police for leaving their home without a legally permitted excuse. No, not unless they are part of an “exclusive” support bubble, which allows a single-person household to meet and socialise with another household. Parents are allowed to form a childcare bubble with another household for the purposes of informal childcare, where the child is 13 or under. People are allowed to meet one person from another household socially and for exercise in outdoor public spaces, which does not include private gardens. Up to 30 people will still be allowed to attend funerals, while stone settings and ash scatterings can continue with up to 15 guests. Weddings and civil partnership ceremonies are not permitted except in “exceptional circumstances”. Places of worship must remain closed except for voluntary services, individual prayer and other exempt activities. Most outbound international travel will be banned. There is no exemption for staying away from home for a holiday. This means people cannot travel internationally or within the UK, unless for work, education or other legally permitted exemptions. Everything except essential shops and education settings, which include nurseries, schools and universities, will close. Entertainment venues will also have to close. Pubs, restaurants and indoor and outdoor leisure facilities will have to close their doors once more. However, takeaway and delivery services will still be allowed, while construction and manufacturing will stay open. Parents will still be able to access registered childcare and other childcare activities where reasonably necessary to enable parents to work. Some youth services may be able to continue, such as one-to-one youth work, but most youth clubs will need to close their doors. Public services, such as jobcentres, courts, and civil registration offices will remain open. There is no exemption for grassroots organised team sports. Elite sports will be allowed to continue behind closed doors as currently, including Premier League football matches. Aaron Walawalkar “We have all made sacrifices and they have helped to save many lives. Let’s stick with it to keep our loved ones safe. The fewer people you see, the more you’ll help stop the spread.” The government figures showed a further 25,177 people had tested positive, the second highest total after 21 October, when there were 26,688 positive results. Testing capacity has increased significantly since the first wave of the pandemic. Wednesday’s number of new positive cases was 26% greater and more than 5,000 higher than the equivalent figure on Tuesday, which was 20,018. There are 12,320 people in hospital with Covid-19, with 1,142 in hospital beds, according to the latest figures. The number of hospitalised patients was 19% greater and almost 2,000 higher than Tuesday’s total.