Opera Australia will launch its summer season on Thursday, still reeling from a turbulent past six weeks that saw the company hit with a slew of unfair dismissal cases, and its orchestra deliver a vote of no confidence in its concertmaster. Guardian Australia has learned that – in a bid to stop the forced redundancies of almost one-third of the Opera Australia orchestra’s 56 full-time employees – the musicians took the unprecedented step of holding a confidential ballot on 25 September to signal to management its unwillingness to continue working with the concertmaster and orchestra director Jun Yi Ma. According to the orchestra’s now-redundant principal clarinettist, Peter Jenkin, the musicians’ revolt was fuelled by anger at Ma’s alleged participation on a four-member panel that was formed to decide who to sack. The motion of no confidence, which has been seen by Guardian Australia, noted that such a course of action had not been taken lightly. “It is devastating that we find ourselves in this situation, but unfortunately Jun has demonstrated through his actions that his position as our leader is now untenable,” the motion reads. “Specifically, his role in the redundancies, his unwillingness or inability to communicate support to his colleagues, his unwillingness to meet with player reps, and his active attempts to undermine [the union] MEAA’s campaign to save the positions, make it clear that we cannot continue to support him.” As concertmaster, one of Ma’s roles is to be chief intermediary in any contentious issue between the players and a conductor, or company management. But his additional title of orchestra director – not a common title found in opera orchestras – appears to have placed Ma firmly in the managerial camp. The company’s chief executive, Rory Jeffes, was informed of the vote of no confidence – signed almost unanimously, sources told the Guardian – but the motion was never formally tabled to management. An OA spokeswoman declined to comment on the no-confidence motion, but told the Guardian the continuing Covid-19 crisis forced the company into making redundancies. “They were very difficult decisions for all involved and certainly not made lightly,” she said in a statement. The shortfall in players will be filled by casual freelance musicians, possibly including some of those who were only recently made redundant. In the face of a protracted shutdown brought on by Covid-19 in March, Opera Australia’s board approved cuts to all permanent positions across creative, technical and administrative operations in August, without the opportunity for voluntary redundancies. The bulk of remaining staff were placed on jobkeeper, and the company set in motion preparations to sell its Sydney warehouse in Alexandria and much of its contents, including costumes and props. By the end of November, the orchestra will meet as a whole for the first time in more than six months to begin rehearsals for the 2021 summer season. Its size will have shrunk by almost one-third, and the musicians will be squaring off with a concertmaster many may no longer wish to work with. “There is an expectation that a concertmaster goes in to bat for his musicians,” Jenkin told Guardian Australia. “If he was pushed into a corner [by management] to sit on that panel, then the right thing to do would have been resign, not move against his own orchestra.” Another musician, whose position was not cancelled and who spoke on condition of anonymity, said management had placed Ma in an impossible position. “He wears two hats, and as orchestra director he had no option but to participate,” the musician said. “But that doesn’t change people’s feelings of anger and disappointment in him.” Oboist Mark Bruwel, who had been with the orchestra for more than 30 years before being dismissed on 25 September, said there were deep concerns over the lack of transparency in the mass forced redundancy procedure. As president of the Symphony Orchestra Musicians Association [Soma] up until September and a former member of the orchestra’s work health and safety committee, Bruwel told Guardian Australia some musicians, including himself, believed they were sacked because of their union activities. “There is no doubt in my mind that people who were outspoken on issues were targeted in the elimination process,” he said. Jenkin, a musicians’ representative on the MEAA’s federal council, told Guardian Australia his case to the Fair Work Commission would argue that his dismissal was based in part on his union membership. The OA spokeswoman denied claims that redundancies were motivated by union activities of their members. “Decisions regarding these redundancies were solely based on the positions required by Opera Australia into the future in responding to this once-in-a-century crisis,” she said. “We appreciate the significant role that the union plays in the organisation and respect and support our employees’ rights to be a member of the union. “We consider that we enjoy a positive and productive relationship with the union and are continuing to work with them during these difficult times.” Jenkin and Bruwel are among as many as nine redundant OA musicians, choristers and crew who have so far brought cases of unfair dismissal against the company in the Fair Work Commission, with hearings beginning next week. On Monday, the federal arts minister, Paul Fletcher, met with Jeffes and the OA chair, David Mortimer, to discuss the company’s financial predicament. “Opera Australia, like many other institutions across the nation, is facing difficult decisions in response to Covid-19,” Fletcher told the Guardian. “While these decisions are for the board and management, the loss of any Australian job is always regrettable.” OA will receive $21.853m in recurrent federal funding in 2020 and that support would continue into 2021, he said. The Guardian has been given a copy of an email that was sent to OA staff – including the 16 musicians it had sacked – on Wednesday. The email called for expressions of interest to fill at least 13 newly vacated “temporary” positions in the orchestra, across woodwind, string, brass and percussion. The MEAA’s director for musicians, Paul Davies, told the Guardian the company was now scrambling to fill the very positions it purported were redundant in September. “There appears to be no real change to the operating model as claimed, but rather a brazen strategy to casualise the workforce and reduce wages and conditions,” Davies said. OA’s spokeswoman told Guardian Australia on Monday that previous OA employees were welcome “and indeed have been encouraged, to apply for any vacant seasonal positions that become available in the future”. Federal Labor’s arts spokesman, Tony Burke, said OA management needed to explain itself. “[They] should explain why just a few weeks after sacking permanent performers they’re now hiring temporary replacements,” Burke told Guardian Australia. “Arts workers deserve the same job security as anyone else.” Bruwel said he believed that Opera Australia “had committed an act of cultural vandalism” on the orchestra and the company’s chorus and crew. “There was an ideological as well as a financial agenda and [OA] very much took advantage of Covid-19 to run it.”