A former deputy leader of the Ulster Unionist party and member of the House of Lords has been called on to apologise after referring to the US vice-president-elect as “the Indian” in a tweet. The Speaker of the Lords, Norman Fowler, was among those to demand John Kilclooney retract his remarks about Kamala Harris, who is the first black and Asian-American person to be elected to the role. Lord Kilclooney should retract and apologise. This is an offensive way to refer to anyone, let alone a woman who has just made history. The comment is entirely unacceptable and has no place in British politics. I could not be clearer. The 82-year-old peer was widely criticised after tweeting: “What happens if Biden moves on and the Indian becomes President. Who then becomes Vice President?” “Lord Kilclooney should retract and apologise,” said Fowler. “This is an offensive way to refer to anyone, let alone a woman who has just made history. The comment is entirely unacceptable and has no place in British politics. I could not be clearer.” Labour’s Lords leader, Angela Smith, said she would be making an official complaint. “I am so angry about this comment. It is despicable and beneath contempt and totally unacceptable from anyone – but especially from someone in parliament.” Harris made history as the first female, first black and first Asian-American US vice-president-elect. MPs and public figures condemned the tweet as racist. The shadow justice secretary, David Lammy, said: “She is called Kamala Harris. Please send this awful comment straight back to the dark ages.” The Alliance party MP for North Down, Stephen Farry, said the tweet was “disgusting and racist”. Labour shadow minister Wes Streeting said “action must be taken” over the tweet and added: “This sort of racism would be unacceptable from anyone, but from a member of the House of Lords it beggars belief.” He did it before to Leo Varadkar and now he's done it to Kamala Harris. This sort of racism would be unacceptable from anyone, but from a member of the House of Lords it beggars belief. Action must be taken. https://t.co/2JbWFbqr9r When challenged Lord Kilclooney, who sits as a crossbench peer, claimed he had not “known her name yet” and denied it was racist. “Whilst Biden is proud to be Irish and Harris is rightly proud of her Indian background I certainly withdraw my reference to her as an Indian as it seems to have upset some people,” he tweeted. “I did not know her name and identified her with the term Indian. Most people understood. Racist NO.” He told the Press Association: “I’m very fond of India myself, I’m a member of the British India all-party group, I have two Indians (tenants) in my flats here in London and there’s nothing racist in it whatsoever.” In 2018, Kilclooney was the subject of complaints after described Ireland’s then taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, a “typical Indian”, which he later said was a mistake. The Irish prime minister said at the time he thought they were fake remarks and had come from a parody account. Doug Beattie, an Ulster Unionist party member of the Northern Ireland assembly, said the tweet was “poor” and urged the peer to delete it. Daniel McCrossan, an SDLP assembly member, branded the peer “a disgrace”. Comedian Nish Kumar tweeted: “This guy is a life peer. What a country.”