England is at risk of a third wave of coronavirus in the new year if the right balance is not struck on restrictions, Dominic Raab has warned, as Downing Street faces an angry rebellion from Tory MPs on its strengthened tiers measures. The foreign secretary also refused to rule out the prospect of a third nationwide lockdown next year. The Commons will vote on Tuesday on whether to approve the three-tier system replacing the national lockdown. Boris Johnson wrote to Tory MPs on Saturday in an attempt to head off a potential rebellion, saying the new regulations will have a “sunset” clause meaning they will end on 3 February, will be reviewed every fortnight until then, and will only continue with MPs’ approval. Further analysis of the health, economic and social impacts of Covid and the measures taken to suppress them will also be published before Tuesday’s vote, Johnson said. Asked if the country may face a third wave in January and February if the process does not work and infection rates rise again, Raab told BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday: “Well, there’s a risk of that if we don’t get the balance right, but so far the R level is coming down, and that’s really important. And that’s why we’re starting with the tiered approach, more restrictive than some people would like previously.” Pressed on whether there could be another national lockdown early next year, Raab said: “We’re doing everything we can do avoid that,” citing the government’s five criteria for assigning tier levels. #Marr: Will a third national lockdown happen if #coronavirus infection rates increase?Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab: "We are doing everything we can to avoid that"#Covid_19 https://t.co/7fjcYASvZQ pic.twitter.com/k7kpI71HVt Explaining the government’s exit strategy from restrictions, he added: “We move to localised, we aim for that vaccine being distributed in the spring. And the two things that are crucial are a tiered approach, from a position of strength and confidence, with areas coming down the level of restrictions once it’s safe and responsible to do so, and the community-wide testing … We’ve seen in Liverpool how that can really be a force for change, they’ve now come into a lower-level tier and that’s great credit to the authorities up there working with the government and, frankly, the forbearance and the stamina of the people in that area. We need to see that nationwide, that’s how we get to spring and a much better place.” While Downing Street faces the task of persuading wavering Tory MPs to back its strengthened tiers measures ahead of a Commons showdown, it has outlined the road ahead for Covid-19 restrictions. Here are some of the key dates On Tuesday, MPs will vote on whether to approve the three-tier system replacing the national lockdown in England. The current lockdown ends on Wednesday and the new strengthened tiered system, if approved, comes into force with nearly 99% of England headed for the strictest two tiers. Only the Isle of Wight, Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly are set to go into tier 1, with more than 32 million people in tier 2 and more than 23 million in the toughest tier 3. In a letter to MPs on Saturday, the prime minister explained that tThe joint biosecurity centre and ministers will consider data weekly throughout the tiers period, highlighting that there is a specific requirement in the, while legislation to conductrequires a formal review of tiering allocations every fortnight. The first review point is 16 December, with new tier allocations announced the following day – decided by a cabinet committee chaired by the prime minister. They will come into effect on Saturday 19 December, Boris Johnson said.Boris Johnson wrote that here 'will be an opportunity to review all tier allocations at the first review point on 16 December'. He added: 'A cabinet committee, which I will chair, will take the final decisions on the tier allocations, which will be announced on Thursday 17 December and will come into effect on Saturday 19 December.' For five days over Christmas there will be a UK-wide relaxation of rules to let up to three households form a 'bubble' so they can mix socially indoors and stay overnight to enjoy the festive period together. In Scotland, a maximum of eight people will be allowed but that does not include under-12s. In Northern Ireland, the window has been extended to 22-28 December to allow for additional travel time between countries. In his letter to MPs, Johnson also said that there would be has announced a 'sunset' clause on the tiered restrictions, meaning they will expire on 3 February and require MPs’ approval if they are to be extended into March. Johnson said: 'The government will again need to secure parliament’s support before then, in order for the tiered approach to remain in place until the end of March as we believe will be necessary to control the virus through the winter.' Labour has not yet disclosed how it will vote on the measures, although the shadow foreign secretary, Lisa Nandy, told Marr: “We very much share the view that there need to be public restrictions.” However, she stressed Labour was seeking clarity about the new tier system and that her party’s support was “not unconditional”. On Thursday, the government announced that nearly 99% of the population in England would enter the highest two tiers when the measures come into effect on 2 December, where tougher restrictions include a ban on indoor mixing between households unless support bubbles exist. There is anger among Conservative MPs who argue the new system is too blunt, lumping together whole counties or areas into a single tier when there are localised distinctions in the prevalence of the virus. Asked if the government was thinking of breaking down regions into smaller areas so restrictions could be lifted earlier, Raab told Sky News’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday: “Well, we’ll have a review every two weeks and of course there’ll be, I’m sure, debate this week on it. “We always look at all things, but the problem is … you’ve got to get the geographic size sufficiently effective that you don’t find the smaller enclaves of lower-level virus shooting up because they’re not subject to the restrictions in the higher level areas around them.” Asked if the government could switch to putting restrictions on small areas, Foreign Secretary @DominicRaab says "we always look at all things" but the government has to avoid the virus "shooting up" in small areas under looser restrictions.#Ridge https://t.co/Lyl4YX3atP pic.twitter.com/edU7sZyCX4