Salmon is a great choice because it’s simple to cook. I’m particularly fond of this recipe because it can be whipped up in just under an hour. There are no special cooking methods involved. This is bright, fragrant and colourful, making it a wonderful show-stopping centrepiece for your dining table. In addition, the beetroot-boiled potatoes are eye-catching, and more palatable for those who feel like the taste of beetroot on its own is too harsh. Serves 4salmon 1 x 600g piece, kept wholemaris piper potatoes 12 mediumbeetroot juice 1 litrecinnamon 1 tspplain yogurt 120gfresh tarragon 2 sprigs, choppedbutter 40ghoney 40ggarlic 4 cloves, choppedginger 20g, gratedlimes 2lemons 2oranges 2oil for fryingsmoked sea salt to serve Preheat the oven to 180C fan/gas mark 6 and line an oven dish or tray with baking paper. Place the salmon skin-side down on the lined oven dish and let it come up to room temperature. If you’re using an oven tray instead of a dish, you’ll need to prop the baking paper up at the edges so the juices won’t escape. Peel the potatoes and cut in half widthways – if you have large potatoes, cut into four. Rinse and drain the potatoes. In a medium-sized pot, add 750ml of the beetroot juice and 250ml of water to the potatoes, season with salt and bring to a boil. Once a rolling boil has been achieved, turn the heat down and simmer for 20 minutes. When the spuds are done simmering, they should be bright red and easy to pierce. Use a slotted spoon to carefully place your potatoes into a serving dish and cover with foil to keep warm. Meanwhile, for your quick condiments, place the remaining beetroot juice in a pan and boil on high heat for 15 minutes. Once it’s reduced to half or less, add the cinnamon and taste for salt, then set aside. Take 2 spoonfuls of this beetroot glaze and mix with the yogurt and chopped tarragon. Put the beetroot yogurt into a bowl and place in the fridge to chill. Meanwhile, in a small pot, melt the butter over a medium heat. Add the honey, chopped garlic and grated ginger. Juice 1 lime, 1 lemon and half an orange. Add to the honey-butter mix and stir until well combined. Keep the pot on a gentle heat and continue to cook until it smells fragrant. Pour the citrus-honey-butter mix onto the salmon and transfer to the oven. Bake for 15-20 minutes, depending on the salmon’s thickness. You will know it’s ready when the centre flakes easily when pressed with a fork. Cover with foil until ready to serve. To serve, cut the remaining lemon, lime and orange into slices and either line them up on top of the salmon or place on a plate. Drizzle the reserved beetroot glaze, if serving, over the potatoes. Serve the salmon and potatoes with the bowl of beetroot yogurt. Lopè Ariyo is food writer The Observer aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US