Elliott Erwitt is a man of few words – but to get the 92-year-old photographer talking, just ask him about the weather. “It’s been raining this morning and it’s overcast,” he says on a recent afternoon, over the phone from a house in the Hamptons. He lets silence fill the air, something of a trademark of his (by no surprise, a 2019 documentary about Erwitt was called Silence Sounds Good). Though his career has spanned the course of 70 years and has witnessed some of the most notable moments of modern history, he lets his photos do the talking. Erwitt snapped John F Kennedy at the White House, Fidel Castro in Cuba and Richard Nixon in Moscow. He shot stars such as Marilyn Monroe, was backstage with Marlene Dietrich and got most of these shots because he always had a camera, capturing a bygone era. Now, Erwitt has teamed up with the non-profit Project Hope and philanthropy firm Phil Ropy for a campaign that turns one of Erwitt’s photographs into a digital postcard to raise awareness about providing personal protective equipment to healthcare workers around the world. It’s an image that makes sense for today’s pandemic – a pair of plastic gloves hang from a clothesline. It was taken by Erwitt in Sicily in 1965. “Instead of underwear, they hung up plastic gloves,” he says. “I was just walking around in the city and that’s when you find such things.” Erwitt was on a trip with his kids and found himself there for work. “It’s such an interesting place,” he recalls, “that’s what I did there, you just go around, say hello to the volcano, the usual things.” He has a playful approach to photography, bringing a sense of adventure and spontaneity but he’s clearly into the banal too, having shot everything from classrooms to open roads and train stations, proving his famous adage is true: “The best things happen when you just happen to be somewhere with a camera.” They have a sense of uncanny wit about them like his shot of a bather with the American flag covering his face in 1975, or his photo of a yorkie with its hair blowing in the wind with its owner, from 1968. But ask about his great photographs that have documented political history – like his crushing photograph of Jackie Kennedy crying at JFK’s funeral – and he just falls silent or changes the subject. He’d rather talk about dogs or travel, two of his passions when it comes to photography. He remembers being in Paris in the 1950s. “I have a long career of taking photographs in most places, and certainly Paris was one of them,” says Erwitt. “I visited it regularly. What do I love about Paris is the language and the food, that’s about it. “I was born in Paris, but left early on,” he recalls (he was born to Russian parents but moved to America in 1939, when he was just a child). “I have a book about Paris, one about Rome, one on the Soviet Union, wait.” Silence. “What was I going to say? Oh, right. I’ve been at it for quite some time. I’ve been to most of the places that are of interest, touristic and journalistic.” Erwitt loved being a photojournalist, he especially loved the aspect of traveling, always on the go. He started out shooting in the 1940s before being drafted into the US army in 1950, where he took photos of his life in the barracks in France, which led to him joining Magnum. “I’ve been doing quite a lot of travel photography,” he says. “I used to work for a magazine called Holiday, quite a good magazine from a writing aspect, but unfortunately, a lot of magazines are a thing of the past or are about to be.” He changes the subject. “How are the restrictions to the UK right now?” asks Erwitt. “It screwed up for me because I was supposed to have a book that was ready for printing and the restrictions keep it from happening.” The forthcoming book Erwitt is talking about is called Found Not Lost, now slated for release this winter, which will feature over 150 never seen before photos from the past 60 years. The photos are personal, taken during work breaks. “It’s a book about stories that you missed,” he says. “It’s a strange title.” At 92, Erwitt shows no sign of slowing down. At every chance he gets, he’ll throw in: “Check out my upcoming exhibition in London” and “I have a book coming out”. He adds: “I have a recent book about Rome, and another one about Scotland. Scotland is nice.” He’s talking about the book, Elliot Erwitt’s Scotland, featuring shots of the highlands, Edinburgh Castle, local chip shop owners, and more, traveling there in his 80s, and also recently released a book about Cuba, where he photographed the locals in a sunny light. “I went to Cuba on a commercial assignment, I met the people and I have stuff left over that I never edited or published, which is what the theme of the book is – the things that were never published and were missed in the years that were found afterwards.” That seems to be a recurring theme in many books of his. “You always have stuff left over,” says Erwitt. He told the paper in 2008, his simple approach to shooting: “Photography is pretty simple stuff. You just react to what you see, and take many, many pictures. Even now, he is just as practical. He says: “I’m not enthusiastic, I just take pictures.” He’s known for being a Hollywood fixture since the 1940s, having taken intimate shots of Monroe in 1956 and attending Truman Capote’s famed Black and White balls in the 1960s. He said in his recent documentary: “A photo of a celebrity is a good idea because it’s more likely to be published.” But more than just selling images, it could also be about showing a side of them nobody has seen before. But he has since given that up. “I’m not young and fast, you got to be fast,” says Erwitt. “I’m slower than I used to be.” When asked what he loves the most about life right now, Erwitt answers in his trademark one-word answers. “People,” he says, followed by a gap of silence. “People.” More silence. “And dogs,” he adds. “I have several books about dogs, I’ve had many dogs and I like them all, my favorite dog is the one I had for 15 years, until he died when he was 17 years old,” says Erwitt. “Let’s see, hard to think of what he was. Not a scottish terrier, but like a scotty, a cairn terrier. He photographed his dog, who was a kind of muse, standing in a doorway in Scotland, in a photo dated from 2011. “They’re very opinionated,” he says. He has photographed hundreds of dogs as part of his canine series, which each have a human quality; in one, a chihuahua is gussied up in a knit sweater in the 1950s, while others range from pomeranians to bulldogs and mutts. Many photographers look up to Erwitt, eager for advice. The best piece he ever got is simple: “Keep busy,” he says. He says remaining an amateur photographer is key to keeping his curiosity alert. It’s also just plain and simple work. “The fact that photography is international working, and people have to work,” says Erwitt. “Most people have repetitive jobs; it doesn’t last very long before you get bored.” But photography is different, he says. “It’s elective, you don’t have to spend much time doing stuff you don’t like, in the end,” says Erwitt. “You are able to get up early in the morning and even have real choices. “That’s it, choices,” he says. “I never thought of that, until now.”