Crave was the one-act play that turned Sarah Kane’s critical reputation around in 1998. Until then she was known for staging shocking extremes of sex and cruelty, but this drama, written under a pseudonym, was too poetic to be dismissed as the “disgusting feast of filth” that her debut had been three years earlier. More than two decades on, it has lost none of its lyricism and dramatic intensity. Kane left almost no stage directions to denote gender, time or place, and because of this deliberate vagueness, the play becomes fertile ground for invention. Tinuke Craig’s direction gives it a noirish tautness. The stage is uncluttered and abstract with little to distract us from its four characters, who spend the play tussling between nihilistic despair and cravings for love. But there is no ponderousness to the anguish and the speed of their delivery builds a magnetic, edge-of-the-seat tension. Their voices initially rise out of darkness. The lights are switched on and we see them each on their own strip of conveyor belt. They look and sound Beckettian, forever propelled forward on the treadmills but going nowhere. The characters speak their lines in rhythm, as if a modern-day Greek chorus, but they also appear to be stranded in their own psychic quarantine and pouring words into the void. They have just single letters for names – A, B, C and M – but each actor quickly makes themselves solid and distinct. Erin Doherty as C gives a scintillating performance, speaking of childhood abuse, doubling up in anguish and spitting out words in rage. Jonathan Slinger as A is just as sensational, declaring himself a paedophile, and telling mournful, poetic stories. Alfred Enoch as B, and Wendy Kweh as M, are strong presences as well, if slightly eclipsed by the force of the other two. The script contains a quick, kinetic energy and Alex Lowde’s stage design reflects its motion. The stage constantly revolves, and cameras at the end of each treadmill project images of the actors on to a back-screen, which at first feels an unnecessary distraction, but the overall effect is cumulatively dramatic, mirroring the lurching inner states of its four characters. Joshua Pharo’s lighting is filled with shadows and silhouettes to create a brooding intensity and there are switches between light and dark as the characters try to find a way out of their despair. The script echoes everything from the Bible (“Glory be to the father”) to TS Eliot’s The Waste Land (“Hurry up please it’s time”) and Shakespeare’s Hamlet (“To die, to sleep”). But there is plainer language, too: “I am so fucking lonely,” says one, against a soundscape of discordant violins. “I feel nothing,” says another. But then, out of the blue, someone says “I dream about you”, while another speaks of “a pale gold sea under a pale pink sky” and these suddenly hopeful moments seem like a match struck in the dark. • Performances streamed live until 7 November.