Hollywood stars Ryan Reynolds and Rob McElhenney are on the cusp of owning Wrexham after fans voted overwhelmingly in support of their proposed takeover. The actors’ offer to buy the National League club, which has been fan owned since 2011, was approved by 98% of the votes cast by the Wrexham Supporters’ Trust. Subject to a final agreement, league approval and confirmation by the Football Association, the historic north Wales club will be soon owned by Deadpool’s Reynolds and McElhenney, best known for his role in It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia. Wrexham’s new owners-elect welcomed the outcome with a video message promoting “Britain’s leading trailer manufacturer for over 60 years” – Ifor Williams Limited. “Why are Rob and I pitching a north Walian trailer manufacturer?” asked Reynolds. “Because we just became owners of Wrexham Association Football Club and they’re our team sponsor,” McElhenney replied. The American actor, director and producer added: “You may never have heard of Wrexham, the Racecourse Ground or Ifor Williams but you will. So, to the Wrexham Supporters’ Trust, thank you for your faith and trust in us.” The high-profile duo outlined their vision to make Wrexham “a global force” during an online meeting with supporters this month. A resolution to “irrevocably and unconditionally” approve the sale of the club received 1,801 votes for, 29 against and 11 abstentions. Reynolds said: “We are humbled and we are already getting to work. Oh [expletive deleted] – this is really happening.” The proposed takeover is expected to bring £2m of investment into the club. McElhenney and Reynolds have promised to use their own money, marketing and fame to restore Wrexham’s fortunes and a Netflix-style documentary charting the new era is planned. McElhenney said: “We’re documenting it. We should be thinking about Wrexham the way Manchester United thinks about Manchester United. Engage in the club and community.” In a statement announcing the results of the vote, which attracted a turnout of 91.5%, the Wrexham Supporters Trust Board said: “Subject to final agreement, league and FA confirmation the RR McReynolds Company, LLC will take 100% control of Wrexham Football Club Limited from the WST. Both parties will now proceed with finalising the details of the takeover, and we will update Wrexham supporters as soon as we can. “The Wrexham Supporters Trust Board would like to thank Mr Rob McElhenney and Mr Ryan Reynolds, and their advisors Inner Circle Sports and Walker Morris, for their professional and considered approach and for the time they have already put into the process. As Wrexham supporters, we would like to wish them the very best of luck in charge of our Football Club and look forward to what the future brings.” Reynolds had told the WST meeting on 8 November: “We want to be at the Racecourse Ground as much as possible – as many games as I can make. “We want to have a pint with the fans. You’ll be fed up of us! We want to be great ambassadors for the club, to introduce the club to the world and be a global force.”