Tiger Woods pulled off one of the great comebacks in sport at Augusta last year, bouncing back from serious injury and personal problems to claim a fifth green jacket 14 years after his previous success. But his defence of that 2019 title ended in eye-catching style for all the wrong reasons on Sunday as he recorded an astonishing seven-over-par score of 10 at the par-three 12th hole. The notorious 12th has caused plenty of problems over the years – Jordan Spieth collapsed there in 2016 and Tom Weiskopf even registered a 13 in 1980. Woods had posted his lowest-ever first-round total at Augusta on Thursday, a 68, following that with rounds of 71 and 72 to start the final day five under par. There are nightmare rounds and then there is THIS from Tiger Woods! 😩Tiger ended with a score of 10 on a par-three at the 12th after finding the water three times! 🌊Watch live only on Sky Sports #TheMasters or follow: https://t.co/nFGK8h7LTt pic.twitter.com/qttXpL5znV At the 12th, Woods saw his well-struck tee shot bounce just short of the green and spin back into Rae’s Creek. The same fate befell his third shot, taken from the drop zone, which bounced to within several feet of the hole before viciously spinning back into the water. His next attempt found the bunker behind the green, leaving a fiendishly difficult chip, which he sent into the water for a third time. That brought yet another penalty stroke, followed by Woods’ second attempt at the incredibly tough chip from the bunker which left his ball on the edge of the green. From there an ashen-faced Woods two-putted to finally score a 10, including three penalty strokes – the highest score he has ever recorded on a single hole in his career. Further proof that Augusta National, where Woods has enjoyed so much past success, can embarrass even the greatest champions. In typical style it did not take Woods long to recover: he birdied the par-five 13th before completing his round with four consecutive birdies, salvaging a 76 to finish one under par.