Parody hack standup is a genre all of its own, with its own superstars (Neil Hamburger) rookies (Zach Zucker’s alter ego Jack Tucker) and leftfield contenders, like Zoe Coombs Marr’s macho meathead Dave. So when playing such a character, it’s not enough just to be bad – you’ve got to be bad in creative and distinctive ways. I’m not sure Tim Heidecker pulls that off in the Tim & Eric man’s first standup special, recorded in 2017 but only now appearing on YouTube. What he has in his favour is subtlety. This is no lurid 2D caricature: Heidecker plays the character – talentless, resentful and unreconstructed – with an enjoyably straight bat. OK, so the opening slapstick sequence, as he wrestles to subdue his recalcitrant mic stand, is plain silly – the more so as he pushes it ad absurdum. But thereafter, he really nails the character’s high if brittle self-regard (see the pompous speech about risking “comedy without a net”) and the cheapness of bad comedy’s “no more bullshit” posture. The joke thenceforward is that Heidecker can’t do comedy at all, net notwithstanding. The gags are groansome puns that would shame a Christmas cracker (what’s next after Lady Gaga? “Lord Goo-goo?”), or autobiographical bits that peter out sans punchline. (Only when he moves to the next joke do you realise the previous one has supposedly climaxed.) The shtick soon gets more aggressive, as Heidecker badmouths his wife and blames Obamacare for a frustrating trip to the vet. The highlight is the meta sequence when our host restages the same malfunctioning joke three or four times over, to get it right for the special. The joke is on his perfectionism (this joke will never be right), and his contempt for the live audience. But elsewhere, things get samey – unless there’s anything else going on, unfunny jokes and impersonations are, finally, just unfunny. There are mis-steps, too: even if Heidecker is spoofing bad entertainment when he forces an audience member to propose to his girlfriend onstage, it feels abusive. It’s worth a look, finally, at least for fans of the standup in-joke. But the character doesn’t really stand out in anti-comedy’s crowded market. • Available on YouTube.