I was concerned about the tone and accuracy of your story which appeared on the front page of the Guardian newspaper (Government admits millions may miss out on most effective vaccine, 12 November). This headline, which I view as both misleading and sensationalist, occurred due to a lack of understanding. Vaccines against Covid-19 will not all come at once, or in large quantities in all cases. Nor will they be delivered in volumes or over timeframes we can fully predict currently, and their storage characteristics may differ. We will have to use the vaccines that are authorised, in the quantities they become available, according to expert advice. We should use them as soon as we get them. If the choice is between the eligible public accessing a safe vaccine with a lower interim efficacy or having no vaccine at all, we would always choose the former as some protection is absolutely better than no protection. This is the approach that will save lives. Waiting for the “very best” vaccine, which may not come for some time, bearing in mind some future vaccines in development may yet fail, will cost lives. It is oversimplistic to imply that any vaccines are “superior” or “inferior”. The results we will have initially for any vaccine will pertain to efficacy determined over a relatively short timeframe. A vaccine with slightly lower headline efficacy than another may prove to be the one that offers more durable protection or a greater effect on transmission. Comparing vaccines based on a single interim estimate of effectiveness is therefore a mistake. The UK has targeted seven vaccines, procuring, over time, a total of 355m doses for the UK population, and vaccine effectiveness will be closely monitored in real time. As UK citizens, we are incredibly lucky we will be one of the very first nations to get a vaccine, and if some of the later vaccines we have targeted also succeed we will have multiple options for re-vaccination if this becomes scientifically necessary in the future.Professor Jonathan Van-TamDeputy chief medical officer, Department of Health and Social Care