Richard Sennett’s analysis of the malaise in US politics is timely and pertinent (Even if Donald Trump loses the election, the US isn’t going to heal any time soon, 2 November). Sadly, the words of academics have little effect on the ground. In 1965 David P Calleo wrote: “In many countries the political function has shifted from parliaments to presidents and prime ministers. Strong men, using the power of mass communication to draw strength from the people, have taken over the tasks of rule. It is one of the paradoxes of modern politics that a kind of elected monarchy seems the typical form of government for a large-scale democracy. It is the president who represents the people and parliament the elite. While that may have been the deplorable pattern of Napoleon III and Mussolini, it is also true of government in the United States and even in parliamentary Britain.” And here we are.Roger WoodhouseSutton Coldfield, West Midlands • Adam Tooze’s critique of the American political system (Whatever happens, it will take more than promises to Make America Normal Again, 1 November) does not propose any changes, so let me suggest one. Even more than the 2000 election Tooze mentions, 2016, when it overturned a clear popular majority, demonstrated that the electoral college is no longer fit for purpose. When the constitution was drafted, many voters living far from the centre of government had difficulty getting enough information to make a reasoned choice, and it made sense to delegate someone to go and find out. That is no longer true, and it is time to enact an amendment to abolish the electoral college, and elect the president by a simple majority of the aggregated votes of all citizens.Herbert MunkCoventry • Two countries are preoccupied with hotly contested national elections this week. One is to decide between a thug and an old man for president and the other, New Zealand, whether to have a parrot, a penguin or a flightless bird as its bird of the year (Voting opens in New Zealand’s beloved Bird of the Year competition, 2 November). I’m sure there is a moral here, but cannot think what it is.Peter WatersonBishopbriggs, East Dunbartonshire • Some years ago, on arrival at Auckland airport, passengers were (jokingly) advised to put their clocks back 20 years. How times have changed (Jacinda Ardern unveils diverse new cabinet to focus on Covid-19 recovery, 2 November). Christine WestrenIpswich • Join the conversation – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit theguardian.com/letters