I remember, as a 17-year-old taking an A-level in history, coming home from school and one of my mums asking what I had learned that day. She knew we were studying the Soviet Union, and it was a subject she felt close to: her parents were Polish-Jewish refugees who’d found safety in the USSR after fleeing east in 1939. Her father was in the Red Army from 1939 to the end of the war. When I replied that I’d learned how many people Stalin had killed, estimated at 6 million or more, my mum bristled: “Is that really all they teach you?” At the time, my mum’s prickly response surprised me. Stalin’s death toll seemed too big to carry any caveats. The sheer enormity of the number – which included many Jews – eclipsed any curiosity for marginal histories or rival experiences, however close to home. But our exchange stayed with me, and over time crystallised into a lesson that every history syllabus struggles to convey: sweeping narratives of heroes and villains, victors and vanquished, good democracies and evil dictatorships, cannot capture the contradictions of how life is lived on the ground. I often think of this around Remembrance Sunday, when comforting binaries of “good” and “bad” come to the fore. A reassuring story – of British bravery and sacrifice – is told as if it’s the only one. In this sense, my mother’s mixed views of the Soviet Union, passed down from her parents, confound the dominant narrative , which sees the communist states purely through the prism of the cold war that came after 1945. But, as the historian Sheila Fitzpatrick noted in a recent essay in the London Review of Books, such views aren’t uncommon. “Many Polish Jews … who found themselves in the Soviet Union during the war, deportees as well as refugees, retained affectionate memories of the place and its people, whom they experienced as not antisemitic and generous in sharing the little they had with strangers,” she writes. The feelings of such Polish Jews are further complicated by the outsized role that the Soviet Union, initially an ally of the Nazis, then played in defeating them – a fact that is entirely forgotten in “remembrance” day events. No state suffered more casualties in the second world war than the Soviet Union, nor inflicted more upon the Nazis, the Eastern front accounting for three-quarters of the Germans’ military losses in the war. The Red Army liberated Auschwitz, and raised the red flag in Berlin months before the US dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Yet according to recent polling, only about 13% of British people believe that the Soviet Union made the biggest contribution to winning the second world war. Other former Allied nations differ only insofar as they see the US, rather than Britain, as playing the major role. (This wasn’t always the story: just after the war, there was a broad appreciation among Allied nations for the Soviet Union’s role. In a 1945 poll in France, for example, 57% people credited the Soviet Union for the biggest contribution, while only a fifth named the US. By 2004, these numbers were reversed.) Growing up in Australia after the war, my mother lived history’s contradictions first-hand. In 1945, her parents returned to Poland briefly, then travelled to Marseille to board a boat to Melbourne, where she was born. One year, as Australia’s Remembrance Day approached, her primary-school teacher asked the class to bring in any war medals their fathers might have. She skipped home and, bursting with pride, told her dad she needed his Red Army medals to show her teacher and classmates. “I don’t think that’s a good idea,” he said, smiling. It was the late 50s, amid the escalating cold war, and her parents’ saviour – and the west’s key ally in the war – was now her home nation’s sworn enemy. This isn’t a call to reappraise the Soviet Union or tyrants such as Stalin but to recognise that, while myopic narratives of triumph and tragedy are easy to follow, they just as easily mislead. Britain marches on with an unblemished record of moral victory, even as its power wanes, begetting the belief that we don’t owe anything to anyone – neither neighbouring nations nor asylum-seekers. This narcissistic approach to history, wherein we turn to the past only for a flattering reflection of ourselves, is not unique to Britain. But it resurfaces with a special force every Remembrance Sunday. We mourn the victims of our opponents’ brutality, and ignore the suffering caused by our own. We speak solemnly of sacrifice and of all those who gave their lives, repressing the national conscription, propaganda and petty nationalism that often forced “our heroes” into “service”. All the more so this year, when the right has concocted a feeling that British identity is under siege and the pandemic is romanticised as military combat. What’s lost in this dreaming is war as a time of universal tragedy and often arbitrary coalitions. The brutalities are swept aside, and a clear purpose is retrospectively imposed. War retains an allure, persisting in the popular imagination as a kind of ideal: a time when everyone knew their place and happily fought together against a foreign threat. In this sense, Remembrance Sunday is best understood as an exercise in collective amnesia rather than historical awareness. The red poppy, with its narcotic, numbing connotations, is an apt symbol for proceedings. Britain’s dream-sleep as the polite and plucky underdog – always punching above its weight and never punching too hard – continues unbroken. It’s a naive vision, but I sometimes wonder what a world would look like where my mother could have brought her father’s war medals into a children’s classroom. Not to boast, but to reflect how arbitrary it can be whose side we end up fighting for, and whom we stand next to when it’s all over and done. Our collective lack of desire to relate to the past in ways that might complicate – or implicate – ourselves is plain to see, and belies a constant anxiety in our approach to history, as if a single negative discovery might unravel everything we are. “It’s not ‘lest we forget,’ it’s ‘lest we remember,’” as Irwin says in Alan Bennett’s The History Boys. “That’s what all this is about – the memorials, the Cenotaph, the two minutes’ silence. Because there is no better way of forgetting something than by commemorating it.” • Samuel Earle is a writer based in London