If it happened today, we’d call it gaslighting. There’s surely no other word for playing on someone’s darkest suspicions, planting seeds of doubt that could only leave her more bewildered about whom to trust. It would be a scandal now if it was alleged that a journalist had secured an interview with an emotionally fragile woman – for everyone knew Princess Diana’s history of eating disorders, her belief the palace was out to get her, the tales of her trying to throw herself down the stairs as her marriage imploded – after showing members of her family forged bank statements supposedly “proving” that her closest aides were being paid to spy on her. But in 1996, Britain was a different country. A year after the princess’s bombshell BBC Panorama interview about the state of her marriage, when claims first emerged that the programme had employed some decidedly dubious tactics as it tried to reel her in, there was no great moral outrage that I can recall. Earl Spencer told much the same story then, about feeling duped into introducing interviewer Martin Bashir to his sister, as he told last week’s Channel 4 documentary marking the 25th anniversary of the interview. But, at the time, it felt like just another plot twist in the endless royal soap opera. True, the graphic designer who produced the forgeries was dropped by the BBC. But the corporation’s then head of news, Tony Hall, reported reassuringly back to his bosses that Bashir, while “contrite” about it all, remained an honourable and honest reporter who just “wasn’t thinking”. It doubtless helped that in those days Diana was still widely portrayed as a knowingly manipulative player of the media game, a cunning minx who’d got what she wanted out of her coy confession that there had been “three of us” in the royal marriage, while the BBC got its global scoop. Who could have known the whole thing would feel so different, rehashed a quarter of a century later when the media’s treatment of another potentially vulnerable princess is still fresh in people’s minds? Yet the uncomfortable truth is that it does. The rightwing press has its own reasons now, of course, for taking a story that makes the BBC look bad and flogging it to death for days on end. Any excuse to kick lumps out of a liberal institution in politically sensitive times. It feels horribly unfair, too, that all this is being exhumed when Bashir (said to be recovering from heart surgery and Covid complications) is too sick to defend himself. It’s ancient history, for heaven’s sake, so why not just let it go? But it’s history that sheds an uncomfortable light on the present, which is why the BBC is right to promise a fuller inquiry now. Had it not been for this subterfuge, of course, Diana might have ended up telling all on some other broadcaster’s sofa instead (indeed, in the BBC’s original investigation, she indicated she would have been open to a Panorama interview even without any of the alleged actions). She had already cooperated with Andrew Morton’s explosive book about her and spilled the beans in private to the then Daily Telegraph editor, Max Hastings, although that seems to have left him not so much reaching for his notebook as fearing for her mental health. He resolved in the end not to write it up because it seemed best to “keep a lid” on things. Was that an overly cosy, establishment-friendly interpretation of an editor’s job or, in hindsight, the compassionate choice? Most reporters will certainly recognise something of the moral dilemma: the knowledge that sometimes the public interest is served only by people revealing something they will later bitterly regret, and that if it isn’t you it will be someone else, balanced against a queasy understanding that news chews people up and spits them out. Some will wonder whether the earl’s vehemence in pursuing the BBC now is at least in part about atoning for his own unwitting role in unleashing something that ultimately burned everyone it touched. Diana herself came to regret the interview in later life, it is said, because of the impact on her sons. (A tearful William, then 13, was left to watch it with his housemaster at Eton, another aspect of this story that by 2020 standards feels utterly insane. What teenage boy wants to watch the messy details of his parents’ divorce being publicly rehearsed in front of a teacher?) Both princes have struggled all their lives to reconcile their public roles with distrust of the media, and in Harry’s case also the suspicion that the palace machine was moving against his new wife Meghan, just as his mother felt it move against her. There is something poignant about reports that the couple are following current developments closely from exile in the US. It’s not ancient history for some. And, for all one’s doubts about whose interest the exhumation of this long-dead story really serves, the point remains. Something happened here of which our national broadcaster cannot now justifiably be proud, but nor in a sense can the rest of us. Why didn’t we see, 24 years ago, that what Earl Spencer described was wrong? Why wasn’t it more obvious – long before we knew about the human costs of phone hacking and the Leveson inquiry, and perhaps also the damage done by commodifying women in the public eye for media consumption – where we were heading? The only point in digging up long-buried history, in the end, is to learn from it. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist