It is expensive, it is niche, and the market seems crowded. Yet the meal-kit delivery dinner has become one of Britain’s biggest consumer success stories of the year. Who would fork out an average of £20 for a two-person meal they cook themselves? In a pandemic, it turns out customers have spent hundreds of millions of pounds doing just that. Last week, Nestlé beat off competition from Waitrose to acquire a major stake in health-food-box company Mindful Chef, while rival Gousto secured a £25m investment, pushing it into “unicorn” status with a valuation in excess of £1bn. Hello Fresh, the global market leader, branded “the world’s most ruthless food startup” by a trade magazine, has seen its customers double in 2020, while revenue jumped by 120% to £870m. The nation may be locked down, but food subscription services have lucked out. “Meal-kit delivery companies have profited from the pandemic as consumers turned to them for a guaranteed source of meals as shopping in store became harder and less desirable,” said Ayisha Koyenikan, global food and drink analyst at Mintel. “Frazzled people cooking at home, tasked with preparing more meals than they might have felt comfortable with, have sought inspiration and relief from food preparation.” According to research from Barclaycard, Britain is fast becoming a nation of “super-subscribers”, with the average household now signed up to seven subscription services a month. This was a 40% increase year on year in July. Individually, that adds up to £552 a year with food and drink – be that recipe kits or ready-made meals, cheeseboard or cocktail clubs – second only to streaming entertainment services, such as Netflix and Amazon Prime. Poppy Dinsey, a community manager from Cheshire, signed up to Gousto after the birth of her twins and two years on has stayed loyal. At first, convenience and price, compared to restaurant deliveries when she craved home-cooked food, made it worthwhile: “I didn’t want to think, I just wanted the food to arrive and to have half an hour to myself to cook something different and tasty.” Recipe-kit services – where customers choose from a selection of meals online and have the instructions and ingredients measured out, with no food waste, delivered to their door – hold huge appeal for the time poor, the savviest of whom regularly switch services, depending on the discounts available each month. Ready-meal delivery services are booming, too: Manchester-based company KBK said sales have “tripled over the same period last year” as new customers report a sense of urgency to become healthier. Jennifer Irvine, founder of Pure Package and Balance Box, echoed similar feedback from her new customers. Her company has been providing fresh meals to the UK premium market for 17 years and is now delivering 10,000 boxes a week. “November has become like January for the industry in terms of the number of people wanting to shift Covid kilos or just give themselves a treat,” she said. “There’s certainly plenty of room for everyone.” The sector is confident consumer habits will have been shifted permanently by the pandemic. In one survey by Mindful Chef, seven in 10 customers claimed they would continue to use the service post-pandemic. For Pete Ingo, a single dad from north London, the company has been a lifeline this year when he was wary of being in supermarkets. “It seemed to have the right ethos from the get go: ethically sourced produce, good recycling options for packaging,” he said. “Plus, it managed to make the recipes simple enough to follow without making for bland meals. When it offered a recipe that was not on par, you could email in and get the chef herself writing back. As with all these companies, I think sometimes they grow so fast they sometimes manage to leave those little details in the dust. But until then, I’m kinda loyal.” Ingo was aghast to learn of the buy-out by Nestlé, which has a notoriously troubled reputation, and is the target of the world’s longest-running boycott. “I couldn’t think of a worse business partner,” he said, unconvinced by the reported “hands-off” approach the conglomerate was taking. “I might cancel my subscription now.” Tim Lee, chief executive of Mindful Chef, told the Observer that the deal would allow the company to expand and still “operate independently … the Nestlé of old is different to the Nestlé of new. If you look at its FTSE4Good standards, it scores very highly on social, ethical and environmental standards.” Koyenikan, however, warned that the boom in food-box delivery could be short lived. The marketing spend needed to secure new customers is huge and retention was a problem prior to Covid-19. “While consumers are interested in the format, recipe and meal kits are sold at a huge premium price,” she said. “It is unappealing to lower-income households and, as we face the most severe recession in nearly a century, subscription services will have to offer more than basic convenience and shift the perception of value to retain newly acquired customers.”