Hopefully there will be more gripping encounters to come in the Autumn Nations Cup but it is going to take a strong forward pack to overpower England at Twickenham over the next month. Georgia tried their hearts out on a damp, inhospitable south-west London afternoon but the final scoreboard told the story of a largely one-sided fixture. The visitors were gallant from start to finish but spent just 39 seconds in their hosts’ 22 over the course of 80 minutes. There was a good deal more activity at the other end where Jamie George became the first England hooker in history to claim a hat-trick of tries and new cap Jack Willis marked a promising debut in the back row with a first-half try. In total England, who led 26-0 at half-time, defied the inclement conditions to score six tries and showed enough to suggest Ireland will have to dig deep in Saturday’s likely group decider in this same echoing arena. Aside from George and the fit-again Elliot Daly, Henry Slade had an excellent game in the English midfield and Eddie Jones will be pleased that his defence did not permit the Lelos even a solitary point. It was not always perfect - with so much rain around mistakes were inevitable - but by the final quarter the home side’s underwhelming first half hour had been mostly, if not entirely, forgotten. Georgia have barely played since February while England’s best players have now been back at it for almost three months yet, for a while, the blue-clad hosts were guilty of over-thinking things. For some reason Owen Farrell twice kicked ball away when simply putting it through the hands might have yielded a better result, as if he was responding to a pre-arranged plan rather than the situation in front of him. At the scrum, too, England were obtaining little change from a Georgian pack who pride themselves on not giving an inch to anyone. Defensively close to their own line the Lelos were equally defiant, forcing their opponents to work hard and long for their opening close-range score from a visibly delighted Willis. Where England are increasingly world class, however, is in an area they have only recently begun to rediscover. Twice they forced lineouts in the Georgian 22, twice they threw in to a soaring Charlie Ewels and twice the subsequent driven maul motored unstoppably over with George applying the finishing touch. It was the encouragement England needed to loosen up a little and start to weave a few prettier patterns. Slade is a class act regardless of what number he wears and with Jonathan Joseph floating into space just behind him the Georgian midfield began to find life increasingly tough. Sure enough it was the same combination who combined to set up Daly for a lovely try in the right corner to secure the bonus point. Joseph, unfortunately for him, was injured in the act of giving the scoring pass and the deteriorating weather also presented England with another fresh challenge in the second-half. It did not seem to faze them unduly with George adding a third close-range try to his collection and replacement scrum-half Dan Robson nipping in with England’s sixth in the final quarter. Georgia remain ambitious to join an expanded Six Nations one day but this result has underlined just how much hard work still lies ahead of them.