Samantha Wood Fri 20 Nov 2020 15.31 GMT


Last modified on Fri 20 Nov 2020 15.33 GMT As we stare down the barrel of winter with the added pressure of new lockdown restrictions, there’s never been a more pertinent time to focus on our wellbeing. For many, the unprecedented nature of this year has had a negative effect both physically and mentally, but with the end of the year fast approaching and the promise of a fresh start in 2021, now is a great time to give mind, body and soul a much needed overhaul. “This year, few of us have looked after ourselves the way we deserve to be looked after,” says personal fitness and strength trainer Matt McCormack (@mattmccormackpt). “Due to no fault of our own, we’ve neglected to give our bodies what they need, and anxiety and stress levels for many have been understandably sky-high. The temptation may be to put off making changes until the new year, but now is actually the ideal time to toughen up our bodies if we want to face the winter and life’s next chapter in the best possible shape.” So whether your aim is to feel trimmer, stronger or happier, the time is now – and yes, whatever the weather. 1 Give booze a breakIf that sounds like a ridiculous suggestion with the festive season just around the corner, you don’t have to go completely dry as a bone, but a more mindful approach to how much – and what – you’re drinking could make a huge difference to your physical and mental health. “We all know that drinking to excess isn’t great for our bodies, so implementing some small changes to your drinking habits is really beneficial,” says nutritionist and founder of LunchboxDoctor.com, Jenny Tschiesche. “Try swapping some of your weekly alcoholic drinks for something like kombucha, which still feels special, treat-like and is very on-trend.” When choosing a non-alcoholic drink, keep an eye out for the sugar content – check the label and choose those drinks that are green for sugar when you can. It’s also a good option to aim for some entirely alcohol-free days throughout the week, so try downloading Public Health England’s Drink Free Days app, which can be found on the Apple App Store and Google Play. 2 Keep a journalMove over meditation, there’s a new tool in town to achieve a clearer, happier mind: writing. According to some mental health professionals, keeping a journalis one of the best ways to release mental blocks, understand your feelings and attain your goals. You may have kept a daily gratitude list to remind yourself of things to feel thankful for, but trying a more expressive approach to writing can be a way of hacking into the deepest parts of the brain, helping us recognise our needs. Invest in a nice notebook and aim to write for 10-15 minutes each morning. Think of how you’re feeling, what you’re worried about, someone you’re angry with, hopes for that day – and see what comes out. 3 Download a fitness appSometimes we all need a helping hand, so why not lean on an app? Whether it’s to track your diet, plan a workout or record your daily physical activity, checking in with your phone or smartwatch is a great way to help you keep on top of your health and fitness goals – and set new ones when the time is right. “I see it all the time with my clients, especially during this time of the year,” says McCormack. “They lose track of what they’re eating or drinking, which then spirals into bad choices and habits, quickly followed by negative thoughts. But using a fitness app is a brilliant and simple way to regain some control and keep your health and fitness in order.” Apps such as MyFitnessPal are free to download and can help you keep an eye on what you’re eating, the number of steps you’re doing, and even make everything feel more manageable, which is often half the battle. 4 Get a flu jabWith the spread of Covid-19, it’s easy to forget that it’s also important to protect yourself against the flu – especially so if you’re in a high-risk category for coronavirus, as research has shown you’re more likely to get seriously ill if you get the flu and contract coronavirus at the same time. The good news is that by getting a flu jab, you’ll help reduce pressure on the NHS and social care staff who may be dealing with the pandemic. Changes including social distancing, hand washing and wearing protective equipment have now been made to ensure it’s safe to get your flu jab at GP surgeries and pharmacies, so go and book one in for peace of mind. 5 Seek out supportWinter can be lonely. Anything from weather conditions to potential restrictions due to the pandemic could keep us from loved ones this festive season. Plus the reduced sunlight can reduce our body’s production of serotonin, potentially making us feel low and more alone. Kate Lucey, author of Get a Grip, Love, says that right now we need to make the effort to talk to each other – but with our voices and not just a WhatsApp or text message. “We’ve become a bit scared of phone calls,” she says. “Don’t plan it, just dial. Send a voice note if they don’t answer, and even if you have to play phone tag you’ll get there eventually. Voice action is so much more nourishing than a message.” Conversation keeps us feeling connected so make a list of three people a day that you could contact – and make it happen. If you’re not able to get in touch with someone, or you’d just like to find out more about managing your mental health and wellbeing, head to nhs.uk/oneyou/every-mind-matters. 6 Invest in supplementsIt’s that time of year when we can’t make vitamin D from sunshine. To keep your bones and muscles healthy it’s best to take a vitamin D supplement every day between October and early March. This is especially important as many of us have been indoors more than usual this spring and summer. “The majority of us don’t get the sufficient amounts of vitamin D through our diet, and with sunlight limited at this time of year, in my opinion, we should all be supplementing,” says Tschiesche. You can get vitamin D from most pharmacies, and supermarkets and other retailers. Just 10 micrograms a day is all you need – it’s the same for the whole family. 7 Stop smokingThinking of knocking smoking on the head in the new year? Why wait? By quitting now, you’ll reap the rewards almost immediately. Longer-term benefits include reducing your risk of lung problems, heart problems and various types of cancer. In the short term, if you stopped now you would be free of nicotine, finding it easier to breathe and have a pocket full of surplus cash by the time you’re singing Auld Lang Syne. Plus, you’ll have the hard bit out of the way. “Quitting smoking is always a fantastic idea,” says Dr Catherine McCullagh, a trainee GP. “But people don’t realise that you can feel the benefits immediately. Contact your GP or pharmacist about the various options available to help you quit – often they can refer you to a smoking cessation clinic where you will receive specialist advice.” 8 Get outdoorsThe great outdoors might be wet and wild right now, but a winter walk (find one near you at walkingbritain.co.uk) is the best way of blowing away the cobwebs. Fresh air has higher levels of oxygen than indoor air, so getting outdoors for a brisk 20-minute walk each day is good for your lungs, blood pressure, circulation and heart rate. Plus, more oxygen is thought to result in greater brain functioning, improving energy and concentration skills – perfect for anyone working from home. Entice your kids out with a homemade scavenger hunt. Make a checklist of 10 things – such as acorns, feathers, yellow leaves – and head to the woods, only returning when you’ve found them all. Not close to woodland? No problem. Even a walk around the streets with a list of items to spot – a black cat, three buses, Christmas trees in windows – can turn exercise into a fun, and free, game. 9 Light a scented candleBurning a scented candle doesn’t just achieve peak winter ambience, it can also do wonders for your wellbeing. The combination of essential oils in some aromatherapy candles – such as lavender, rose or lemon balm – can relieve anxiety and reduce stress. And there’s more ... stuffy noses and congested chests can be eased by burning peppermint or eucalyptus. Sleep can be helped by a chamomile or sandalwood candle – just remember to blow it out before your head hits the pillow – and energy may be boosted by the scent of bergamot, cinnamon or ginger. 10 Treat yourselfWhen it comes down to it though, 2020 has been hard enough. For long stretches of this year, we haven’t been able to enjoy a sit-down meal at a restaurant or the comforts of a Sunday roast at the pub. While it’s important for us to take care of our bodies, this winter really isn’t the time to start feeling guilty and deny ourselves a little taste of the good stuff. We’ve missed out on enough this year, thank you very much. So have a treat and reach for the chocolate when you want to, whether it’s milk chocolate, or dark chocolate – which is generally a bit lower in calories and sugar – just enjoy. Of course, moderation is key, but as Francesco Petrarch said: “A little bit of sweetness can drown out a whole lot of bitterness.” This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (Keep well this winter) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit gov.uk/coronavirus