The terror attacks in Vienna have been widely condemned by international leaders. We, the French, share the shock and the grief of the Austrian people struck this evening by an attack in the heart of their capital, Vienna. After France, it is a friendly country that is attacked. This is our Europe. Our enemies must know who they are dealing with. We will not give up anything. Nous, Français, partageons le choc et la peine du peuple autrichien frappé ce soir par un attentat au cœur de sa capitale, Vienne. Après la France, c’est un pays ami qui est attaqué. C’est notre Europe. Nos ennemis doivent savoir à qui ils ont affaire. Nous ne céderons rien. Europe strongly condemns this cowardly act that violates life and our human values. My thoughts are with the victims and the people of #Vienna in the wake of tonight’s horrific attack. My thoughts are with the victims and the people of #Vienna in the wake of tonight’s horrific attack. We stand with Austria @sebastiankurz I am shocked and saddened by the brutal attack that took place in Vienna. My thoughts are with the families of the victims and the Austrian people. Europe stands in full solidarity with Austria. We are stronger than hatred and terror. Terrifying and disturbing news from #Vienna: Even we don’t know the full extent of the terror yet, our thoughts are with the injured and victims at this difficult time. We will not give way to hatred which is aimed at dividing our societies. There is no room for hatred and violence in our common European home. Ferma condanna dell’attentato che questa sera ha colpito la città di #Vienna. Non c’è spazio per l’odio e la violenza nella nostra casa comune europea. Vicinanza al popolo austriaco, ai familiari delle vittime e ai feriti. A cowardly attack, which we strongly condemn. Italy is close to the Austrian people. Europe must react. Seguiamo con grandissima preoccupazione le terribili notizie che arrivano da #Vienna. Un attentato vile, che condanniamo con forza. L’Italia è vicina al popolo austriaco. L’Europa deve reagire. Shocked by the horrific attacks in #Vienna. I have conveyed to @sebastiankurz our full solidarity. Our thoughts are with the people in Vienna and the authorities dealing with the situation. Our hearts, with the victims and their loved ones. Shocked by the horrific attacks in #Vienna. I have conveyed to @sebastiankurz our full solidarity. Our thoughts are with the people in Vienna and the authorities dealing with the situation. Our hearts, with the victims and their loved ones.Europe stands united against terror. Our prayers are with the people of Vienna after yet another vile act of terrorism in Europe. These evil attacks against innocent people must stop. The U.S. stands with Austria, France, and all of Europe in the fight against terrorists, including radical Islamic terrorists. After tonight’s horrific terrorist attack in Vienna, Austria, Jill and I are keeping the victims and their families in our prayers. We must all stand united against hate and violence.