Manor Solomon has fitted plenty into his 21 years: he has turned down Manchester City, served in the Israeli army, defeated Real Madrid and played almost 150 games as a professional. He is yet to get the better of Scotland in three attempts but will get another chance in Netanya on Wednesday night. The Shakhtar Donetsk winger is a Champions League specialist having scored three times in six appearances in the competition last season and the decisive goal in an unlikely win at Real Madrid last month. The Israeli is his country’s great hope, having been thrust into the first team at Maccabi Petah Tikva aged 17. Four years on he is lighting up Europe, epitomised by his match-winning display in Madrid. Solomon now has Scotland in his gaze, as he looks to emulate what he is achieving for his club with his country. He aims to take inspiration from that night in the Spanish capital to show what Israel can achieve in the Nations League. “It was incredible, it was really amazing for us as a team to win in Madrid, against one of the best teams in the world,” Solomon says. “Real Madrid have won so many titles and have such a great history, so it felt really really special for us. I think nobody thought that we would win … It was maybe one of the biggest wins in the history of Shakhtar and for me it was also very special to score in the Champions League against Real Madrid, who are maybe the biggest club in the world.” A late VAR decision ruled out a potential equaliser for the hosts, much to the relief of Solomon and his teammates. In many ways it was the perfect end to a historic night for the Ukrainian side, even if the match was played at the Madrid’s B team ground because the Bernabéu is being renovated. “As a kid I always dreamed of playing in the Champions League – it is the dream of every kid and every football player wants to play on the biggest stages and the Champions League is maybe the biggest stage. It is a big opportunity to show your qualities; every goal, every move, every assist is so important.” Manchester City should not have been surprised by Solomon’s capabilities when he came off the bench to equalise against them last November, given they tried to sign him three years ago. Solomon spoke to the club but did not want to stifle his development by not playing regular first-team football and so a deal could not be done for a man compared to Eden Hazard. “They really wanted me and I had a meeting with them but unfortunately it did not work out. I played against them with Shakhtar and it was a really good point for us but in the end it didn’t help us to qualify. It was also very special to play against Manchester City and Pep Guardiola and to score.” Solomon ended up leaving Maccabi Petah Tikva to join Shakhtar, where he has won two league titles. The club is better known for importing Brazilians and selling them on to bigger European sides: Douglas Costa, Willian and Fred are some of the many to have made Shakhtar their first stop outside South America. There are 11 Brazilians at the club, in addition to a Portuguese coaching staff, meaning it was more productive to learn the language of his teammates than the locals. “Brazilians have their own style; they like to dribble, magicianing, and I think Shakhtar bought me because I have those skills and quality as well. I really enjoy playing with them but in the beginning it was a little bit difficult as I needed to adapt. But I like to play with them in the offensive part and I like their game. I started to be part of it and it has really helped me. I’ve learned lots of things here at Shakhtar from great players. I am enjoying life at Shakhtar, I am only 21 years old but one day I will join one of the best leagues in the world “Clubs in Europe don’t look at the Israeli league as a strong league, so they don’t buy players from Israeli league for such big money. My owner in Israel demanded a lot of money; he wanted €5m for me and then he heard it was Manchester City, he wanted €10m. After he was willing to sell me to Shakhtar Donetsk and I wanted to go. I looked at the history of the club, I saw everything, the players they produced over there. I thought it was a great opportunity for me to play in the Champions League, to continue my young career in this club. I am enjoying life at Shakhtar, I am only 21 years old but one day – sooner or later – I will join one of the best leagues in the world.” Solomon was part of the Israel team who lost to Scotland on penalties in the European Championship play-offs last month. They have a chance to redeem themselves in the Nations League, although it will not make up for the disappointment that Israel will need to wait to qualify for their first major tournament since 1970. Solomon says the team were “really devastated” but adds: “We have to overcome this and look forward. We have great young players, we have a good generation now and we could do this in the future.” Israeli teenagers have to complete mandatory national service, which complicates matters for aspiring footballers, potentially stifling their progress. “This is one of the main problems in Israel for athletes and football players in particular. It is not easy as when you turn 18, after you finish high school, you need to start service in the army. You need to serve two years and eight months and it is not easy.” Solomon was given light duties because he was earmarked for a different type of national service and Israel’s most exciting crop of players in a generation will be looking to prove their worth, starting by bouncing back against Scotland.