Four previously unknown drawings by John Constable have been discovered hidden among a jumble of letters, poems, jokes and even dried leaves accumulated in a family scrapbook made over the course of the late 18th and 19th centuries. The auction house Sotheby’s said it had authenticated “an extraordinary re-emergence” of drawings by one of Britain’s most important artists. “These works have lain hidden for the best part of 200 years in an album compiled by the Mason family of Colchester,” said Mark Griffith-Jones, a Sotheby’s specialist in British watercolours and drawings. “It is full of all sorts of weird and wonderful objects and images and these four drawings.” The works include a watercolour drawing of a rural landscape signed J Constable and dated 5 April 1794, which was when he was 17, making it one of his earliest known works. It is not a drawing that shows much of Constable’s genius but he was only a teenager, still working at the family windmill at the time. It would be another five years before he started his training as an artist at the Royal Academy Schools. “It probably is a copy after a print and it is pretty naive,” said Griffith-Jones. “He was very young. From an academic point of view it is interesting to find something of this date. Constable, quite famously, was a late developer.” There is also a drawing of a ramshackle thatched cottage that has been established as the original drawing for an etching Constable made in 1797, which is his only surviving etching from that period. An edition of it is in the collection of the V&A in London. The two other drawings are portraits. “In some ways they are the most exciting,” said Griffith-Jones, because they are drawings connected to Constable oil paintings. One is of his younger brother Abram, a painting that is in the Constable collection at Christchurch mansion in Ipswich. The two brothers got along famously and it was Abram’s willingness and skills to manage the family business that allowed John to embark on a career as a professional artist. Griffith-Jones said the portrait captured Abram as a “handsome and romantic figure” with full sideburns and fashionable hair. The other drawing is of his cousin, Jane Anne Mason, later Inglis, who was the subject of an oil painting Constable produced around 1808 and which is now in the Government Art Collection, hanging for many years inside No 10 Downing Street. “This is a particularly sensitive and really very beautiful pencil portrait study,” said Griffith-Jones. “It is a really stunning work.” The album is being sold with an estimate of £24,000-£28,000 and will be the highlight of Sotheby’s online Old Master and British works on paper sale from 24 November-4 December. Griffith-Jones said the album was essentially a family scrapbook, made between 1794 and 1862, resulting in a time capsule containing a higgledy-piggledy myriad of material. It includes amateur watercolours, engravings after Old Masters, oak leaves, poems, ditties and comments on contemporary events. He said he had spent a large part of lockdown working on the album, which had been tremendous fun. “It has been an exciting journey and I’m sure the art world will be interested in the discovery, museums as well as collectors. This is a rare opportunity,” he said.