Data released in the next few days will determine which areas will enter each of the new tiers being proposed across England, as hopes emerge of the coronavirus reproduction number dropping below dangerous levels. The UK transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said an area’s placement in a specific tier after the lockdown ends on 2 December will be determined by its number of cases, and factors such as the speed of rising cases and the numbers of people aged over 60 testing positive for the virus. “New data is coming out in the next day or so, which is why the actual specification of which tier goes into which place will be announced on Thursday, and it will be on the basis of a number of cases,” Shapps said in an interview with Sky News. “For example, the number of cases in the over-60s, where it is much more likely or possible that it could be fatal. And things like the speed at which coronavirus is rising or falling in a particular area and a couple of other measures along those lines.” He told BBC Breakfast that although half the country might be placed in the strictest tier 3 alert level, this would still allow for more freedoms than the national lockdown currently in place for England. “I think it is the case that we do need to be a bit tighter on the tiers – tier 3 in more places is a strong possibility – but there’s still a difference between that and what we’re doing now. “For example, in terms of the number of people that can meet outside in a public place, and a number of other things. We’ve been living through this nightmare for a long time now, we all know the only way to defeat this virus is, I’m afraid, to keep people apart and separate from the most natural thing, which is human contact. From 2 December will be divided into three different tiers of restrictions. They are slightly amended from the previous system. Across all tiers, shops, personal care, gyms and the wider leisure sector are set to reopen. Collective worship and weddings – with a maximum of 15 in attendance – can also resume. Under the new system hospitality businesses in England can stay open until 11pm with table service only but last orders must be made by 10pm, in an effort to stagger departures. The “rule of six” will also remain in place indoors, meaning social household mixing is still allowed. Spectator sport is set to resume, albeit with limits on numbers and abiding by social distancing. In tier 1, there will be a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of occupancy of the stadium or 4,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000. In tier 1, people will be encouraged to minimise travel and work from home where possible. Support bubbles – which allowed a single household to join with another household – are also being broadened across all tiers. Parents with a child under one will be able to form a support bubble, as well as those with a child under five who needs continuous care, such as a child with a disability. Also, in cases where there is a single adult carer, for a partner with dementia for example, they would also be able to form a support bubble. How was it before? In the least restrictive tier, also known as alert level “medium”, the rule of six applied indoors and outdoors, meaning up to half a dozen people from different households could gather. Hospitality businesses, such as pubs and restaurants, could stay open but were forced to shut by 10pm – a move that prompted much criticism, including from Conservative backbenchers. Under the new system, although hospitality venues will be allowed to stay open until 11pm – with last orders at 10pm – only those that serve substantial meals can operate. It means pubs and bars that do not will have to close. As before, social mixing outside of households or support bubbles will not be allowed indoors. The rule of six will apply outdoors. Spectators will be allowed to watch sport in tier 2, with a maximum crowd capacity outdoors of 50% of the capacity of the stadium or 2,000 people, whichever is smaller. Indoors, the maximum capacity is 1,000. Indoor entertainment venues, such as cinemas, casinos and bowling alleys, must also close. How was it before? In the “high” alert level tier people were prohibited from mixing socially indoors with anybody outside of their household or support bubble but the rule of six remained in place outdoors. Hospitality businesses, such as pubs and restaurants, could open until 10pm but people were only allowed to visit with their household or support bubble. Hospitality venues will have to close, except for delivery and takeaway service. In tier 3, hotels and other accommodation providers must also close, except for specific work purposes where people cannot return home. Outdoor sports, including golf and tennis, will be allowed to continue in all tiers, as will amateur team sports such as football. Unlike the first two tiers, spectators will not be allowed to watch sport in tier 3. How was it before? In the most restrictive tier, known as the “very high” alert level that was endured by vast swathes of the north of England, mixing socially indoors between households – unless a support bubble was in place – was banned. Under baseline measures hospitality venues serving substantial food could remain open until 10pm. Up to six people from different households could socialise outdoors in public spaces, such as parks, beaches or public gardens. Simon Murphy Political correspondent “You can only breach that in a certain number of places and I think we’ve made our decisions as a country that that has to be for things like education and work while we get through this winter.” He agreed, however, that the country’s test-and-trace system needed to be improved, adding that the government had no choice but to spend a great deal on it during the crisis. “We have to get through this coronavirus and I’m afraid there has been no other option but to spend a lot of money,” Shapps told Sky News. “We’ve said that we want test and trace to be a lot better.” The system, which has to date cost £22bn, has been heavily criticised after a series of high-profile failures since its launch earlier this year. The government has also announced that travellers arriving in England from 15 December will be able to end their quarantine period with a negative coronavirus test after five days. Whitehall has said passengers who arrive from a destination not on the government’s travel corridors list can reduce the 14-day period by paying for a test from a private firm after five days at a cost of £65 to £120. “We still wanted to make sure we had testing available for doctors, nurses and teachers and any others before turning to travellers, and we’ve done that by turning to the private sector for these tests,” Shapps said. National restrictions are in effect in England until 2 December, when they will be replaced with a revamped three tier system of measures. Government say the list is not exhaustive, and other permitted reasons for leaving home may be set out later. People could face fines from police for leaving their home without a legally permitted excuse. No, not unless they are part of an “exclusive” support bubble, which allows a single-person household to meet and socialise with another household. Parents are allowed to form a childcare bubble with another household for the purposes of informal childcare, where the child is 13 or under. People are allowed to meet one person from another household socially and for exercise in outdoor public spaces, which does not include private gardens. Up to 30 people will still be allowed to attend funerals, while stone settings and ash scatterings can continue with up to 15 guests. Weddings and civil partnership ceremonies are not permitted except in “exceptional circumstances”. Places of worship must remain closed except for voluntary services, individual prayer and other exempt activities. Most outbound international travel will be banned. There is no exemption for staying away from home for a holiday. This means people cannot travel internationally or within the UK, unless for work, education or other legally permitted exemptions. Everything except essential shops and education settings, which include nurseries, schools and universities, will close. Entertainment venues will also have to close. Pubs, restaurants and indoor and outdoor leisure facilities will have to close their doors once more. However, takeaway and delivery services will still be allowed, while construction and manufacturing will stay open. Parents will still be able to access registered childcare and other childcare activities where reasonably necessary to enable parents to work. Some youth services may be able to continue, such as one-to-one youth work, but most youth clubs will need to close their doors. Public services, such as jobcentres, courts, and civil registration offices will remain open. There is no exemption for grassroots organised team sports. Elite sports will be allowed to continue behind closed doors as currently, including Premier League football matches. Aaron Walawalkar The transport secretary said the tests to reduce the quarantine period for travellers were not just for business travellers, despite their cost. He told BBC Breakfast: “I expect what will happen as this market gets going is we’ll see the cost of tests being driven down, particularly as some of these new types of tests have come around. And rather than specifying – people have heard terms like PCR tests and lab tests and lateral flow – rather than specifying a type of test, we’ve specified a specification standard for these tests – medical experts have. “It’s up to companies to innovate. If they can produce a test for much less money, or indeed much faster turnaround, then they’re welcome to do that as long as it meets the very exacting standards.”