Eighth-tier Marine defeated League Two Colchester on penalties on a day of multiple upsets in the FA Cup first round, where non-league sides Darlington, Stockport, King’s Lynn Town, Dagenham & Redbridge and Boreham Wood all beat EFL clubs. Michael Howard was the hero for Merseyside-based Marine, a side in the Northern Premier League Division One North West, scoring the winning spot-kick to secure a 5-4 shootout win after Joshua Bohui had put his effort wide. Anthony Miley had put the underdogs ahead midway through the first half but Harry Pell levelled after 64 minutes and, because there are no replays this season to ease fixture congestion, the tie went straight to extra-time. It was still 1-1 after 120 minutes and following six successful spot-kicks, Colchester’s substitute Bohui missed the target, which allowed Howard to step up and secure the win for Marine. Adam Campbell got two goals for National League North side Darlington, who claimed a 2-1 victory at League One Swindon. Campbell put Darlington ahead just after the half hour after intercepting a headed back pass and stroking the ball beyond the Swindon goalkeeper, Matej Kovar, but the hosts levelled four minutes before half-time through Brett Pitman. Campbell had the last word with a deflected strike on the hour as the Darlington, in the sixth tier of English football, reached the second round for the first time since 2006. John Rooney and Alex Reid struck inside the opening quarter of an hour as National League promotion hopefuls Stockport won 2-1 at League One Rochdale. The hosts pulled one back in the 22nd minute through Matthew Lund but were unable to find a leveller. Sonny Carey came off the bench to score eight minutes from time as fifth-tier King’s Lynn Town reached the second round for the first time in their 10-year history by winning 1-0 at League Two Port Vale. Boreham Wood advanced after a 4-3 shootout victory over Southend, who are rock-bottom of League Two and were knocked out of the cup as Jason Demetriou missed the decisive penalty, following a 3-3 draw over 120 minutes. League Two Stevenage avoided a setback against National League Concord Rangers after winning 5-4 on penalties following a 2-2 draw, while Nigel Clough’s reign as Mansfield manager started with a 1-0 victory at Sunderland. Gillingham came from two goals down to beat Woking 3-2, with Vadaine Oliver scoring the winner 11 minutes from time, while Charlie Kirk struck a quarter of an hour from the end as Crewe edged out Bolton by the same scoreline. Brackley beat Bishop’s Stortford 3-2 on penalties after an entertaining 3-3 draw in which Bishop’s Stortford twice came from two goals down, while Elliott Ronto’s goal helped Canvey Island defeat Banbury United 2-1. Yeovil won 1-0 at Bromley courtesy of Gabriel Rogers’ strike in the last moments of extra-time, while Scott Wilson’s brace helped Dagenham & Redbridge overcome Grimsby 3-1, while and Luke Jephcott struck as Plymouth won 1-0 at Charlton. Jack Taylor’s goal gave League One table-toppers Peterborough a 2-1 triumph at Oxford while Jorge Grant and Anthony Scully each scored twice as Lincoln thrashed Forest Green 6-2. Sean Raggett’s extra-time winner helped Portsmouth edge to a 3-2 success at Ipswich, who came back from 2-0, while Salford advanced after downing Hartlepool 2-0 in a game that also required an additional half hour. Bristol Rovers won 2-1 at Walsall thanks to first-half goals from Jack Baldwin and Brandon Hanlan, and on Merseyside Tranmere overcame Accrington by the same scoreline, Peter Clarke getting the winner for Rovers six minutes from time. Bradford thumped Tonbridge Angels 7-0, Hull saw off Fleetwood 2-0, Newport County beat Leyton Orient 2-1, Exeter came from behind to triumph 2-1 over AFC Fylde, Cheltenham beat South Shields 3-1 and Shrewsbury won 2-0 at Cambridge.