The US was bracing for a long and agonising fight for the White House early on Wednesday morning as a presidential election that could test the country’s democracy to breaking point headed towards an uncertain climax. Democratic hopes of an early landslide for Joe Biden over Donald Trump on election night were dashed as the president won Florida, one of the biggest prizes of the night, raising the spectre of legal challenges and civil unrest. As of 1am ET on Wednesday morning, Biden had won 223 electoral college votes, and Trump had taken 212. Trump, who was expected to speak to the nation, appeared to claim victory on Twitter, despite the fact a winner would need 270 electoral college votes to clinch the White House. Early results went as expected with no shifts from the 2016 electoral map. But millions of votes were still being counted in the key battleground states, counts that could drag on for days. The crucial battlegrounds of Pennsylvania, Michigan, Georgia, North Carolina, Arizona, Wisconsin and Minnesota were all too close to call. “We feel good about where we are,” Biden told supporters tooting car horns in Wilmington, Delaware, early on Wednesday. “We really do. I’m here to tell you tonight we believe we’re on track to win this election. “We knew because of the unprecedented early vote, the mail-in vote, that it’s going to take a while, we’re going to have to be patient until the hard work of counting votes is finished. And it ain’t over till every vote is counted, every ballot is counted.” The former vice-president added pointedly: “It’s not my place or Donald Trump’s place to declare who’s won this election. That’s the decision of the American people but I’m optimist about this outcome.” But even as Biden spoke, Trump made a baseless allegation that appeared to preview a bitter fight ahead. He tweeted from the White House: “We are up BIG, but they are trying to STEAL the Election. We will never let them do it. Votes cannot be cast after the Polls are closed.” Twitter flagged the tweet as disputed or possibly misleading. Though most people will probably be watching the results of the race for the White House, there are more than 7,000 elections taking place across the US on Tuesday 3 November. In the age of disinformation, it is more important than ever that media outlets report election results as clearly and transparently as possible. The Guardian will be using data collected and analysed by the Associated Press (AP) as the source for when we will call election results for the presidency, Senate, House races and others. AP has a team of thousands of specialists and correspondents across America, who have trusted relationships with local officials. This will guide their data-led assessment of when it's time to call a race. There are a number of other highly reputable election "decision desks" in US media. They may call races earlier than AP. While the Guardian will report this is happening, we will rely on AP's data to make our own final call. Should any candidate declare victory prematurely, we will report this claim, but make clear that it is not valid. The only measure of victory is a complete count of all outstanding ballots. The tightening of the race heightened fears of prolonged and perilous limbo, increasing the risk of street protests and violence. Both sides have hired battalions of lawyers for a post-election fight. The Trump campaign sent out a fundraising email on Tuesday night predicting victory and claiming without evidence that “the Fake News media and their Democrat Partners will REFUSE to call the race”. It sought donations to ensure “we have a MASSIVE WARCHEST to protect the integrity of this Election.” The tallies came on a night by turns both inspiring and unnerving, with tens of millions of Americans queuing up to express their voices as a nation facing multiple crises found itself at a crossroads. From New York to Phoenix, from Detroit to Los Angeles, and even as coronavirus cases surged in swing states, tens of millions of people waited patiently to determine whether Trump will serve a second term or make way for Biden, a former vice-president. A record of more than 100 million people had voted early due to the surging pandemic, with Democrats thought to have the edge, so Trump, a Republican, was relying on what he called a “red wave” on election day itself. Experts predicted the final total could be around 160 million, a turnout rate of more than two-thirds of the eligible voting population – the highest in more than a century. Both candidates signaled confidence before polls closed on Tuesday night. Trump, the first impeached president to run for re-election, expressed faith that the size of his campaign rallies would prove a more reliable measure of support than conventional national polling, which has consistently shown Biden leading. “We’re feeling very good,” Trump told the conservative Fox News channel, his voice sounding scratchy after holding 14 rallies in three days in a last-ditch campaign blitz. “We have crowds like nobody has ever had before. I think that translates into a lot of votes, and we’re going to see very soon.” Biden, who at 77 would be the oldest US president ever elected if he wins, visited his childhood home in Scranton, Pennsylvania. He wrote in ink on the living room wall: “From this house to the White House with the Grace of God. Joe Biden 11.3.2020.” He then made a last-ditch appeal to voters in the battleground state, addressing an impromptu street gathering in Philadelphia. If you elect me, I’m going to be an American president. No red states or blue states, just the United States of America “Trump’s got a lot of things backwards,” he said through a face mask. “If you elect me, I’m going to be an American president. There’s going to be no red states or blue states, just the United States of America.” Concerns about voter suppression and voter intimidation hung over the election but, as the day went on, election observers said it went relatively smoothly. This may have been a result of increased awareness about the issues in addition to so many people having cast their ballots early, easing pressure on election officials. Kristen Clarke, the president and executive director of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, which runs an election protection hotline, said: “We are not seeing major systemic barriers that are obstructing voters’ ability to participate in the process en masse.” Even so, a federal judge also ordered the postal service to conduct a last-minute sweep of its facilities to search for nearly 300,000 ballots unaccounted for. The agency said in a late afternoon court filing it was unable to complete the sweep by the deadline without disrupting its election day schedule. There were also reports of misinformation. Voters in Flint, Michigan, received a robocall telling them to vote on Wednesday because of long lines, Dana Nessel, the state’s attorney general, said. New York’s attorney general said she was investigating reports 10m people received a robocall telling them to “stay safe and stay home”. Twitter also flagged several tweets from Mike Roman, a Trump campaign operative, spreading false information that suggested improper voting practices in Philadelphia, a city that likely to shape the outcome. The election is widely seen as a hinge moment that will decide whether Trump was an aberration or a direction. After four years of domestic and international turmoil, Democrats are hoping to seize their chance to halt his populist-nationalist “Make America great again” movement in its tracks. Trump was hoping for a replay of 2016 when, as a businessman and reality TV star with no prior political experience, he beat Hillary Clinton in a seismic repudiation of the Washington establishment and its consensus on issues long assumed settled. Patience was the watchword, however. TV networks promised to exercise extreme caution to avoid calling results prematurely, mindful of the confusion that set in during the disputed 2000 election between George W Bush and Al Gore. Early voting includes 64m mail-in ballots, meaning that the count could take hours, days or even weeks before producing a definitive winner. There were fears that Trump could exploit that delay to prematurely declare victory, spread conspiracy theories and mobilise armed supporters. On Monday Trump threw a match into the tinderbox by suggesting that a supreme court ruling allowing Pennsylvania to accept mail ballots sent by election day and received up to three days later would “induce violence in the streets”. Twitter labelled the tweet with a warning that it “might be misleading about an election or other civic process”. Fearful of potential convulsions, shops were boarded up in cities including Washington, New York and Raleigh, North Carolina. Concrete barriers and a “non-scalable fence” were erected outside the White House, where Trump was due to host an election night party for hundreds of people – yet another potential Covid-19 threat.