“Why is there a ring in your nose? Are you cattle?” No prisoners are taken in this bleak new drama, directed by Lena Dunham and written by Mickey Down and Konrad Kay, which follows hyper-ambitious graduates competing for a foothold in the world of investment banking. Sleep is for wimps, cruel banter is the order of the day and power structures along class and racial lines are quickly established. It’s a darkly intriguing opener, although finding anyone to root for in this loveless, joyless world may prove tricky. Phil Harrison It might be cold, rainy and light for two hours a day, but remember when it wasn’t? Alan Titchmarch, Angellica Bell and shepherd Amanda Owen take a look at how fruit and veg made it to our supermarket shelves over the summer – despite the pandemonium of the pandemic. Hannah J Davies This compelling high-end cook-off is the most successful of the BBC’s cookery shows – more than 3.5 million people watched Stu Deeley’s 2019 triumph. So the show has earned this move to BBC One where, tonight, Monica, Marcus and Gregg will oversee the process of elimination. PH The charming classroom strand continues to highlight the heroism of teachers and the resilience of the kids they nudge in the right direction. Tonight, Rani plays a Valentine’s prank on his best mate Jack and finds their friendship in the balance. And the search for a new head girl is over at last. PH The peculiar dating show, which combines body-positive good intentions with the odd dose of unpleasantly voyeuristic leering, returns for a seventh series. Tonight, a woman searches for a man with perfect balls, and a virgin from Kent is confronted by six naked women all at once. Which is stressful for him. PH Tim Marlow presents a new series of the art show that goes beyond the obvious, with Van Gogh as the starting point in this opening episode. He explores the influence Japan had on the artist, despite the Dutch painter never having visited the country, instead heading to the south of France. Hannah Verdier The Killing of a Sacred Deer (Yorgos Lanthimos, 2017), 11.15pm, Film4Yorgos Lanthimos’s horror-thriller is weird, bordering on the absurd, to hugely entertaining effect. On the face of it, heart surgeon Colin Farrell and his wife Nicole Kidman are a beautiful, successful couple, but his peculiar friendship with teenager Martin (Barry Keoghan) casts a threatening shadow. Paul Howlett Women’s Big Bash cricket: Melbourne Renegades v Hobart Hurricanes 8am, BT Sport 2. At Blacktown ISP Oval, Sydney. Table Tennis: World Cup 11am, Eurosport 1. The women’s final from Weihai, China. IPL Cricket 1.45pm, Sky Sports cricket. The final of the T20 tournament from the UAE.