The decision to go into coronavirus lockdown is not one that any government takes lightly as there are considerable economic and human costs. However, when virus transmission has spiralled out of control, most experts agree that there is little choice but to go down this path. As the UK likely begins its month-long lockdown on Thursday, and after the rapid soaring in cases that has occurred over the previous month, it’s perhaps appropriate to look to Australia, and particularly the state of Victoria, for guidance on how best to bring its second wave under control. Residents of Melbourne, the capital of Victoria, were subject to one of the world’s strictest coronavirus lockdowns, including a nightly curfew. Those in metropolitan Melbourne were not allowed to leave their home between 8pm and 5am, except for urgent medical care. They could only exercise for one hour per day within a 5km radius of their home. Those who tested positive could expect to be door-knocked by police and Australian defence force personnel and receive fines if they were not at home. The extraordinary measures worked. With no cases and no deaths reported in the past five days, Victorians are now tentatively stepping back into the world. Despite the success of Victoria’s lockdown, it’s important to note that this did not come without considerable opposition – from some members of the public, from businesses, and even from the federal government – who implored the Victorian government to open up more quickly than they did for the sake of the economy. And the truth of the matter is we won’t know for some time, perhaps years, whether all of the restrictions imposed were appropriate, and whether settings should have been different. One thing is unmistakable, however. In terms of health outcomes, the lockdown was an overwhelming success. Although making crude comparisons between countries is fraught when it comes to the pandemic, with so many differences and unknowns, it is clear that the situation the UK finds itself in is much worse than the one that Victoria faced back when it implemented its lockdown. On the same day Victoria recorded 723 cases in July, the UK recorded 763. At the time of writing Victoria is recording no new cases, while the UK has 18,950. There are lessons for the UK to be gleaned from how Victoria’s lockdown was successfully implemented. If nothing else, the experience of Victoria demonstrates that lockdowns don’t just work, they can crush transmission of the virus. But they shouldn’t be delayed and you can’t have half measures. If you want to limit transmission of the virus, prevent thousands of deaths and an overwhelmed health system, then you need to impose tough restrictions to limit people coming into contact with each other. It’s as simple and as difficult as that. One of the important lessons from Victoria would have to be not to underestimate the difficulty of the task at hand, and for the UK to prepare itself for lockdowns to have to be extended beyond one month. The key to the effectiveness of lockdowns rests with the testing, isolating and contact tracing of cases. Ensuring that these pillars of the public health response are completed in a timely fashion during lockdown is the key to interrupting transmission of the virus. Thus, the public need to be reminded at every opportunity of the importance of getting tested if they have any symptoms, and to isolate if they test positive. Public health departments need to make sure they have enough capacity to contact-trace in a timely fashion and need to be willing to continually improve how they go about this vital task. One of the keys to controlling the transmission of the virus is to extinguish clusters quickly wherever they appear. This requires the public health response to clusters to be aggressive, decisive and timely, particularly when clusters occur in high-risk settings such as aged care facilities, schools, social housing towers and hospitals. The goal needs to be to rapidly control clusters, as these pose the greatest risk of accelerating the ongoing transmission of the virus. Mandatory mask wearing was likely to have been a key reason why the lockdown in Victoria was so successful. Setting the rules clearly for when masks needed to be worn has changed the social norms regarding mask wearing in Victoria, probably forever. One of the key features of the response to the pandemic in Victoria was the media briefing held by the premier every day during lockdown. Although Daniel Andrews had some challenging moments and was at times fiercely criticised, the fact that he fronted up every day and answered every question patiently, was important for the tone that it set in highlighting that a lockdown should be a partnership between the government and the people, and that all successful partnerships rely on two-way communication. If you can largely maintain the faith of the public, they are willing to endure a great deal of hardship for the common good. It’s going to be really important for everyone in the UK to maintain hope over what will be a difficult month ahead. And looking to the success Victoria had should provide faith that there is light at the end of the tunnel. • Hassan Vally is an epidemiologist and associate professor in public health at La Trobe University