Iain Lauchlan has been putting on panto in Coventry for almost 30 years. Whenever he starts rehearsals, the writer, director and uproarious dame gives his actors the same advice. “I say we’re not going to have the full pantomime cast until the first night because you need the audience,” he explains. Whether they’re being showered with sweets, dragooned on stage by Widow Twankey or bellowing “It’s behind you!”, audiences always ramp up the voltage. But this year, Lauchlan has made a show without one. While a few venues still hope to stage socially distanced productions when (or if) theatres reopen in December, Coventry’s Belgrade theatre postponed its pantomime to 2021. “It’s very unusual for me not to do one,” says Lauchlan, who decided to film a show for audiences to watch online this year. A co-creator of Tweenies, he has extensive experience in children’s television and has combined the look and feel of his previous stage and screen work for Jack and the Beanstalk Online, available from the Belgrade next month. Previous attempts to film pantomimes live in the theatre have never quite come off, Lauchlan says, because it is hard to capture the anarchy in the auditorium. While his new production starts with Lauchlan and co-star Craig Hollingsworth sitting on the stage at the Belgrade looking at an empty auditorium, Jack and the Beanstalk has been filmed using traditional panto sets in a studio. It keeps the same mix of songs, dances and slapstick comedy, just without an audience joining in. He likens it to a cross between the CBeebies panto and a sitcom, and says the characters often talk straight to the camera to draw in the audience. He considered adding a laughter track, but says: “We decided to treat it more like a comedy movie – they don’t have laughter tracks. We put a bit more incidental music in instead.” The meta plot follows Lauchlan and Hollingsworth as they overcome the challenges of doing an online pantomime by downloading a “panto app” to provide necessary noises and have a Zoom call with the Giant. There are plenty of gags about our shared experience of lockdown and, thanks to a pair of socially distanced actors, an extraordinarily long pantomime cow. An unseen online audience is one thing – what about putting on panto in a car park? Director Gary Starr is staging a drive-in Cinderella with a cast of nine actors this winter and faces similar challenges about connecting with viewers. “You’re not going to get the theatre audience, that sort of noise, but you have to adapt to make it work,” he says. “They’ll be honking their horns and joining in within their cars.” Cinderella is part of The Parking Lot Social, which is touring UK venues with a standup comedy, film screenings and bingo, plus a giant Santa Claus MC against the psychedelic backdrop of a 60ft rainbow-coloured Christmas tree. As in Lauchlan’s film, the actors will often directly address the camera during the show, which is filmed live on stage and relayed on two huge screens. Watching from a car provides a different experience to being packed into the stalls. Starr says “you’ve got the comfort of your own space” and that families can get cosy and keep that festive spirit of enjoying a show together. Unlike Jack and the Beanstalk, with its “12 days of lockdown”, Starr’s Cinderella is steering clear of too many topical references to this pandemic year – or, indeed, to the fact that it’s being staged in a car park. “I don’t think you need to draw attention any more than is needed to the fact that it’s different,” he says. “We’re trying to take people away from the reality that we’re all in.” Panto is escapist in its nature, he says. “It always takes you to a different world.” Both Starr and Lauchlan are passionate about panto’s power to bring new audiences to the theatre and to bring families together. “A lot of people use the panto to gather together their family from different parts of the country,” says Lauchlan. While that may not be possible this year, families can at least enjoy a show by the carload or laugh together at an unprecedentedly long panto cow online. Jack and the Beanstalk Online is available 1-31 December; The Parking Lot Social, with Cinderella, is touring the UK from 3-30 December.