Christmas should be about spending quality time with family and friends, and what better way to do that than sharing this delicious fish stew with them? It’s really quite easy to make, but it looks and tastes very special, just right for a winter celebration dinner. Your fishmonger should be able to prepare most of the fish and seafood for you. Using good-quality prepared fish stock makes things easier but still adds depth of flavour. Serves 4For the marinated fishmonkfish tail 1, about 1.5kg, bone removed, trimmed of sinewscod fillet 600gscallops 8 large, shelled and cleanedlive mussels 20, de-bearded and rinsedsquid 2, 250-300g each, cleaned and sliced into ringsgarlic 1 clove, peeled and choppedrosemary 1 sprig, leaves picked and choppedlemon zest of 1, finely gratedlight olive oil 100mlsea salt and freshly ground black pepper For the stewolive oilwhite onions 2 medium, peeled and finely slicedgarlic 4 cloves, peeled and finely choppedred peppers 2, cored, deseeded and finely sliceddried chilli flakes ½ tsporange ½, finely zested (microplaned) and juicedsaffron strands a big pinchbay leaves 3rosemary 1 sprigtomato purée 50ggood quality chopped tomatoes 1 tin, drainedcelery 2 sticks, choppedceleriac 1 small, peeled and chopped into thin stickswhite wine 300mlgood-quality fish stock 1.2 litresbrussels sprouts 100g, shreddedtinned chestnuts 150g, drained For the rye bread croutonsgood-quality rye bread 6 slicessunflower oil for frying Cut the monkfish into 8 equal chunks. Cut the cod fillet to give 4 pieces. Put the monkfish, cod and scallops into a bowl and add the garlic, rosemary, lemon zest, olive oil and some salt and pepper. Mix carefully, cover and leave to marinate in the fridge for 1 hour. Heat a large pan over a medium heat and add a drizzle of olive oil. When it is hot, add the onions, garlic and red peppers. Cook, stirring occasionally, for 5 minutes until the vegetables have softened but not coloured. Now add the chilli flakes, orange zest, saffron, bay and rosemary and cook for 2 minutes. Stir in the tomato purée and cook, stirring frequently, for 5 minutes. Add the drained chopped tomatoes, orange juice, celery and celeriac. Cook, stirring occasionally, for 10 minutes. Next, add the white wine and fish stock and simmer gently for 20 minutes. Taste and adjust the seasoning, if necessary. Now add the monkfish to the stew base and cook for 1 minute. Next, add the cod, scallops, mussels and shredded brussels sprouts and cook for another 2 minutes. Finally, add the squid and chestnuts then cook for 2 minutes. To make the rye bread croutons, cut the rye bread into ½cm cubes and heat some sunflower oil in a large frying pan. Once hot, shallow-fry the rye bread cubes until crispy then drain onto kitchen paper. To serve, place the rye-bread croutons in serving bowls then serve the stew in the centre of the table for everyone to help themselves. Nathan Outlaw is the chef-owner of Outlaw’s Fish Kitchen and Outlaw’s New Road, Port Isaac, Cornwall The Observer aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US 