As they exit No 10 Dominic Cummings and his associates will leave behind a seemingly contradictory legacy. On the one hand, their unscrupulous campaigning skills helped deliver the outcome of the 2016 referendum on the EU and the scale of Boris Johnson’s victory in the general election in 2019. On the other, their astonishing capacity to generate destructive mayhem left much debris at the heart of government. The two, of course, went together, as could be seen during the political crisis over prorogation last year. The No 10 press operation was turned into a lie factory spewing out factual untruths about the government’s intentions and smears against anyone trying to stand in its way. It then sold the new “withdrawal deal” as not involving the risk of a hard border between Great Britain and Northern Ireland, only for it now to be the government’s position that this deal risks exactly that outcome. Politics is not for the fainthearted, but during Cummings’ tenure we saw the disappearance of any standards of conduct at the heart of government. We have had summary sackings of fellow special advisers, one of whom is now receiving tens of thousands of pounds in compensation. Public trust and respect for government has been eroded by the double standards of Cummings’ personal conduct over lockdown and the prime minister’s policy zig-zags. Most recently, the clear terms of the ministerial code have been ignored to bring forward the clauses of the internal market bill, which flagrantly breaches international law. This has turned out to be not just a crime but also an error. Far from the lack of scruple delivering some negotiating advantage with the EU, it has backfired spectacularly, prompting a rebellion in both Commons and Lords and souring relations with the new US president at a time when Brexit maximises the prime minister’s need for goodwill. Nor is there anything positive to show on the promised modernisation of government and civil service. While Michael Gove may make speeches about encouraging civil servants to take risks, Cummings’ threatened change was by “hard rain” and denigration, which was hardly likely to make them feel valued. A sense of public duty and probity is a cornerstone of any Whitehall reforms, so it is an odd way forward for the cabinet secretary to give civil servants specific direction to work in breach of their own standards on the internal market bill. But, perhaps most damagingly, I note that when I talk with younger people they communicate their sense of government as being corrupt – almost accepting it as normal. That view is the inevitable consequence of the cronyism and party politicisation of administrative decisions that has surfaced in the last 12 months. As I remain a Conservative, despite having been thrown out by my party, I have no reason to wish this government to fail, however saddened I might be at what has been done to it and by it. Some of my ex-colleagues are hoping now for a reset, with the prime minister returning to more orthodox methods, with respectable advisers and a cabinet government that allows ministers some independence of thought. That leaves massive challenges relating to Covid, the economy, Brexit, the union of the UK, the climate crisis and social needs. But the change in personnel might at least help underpin some reasoned decision-making. The government has only days to decide whether it wants a thin deal or no deal. The former would help minimise disruption in January, but both are likely to be unsatisfactory and our future wellbeing as a nation is going to depend on what longer-term relationship with our neighbours can be achieved. These will all require hard choices, particularly as the public has been so consistently misled as to the reality of our country’s strengths and weaknesses. But that is what good governance is about. But, much as I would be pleased at such a transformation, I have doubts that the prime minister is capable of it. Those of us who have watched him in action as a colleague over the years can appreciate the engaging optimism that forms the base of his success as a communicator. But behind this lies a vacuum of detail, industry and integrity. It is this vacuum that gets filled by chaos. Equally troubling is the tendency when facing hard choices to take refuge in Churchillian “heroics” that serve only his personal short-term needs and can be reckless as to consequences. Outside observers have often predicted a skilful change of direction towards rational decision-making on many occasions, but it has failed to transpire. My former colleagues need to ask themselves the question: what, in the last 11 months since Brexit, reflects well on us as a party in government? If the answer is as damning as it looks, then what are they going to do about it? • Dominic Grieve was Conservative MP for Beaconsfield from 1997 to 2019, and attorney general from 2010 to 2014