Harry Kane’s 150th Premier League goal allowed Tottenham a visit to the top of the table – their first in six years – though once again they left it late. Just as at Burnley a couple of weeks ago Spurs found it hard to break through an organised defence but managed a winner in the last 10 minutes. Kane’s header here was even later in the game than Son Heung-min’s at Turf Moor. Another couple of minutes and West Brom might have been able to claim a valuable point that would have been far from undeserved, but Spurs are gaining a reputation for persevering right to the end and a momentary lapse of defensive concentration cost the home side dear. “West Bromwich gave us a very difficult match,” José Mourinho conceded. “The way they played meant we had to play even better. I am pleased that we are compensating in away games for the points we have dropped at home but it is too early to get excited about anything at the moment. In a lot of countries we might be talked about as title hopefuls, but it is hard in the Premier League. You can have a very good season and still find Liverpool or Manchester City ahead of you. I am happy that Kane reached another landmark, but mostly I am pleased to have Harry playing for us. His all-round game is worth just as much as his goals. As well as scoring goals he recovers the ball and wins so many challenges.” While Slaven Bilic could not disguise his disappointment at such a late setback, he was correct in stating West Brom would soon be climbing the table if they played like this every week. “We have to make this our standard,” the Albion manager said, aware that his future at the club will be under consideration during the international break. “We made good chances against a good team today, and if we can keep doing that we will have a chance of staying up.” Gareth Bale enjoyed a fairly quiet opening on his first Premier League start since his return, though he did pop up in the left-back position to launch the attack that brought Tottenham’s first chance. Bale’s ball set Kane free down the left and when Tanguy Ndombele switched the ball right to find Son free at the far post it seemed certain the league’s leading scorer would add to his account. Son had so much time he steadied himself and went for placement, only to find Semi Ajayi able to get across and block his eventual shot. West Brom were competitive in an evenly contested first half, despite the late reshuffle due to Branislav Ivanovic and Matheus Pereira being ruled out after testing positive for Covid-19, and could have taken the lead had Karlan Grant been more accurate with a free header from six yards. A few minutes later Eric Dier had to head out from under his own crossbar to prevent Callum Robinson’s cross-shot finding its way into the net, before Bale found himself with a brief shooting chance at the other end but was dispossessed by Dara O’Shea. The Irish defender opened the second half with a glancing header from Filip Krovinovic’s corner that Hugo Lloris was relieved to see pass just the wrong side of his right hand upright, before Kane beat Kyle Bartley on the Spurs right to send over a cross that Bale could not quite reach. Bale attempted to return the favour from a free-kick when Conor Townsend was penalised for handball just before the hour, but though Kane got his head to the cross he found himself crowded out at the far post. Sam Johnstone beat away a well-struck shot from Sergio Reguilón as Spurs began to increase their attacking efforts, with a neat touch from Ndombele setting up another shooting chance for Kane and then Son breaking free on the right to send a shot straight at the goalkeeper. Probably the best chance of all fell to newly arrived substitute Giovani Lo Celso when Reguilón saw a shot blocked and the Argentinian could not adjust his feet in time and managed to miss the target from the six yard line. West Brom were being pushed back a little yet had their moments going forward – it took a very good save from Lloris to keep out a header from Grant after a Krovinovic corner. It looked as though Spurs would have to settle for a draw when Toby Alderweireld and Carlos Vinícius both saw attempts saved in the closing minutes, but Kane was able to provide the winning goal from the simplest of situations. When Matt Doherty sent in a cross from the right with less than two minutes remaining on the clock Kane was able to both stay onside – just – and escape the attentions of Bartley to flick a backwards header over the helpless Johnstone. It was tough on the home side, who were worth at least a point, but Spurs had their reward for keeping going right to the end.