This wonderful soup infuses the air with warmth and comfort, promising as well as delivering a bowl of soothing goodness. Make lots as it keeps remarkably well and folk always seem to want seconds, or more, the next day. You’ll need to soak the beans overnight or buy very good tinned or the excellent jars of beans, such as those from Brindisa. Feeds 8cannellini beans 500g, soaked overnightsmoked ham hock 1 small, rinsed or 6 rashers of streaky bacon (250g), cut into small stripsgarlic 1 head, cloves peeled, plus 2 extra cloves, peeled and thinly slicedpumpkin 1 small, peeled and chopped into random rough shapes 1-2cm in lengthcarrots 2 medium, peeled and chopped into random rough shapes 1-2cm in lengthonions 2 medium, peeled and chopped smallcelery ½ a head, chopped into random rough shapes 1-2cm in lengthfennel 1 small head, chopped into random rough shapes 1-2cm in lengththyme a small bundlebay leaves 10red chillies 2 olive oil roasted peeled chestnuts 500gdried chilli flakes a big pinch rosemary a small branch sage a small branchthyme a small branchgarlic 2 cloves, peeled and thinly slicedgrated parmesan to serve In a big pot, bring the soaked beans, ham hock and whole garlic cloves to a simmer and cook for 10 minutes spooning away any foam rising to the surface. Tumble all the chopped vegetables, the thyme and bay tied in a bundle, and the whole chillies into the pot with the simmering beans. Add 3 tablespoons of olive oil. Bring the pot back to a simmer over a moderate heat and, once again, spoon away any foam that sullies the surface. Cover the pot and let cook for at least 2 hours. If making the soup with cooked beans from a jar, then only 45 minutes to 1 hour until the vegetables are tender. Lift out the hock and let cool. Remove the skin, pull the meat and pop it back in the soup. Half an hour before serving, chop the peeled chestnuts. Stir these gently into the soup with a pinch of dried chilli flakes. Taste for seasoning and adjust accordingly. Place the rosemary, sage and thyme in 8 soup-spoonfuls of olive oil with the thinly sliced garlic cloves and warm gently in a pan. Serve bowls of the soup with a spoonful of infused olive oil atop and a great spoonful of grated parmesan. Jeremy Lee is chef-proprietor at Quo Vadis, London