Norwich claimed the lead in the Championship with a 1-0 win at Middlesbrough after Bournemouth came from two goals down to beat Reading 4-2 in the early kick-off at the Vitality Stadium to knock the Royals off top spot. Watford could also have gone top but were held 1-1 at QPR, Ben Wilmot giving the Hornets the lead before Ilias Chair made the final score 1-1. Teemu Pukki earned Norwich all three points with a late penalty after Marcus Tavernier had his earlier successful spot-kick ruled out for Middlesbrough after he was adjudged to have touched the ball twice when he slipped during his run-up. Sam Finley, Callum Camps and Wes Burns put Fleetwood out of sight in the first half against Plymouth Argyle. Charlie Mulgrew and a second from Camps completed a 5-1 rout. There was plenty of later drama in the third tier. A last-minute Gary Madine winner for Blackpool secured them a 2-1 win and the points against Peterborough. AFC Wimbledon also won in the dying embers as Ethan Chislett popped up to defeat Rochdale 1-0. Meanwhile, a 93rd-minute leveller from Fejiri Okenabirhie rescued a point for Doncaster against Sunderland. Portman Road saw the latest drama when Jake Lankester struck for Ipswich in the 97th minute to complete their comeback against Shrewsbury. Three goals were scored in four minutes as Josh Magennis netted twice for Hull with Stephen Walker finding time to level in between for MK Dons. James Scott (pictured) made it 3-1 to ensure the Tigers ended the day top of the table. Portsmouth put in a dominate display to down Crewe 4-1, with Ronan Curtis striking twice for the hosts. Matty Taylor and James Henry settled Oxford United’s trip to Wigan, 2-1 in favour of the visitors. Northampton added to the misery at bottom club Burton by running out 3-1 victors. A Brett Pitman strike was enough for Swindon to see off Bristol Rovers 1-0. Accrington and Lincoln played out a goalless draw. Gillingham and Charlton shared the points after Chuks Aneke’s equaliser cancelled out Jordan Graham’s penalty.  Reading led 2-0 at the break as Lucas João’s penalty made it 10 for the season and Sone Aluko also netted before Bournemouth hit back in the second half. Dominic Solanke’s double came either side of goals by Arnaut Danjuma and Lewis Cook to complete the turnaround. Swansea kept pace with the leaders as captain Matt Grimes scored the only goal just before the half-hour mark at home to Rotherham. Bristol City beat Derby 1-0 in the first game for the Rams since the sacking of manager Phillip Cocu, Famara Diedhiou scoring the only goal 12 minutes before the end. Stoke edged a seven-goal thriller 4-3 against Huddersfield as Tyrese Campbell scored twice for the hosts. Carel Eiting netted for Huddersfield with 24 gone but Campbell replied with two goals in as many minutes. Isaac Mbenza brought Huddersfield level but a Richard Stearman own goal and a Sam Clucas strike put the hosts on top before Naby Sarr ensured a nervy finish. Forty-one-year-old Kevin Ellison pounced in stoppage-time for top-of-the-table Newport County to break the resilience of 10-man Port Vale as the Welsh side won 1-0. Cheltenham moved up to second in the table thanks to a 3-0 victory over Walsall. Dan Scarr turned the ball into his own net before Matty Blair added the second and Ben Tozer a third. Tranmere had the game won before half-time against Grimsby as veterans James Vaughan and Peter Clarke helped them to a three-goal lead, before Otis Khan added a fourth with Paul Lewis rounding things off late on. Salford City eased past Bradford City as Luke Burgess scored twice either side of an Ian Henderson goal. Oldham’s long trip to Exeter was thoroughly worthwhile as they came away with a 2-1 win. In the early kick-off, Carlisle sauntered to a 3-0 win at Crawley. A Danny Johnson hat-trick led Leyton Orient to a 3-0 victory over Harrogate Town. Stevenage remain second from bottom after losing 2-1 at home to Bolton. Barrow thought they had secured victory until the 96th minute against Forest Green when Nicky Cadden made it 2-2, while Aaron Wildig earned a late draw for Morecambe three minutes into stoppage time at Scunthorpe. Late goals from Callum Styles and Cauley Woodrow earned Barnsley a 2-0 home win over Nottingham Forest and Tom Barkhuizen sealed a 1-0 victory for Preston over 10-man Sheffield Wednesday, who had Josh Windass sent off after 17 minutes. Kieffer Moore earned Cardiff a point from a 1-1 draw at Millwall with his reply to Matt Smith’s opener and the substitute Sam Gallagher did the same for Blackburn after Luke Berry had given Luton the lead. The Wycombe goalkeeper Ryan Allsop made several important saves as his side battled to a goalless draw at home to Brentford.