Internazionale continued their rollercoaster season by scoring twice in the first 15 minutes on the way to a convincing 3-0 win at previously unbeaten Sassuolo in Serie A. Outplayed in a 2-0 home defeat by Real Madrid in the Champions League on Wednesday, Inter went ahead through the former Arsenal and Manchester United forward Alexis Sánchez in the fourth minute, and doubled their lead when Vlad Chiriches scored an own goal 10 minutes later. Roberto Gagliardini scored an exquisitely taken third goal on the hour as he flicked up a bouncing ball with his left foot and volleyed into the far corner with his right. The win takes Inter into second place with 18 points, ahead of Sassuolo on goal difference, and two behind the leaders, Milan, who host Fiorentina on Sunday. In Germany, Kingsley Coman scored one goal and set up another as Bayern Munich came from a goal behind to beat VfB Stuttgart 3-1 on Saturday and defend top spot in the Bundesliga. Robert Lewandowski drilled in his 12th league goal of the season on the stroke of half-time from a Coman assist to turn the game around after Tanguy Coulibaly had put the hosts in front in the 20th minute and Coman had levelled. It was the seventh consecutive game in which Bayern conceded a goal, and Philipp Förster should have doubled Stuttgart’s lead when he missed the target from three metres out. But Coman then hit the home side on the break, scoring from a tight angle to level on 38 minutes. Stuttgart kept carving out chances in the second half and Manuel Neuer did his best to keep the visitors in front. It was not until Douglas Costa’s low shot three minutes from time made it 3-1 that the Bavarians were able to breathe easily. Bayern, who face Atlético Madrid in the Champions League next week, are on 22 points with RB Leipzig second on 20 after beating Arminia Bielefeld 2-1 thanks to goals by Angeliño and Christopher Nkunku. Borussia Dortmund suffered a shock 2-1 loss at home to Cologne to drop four points off the pace in the Bundesliga title race. Cologne stunned the hosts with an early goal when Ellyes Skhiri tapped in at the far post in the ninth minute. Dortmund, who had fired five goals past Hertha Berlin last week, were lacking any punch and instead it was hard-working Cologne who scored again with Tunisia international Skhiri on the hour. Thorgan Hazard cut the deficit with a low shot on 74 minutes but despite desperate late attacks and a golden chance missed by Erling Haaland deep in stoppage time they could not find an equaliser. Dortmund are third on 18 points, four behind Bayern and two behind RB Leipzig.