Casey Stoney said Manchester United’s monumental first win against one of the traditional top three has given her players the “belief that they can compete at the top level.” Ella Toone’s late strike sunk Arsenal and lifted United to the top of the Women’s Super League table in the process but Stoney tempered the party: “I don’t usually let them enjoy it for too long to be honest,” she grinned. “I said to the players it’s a very long season and it’s one win.” Arsenal struggled to cope with United’s intense press from the off but it looked like the home team would be left ruing missed chances as the clock ticked down and legs got weary. “We weren’t good, they were better,” said a bruised sounding Arsenal manager, Joe Montemurro. “If you look at the game as a whole they were the better team and deserved to win.” Stoney’s side had began the brighter of the two, playing with an energy and bite that left the league leaders looking flustered and under pressure from the moment they would fleetingly salvage possession. Just before the half hour the US duo Tobin Heath and Christen Press combined for the first meaningful chance as the former slipped a delicate pass only for Viktoria Schnaderbeck to whip the ball from Press’s feet before she could take aim. Press had another go moments later, bringing the ball down in the middle of the penalty area but pressure from Leah Williamson disrupted the shot and goalkeeper Manuela Zinsberger flicked it away with her foot. There may have been more fuss over the arrivals of Alex Morgan at Tottenham, and Sam Mewis and Rose Lavelle at Manchester City, all US World Cup winners, plus Danish forward Pernille Harder at Chelsea but it is perhaps the swift integration of Press and Heath into Stoney’s set up that has been the most impressive and natural fit. Chelsea’s manager Emma Hayes hopes Beth England has kick-started a return to form after scoring a brace in the 4-0 Women’s Super League win over Everton. Ji So-yun scored in the first half  before England netted in the 73rd and 75th minutes. Pernille Harder added a fourth goal. Hayes said: “I don’t think she was at the level we’ve seen her at previously in the first half of the season, she had a long Achilles rehab and it takes time to get back.” Aston Villa claimed their first win as goals from Anita Asante and Ramona Petzelberger saw off Brighton 2-0. Emily Van Egmond’s header gave West Ham their first win as they beat Birmingham 2-1. PA Media Former Arsenal and England defender Stoney has built from the back. In her founding squad was the bulk of the Liverpool defence she had played in and a spread of talented youngsters in front of them. Those young players have developed but the addition of Press and Heath adds a level of composure, experience and star quality to their attack. United finished fourth in their maiden WSL season but were 13 points behind Arsenal in third, albeit having played a game less as the season was curtailed. This time they have already taken a point off Chelsea but the morale-building win against a WSL giant to show the club has begun to bridge the gap between the best and the rest had eluded them. In their three games against WSL title contenders in the last campaign, they lost each time, 1-0 at Chelsea and Manchester City while a late goal from Daniëlle van de Donk gave Arsenal the edge in their league meeting. In the rain-soaked Leigh Sports Village, United maintained the pressure after the break. Hunkered in the dugout Montemurro screamed “get the ball” in frustration with his team pegged back. The introduction of Kim Little and Jill Roord, who both made their return from injury in Arsenal’s midweek Continental Cup tie, swung the momentum behind the visiting team and, with an hour gone, Katie McCabe’s ball from the left was flicked goalwards by the heel of Caitlin Foord only for Mary Earps to tip it round the near post. With United’s profligacy looking costly, a slick pass from Jess Sigsworth on the right found Toone and the forward curved her shot beyond Zinsberger to end the visiting team’s 100% record. Does the defeat hurt more as an Arsenal fan? “Very much so,” said Montemurro. “It’s massive,” said Toone. “Last season we always put on a big game against the top three teams. The difference then to now is we were more clinical.”