Peterborough crashed to a 2-0 defeat at Crewe to see their lead at the top of League One cut. Harry Pickering and Charlie Kirk scored for Alex as the hosts collected their third win of the season. The pair wrapped the game up before half-time to condemn Posh to defeat. It allowed Hull to close the gap on the leaders to a point after they beat 10-man Burton 2-0. The Tigers moved into second place after Mallik Wilks and Hakeeb Adelakun scored second-half goals. Burton remain second bottom and had Sam Hughes sent off after just 18 minutes for two yellow cards. Sunderland slipped to a 2-1 defeat to MK Dons at the Stadium of Light to remain sixth. Scott Fraser’s second-half penalty won it for Russell Martin’s side, who climbed to 14th. Cameron Jerome had earlier cancelled out Max Power’s deflected sixth-minute opener. Fleetwood’s thumping 4-1 win at Bristol Rovers proved to be the last act for Ben Garner. The Rovers manager’s sacking was announced straight after the defeat. Joey Barton’s side are two points outside the play-off spots following Callum Camps’ brace, Ched Evans’ penalty and Paddy Madden’s strike. Josh Grant scored on the hour for the hosts. 📰 The Club can this evening confirm that it has parted company with Manager Ben Garner. https://t.co/MnnC5eOMzK Matt Smith’s injury-time strike rescued a point for new Swindon boss John Sheridan in a thrilling 3-3 draw at fellow strugglers Shrewsbury. Quickfire goals from Aaron Pierre and Matthew Millar put the hosts 2-0 up before Joel Grant pulled a goal back. Dave Edwards made it 3-1 but Hallam Hope started Swindon’s comeback before Smith’s late leveller.Elsewhere, Jonathan Russell’s second-minute goal earned Accrington a 1-0 win at Northampton. Bristol Rovers 1-4 Fleetwood, Crewe 2-0 Peterborough, Hull 2-0 Burton, Northampton 0-1 Accrington, Shrewsbury 3-3 Swindon, Sunderland 1-2 MK Dons In League Two, Cambridge missed the chance to move top as Matt Platt struck six minutes into stoppage time to earn Barrow a 1-1 draw at the Abbey Stadium. David Dunn’s side were gifted the lead nine minutes after the break by Barrow goalkeeper Joel Dixon, who, passed the ball straight to Joe Ironside.. Cheltenham climbed into third, three points behind leaders Newport, after winning 2-1 at Carlisle. William Boyle put Cheltenham ahead and Conor Thomas grabbed a second from the penalty spot before the break. Joe Mellish pulled a goal back in first-half stoppage time.Mansfield claimed their first league win of the season at the 12th attempt as they triumphed 2-1 at Forest Green.On-loan George Lapslie put Mansfield ahead in the sixth minute before Harry Charsley added a second 10 minutes before half-time. Managerless Tranmere scored twice in stoppage time to secure a dramatic 4-3 victory at 10-man Port Vale. The Valiants were cruising at 2-0 before they had Luke Joyce sent off seven minutes into the second half. . Kaiyne Woolery eventually made it 3-3 in the third minute of time added on before Kieron Morris won it. Exeter remain fourth after a 2-2 draw at , with all the goals coming in the first half. Billy’s Clarke’s goal was cancelled out by Matt Jay’s sixth of the season. Ryan Bowman nudged the Grecians in front but Reece Staunton restored parity. Scunthorpe snapped a run of eight successive defeats in all competitions as they beat Oldham 2-0 at Boundary Park. Southend remain bottom of the table but claimed their first victory of the season as Emile Acquah’s 88th-minute goal earned them a 1-0 victory at Walsall. In-form Jevani Brown bagged a brace as Colchester won 2-1 at home to Leyton Orient. Jack Muldoon netted an 85th-minute equaliser as Harrogate drew 1-1 at home to Crawley. And Jordan Slew helped Morecambe salvage a 1-1 draw at home to Stevenage, his 80th-minute effort cancelling out Aramide Oteh’s early penalty. Bradford City 2-2 Exeter, Cambridge 1-1 Barrow, Carlisle 1-2 Cheltenham, Colchester 2-1 Leyton Orient,  Forest Green 1-2 Mansfield, Harrogate 1-1 Crawley, Morecambe 1-1 Stevenage, Oldham 0-2 Scunthorpe, Port Vale 3-4 Tranmere, Walsall 0-1 Southend