A special investigator will be appointed to consider criminal cases against Australian special forces in Afghanistan, as Scott Morrison declared that a report to be released next week would contain “very difficult” and “disturbing” findings. The prime minister said he would also set up an independent oversight panel to give people confidence the Australian defence force was tackling the serious cultural issues uncovered by the four-year investigation into alleged war crimes. The announcement of both moves is a sign that the report will contain damning conclusions about the conduct of Australian special forces in Afghanistan. An inquiry led by the assistant inspector-general of the Australian Defence Force, Maj Gen Justice Paul Brereton, has been examining the conduct of elite Australian forces in at least 55 incidents of alleged breaches of the laws of armed conflict between 2005 and 2016. These included alleged unlawful killings of people who were non-combatants or “cruel treatment” of such people, said a report tabled in parliament earlier this year. Morrison said the inquiry report would be released next week and he wanted to prepare the nation for a “long and arduous journey” given “the likely allegations of serious and possibly criminal misconduct”. “This is going to be very difficult for Australians,” Morrison told reporters in Canberra on Thursday. “It is going to be very difficult for our serving community and our veterans’ community. It is going to be difficult for all of us. “I think what we have to do as a country is to absorb this in a way that enables us to uphold the integrity of our justice system and uphold the integrity of our defence forces.” The government has left open the possibility of stripping medals from soldiers who were found to have committed crimes, with the defence minister, Linda Reynolds, saying the ADF chief was “considering all of those options”. The government also did not rule out disbanding the SAS. The chief of the ADF, Angus Campbell, confirmed last Friday that he had received the Afghanistan inquiry report and would consider the matters in detail before speaking publicly. Asked what level of detail would be released, Morrison said it was a “voluminous” document but it would be redacted “both to ensure the integrity of the justice process that is flowing from it, and also national security issues, as are relevant”. Morrison played down the possibility that some of Australia’s soldiers could be called before the international criminal court, which is known as a court of last resort. He said the allegations would be dealt with through the Australian justice system. He said the report would deliver “difficult news” but Australia’s international partners should be assured by the process announced on Thursday that Australia would “deal with it honestly”. Morrison said the office of the special investigator – to be established within the Department of Home Affairs – would address the criminal matters outlined in the inspector general’s report. The office would investigate those allegations, gather evidence and, where appropriate, refer briefs to the commonwealth director of public prosecutions. Australian federal police would normally be the body to prepare a brief of evidence to be considered by prosecutors, but Morrison said: “This is no normal set of circumstances.” He said the government was concerned that leaving this task up to the AFP would “significantly overwhelm” the federal police. The special investigator – who is yet to be appointed – would be either a senior counsel or a retired judge with extensive criminal law experience, Morrison said. The office would be staffed with experienced investigators, legal counsel and other support personnel, along with investigators from the AFP and state and territory police forces. The AFP said in late 2018 that it had already received a referral to investigate allegations of war crimes committed by Australian soldiers in Afghanistan. Morrison said he “would assume that the AFP would resolve how they would handle those issues within this new structure” of the special investigator. The government is also setting up a three-person oversight panel headed by Vivienne Thom, the former inspector-general of intelligence and security. It will report directly to Reynolds – not the ADF top brass. The panel will monitor how the ADF is implementing governance and cultural reform and will alert the defence minister if it notices any challenges and difficulties, according to the terms of reference. Reynolds said she would receive a report from the inquiry oversight panel every quarter, and would regularly update parliament. “Can I just stress [that] nothing will be out of bounds for this inquiry,” Reynolds said. “There are many lessons no doubt to be learned at many levels and so this inquiry, this panel, will be absolutely looking at all of them.” Morrison said he and Reynolds were not privy to the unredacted information in the report, such as the names of individuals. It was unclear how long it could take for prosecutions to begin. The prime minister said there were “very complicated legal issues and so we must prepare ourselves for what will continue to be a long and arduous journey”. Labor voiced support for the the new investigative body and oversight panel, saying the Brereton inquiry must be “treated with the seriousness it warrants”. The Greens senator Jordon Steele-John called for the report to “be made public in full and not redacted to within an inch of being read by the public in any meaningful way” because “Australians deserve to know the truth”. Human rights groups wrote an open letter last month urging Australian government to release as much information as possible. Neil James, the executive director of the Australian Defence Association, said many Australians had served in Afghanistan and “it would be very unfair” to tar everyone with the same brush. “We need to congratulate those whistleblowers in the special forces who said we are not comfortable with some of the things being done in the name of Australia,” he told the ABC.