Jack Willis will make his England debut against Georgia on Saturday while Eddie Jones has also handed a first start to Ollie Lawrence as he rings the changes for their Autumn Nations Cup opener. Willis, has been rewarded for his fine form for Wasps and comes into the side at openside flanker. The 23-year-old won an astonishing 47 turnovers this season and was crowned the RPA’s players’ player, the Premiership’s Player of the Season and Land Rover Discovery of the Season. He was picked by Jones for the tour of South Africa in 2018, only to suffer a debilitating injury soon after, ruling him out of action for nearly 18 months. In total, Jones has made seven personnel changes and two positional, with Ellis Genge and Will Stuart named as the starting props, Joe Launchbury and Charlie Ewels in the second row and Maro Itoje picked at blindside flanker. Jonathan Joseph is again picked on the wing, having played there against Ireland in February, while Elliot Daly comes back into the side at full-back after recovering from a shin injury. Team to face Georgia at Twickenham, 14 November Elliot Daly (Saracens); Jonathan Joseph (Bath), Ollie Lawrence (Worcester), Henry Slade (Exeter), Jonny May (Gloucester); Owen Farrell (c) (Saracens); Ben Youngs (Leicester); Ellis Genge (Leicester), Jamie George (Saracens), Will Stuart (Bath), Charlie Ewels (Bath), Joe Launchbury (Wasps), Maro Itoje (Saracens), Jack Willis (Wasps), Billy Vunipola (Saracens) Replacements: Tom Dunn (Bath), Mako Vunipola (Saracens), Kyle Sinckler (Bristol), Ben Earl (Bristol), Tom Curry (Sale), Dan Robson (Wasps), Max Malins (Bristol), Joe Marchant (Harlequins) Jones has resisted selecting nine forwards, with Ben Earl on the bench and Ollie Thorley omitted from the squad entirely. Max Malins is among the replacements, however, and is in line for a debut on Saturday. The Saracens contingent of Jamie George, Billy Vunipola and the captain Owen Farrell are among those players to keep their places, along with Ben Youngs, Jonny May and Henry Slade. Slade is again picked at inside-centre with the 21-year-old Lawrence outside him. The Worcester centre has impressed Jones since coming into camp and made his debut off the bench in Rome and is now given the chance from the start, charged with providing the backline with additional power in the absence of Manu Tuilagi. “Georgia will be a tough opponent, so we have a team with some real power in midfield,” said Jones. “We have a good mix of youth and experience across the squad and they are completely focused on putting in an excellent performance on Saturday. We’re looking forward to being back at our home at Twickenham, we are humbled by the opportunity and want to give people a reason to smile during such a tough time for the country.” Among the replacements there is no place for Joe Marler, despite his return to fitness, with Mako Vunipola and Kyle Sinckler dropping to the bench along with Tom Dunn, who also made his debut against Italy. Tom Curry is also on the bench alongside Dan Robson and Joe Marchant.