I purchased a Morrisons delivery pass four weeks ago but each shop has been late, with items missing. Last week’s was booked for Thursday evening. When it didn’t arrive I phoned customer services (waiting 30 minutes) and was advised that the store (Stratford-upon-Avon) had emailed head office that day with a list of deliveries that wouldn’t be fulfilled, including my own. When I asked why? I was disconnected. I assumed the delivery was cancelled so I arranged a “click and collect” for early Friday evening. When I arrived at the store, I was told they were hours behind so couldn’t fulfil my order immediately, but promised to deliver between 7-8pm. It didn’t arrive. Friday wasn’t a good day; I also shop for two sets of elderly parents and they had already missed their items due on Thursday, so I was feeling the pressure. I had to take an hour off work to get to the store in time. I work in the NHS and had been told that day that I was being redeployed to the Covid wards until March. It is no longer possible to get through to either Morrisons customer service or the local store. It has taken nearly £300 from my account, for both orders and I cannot get a refund. On social media it just asks me to direct message my contact details and say it will look into it. I was promised this six times – and a phone call – – which I didn’t get. The store said customer services need to refund me, while customer services says the store need to refund me. AN, Alcester, Warwickshire Supermarkets’ online delivery services have struggled under the pressure of Covid-19, and the latest lockdown in England has clearly added to the strain. We contacted Morrisons which confirmed it had been experiencing “very high demand” for its online service recently. One we got in touch, Morrisons swung into action. It says: “We apologise to AN. We always strive to get things right for our customers, but on this occasion we got it wrong. We’ve since been in contact and arranged for her to receive £150 of free shopping to say we’re sorry. And we have also arranged for all refunds to be made to her account.” The money should arrive within three to five days. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions: http://gu.com/letters-terms 