While some people might not have been that familiar with Boris Johnson’s right-hand man before his trip to Barnard Castle to “test his eyesight” during the spring, many across the country will be familiar with Dominic Cummings’ work. There are reports that the prime minister’s chief adviser could step down by Christmas, with Cummings telling the BBC that his “position hasn’t changed since my January blog” when he said that he wanted to make himself “largely redundant” by the end of 2020. Before joining the government, the longstanding Eurosceptic was the mastermind behind the successful Vote Leave campaign during the 2016 referendum on the UK’s membership of the EU. He was responsible for the red bus plastered with the disputed figure of £350m a week for the NHS, targeted Facebook ads to reach voters, and the clarion call: “Take back control”. His role in the campaign was dramatised for Channel 4 in Brexit: The Uncivil War with Benedict Cumberbatch as Cummings. He has gained notoriety for a characteristic determination to forgo rules and conventions. Vote Leave was found to have broken electoral law over spending limits by the Electoral Commission and Cummings was found in contempt of parliament in 2019 for refusing to give evidence to MPs investigating misinformation. It was Cummings who devised the winning formula for the Conservative’s election strategy in 2019. “Get Brexit Done” saw the party sweep into Labour’s heartlands. Cummings has gone on to become one of the most powerful unelected political figures in the country after Boris Johnson brought him into the heart of government and appointed him as his de facto chief of staff last summer. He grabbed headlines again at the beginning of this year when he posted an advert on his personal blog for “weirdos and misfits with odd skills” to work for the government. In the same blog in January, he set out the plans for his own redundancy. “We want to improve performance and make me much less important – and within a year largely redundant.” He set in motion a contentious plan to shake up the civil service, issuing a recruitment call for mathematicians and data scientists to be given more prominence in Whitehall. In April, it emerged that Cummings had been present at meetings of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), coordinating the government’s response to the coronavirus pandemic, raising concerns over possible political interference in science-based advice. But Cummings became more of a household name when he was catapulted into the spotlight in late-May following public uproar over revelations that he drove 260 miles to his parents’ home in Durham while the country was in lockdown. He was forced to address the media in an extraordinary and unprecedented press conference in Downing Street’s rose garden. He denied any wrongdoing and refused to resign. Maybe the timing just wasn’t part of his timetable. 