Erling Haaland scored four goals in a sensational second-half performance to help Borussia Dortmund come from a goal down to win 5-2 at Hertha Berlin on Saturday and climb to second place in the Bundesliga. It was a memorable evening for the Norwegian Haaland, who notched his first away goals of the campaign and took his season tally to 10 goals in eight matches. It was an equally memorable match for the teenager Youssoufa Moukoko, who replaced Haaland late in the game to become the youngest ever Bundesliga player at the age of 16 years and one day. Haaland struck twice between the 47th and 49th minutes to put his team in front after Matheus Cunha had stunned the visitors with an unstoppable shot from 25 metres in the 33rd. He completed his hat-trick when he pounced on a Hertha mistake to round the keeper and slot in, with the hosts in complete disarray. Haaland grabbed his fourth after Raphaël Guerreiro had also scored for the visitors and Hertha had briefly cut the deficit with a 79th-minute Cunha penalty. Lacklustre Bayern Munich had to come from behind to rescue a 1-1 draw against Werder Bremen, slipping up for only the second time in their last 35 matches in all competitions. Borussia Dortmund striker Erling Braut Haaland has won the 2020 Golden Boy award after an impressive start at the Bundesliga club. Haaland beat Barcelona teenager Ansu Fati and Bayern Munich winger Alphonso Davies to the award, which is given to the best under-21 player from one of the top-flight European leagues and awarded by the Italian sports newspaper Tuttosport. The Norwegian scored 44 goals in all competitions last season, which included 16 for Dortmund following his mid-season transfer from Austrian club Salzburg. The 20-year-old had scored 11 goals in 11 games in all competitions this season – before Saturday's remarkable four-goal blitz – including four goals in the Champions League. Atlético Madrid forward João Félix won the award last year. Four days after Germany’s stunning 6-0 loss to Spain, there was little in terms of redemption for Bayern’s many internationals, with the German champions failing to hit a single shot on target in the first half. Werder took a deserved lead on the stroke of half-time after Josh Sargent set up Max Eggestein who beat keeper Manuel Neuer with a well-placed left-footed effort. Bayern, who had won 33 of their previous 34 games in all competitions, had to wait until the 50th minute for Douglas Costa to rattle the crossbar with a fierce shot and the hosts to show some signs of life. They upped the pace briefly and Kingsley Coman drew them level, nodding in at the far post in the 62nd minute. Unbeaten Bayer Leverkusen are second after their 2-1 win over Arminia Bielefeld, courtesy of Aleksandar Dragovic’s 88th-minute winner. Schalke slumped to a 2-0 defeat at home against VfL Wolfsburg and have now gone 24 league matches without a win. Schalke, who are edging closer to the all-time winless run of 31 matches in the league set by Tasmania Berlin in 1965-66, are 17th. Real Madrid conceded a fourth penalty in two games as they drew 1-1 at Villarreal in La Liga, dropping points for the second game in a row, on a day when their city rivals Atlético beat Barcelona 1-0. Zinedine Zidane’s Real side were missing seven players through injury and illness, including Sergio Ramos, Karim Benzema and Casemiro, but the champions went ahead in the second minute with a diving header from Mariano Diaz. Villarreal protested the goal as the linesman had momentarily flagged for offside against Lucas Vazquez, who did not make contact with the ball, and Dani Carvajal picked it up before crossing to Mariano. Unai Emery’s Villarreal were much improved in the second half and after spurning numerous chances striker Gerard Moreno beat Thibaut Courtois from the spot in the 76th minute after the Belgian keeper had felled substitute Samuel Chukwueze. Cristiano Ronaldo’s first-half double allowed Juventus to climb to second in the Serie A standings with a 2-0 win over Cagliari at Juventus Stadium. After a relatively quiet international break for Ronaldo, with one goal in three games for Portugal, he scored in the 38th minute in Turin, finding the net for the fifth successive league match. Four minutes later the 35-year-old forward brilliantly struck at the far post to double his side’s advantage, taking him to eight league goals for the season, from just four starts. The win enabled Andrea Pirlo’s unbeaten side to close the gap to leaders AC Milan to one point, with Milan playing at Napoli on Sunday. Cagliari stayed 11th. “When you come back from the international break it is always difficult, but we returned with the right spirit from the first minute,” Pirlo said. Ciro Immobile became Lazio’s joint second top goalscorer in Serie A history as he set his side on their way to a 2-0 victory at Crotone in sodden conditions. The match was in danger of being called off after violent storms and flooding in Calabria, but after the pitch passed an inspection, Immobile glanced home a 21st-minute header to move on to 107 Serie A goals for Lazio, alongside Giuseppe Signori. As the rain subsided in the second half, Joaquín Correa squeezed a shot in from a tight angle to make sure of the victory. The win stretches Lazio’s unbeaten run to seven in all competitions and moves Simone Inzaghi’s side up to sixth in the table, while Crotone remain bottom. Atalanta are fifth, above Lazio on goal difference, after a goalless draw at Spezia.