At the end of 2019, Lewis Hamilton had a realisation about Formula One. “I was looking at pictures of all the teams – they do these team photos in front of the garage or on the track – and they’ve posted all these pictures and I’m like, there are no people of colour in any of these teams.” Hamilton says he had always thought that his presence and his incredible success would “spark change”. Somewhat naively, he now acknowledges he thought his career as the world’s most successful racing driver – along with the presence of his dad, Anthony, and his racing driver brother, Nicolas – would be enough to “open up doorways” for others. The realisation that after all these years it wasn’t happening led him to rethink. And as he was working things out, the world was slapped in the face by an example of sickening racial hatred. On 25 May, the 46-year-old African American father-of-five George Floyd was killed by Derek Chauvin, a white Minneapolis cop, who, as he was making an arrest, kneeled on Floyd’s neck and choked the life out of him. The 35-year-old remains traumatised by what he saw on the viral video of Floyd’s death that circulated soon afterwards. You can hear it in his voice: “Watching George for that eight minutes and 30 seconds, as for so many people, brought up so much emotion that I didn’t even realise that I had clogged up and suppressed over that time.” It also crystallised in his mind what he needed to do. “Competing and winning championships is a great thing, but what does it really mean? It doesn’t mean anything unless you can help push for change. I cannot keep silent during this time. I decided that I have to use this platform. There are so many people out there who are struggling and so many who have experienced what I have experienced, and worse,” he says, in reference to the racism he was forced to endure both as a youngster and since he has been a professional driver. Hamilton is Formula One’s most successful driver. This weekend, he equalled Michael Schumacher’s record of seven world championships by winning the Turkish Grand Prix. But not only has he won more races than anyone in history and had more pole positions, more points finishes and more top-three finishes than anyone else, frighteningly for his rivals, he says he may continue driving for another three years. He has also just been voted No 1 in this year’s Powerlist, which showcases the country’s most influential people of African, African Caribbean or African American heritage and is sent to institutions such as schools and colleges so that children, especially black children, can see what can be achieved with dedication and perseverance. Hamilton is the first sports star to take top billing in the list’s 14-year history. He says the award is a “monumental moment”. “Growing up in Stevenage, there’s quite a small black community there … to be acknowledged within the black community … I’m just so proud.” The seven-strong panel unanimously voted him No 1, not only for his amazing sporting career, but because of his commitment to change. It’s not enough to be not racist. You have to be anti-racist. You have to be against racism and supporting these movements His stance is symbolic of the way some of today’s black sports stars are using their celebrity to influence issues that, even 15 years ago, most of their predecessors wouldn’t have touched. Apart from some notable examples, from the late 80s through to the early 00s black athletes – perhaps wary of losing lucrative sponsorship deals, perhaps because of the less receptive climate, or even perhaps they were not interested in such matters – tended to focus on making money and keeping quiet. Now, however, if you don’t do something or say something, you are seen as part of the problem. “It’s not enough to be not racist,” Hamilton says. “You have to be anti-racist. You have to be against racism and supporting these movements.” The similarities with other stars such as Raheem Sterling and LeBron James are obvious: like Hamilton, both are at the very top of their game but are more than willing to speak out, whatever the risks. But what distinguishes Hamilton is that in Sterling and James’s sports they do not stand alone. There are a large number of high-profile competitors who support them – both black and white. It is a point that has not been lost on Hamilton: “Look at the NBA, who have been amazing. I was so, so surprised and impressed with what people have been doing … what the football organisations have done.” Yet he himself hasn’t enjoyed the luxury of such company. Formula One racing began in 1950. In the intervening years some 750 young men have taken to the track. Hamilton is still the only one of African Caribbean heritage. Since Hamilton made the decision to start using his platform for more than showering the second- and third-placed drivers with champagne, he has been a whirlwind. He has encouraged competitors to back him by taking a knee before each race; convinced his team, Mercedes, to change its cars’ livery from silver to black; and set up a commission to make the sport more diverse at all levels of employment – all the while showcasing the Black Lives Matter cause with a T-shirt and matching BLM facemask. Speaking out on anything considered controversial when you are a figure of Hamilton’s standing is not easy, he admits. “I’m in a white-dominated sport and, as you know, you have to be very, very careful with how you approach it, what you say, because people will turn your words against you most of the time.” So, how did he convince the sport to change so much, so fast? Taking a knee, for example? “There are some drivers who don’t take the knee, and there are athletes out there that don’t. But they stand alongside their teammates still. “There are some drivers that I’ve worked with who took the knee initially and they’re like [he chuckles, with a mock quizzical look], ‘How long am I supposed to do this for?’ And it’s an interesting question for them, because it obviously shows a lack of understanding.” So what’s the answer? “It is very symbolic to continue to utilise that platform and use that message. And it’s important to continue to do it, to keep awareness, because otherwise this thing could die a quiet death and go back to how it was in the past. So I don’t see this changing for some time.” It’s so huge that Mercedes took the silver away... I’m proud of this team for holding themselves accountable Mercedes has been in Formula One since 1954 and whenever it has raced, its cars have always had silver livery – the team nickname is the Silver Arrows. At the beginning of this season, however, Mercedes said: “We have chosen to race in an all-black base livery as a public pledge to improve the diversity of our team – and a clear statement that we stand against racism and all forms of discrimination.” “It’s so huge that Mercedes took the silver away,” says Hamilton, proudly. “And again, that was a really … that was a lot of conversation in the background, creating a dialogue and explaining to them the importance of it. It took a moment. “But I’m so proud of this team for holding themselves accountable and saying: ‘We haven’t done enough, but we can do more moving forwards, and that’s what we’re going to do.’ “So when we talk, every week, the HR department explain to me the processes that they’re going through to try to improve their understanding and the recruitment process. And, you know, that makes me so proud and more willing to go and fight for them on the track.” His words remind me of the last time I met Hamilton – when he was only 12 years old. It was at the Buckmore Park karting track in Kent and he was competing in the final round of the 1997 Super One British Junior Yamaha kart championships for under-16s. When I asked someone where I could find the young driver I was told: “It’s easy, Lewis Hamilton’s the only black kid here – and he’ll be three laps ahead of everyone else.” All those years ago, it was clear the articulate, well-mannered kid I ended up talking to was going to be something special. And while his extraordinary success may be something to celebrate, he is determined to make sure his experience as “the only black kid” in Formula One won’t be repeated. Arguably, Hamilton’s most important initiative has been the Hamilton Commission. Talking about it, he lights up. “Most people assume I’m talking about racing drivers, but there are so many great jobs in my industry: marketing, engineering, accounting, catering. “So this commission, which I’m really, really proud to be partnering on with the Royal Academy of Engineering, is a research project to identify the barriers for black people who are trying to enter into Stem roles in motorsport. I reached out to all these different, super-important and professional people. Each of them has been chosen for their expertise in their field. And I really, really feel that they’re going to be able to enhance our research. I want to be able to take the findings and come out with some real, tangible results that we can apply to the industry to create opportunity. “I want to look back on Formula One in 10 years’ time and really see change because yes, we have this Black Lives Matter moment and there’s a mic and people are hearing it, but you’ve got to really do the work to activate change.” In 10 years’ time he will have retired, but he has no intention of giving up on his goal to break down Formula One’s institutional inertia when it comes to achieving racial equality. “I’m going to need to continue to work with these guys in the background. You won’t see me on the track, or you’ll hardly ever see me on the track, but I’m in discussions now with Liberty [Formula One owner, Liberty Media] and Formula One, more long-term, to try to help them progress in the right direction and continue to bring in new audiences. I’ll probably do that as a side job. I honestly couldn’t be more excited about it. “On one side, I don’t want the time to ever go by fast. On the other, I can’t wait till I start this new chapter of my life. It’s going to be a challenge, but that’s what life’s about.” Lewis Hamilton accepts his award at the virtual Powerful Media Black Excellence Awards on 17 November at 7pm