Like sunscreen, bronzers are seen to have an “only for summer” setting, but are useful year round. Unlike SPF, I wouldn’t normally tout bronzers as necessary, however, right now, with lockdown and less light, I’d argue they are. A dusting warms skin for a joyful demeanour. Add brushed-up brows, a sweep of neutral lip colour, a bronzed eye (no brush required), and you’re good to go. Choose a quality bronzer; anything shimmery or with a passing resemblance to Tango? Avoid. 1. Victoria Beckham Posh Lipstick £34, victoriabeckhambeauty.com 2. NARS Bronzing Powder £31, lookfantastic.com 3. Byredo Colour Stick in Ancient £26, byredo.com 4. Suqqu Powder Blush Compact £58, selfridges.com 5. Bare Minerals Serum Infused Brow Gel £18, bareminerals.co.uk Most skincare products are tested predominantly on Caucasian and, at a push, east Asian skin tones. And yet they claim to be for ‘all skin types’. Formulating products that do not consider brown and black skins is problematic for many reasons. To create products that are truly, authentically inclusive, there has to be an understanding that melanin-rich skin is structurally and functionally different. It is thicker and, therefore, needs deeper hydration. When it is under attack (from dehydration, or environmental aggressors), it overproduces melanin which results in hyperpigmentation, brown spots, uneven tone… Most brands don’t consider this. I’m so impressed with 4.5.6 Skin as it has been specifically formulated to work on melanin-rich skin. (It is also customised and, unlike most personalised skincare, is affordable.) The range currently comprises two cleansers (one oil, one gel), an exfoliating mask, a brightening serum and a tonic. The tonic stands out because not only does it include antibacterial properties and salicylic acid to regulate sebum production, it refines skin texture and drenches the skin with hydration to leave you with a mindblowing glow. There are rare moments where a brand launches a range that truly excites me: this is one. 4.5.6 Tonic Oh! Treatment Lotion £48 456skin.com Smooth operator An excellent formulation that strengthens and smooths skin texture, reduces fine lines and the look of enlarged pores and hydrates beautifully. Verso Hydration Serum with Niacinamide, £80, cultbeauty.co.uk Well rested Based on sleep-related research, this technologically advanced overnight cream works on lines caused by fatigue. Shiseido Overnight. Wrinkle Resisting Cream, £83, spacenk.com Put up barriers Loved by TikTok-ers and beauty editors, CeraVe is proof that price is no indication of efficacy. Its ceramide-enriched range keeps skin barriers in good shape. CeraVe Cleanser, £9, lookfantastic.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto