Eric Dier was delighted to see Scotland qualify for the European Championship next summer because he is sure the atmosphere at Wembley for the match against England will be amazing. Or at least it will if the fans are allowed back inside stadiums by then. “I have been lucky enough to play in one of those games in Scotland and the atmosphere was one of the best I have ever experienced,” the Tottenham defender said. “We all know the history of England and Scotland and I really hope the fans can be there to witness it because it will be a fantastic game.” Dier knows to his cost – a short FA ban and a £40,000 fine following his action in leaving the pitch to confront a spectator when grounds were still full back in March – that when football passions run high the effect is not always positive. He does believe, however, that the present unwanted hiatus will improve the relationship between players and supporters in the end. “Hopefully both sides will appreciate each other a bit more,” he explained. “It’s only when you start playing in empty stadiums that you realise how much players and supporters need each other. I think we will see some incredible atmospheres once fans are allowed back, at least I hope so. “I’m still not completely happy about what happened to me last season, I have some strong views about the process and the ban, but I’ll save that for my retirement. It’s not the time to talk about it now.” Winning a 50th cap against Scotland would be great, a dream situation for me Before Scotland next year there is Belgium, leaders of England’s Nations League group and familiar opponents to Dier through the bonds formed at Spurs with his fellow defenders Toby Alderweireld and Jan Vertonghen. “I learned a huge amount from those two, and I am still regularly in touch with Jan,” he said. “For two or three seasons I thought they were the best centre-back partnership in the Premier League. “Like me, they enjoyed playing under Mauricio Pochettino and absorbed some of his ideas about how centre backs should operate. They are both intelligent players who read the game really well and as a result never appear to look flustered, and that’s a great quality in a centre back.” Now performing Vertonghen’s old role for his club alongside Alderweireld, Dier is one of the most experienced defenders in the England setup, and should win a 50th England cap next year. Possibly against Scotland. “That would be great, a dream situation for me because I always take pride in playing for England, but you really can’t look that far ahead,” he said. “In football you always have to remember that things can change on an hourly basis.”