The end of the Trump era will in theory look like this. At midday on Wednesday 21 January, Joe Biden will stand on the west front of the United States Capitol, place his left hand on a Bible, raise his right and utter 35 words: “I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully execute the office of president of the United States, and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the constitution of the United States.” With that oath of office Biden will become the 46th president and power will drain from his predecessor, who will become a common citizen, an ex-president, number 45, no longer commander-in-chief, head of state or Oval Office occupier. The moment will thrum with pomp and pageantry. There will be drums, a bugle, the Hail to the Chief anthem and a 21-gun salute. A polished choreography, originating from George Washington’s inauguration in 1789, to symbolise the continuity of democratic rule and the peaceful transition of power. Many Republicans and Democrats believe the other side isn’t just mistaken but evil Of course, this assumes that, despite Donald Trump challenging the results of last week’s election, Biden and Kamala Harris will be able to take office the conventional way. If that happens, millions of viewers around the world will celebrate and a socially distanced crowd on the National Mall will cheer the end of what they consider a four-year nightmare. And then an urgent question will crystallise: can Biden and Harris put America back together? Can they end an era of hyper-polarisation and economic inequality that has degraded democracy and turned Americans against each other; that has shredded the idea of America? “Many Republicans and Democrats believe the other side isn’t just mistaken but evil,” says John Pitney, a Claremont McKenna College political scientist. Cultural, ethnic, geographic and racial divisions underpin party affiliations as never before, producing ideological polarisation in Congress not seen since the civil war. Trump set the tone of his administration with an inauguration speech in 2017 that depicted a dark, hellish America that he, and only he, could save. He then promptly lied about the size of the crowd he drew to the National Mall, launching a rule of “alternative facts”. Opponents hooted in derision but Trump’s supporters hailed their president as an unvarnished truth-teller who shattered a discredited status quo. Over four tumultuous years he enjoyed remarkably stable approval ratings. “I don’t see how we do repair the fabric of society when we have people living in effectively different countries, especially when this is amplified by media platforms that have commercial incentives to drive misinformation,” says Anne-Marie Slaughter, an author and the chief executive of New America, a thinktank dedicated to renewing American politics. “So much of what is happening is reflecting really big demographic and technological changes, secular trends that are much bigger than any one president.” Huge challenges await the Biden-Harris administration. It will inherit subverted institutions, deformed traditions, an economic crisis, extreme inequality, a rampant Covid-19 pandemic and a bitterly divided electorate churning with hope, expectation, suspicion and resentment. It will also face an unprecedented crisis in the form of Trump, not so much a predecessor as a wrecking ball. He has made baseless accusations of electoral fraud and effectively threatened to sue his way to re-election. “Frankly, we did win this election,” he claimed on Tuesday while millions of votes remained to be counted. Biden and Harris can also expect opposition from a supreme court that now leans conservative, and from Trump loyalists in federal and state posts. Simultaneously, they will be under pressure from the Bernie Sanders and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez wings of their own party to swerve the US towards progressive policies on taxes, undocumented migrants, criminal justice and the environment. Biden is the guy who meets with Republican senators and brings the bonhomie. Harris is the ambassador to the progressives That sounds less a job description and more a doomed political mission. The system, to paraphrase the incumbent, is rigged against concord. Bridging division is akin to traversing a frayed tightrope smouldering at both ends, a challenge worthy of Machiavelli, Solomon and Houdini. Are Biden and Harris up to it? In his nomination speech, Biden, who served 36 years in the Senate and eight as vice-president, said he would lead the US away from the path of shadow and suspicion. “We can choose a different path, and together, take this chance to heal, to be reborn, to unite. A path of hope and light.” He would work for all Americans, not just those who voted for him, he promised. For those yearning for a more civil, tolerant America there is good and bad news. The bad news is that Republicans are expected to greet any Biden-Harris administration with fire and brimstone, and that a combustible media landscape will be fanning those flames. Julian Emanuel Zelizer, a professor of political history at Princeton, says: “The continued radicalisation of the Republican party – combined with the expansion of a vast conservative media infrastructure – has created a world where it is almost impossible to envision agreement on some of the biggest issues of the day. President Trump has also legitimated and embraced divisive politics, which will fuel his supporters to continue along this path.” Republicans reaped electoral dividends a decade ago when they opposed the Obama administration at every turn, says Geoffrey Kabaservice, the author of Rule and Ruin: The Downfall of Moderation and the Destruction of the Republican Party. “It worked out quite nicely for them, and certainly there’s a lot of raw material out there in Trump world for a Tea Party 2.” Pitney, a former Republican congressional aide, says any member who shows moderation in dealing with a Biden administration risks incurring a primary challenge from party rivals. “Trumpism is the coronavirus of the Republican party. It threatens to become endemic. It may linger because Trump revealed there is a large segment of the electorate that demands it. There is no vaccine.” Despite the pandemic, the economic crisis and his attacks on democratic norms, more than 68 million Americans – close to half of all voters – voted for four more years of Trump. Republicans also looked set to retain control of the Senate and narrowed the Democrats’ majority in the House of Representatives. Any illusions that a Biden-Harris administration will somehow break the toxic cycle, perhaps even enjoy a bipartisan honeymoon, don’t survive contact with Sabo. A former marine, he is a guerrilla artist who peppers public spaces with images and slogans targeting liberals. When I interviewed him in his Los Angeles apartment in 2017 it was decorated with a life-sized poster of Sanders with Soviet tattoos and a diaper “full of free shit” and a billboard-style portrait of Hillary Clinton as a maniacal queen. His latest work shows Biden naked, save for a face mask around his groin, and Harris as a cop in suspenders. “They’ll be globalists. It’ll be the Democrats being the Democrats,” Sabo says. “We’ll be a worse world.” He blames polarisation on the left. “They never got over the fact Trump won [in 2016].” In addition to Republican hostility, a Biden-Harris administration will face two other major obstacles. The business model that has enriched Facebook and other social media companies, and propelled ratings for Fox and MSNBC at the expense of less obviously partisan networks, such as CNN, endures. Talk of regulation and structural reform remains talk. Even more ominous is that mainstream values and institutions were unravelling even before Trump. Wall Street excess, sub-prime mortgages, the opioid epidemic, manufacturing’s decline, unaffordable education and income inequality were all plucking at the threads of America’s social contract. The New Yorker writer George Packer chronicled this alienation in his 2013 book The Unwinding. The book included an unsettling portrait of Biden, who was then vice-president. Folksy Uncle Joe, it suggested, was ungrateful and self-obsessed. “Don’t take this personally,” a veteran Biden hand told a long-suffering colleague. “Biden disappoints everyone. He’s an equal opportunities disappointer.” If all this sounds bleak and depressing and a terrible way to usher in a post-Trump era there are actually grounds for optimism – several plausible reasons, in fact, to think Biden and Harris can heal the nation and maybe some of the world. They could placate some of Trump’s white, male base while giving voice to the young, multiracial left, says Kabaservice, who is the director of political studies at the Niskanen Center in Washington. “I suspect there will be a double act. Biden is the guy who meets with Republican senators and brings the bonhomie, gives the appearance of bipartisanship. Harris is the ambassador to the progressives who is attuned to minority and ethnic interests and can push Joe to the left, but not so far that it alarms the suburbanites.” Some Republicans who study demographic and electoral trends may seek to dial down the polarisation to woo back college-educated, suburban voters, especially women, Kabaservice believes. He advises the Democrats to go easy on cultural battles, even with a continued majority in the House. “A cooling of the political temperature, to my mind, would be more desirable than forcing some hillbilly baker to make a gay wedding cake.” Complete harmony will never happen but it makes a difference whether you’re pouring fuel on the fire or trying to dampen it Under this scenario the things that made Biden unexciting to many Democrats in the primaries – his age (78), whiteness and congressional record – could make him the right figure to lead Americans out of the Trump era. Rebecca Lissner, an assistant professor at the US Naval War College and co-author of the book An Open World, says a Biden presidency could muster Republican votes for an infrastructure bill and on foreign policy, such as repairing overseas alliances and competing with China. “There could be a lot of bipartisan support in some areas.” Complete harmony will never happen but it makes a difference whether you’re pouring fuel on the fire or trying to dampen it, says Slaughter, who is writing a book about US renewal. “Imagine Biden going on Fox once a week – even if hosts are determined to polarise. He can talk about what this is doing to the country. The other thing he needs to do is engage us in big national projects, moving us to a green economy, investing in infrastructure, a sense that we’re doing great things.” At this point in the pandemic Americans might settle for the government stopping doing daft, destructive things. More than 240,000 people have died and cases are nearing 10 million. Anthony Fauci, the country’s senior public health expert, has predicted a winter of 100,000 or more cases a day and a rising death toll. “We’re in for a whole lot of hurt,” Fauci has said. A White House that projects a coherent, scientifically informed response to the crisis could ease the politicisation of masks and social distancing, says Kenneth McCallion, the author of Covid-19: The Virus That Changed America and the World. “The function of the presidency is not necessarily raw political power but use of the bully pulpit, talking to the nation in a calm, conciliatory but firm manner to explain the importance of crushing the virus. Americans expect that of their leaders.” McCallion, a former federal prosecutor, says a Biden administration could swiftly replace Trump-appointed “political commissars” and restore trust in embattled agencies such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “I don’t think it’ll be very difficult to roll things back. The rank and file are professional civil servants who believe in their mission.” A different path, a chance to heal, to be reborn, to unite, a path of hope and light – Biden has set a high bar. The republic’s founding fathers anticipated election rancour, which is why they imbued the inauguration ceremony with pomp and pageantry, a performative act to put balm on the transition of power. For the democratic alchemy to work properly, however, one candidate must concede defeat. Healing, in other words, requires Trump to do the almost inconceivable and admit that he lost; that he is, in his own parlance, a loser.