Joe Biden is poised to become the 46th president of the United States after a record turnout in a unique and turbulent election put him in front in the four remaining swing states, with the postal ballots continuing to skew heavily in the Democrat’s favour. Biden made preparations to address the nation on Friday evening, and CNN reported that a “national defence airspace” would be established above the Democratic candidate’s house in Wilmington, Delaware – meaning he would begin to receive the protection of the US military, the first trappings of the presidency. But a smooth transfer of power still looked far from certain, with the president showing every sign he was unwilling to leave the Oval Office gracefully. Donald Trump’s defiance divided his party and his White House staff between those willing to back a last stand, and those urging him to accept defeat. With every passing hour, the arithmetic moved relentlessly against the president. In the early hours of Friday morning, Biden took the lead in the Republican stronghold of Georgia and a few hours later he overtook Trump in Pennsylvania, whose 20 electoral votes alone are enough to carry him over the threshold. The Democratic challenger also remained ahead in the two other outstanding south-western states, Arizona and Nevada, but by narrow leads. In Georgia, the margin was so slim, the state declared there would be a recount after the votes were certified later this month. Reports from the Trump camp said he was in no mood to concede. After the lead slipped in Pennsylvania, the White House put out a statement insisting “this election is not over”. A few hours later a second statement was put out, in the president’s name, impugning the entire US electoral system. “We believe the American people deserve to have full transparency into all vote counting and election certification, and that this is no longer about any single election. This is about the integrity of our entire election process,” the statement said. As was the case with previous claims by Trump and his loyalists, no evidence of fraud was presented. The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, refused to commit himself, telling journalists: “I’m not going to answer any hypotheticals about where we go from here.” However, Senator Roy Blunt, who is close to McConnell, signalled that many in the Republican leadership are reluctant to follow Trump along the path to constitutional chaos. “You can’t stop the count in one state and decide you want the count to continue in another state. That might be how you’d like to see the system work but that’s not how the system works,” Blunt said. “Part of the obligation of leadership is you should always have in your mind how do I leave.” The decisions of Rupert Murdoch and his media empire were also under scrutiny. Fox News journalists were instructed by their managers not to refer to Biden as “president-elect” even if the network’s election team called Pennsylvania for the Democrat, according to CNN. There were growing fears on Friday that some elements among Trump’s devoted fanbase would take their cue from him to take matters into their own hands. Philadelphia police said they had arrested two men on Thursday for carrying guns without permits near the state convention center where votes were being counted. According to the police, one of the men had a pistol in a holster and the second had a gun concealed under a jacket. In their silver Hummer vehicle police found an assault weapon without a serial number and 160 rounds of ammunition. On the back window there were stickers promoting the QAnon conspiracy theory cult, including one saying “#WWG1WGA,” which stands for “where we go one we go all”. The two men had set out from Virginia Beach and a local informant told the FBI about their plan to travel to the convention center. On Friday morning, Biden was seeking to rally prominent figures from both parties to endorse the legitimacy of the election, at a nervous moment for US democracy, amid fears that the Trump camp would try to disrupt the state-by-state certification of results and the choice of state electors to send to the electoral college, which formally names the president. Asked about the prospect of Trump refusing to concede, a Biden campaign spokesman, Andrew Bates, said: “As we said on 19 July, the American people will decide this election. And the United States government is perfectly capable of escorting trespassers out of the White House.” After whittling down a substantial lead for Donald Trump in Pennsylvania on election night, Biden’s vote count passed the president just before 9am, building up a narrow edge of 14,716 by Friday evening. Many of the more than 100,000 votes yet to be counted in the state are in Democratic areas, and Democrats make up a disproportionate share of postal ballots. Winning Pennsylvania would also win the presidency, no matter what happens in the other states remaining undecided, but Biden also had the advantage there. In the early hours of Friday morning in the US, Biden had moved to a 1,555-vote advantage in Georgia with thousands of ballots still left to be counted – many in counties where the former vice-president was in the lead. The final margin between the two candidates looked certain to fall beneath the 0.5%, threshold for triggering a recount. “With a margin that small, there will be a recount in Georgia,” the state’s Republican secretary of state, Brad Raffensperger, told reporters. “Interest in our election obviously goes far beyond Georgia’s borders. The final tally in Georgia at this point has huge implications for the entire country.” Though most people will probably be watching the results of the race for the White House, more than 7,000 elections took place across the US on 3 November. In the age of disinformation, it is more important than ever that media outlets report election results as clearly and transparently as possible. The Guardian will be using data collected and analysed by the Associated Press (AP) as the source for when we will call election results for the presidency, Senate, House races and others. AP has a team of thousands of specialists and correspondents across America, who have trusted relationships with local officials. This will guide their data-led assessment of when it's time to call a race. There are a number of other highly reputable election "decision desks" in US media. They may call races earlier than AP. While the Guardian will report this is happening, we will rely on AP's data to make our own final call. Should any candidate declare victory prematurely, we will report this claim, but make clear that it is not valid. The only measure of victory is a complete count of all outstanding ballots. In the south-west, Biden was holding on to slim advantages in Arizona and Nevada. In Arizona, his lead narrowed to about 39,769 by Friday evening as county results favoured Trump, but so far not on the scale he would need to overtake his challenger. In Nevada Biden was ahead by 20,137 votes, but he was bolstering his lead with votes counted on Friday morning. The fate of its six electoral college votes was likely to be decided over the weekend. Biden’s lead over Trump in the nationwide popular vote stretched to over 4m, as he amassed a record 73.7m, but the president’s tally of 69.7m was the second highest in US political history (just over Barack Obama’s winning total in 2008) – reflecting the reality that while Trump seemed doomed to defeat, Trumpism will remain very much a force. As Biden closed in on victory on Thursday night, he urged calm after an inflammatory and falsehood-filled Trump address from the White House where the president once again claimed he had won. The latest voting figures accelerated increasingly frantic efforts by Trump and his campaign to undermine confidence in the election, threatening a rash of litigation amid unfounded claims of election rigging. “This is a case when they are trying to steal an election, they are trying to rig an election,” Trump said from the podium of the White House briefing room. “If you count the legal votes, I easily win, Trump wrongly claimed. “If you count the illegal votes, they can try to steal the election from us. “If you count the votes that came in late, we’re looking at them very strongly, a lot of votes came in late,” he said. Several TV networks cut away during his remarks, with anchors saying they needed to correct his statements. However, two loyalist senators, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Ted Cruz of Texas, appeared on Fox News to echo Trump’s claims, in the absence of evidence that illegal or late votes were being counted, or that the election is being stolen. Graham whose loyalty had been questioned on Twitter by the president’s son, Don Jr, pledged $500,000 towards the president’s legal fees. Reports from inside the White House said the president had no plans to concede the election even after the votes are fully counted. From his Delaware headquarters Biden sought to project national leadership, beginning his remarks by talking about the surging coronavirus infection rates, and appealed for patience with the electoral process, after it emerged the US Secret Service was sending extra officers to Delaware to join his security detail. “I ask everyone to stay calm. The process is working,” Biden said. “It is the will of the voters – no one, not anyone else – who chooses the president of the United States of America.” Any attempt by Trump to cling on to power looked likely to split his party. While many high-profile Republicans have not commented on Trump’s latest remarks, several GOP lawmakers denounced his baseless allegations about fraud, with Paul Mitchell, a Michigan congressman, saying that every vote would be counted, adding that “anything less harms the integrity of our elections and is dangerous for our democracy”. Adam Kinzinger, an Illinois GOP congressman, tweeted: “Stop spreading debunked misinformation… … This is getting insane.”