Four people have died in the Vienna attacks on Monday night, including two male civilians and one female. One attacker was also killed. Austria’s interior minister, Karl Nehammer, described the attacker as an “Islamist terrorist”. Police said they were not certain how many attackers were involved. “At the moment we think there’s more, we’re investigating,” Vienna police chief Gerhard Pürstl said. “It’s difficult to say for sure if it was one or several attackers. Lots of witnesses are injured, traumatised, and we have to analyse the data. This will take some time… at this stage there is no definite answer.” Police are examining more than 20,000 pieces of video footage uploaded to them by members of the public to determine how many gunmen were involved and the exact course of events. Earlier, authorities had said at least one gunman remained on the run at 1am Vienna time. Nehammer had warned that the assailants were “heavily armed and dangerous” and urged the public to stay indoors until the all-clear was given. Nehammer told broadcaster ORF: “We have brought several special forces units together that are now searching for the presumed terrorists. I am therefore not limiting it to an area of Vienna because these are mobile perpetrators.” 15 people were injured and taken to hospital after the attack that began shortly after 8pm local time on Monday. One of the injured is thought to be a policeman. Seven of the injured were in a serious condition, Vienna’s mayor Michael Ludwig, said. The attacks began with volleys of gunfire and the injury and death tolls were expected to rise. The dead attacker was shot by police outside St Rupert’s Church, carrying an assault rifle, handguns and ammunition. His body was also found with an explosives vest. Later police said on Twitter that the explosives vest was fake. The assaults occurred at six locations close to Seitenstettengasse in the heart of the Austrian capital. The Austrian chancellor, Sebastian Kurz, described the assaults as a “definitely” terror attack that had been “very professionally” planned. Kurz has called the military onto the streets of Vienna. “We are currently going through difficult times in our republic. I would like to thank all the emergency services who risk their lives, especially today for our safety. Our police will take decisive action against the perpetrators of this hideous terrorist attack,” Kurz said. Wir erleben gerade schwere Stunden in unserer Republik. Ich möchte allen Einsatzkräften danken, die insbesondere heute für unsere Sicherheit ihr Leben riskieren. Unsere Polizei wird entschlossen gegen die Täter dieses widerwärtigen Terroranschlags vorgehen. Police have searched the home of the attacker. . Police have told residents to keep away from the centre of Vienna. Early reports suggested the nearby Stadttempel synagogue could have been the target of the attack. But Oskar Deutsch, president of Vienna’s Jewish community, said the synagogue on Seitenstettengasse was closed at the time of the attack. He told the Kurier newspaper it was “unclear” if it was a target. The attack occurred on the last night before a new coronavirus lockdown was due to come into force in the city. Schools will be closed in Vienna on Tuesday. EU and other world leaders  have expressed their solidarity with the Austrian people. I am deeply shocked by the terrible attacks in Vienna tonight. The UK’s thoughts are with the people of Austria - we stand united with you against terror. A terrible attack near a synagogue in Vienna. I have just conveyed full solidarity from the Netherlands to @sebastiankurz. Our thoughts are with the victims and their families, and with the Austrian government in dealing with this heinous act.