A man has described to a jury the “bizarre” sight of his “thoroughly unpleasant neighbours” chasing a man along a Sydney street with a samurai sword. Thomas Scott and his girlfriend were walking home to inner-city Forest Lodge on 10 August 2018 when they noticed someone “piss-bolting down the street”, he told the NSW supreme court on Thursday. Scott said he then saw a woman in “extremely fast and extremely angry” pursuit who appeared dishevelled, as though she had just jumped out of bed, and yelled aggressively “Who are you, bro?” multiple times. “Looked like a sketchy scenario,” he said. Scott said he remembered a third man holding a decorative samurai sword he had seen displayed opposite his home after making “much mockery of it” in the past. “They were thoroughly unpleasant neighbours,” he said. Hannah Quinn, 26, and Blake Davis, 31, have pleaded not guilty to murdering Jett McKee after he allegedly burst into the couple’s home and demanded money. Quinn also denies being an accessory after the fact to murder. The 30-year-old Sydney rapper McKee wanted to rob drug dealers to feed his gambling addiction and had been using the drug ice, crown prosecutor Chris Taylor earlier told the court. The crown has alleged the pair chased McKee about 100 metres down the street before Quinn pulled him to the ground and Davis struck his head with a samurai sword. Scott recalled Davis’s “weird stance” as like something he had seen in a movie, while running and holding the sword with two hands out diagonally in front of him. Scott said he thought he was seeing a viral YouTube clip to the tune of Yakety Sax, with its performers being chased around a carpark. “It was a comical scene ... it was absurd,” he said. “He was in his undies as well, so it was even more bizarre.” He described Davis wearing dark boxer shorts and said he and Quinn were barefoot. Not long after Scott had arrived back at his apartment and lit a cigarette on his balcony, he saw the couple returning the other way. After watching “their heads bobbing up and down” he told the court he saw them enter through their sliding door before leaving shortly after, jumping over the back fence and “fleeing”. He said he remembered thinking it was strange after assuming they had “busted” the man, who he said appeared scared, as if he had been caught doing something wrong. He said the woman was holding a “flimsy bag” small enough for a lip gloss, while his girlfriend remarked that the man had blood on his face. Quinn’s case is that she was chasing after McKee who had stolen her handbag, but when she caught up to him he threatened her with a gun. Scott said he did not see a gun. The trial continues.