It is, perhaps, the perfect play for lockdown, as the heroine fills the hours between “the bell for waking and the bell for sleep” with despair, defiance and memories of better times. The indomitable Winnie in Samuel Beckett’s Happy Days is now to be portrayed by Lisa Dwan in a 60th-anniversary revival directed by Sir Trevor Nunn at Riverside Studios in London next year. Despite its clear resonance with the pandemic, which has kept so many isolated at home, Nunn said his and Dwan’s plans for Happy Days predate the coronavirus outbreak. The pair first discussed it before collaborating on a triple bill of short Beckett plays at Jermyn Street theatre, staged in early 2020, for which Dwan lent her haunting voice to Eh Joe. Nunn said the timing is apposite because the lockdown has left many of us looking back at our lives. “We have been remembering all sorts of happy times in our lives and that phrase [Happy Days] comes up always. We say it with delight and with sadness and with regret. Beckett’s title is very carefully chosen to include all of those ideas.” The great Irish playwright continually explored endurance, Nunn said, and his dramas probe “how we seek for meaning”. Armed with a toothbrush, a revolver and a parasol, immersed in a mound of earth with her partner Willie behind her, Winnie is one of Beckett’s greatest creations. Ruth White originated the role in New York in 1961 and recent Winnies in the UK have included Juliet Stevenson at London’s Young Vic and Maxine Peake at the Royal Exchange in Manchester. In 2016, Dwan starred in No’s Knife, an adaptation of Beckett’s prose collection Texts for Nothing at the Old Vic in London. One section of the performance found her trapped, Winnie-like, within a rocky cliff. Dwan became known as a Beckett specialist when she starred in three short pieces, Footfalls, Rockaby and Not I, the last of which was performed at breakneck pace with only her mouth in the spotlight. She performed the trio at London’s Royal Court, in the West End and around the world. Nunn said that he first learned of Dwan’s Beckettian expertise from David Petraeus, a former director of the CIA, when the two men found themselves side by side at a dinner event. Petraeus encouraged them to meet and Nunn said he was astonished by Dwan when he saw her perform on stage. A former artistic director of both the Royal Shakespeare Company and the National Theatre, Nunn was “bowled over” when he first read Beckett’s Waiting for Godot at university. He went on to work with Peter Hall, who had staged Godot’s English-language premiere in 1955. Beckett had overseen that production and Hall told Nunn of the “terrific, precise detail” with which the playwright “wanted his instructions to be carried out”. The playwright died in 1989 and his estate, now controlled by his nephew Edward Beckett, “very much insists on Beckett’s instructions being observed” said Nunn. (A current show, Godot Is a Woman, featuring female and non-binary performers, deals with the estate’s gender restrictions.) Nunn approached the estate several years ago when he wanted to stage All That Fall, which Beckett wrote as a radio play. He was eventually granted permission to present it in a theatre with the actors, Eileen Atkins and Michael Gambon, appearing as if they are at a studio recording. Nunn said a number of applications to do Happy Days have been made recently and “we are very fortunate and very grateful that the estate have chosen ours”. The production is scheduled to run at the Riverside Studios in February and March. With theatres in England currently closed for the national lockdown – and many yet to open even temporarily since March – the industry is still gripped by uncertainty. A new musical based on The Parent Trap that Nunn was set to direct has been delayed, along with a “huge musical project that has American producers”. “Obviously we can’t just be blithe and assume that in the new year, as we had all hoped, everything is going to start up again,” said Nunn. Until a vaccine is rolled out, Nunn suggested the implementation of some sort of “testing passport” whereby anybody who has recently been tested for Covid-19 and had a negative result can show that when they attend the theatre. While Nunn acknowledged that streaming shows could help theatres to remain financially viable during their temporary closure, he warned that they could damage the industry in the long term. “My biggest fear is, as certain performances are now being streamed, potential audiences will say, ‘Oh, I like that streaming. It was like I was there. I enjoyed the performance and I didn’t have to get in the car or use public transport or have dinner out. Yeah, I think we should just have streaming from now on.’ That would be catastrophic.” The live exchange between actors and audience in a shared space is “what is so uniquely wonderful and thrilling and potentially life-changing about theatre” said Nunn. “That we must never lose.” Happy Days is at Riverside Studios, London, from 16 February to 28 March.