What were you hoping for?Someone with a sense of humour to accompany me to weddings and other major life events. First impressions?Handsome man with crisis bleached hair. What did you talk about?Travels, family dynamics and other unspeakable things. His mum’s new life in Margate and my previous life as a puppeteer. Any awkward moments?I think he thought I was trying to snog him when I asked about his attitude to social distancing. Good table manners?The best – kept my glass full and pretended not to notice when I burped. Best thing about Rufus?He was really easy to talk to. He made everything feel normal right away and kept the conversation going. Would you introduce him to your friends?I’d probably get replaced. Describe Rufus in three wordsSweet, fun, relaxed. What do you think he made of you?That I was an aged old queer. Did you go on somewhere?Due to Bojo’s curfew, this was not really an option. I did bring G&T tinnies in my bag, just in case, but the vibes were not there. I drank mine on the way home. If it weren’t for social distancing, would you have kissed?I would probably need a stepladder. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?We’d probably have got on better had we met at a house party in non-pandemic times. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?Maybe as friends. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?A laugh, fun company, lovely grub. First impressions?Oh, I am a lot taller than him. What did you talk about?The brief amount of stuff we knew about each other prior to the date. The classic coronavirus filler chat, politics, our favourite flicks. Any awkward moments?I commented on his restless leg, which I felt a bit bad about because he tried to stop it but couldn’t. Good table manners?Yes, very. He showed an interest in what the waiters had to tell us and kept our glasses topped up. Best thing about Freddy?He was easy to talk to and had an interesting background. Would you introduce him to your friends?If he’s happy to get with them (Spice Girls, 1996). Describe Freddy in three words?Friendly, articulate, engaging. What do you think he made of you?Hopefully that I was quite pleasant and chilled, maybe that I can put away a lot of scran… God knows. Did you go on somewhere?The tube, where we parted ways. If it weren’t for social distancing, would you have kissed?No, I don’t think so. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I’d have sunk a couple more bevs, lived, laughed, loved and danced on the table, but the curfew was calling. Marks out of 10?6. Would you meet again?Probably not, unless I get an invite to the premiere of the musical he’s writing. We shall see. • Freddy and Rufus ate at Kolamba, London W1. They were photographed separately for this image. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com