Eight destinations have been added to England’s quarantine-free corridor list in the latest announcement by transport secretary Grant Shapps. But quarantine rules will apply to people arriving back from most of Greece from 4am on Saturday 14 November. Shapps tweeted: “Latest data also means we have to REMOVE all of GREECE apart from Corfu, Crete, Rhodes, Zakynthos and Kos from the #TravelCorridorlist.” Latest data also means we have to REMOVE all of GREECE apart from Corfu, Crete, Rhodes, Zakynthos and Kos from the #TravelCorridor list.From 4am Saturday 14th November, if you arrive into the UK from this destination you will need to self-isolate. The eight destinations that have been added to the quarantine-free list initially appear to be good news for travellers seeking winter sun after lockdown as they include Chile, Cambodia, Laos, the Turks & Caicos Islands in the Caribbean and the UAE including Dubai. However, some countries, including Laos and Chile, are currently not welcoming visitors. Iceland, Bahrain, Qatar have also been added to the list. Paul Charles, chief executive officer of travel consultancy the PC Agency who has become a leading voice for the travel sector during the pandemic, tweeted that the news would open up the possibility of long-haul travel from December. BREAKING: As @transportgovuk announce new travel corridors to #UAE #Qatar #Iceland and #Chile this is a significant move to open up long-haul destinations. It re-connects the #UK to Gulf hubs and the world and enables plans to be made for #December travel. @ThePCAgency Sigríður Dögg Guðmundsdóttir, head of Visit Iceland, said: “We are delighted that Iceland has now been removed from the UK Government’s quarantine list and a safe travel corridor has once again been reinstated.” However, she added that “visitors must choose between a 14-day quarantine or a double testing procedure with a quarantine for four to five days before they can embark on their adventure around in Iceland. Our commitment is to ensure travellers stay safe during their visit.” Following the news of a Covid-19 mutation discovered in mink in Denmark last week, Shapps announced an extension on the travel ban to the country for a further 14 days. The other countries on the travel corridor list are the Canary Islands and Gibraltar.