Chorley recovered from going two goals down away to Wigan to knock the League One side out of the FA Cup. Joe Garner and Tom James made it look like the hosts would east into the next round by putting them into a comfortable lead. The game, however, changed in the 41st minute when Wigan’s Adam Long was shown a straight red. Chorley seized their opportunity as Elliott Newby and Harry Cardwell levelled the scores to send the game into extra-time. Chorley forward Connor Hall completed the turnaround in the second minute of extra-time to send the National League North side through. Ten-man Barnet dug deep to clinch a battling 1-0 FA Cup first-round upset win over League One Burton Albion at The Hive. The Brewers sit 41 places above the non-league outfit but slipped to their 11th straight game without a win. Wes Fonguck grabbed the only goal of the game as the Bees, who reached the fourth round last season, bagged another memorable cup win. Michael Petrasso produced some magic down the left as his cross was knocked down for Fonguck to fire into the top corner from the edge of the box just 10 minutes in. Barnet made things toougher for themselves when last man Matt Preston was sent off just before the break for wrestling Niall Ennis to the ground but held on for the entire second half to ensure progression. Two Stephen Gleeson’s brace of penalties and a looping header from Krystian Pearce secured National League side Solihull Moors’ progress, cancelling out goals from theLeague Two Scunthorpe United John McAtee and Kevin van Veen. “The mentality was probably what pleased me most today, and how we responded to conceding the equaliser in the first half,” Moors manager Jimmy Shan said. “We talk week in, week out about improving and we’ve done that today against a good outfit. We held our own and won the game.” Tom Nichols scored a hat-trick to help Crawley produce a stunning comeback in extra-time and claim a 6-5 victory at Torquay. John Yems’ Sky Bet League Two side scored three times in 10 minutes, Nichols getting two of them, to stun the National League leaders. Aaron Nemane and Ben Whitfield had Torquay in control of the tie and – with seven minutes remaining – there was little indication of the goal drama which was to follow. But Nichols pulled a goal back with a penalty and Max Watters levelled in the 14th minute of time added on because of an injury to Crawley goalkeeper Tom McGill. There was still time for Josh Umerah to restore the hosts’ advantage, only for Jordan Tunnicliffe to level again – 21 minutes into added time – to take the contest to extra-time. Captain Asa Hall successfully converted two penalties to seemingly restore control of the tie to the Devon side. But Nichols replied immediately, then completed his hat-trick with seven minutes remaining. And Ashley Nadesan completed the comeback with two minutes remaining when he ran on to a Nichols pass and beat goalkeeper Lucas Covolan with a low shot. League Two Morecambe overcame a stubborn Maldon & Tiptree with a narrow 1-0 win to move into the second round of the FA Cup. Adam Phillips scored the Shrimps’ winner with the only goal of the game coming from the penalty sport three minutes before half-time. Hayes & Yeading were a matter of moments away from making FA Cup history as they watched a two-goal extra-time lead slip before losing 4-3 on penalties at home to Sky Bet League Two Carlisle. Fellow League Two side Oldham put their name in the hat for the second round after a 3-2 FA Cup win at National League South side Hampton and Richmond. Sam Deadfield scored twice for the non-league side but it was not enough as Ben Garrity, Bobby Grant and Danny Rowe ensured an upset was avoided. Scott Fraser scored the winning penalty for MK Dons as they progressed beyond the first round of the FA Cup for the first time in three years after being held to a 0-0 draw against dogged Eastleigh. Tom Bearwish hit his spot kick against the crossbar which handed MK Dons the chance to move into round two. Fraser made no mistake with his penalty to send his side through 4-3 after the shootout. Midfielder Bedsente Gomis scored the only goal as Havant and Waterlooville beat Cray Valley Paper Mills 1-0 to reach the second round of the FA Cup for only the second time in their 22-year history. 