[The Wall Street drama] Black Monday, which is hilarious and important, as well as being so well written and acted. It is very timely and relevant, but you forget that because it is just entertaining. Andrew Rannells as Blair in Black Monday. He went from charming to villainous seamlessly – and always while making you love him, even at his worst. There was one scene in particular that made me cry. His character was confiding to Regina Hall about what it was like to be afraid to come out. Heartbreakingly honest and so subtle. Not preaching, just giving you a glimpse. He kept talking and smiling with tears in his eyes – you could feel his pain without seeing an actor trying to show that. Gore and violence. Victimisation. I stopped watching Narcos after the umpteenth prostitute was tortured. The reality series Below Deck: Mediterranean. I got a glimpse of that world while making my own show, Riviera, so it is nostalgic for me. I was always curious about the people working behind the scenes of those luxury yachts. Black Monday or Fleabag. Or Queer Eye! Please, Fab Five, give me a pandemic makeover. They are the sweetest. Smilf. It was so authentic, well written, quirky, funny and honest. I root for that. Any storyteller that has a true voice and doesn’t compromise. I went to college with Frankie Shaw and, back then, the idea of us young actresses being able to direct or even create a show was unheard of. I think any of these impossibly fake aspirational shows. Or the ones that make you talk in a whiny baby voice. You know which reality shows I mean. Pee-wee’s Playhouse. I still watch it; thank you, Netflix. Cyndi Lauper did the opening theme song – also amazing! Archie Bunker in All in the Family and Al Bundy in Married With Children. Those shows are funny to watch, but the regressive old white dude is something we’re all sick of. It’s too close to home these days – not my home, thankfully, but when you look at current events and social media. It’s toxicity masked as being a clown. Riviera airs at 9pm on Thursdays on Sky Atlantic