In the Observer Magazine of 22 September 1974 was the first part of ‘A comprehensive guide to the development of children… from knee-level to A-level.’ The central argument of the series was that ‘in our society we crudely underestimate the mind-dizzying potentiality of our children,’ quoting Buckminster Fuller: ‘Every child is born a genius.’ (Salvador Dalí wrote: ‘At the age of six I wanted to be a cook. At seven I wanted to be Napoleon. And my ambition has been growing steadily ever since.’) Much is very familiar: ‘Our babies are the centre of a multi-million pound industry and a major example of conspicuous consumption. Those trendy prams, that prima donna’s wardrobe, the endless parading and display are statements of the parents’ wealth and importance.’ (I’m looking at you, preposterous four-figure ‘performance prams’.) The authors gave a worrying list of verbs that parents might be teaching their children: ‘Eat it, shut up, go to sleep' The authors Brian and Sonia Jackson decried ‘a powerful streak of anti-intellectualism in the whole play-centred movement,’ but then gave a worrying list of verbs that parents may be teaching their children: ‘Eat it, shut-up, go to sleep.’ Modern ears will also blanch at the following: ‘The key decision is: should both parents go out to work? Dr Spock takes the standard line: if a mother realises how vital her care is to a young baby “it may make it easier for her to decide that the extra money she might earn, or the satisfaction she might receive from an outside job, is not so important after all”.’ Even weekends pushed parents further apart: ‘Split Saturday works well for some. Father has morning off, Mother afternoon off, to do what they like unencumbered by children.’ The authors also argued that babies slept too much: ‘Every day, millions of babies spend endless, empty hours lying on their backs, unable to move their heads to vary their view – so they sleep for lack of alternatives.’ Sounds like good preparation for student life.