What were you hoping for?Love. Or, failing that, good conversation with someone outside my normal circle, tasty food and a break from the endless pile of washing-up that lockdown has created. First impressions?Smiley, chatty, warm and welcoming. He had just had a haircut, so I appreciated the effort there. … What did you talk about?So much! Family dynamics, north v south London, BLM, Marvel v DC, E-sports, space… Any awkward moments?None. Good table manners?Absolutely, couldn’t fault them. Best thing about Junior?His openness. We talked about some deep topics, and his ability to share his experiences allowed me to feel safe enough to talk about more personal subjects. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes, I think he would get on with all of them. Describe Junior in three words?Interesting, sociable and confident. What do you think he made of you?He probably thought I was a bit scatty. Hopefully he found my questions thought-provoking and not invasive. Did you go on somewhere?We stayed at the restaurant until 10pm. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed?No, for me there were no romantic feelings. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be?A bigger table. Ours was tiny, and the main course felt like a high-stakes round of Jenga. … Marks out of 10?I can’t mark Junior less than 10 as a person. However, there was no romantic spark on my part, so I would have to rate the date 7. Would you meet again?Yes, but as friends. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?This was my first blind date so I was hoping it wouldn’t be a disaster. First impressions?Good! I liked her energy and found her attractive. What did you talk about?The BLM movement and how it affected both of us over the summer. Bad dating stories (I told her about the time I was catfished). We talked about our tattoos and realised we actually have the same tattoo of the Basquiat crown, which is pretty damn cool. Any awkward moments?All she knew about me from the matchmaker was that I like Craig David and the Spice Girls, so I had to explain that I’m not obsessed with the Spice Girls… I just used to be. When I was 10! Viva Forever. Good table manners?Impeccable. Best thing about Lizzi?Just her. She seems like a cool, level-headed person. Would you introduce her to your friends?For sure. Describe Lizzi in three words?Really good company. What do you think she made of you?I think she liked me, we vibed all night, had good discussions and she got my sense of humour… I think! Did you go on somewhere?No, we spent ages at the restaurant. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed?Not gonna lie… I would have tried. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be?That the government allowed people dating to eat inside. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?I would like to. We exchanged numbers so let’s see what happens. • Junior and Lizzie ate at Namaaste Highgate, London N6 before lockdown 2. They were photographed separately for this image. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com.