The Tottenham co-manager Juan Amoros said he hopes Alex Morgan “stays in England for ever” after the two-times World Cup winner made her long-awaited WSL debut. Morgan came off the bench as Spurs drew 1-1 against Reading to claim their first ever point off Reading and only their second of the season. “Why not?” said Amoros. “I want to have her in my team for ever. At the moment she is our player and hopefully she stays with us for a very, very long time because she’s one of the best professionals and best people I’ve ever coached.” The US forward, seven months after the birth of her daughter, Charlie, entered the fray in the 69th minute with the match finely poised at 1-1 but struggled to assert herself as the visiting team pressed for a winner. However, just being on the pitch will be extremely welcome with speculation rife on whether she would even make an appearance before the option of a return to the US in the new year. “It was one of those games that it’s difficult to get into and find your feet but I think she’s done well,” said Amoros. “We’re not talking about Alex scoring the winner but the main thing is that we all can enjoy her being back on a football pitch.” The arrival of the 31-year-old has also heaped pressure on Tottenham, in ways that the club could perhaps not have envisaged. The global superstar brings a following that, online at least, dwarfs her new club’s. The overwhelming majority will not be familiar with Spurs’ recent journey from the bottom to the top of women’s football. Their expectations are not tempered by the knowledge that this is only the club’s second season at this level, or that Saturday’s opponents Reading are far more established in the top division. Instead, they see one of the biggest players in the world at one of the sport’s best-known clubs. Reading, though, ooze experience and a line-splitting pass from the Wales international Jess Fishlock found Emma Mitchell on the left and her cross was headed in by Brooke Chaplen to give the visitors the lead. Manchester City made light work of defeating a depleted Bristol City 8-1. Bristol City were missing five first-team members after a player developed Covid-19 symptoms, forcing housemates and teammates Charlie Wellings, Gemma Evans, Ella Mastrantonio, Abi Harrison and Meaghan Sargeant to self-isolate. Due to the weakened side Bristol City, it came as no surprise when the hosts took the lead within 10 minutes as Naomi Layzell’s clearance off the line struck goalkeeper Sophie Baggaley and rebounded into the net. However, Manchester City’s arrogance was quickly punished when a lazy pass across her own area from Gemma Bonner was intercepted by Ebony Salmon who calmly slotted the ball home. Gareth Taylor’s team struck three times in four minutes before the break. First, Laura Coombs ran through and converted a chance. Then Keira Walsh drilled a shot into the corner from 20 yards, before Lucy Bronze chipped in the fourth to confirm her side’s dominance. Georgia Stanway added a fifth in the 48th minute as she turned home a pass from Bronze. The sixth went in before the hour mark when Ellen White slid the ball into the net. Janine Beckie added a seventh before White hit her second of the day and City’s eighth late on. Tottenham equalised shortly afterwards when a corner from the Dutch defender Siri Worm was eventually flicked over the goalkeeper Grace Moloney by Ashleigh Neville. With Morgan’s recruitment at one end of the spectrum, the progress of the right-back Neville – who has helped Spurs climb from the third tier to the WSL in three years – and the introduction of the 19-year-old Elisha Sulola speaks to the other side of the managers’ strategy. “That’s what we want to do,” said Amoros. “Have the best players in the world together with players that we develop, local talent, and today was a prime example of that.”