Nostalgic beauty isn’t always a bad thing. Colourful makeup can be joyous and fun – which we all need right now. So let’s go all out with a multicoloured look as per the Dries Van Noten AW20 show. Things to note: a good foundation is a requisite to even out the skin. Colour around the eyes should be a wash – achieve it using a damp brush dipped in colour. The lips, however, are best kept bold, opaque and unapologetic. But avoid blush. It’s already teetering nicely on the brink of 80s pop star territory. Cheek colour will tip it over the edge. 1. Glossier Boy Brow in Auburn £14, glossier.com 2. Huda #FauxFilter Skin Finish Foundation Stick £32, cultbeauty.com 3. Mac Lipstick in Heart Goes Boom £17.50, maccosmetics.co.uk 4. Kevyn Aucoin Blitz Kid Palette £47, selfridges.com 5. By Joy Little Mama brush £13.50, byjoyadenuga.com Sometimes our skincare regime is a bit much. We overclean, we overlayer, we overmix and we generally just overdo it. This results in a compromised and confused skin barrier. I, due to the nature of my job, have also fallen foul of this. I recently began trialling a new retinol product, got a little too excited about the results I was seeing and began to overuse it, layer other new things on top of it and one night after my OTT skincare regime, my skin started to feel a little sore. The next morning I woke up with an angry rash all over my face, including the crevices of my eye area. It was uncomfortable, rough, irritated and irritating. Everything I applied stung and exacerbated the condition. Everything except this. Billed as a ‘booster’ – which is confusing as it suggests that you must use it in addition to other products – it is essentially a hyaluronic acid serum that also works brilliantly on its own. It is formulated with ingredients to activate the skin’s natural defences against irritants, bacteria and any environmental aggressors. In addition to that, it is incredibly calming and soothing. Within a few days my skin was back to its calm, happy state. So if, like me, you sometimes overdo it, look no further, here’s the remedy. Sarah Chapman Skinesis Intense Hydrating Booster, £64, sarahchapman.com Magic number A three-in-one nighttime solution that lifts dead skin, reduces the appearance of pores and smooths texture. Expect super-luminous skin. Summer Fridays Soft Reset AHA Exfoliating Solution, £49, cultbeauty.com Waxing lyrical Inspired by a winter’s tale, the three candles in Diptyque’s Holiday 2020 collection – floral, fir tree and amber – guarantee a happy ending. Simply divine. Diptyque Limited Edition Candles, from £32, diptyque.com Hey, sister The little sister to niche skincare brand Allies of Skin has launched this brightening, hydrating and breakout-preventing potion. It’s one of my faves. PSA Heroine Mandelic and Licorice Toner, £28, asos.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto