Ballet Vlaanderen’s ongoing Imagination Is Alive series pairs musicians and dancers, filmed around their home city of Antwerp. Cold Genius has dancer Matt Foley in a flesh-coloured leotard tending towards the absurd, his bouncing, bending, quivering and tip-toeing body (choreographed by Drew Jacoby) lent gravitas by the intense, authoritative bass-baritone Justin Hopkins watching over him in an empty theatre, singing Purcell’s What Power Art Thou. It’s peculiarly compelling. US choreographer Trey McIntyre has had an eventful lockdown. He moved continents, to London, and set up the online dance platform FLTPK, premiering new short dance films from different choreographers every fortnight. McIntrye’s own opening film Who Am I Here? is a smart take on the “dancers practising in their living rooms” theme; another, Hysterical, sees the Royal Ballet’s Joshua Junker living out that title trapped inside a giant bright yellow inflatable. For the peaceful blue sky and view over the Paris rooftops as much as anything, this solo from Paris Opera Ballet dancer Pablo Legasa is like pressing the reset button on your day. The music is Satie’s dreamy Gnossienne No 1, the mood is understated, the choreography modest but it’s enough to savour Legasa’s dancerly bearing and faraway gaze. POB’s director Aurélie Dupont can also been seen looking divine against an empty sky, dancing Martha Graham in the film Breathing. A slickly made (pre-pandemic) short from Ukweli Roach and BirdGang, filmed by Colin Emerson. Set to the eponymous track by electro-soul singer Kyan, there’s a simple idea behind it – I won’t describe it in full, but suffice to say it gives you a couple of perspectives on the same moves and you’ll soon notice that the glitchy popping of the dancers’ bodies doesn’t always seem to be going in a natural direction ... More multiple perspectives in Peter Leung’s The Same Space for Dutch National Ballet. This is perfect for anyone frustrated by online viewing because you’re stuck with someone else’s directorial choices – here there are three camera angles and you can switch between them as you watch the meditative 19-minute piece play out. The online player is frustratingly small but it’s an interesting proposition for the future of digital dance. Five dancers, three empty cubes, myriad possibilities. A creative response to everyone being stuck at home in the first wave of the pandemic, frustratingly still pertinent. Choreographer Rebecca Evans and Pell Ensemble sent projectors into the homes of residents in Waltham Forest, north-east London, loaded with films of solo dancers. The recipients (none of them professional dancers) then filmed themselves interacting with the projection, with some ingenious results, and a sweet turn from a toddler chasing a tiny dancer across the wall.