Hello, Warren Murray with a briefing that is 95% effective in peer-reviewed clinical trials … Labour has been plunged into fresh turmoil after Keir Starmer refused to restore the parliamentary whip to Jeremy Corbyn, despite what Corbyn’s allies claim was a private deal to do so. Starmer issued a strongly worded statement saying he would not welcome back his predecessor after at least one senior Jewish MP – Margaret Hodge – threatened to quit. Corbyn was reinstated to party membership this week after his suspension for dismissive comments about a damning official report on Labour antisemitism. Starmer said yesterday: “Jeremy Corbyn’s actions in response to the EHRC report undermined and set back our work in restoring trust and confidence in the Labour party’s ability to tackle antisemitism. In those circumstances, I have taken the decision not to restore the whip to Jeremy Corbyn. I will keep this situation under review.” Coronavirus latest – Overnight the US death toll has passed 250,000. Ed Pilkington writes that Donald Trump remains in denial but there is hope: two vaccines are edging closer to release and some Republicans are at least showing signs of working with Joe Biden. The NHS is marshalling retired doctors, health visitors and physiotherapists for the country’s biggest ever mass vaccination programme, according to documents the Guardian has seen. In England 22 million vulnerable adults would be given jabs first, followed by the rest of the population. The two most promising vaccines have been codenamed: the Pfizer/BioNTech version is “Courageous” and the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine is known as “Talent”. A Birmingham hospital consultant has given birth to twins while in a coronavirus coma. Perpetual Uke awoke to find her babies had been delivered by caesarean at 26 weeks. They are a girl named Sochika Palmer and a boy called Osinachi Pascal. Further coronavirus developments at our global live blog. ‘Profound betrayal’ – Australian special forces were allegedly involved in murdering 39 civilians during the Afghanistan occupation, in some cases executing prisoners to “blood” junior soldiers before inventing cover stories and planting weapons on corpses, a major report has found. A small group within Australia’s SAS and commando regiments allegedly slit victims’ throats, gloated about their actions and kept kill counts. The inquiry head described the actions as “disgraceful and a profound betrayal” of the Australian military. In all cases, the report finds, it “was or should have been plain that the person killed was a non-combatant”. The majority had been captured and were under control, giving them protection under international law. The inquiry has recommended referring 36 matters involving 19 individuals for criminal investigation. Fewer refugees find safety – The number of refugees officially resettled in safe countries will hit a record low in 2020, the UN refugee agency (UNHCR) has warned, as it urged the UK government to restart its flagship programme. British ministers have said they will soon restart resettlement flights under a scheme known as VPRS that was suspended in March due to Covid. But even then, VPRS is due to end soon, and a new programme to replace it has not been finalised. By the end of September only 15,425 refugees had been resettled globally, compared with more than 60,000 in 2019, and 126,000 in 2016. The Home Office said a new scheme would be rolled out “as soon as coronavirus circumstances allow”. ‘Clear breach’ – The Five Eyes alliance that includes Britain has called on China to reinstate Hong Kong legislators banned from the territory’s parliament for being pro-democracy. “China’s action is a clear breach of its international obligations under the legally binding, UN-registered Sino-British Joint Declaration,” the five countries said, referring to the “one country, two systems” obligation that Beijing accepted in return for getting all of Hong Kong back. Britain now considers China has broken the joint declaration three times, including with national security legislation for Hong Kong introduced this year. Upcycling made light work – A material made of crop waste that turns sunlight into renewable energy has landed its designer the first sustainability prize in the James Dyson awards. The award was given to 27-year-old Carvey Ehren Maigue, from Mapúa University in the Philippines, for his invention, Aureus, which can be attached in panels to windows and walls. It allows energy to be absorbed by luminescent particles which then emit energy as visible light. Unlike conventional solar panels it does not have to face the sun directly, picking up UV rays through clouds and bouncing off surroundings. The overall award went to 23-year-old postgraduate student Judit Giró Benet for her Blue Box, which can be used at home to detect breast cancer by urine analysis. Each winner receives a cash prize of £30,000. Joe Biden will enter the White House in 2021 facing numerous domestic crises. But as Patrick Wintour explains, he cannot ignore the rest of the world. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/11/18-62714-20201119_TIF_Bidenworld.mp3 The comic has dazzled viewers with his dancing skills. He explains how he has used lockdown to learn exotic musical instruments, how the arts are being devastated by the pandemic, and why we’re all sick of “jackanape” politicians. Gareth Southgate claimed Phil Foden gave a glimpse of the young talent that “will be fabulous for England for years to come” with two goals and a display that delivered international redemption against Iceland. Manor Solomon scored Israel’s winner as a 1-0 defeat cost Scotland top place in Nations League group B2, while Wales secured promotion to the top tier with a 3-1 win over 10-man Finland. Johanna Konta shares the anxiety of everyone in tennis as desperate administrators and nervous politicians argue over the viability of holding the Australian Open in January, as the country continues to wrestle with coronavirus. Alexander Zverev’s chances of a second ATP Finals title are still alive after a ragged three-set struggle to get past Diego Schwartzman. Sir Geoff Hurst has said he supports a ban on children heading footballs in the wake of sweeping dementia diagnoses and deaths among his 1966 World Cup-winning teammates. George Ford believes England will showcase their full array of attacking threats in Saturday’s Autumn Nations Cup fixture against Ireland, having declared himself fit and ready to return. Anthony Edwards was taken by the Minnesota Timberwolves with the No 1 pick in an NBA draft delayed multiple times because of the coronavirus pandemic. And the government is set to announce a bailout for sport on Thursday, with rugby union expected to be the prime beneficiary. The labour market in London has been hit harder by the pandemic than other parts of the UK, a new study claims. Researchers at the Centre for London thinktank and King’s College London found there had been a 170% increase in the number of people in London claiming unemployment-related benefits, compared with the same period in 2019, equal to about 300,000 new claims. The average for the country was 120%. The FTSE 100 is on course to shed nearly 1% this morning because of concerns about the economic recovery. The pound is down 0.25% at $1.323 and €1.117. Our Guardian print edition leads with “PM finds £16.5bn for defence as foreign aid budget faces huge cut”. Experts say it represents the largest real-terms increase in the defence budget since Thatcher and will be partly spent on a “hacker HQ” to bolster Britain’s cybersecurity and a Space Command designed to protect orbiting satellites and launch rockets. Also on the front, the black official who has quit the “racist” Windrush compensation scheme and the tougher regional coronavirus restrictions touted as England’s best hope of saving Christmas. A very Covid Christmas stories have been rattling around for a while now and these sorts of headlines seem a bit old: in the Telegraph, “Rules to be relaxed for families at Christmas”; the Mail, “Xmas is back on!” and the i, “Hopes grow for family Christmas”. The Mirror, like the Guardian, manages to move the story on with “The cost of Christmas” as it calculates “five days of extreme lockdown for every day of fun with family”. The Times has “Johnson pledges £16bn military spending spree”. Metro reports on “My Covid miracles” – the doctor who gave birth to twins while in an induced coma with coronavirus. The Express has more two-jabs coverage: “Vaccine – double dose of good news”. The FT reminds us how much this is all costing ahead of next week’s spending review: “Sunak faces worst hit to public finances since second world war”. And the Sun has “Wills: I want Bashir truth” about the BBC’s inquiry into his mother’s Panorama interview. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com