Sophie Goddard Fri 6 Nov 2020 13.09 GMT


Last modified on Fri 6 Nov 2020 13.11 GMT Having painstakingly built up her business as a driving instructor over the past four years, the decision to shift careers during lockdown was not an easy one for Camilla, 32, from Worcester. But in the weeks leading up to the lockdown announcement, she had noticed a steady surge in cancellations. “Quite a few people weren’t comfortable having lessons because they were worried about the virus and because everyone’s financial priorities had shifted,” she says. “Then the 2-metre distancing rule was implemented and I knew that wasn’t possible in a car. It wasn’t essential work, either.” Realising her income had shrunk to virtually nothing overnight, Camilla took action and began searching for other opportunities. “Initially I looked into supermarket work and delivery driver jobs, but then I realised that I’d always wanted to provide home care for people. It’s really important as it enables people to live in their own homes independently.” One company Camilla came across in Worcester stuck out – a family-run organisation providing home care to the elderly and vulnerable. “Their website explained they offered extensive training and support, so I filled in an application.” The next day, Camilla was contacted by the team and before long she’d landed a care-assistant role, working full-time. Covering towns across Worcestershire, Camilla’s job involves visiting elderly people to help with various tasks – anything from food shopping to cooking, cleaning and personal care. “Some need help with medication, others with things like opening the curtains, making beds or washing up,” she says. “We have an app where we put all our notes, so before each shift I’ll read up to ensure we give the right level of care. It’s important that the people we support are able to keep their independence and we don’t take over. We know what each person is capable of doing and wants (or doesn’t want) to do.” Despite her training and time spent shadowing colleagues, the role proved challenging initially. “I’d never done anything like it, so I didn’t know whether I’d be able to. I get quite anxious with new things and was trying to calm myself down, saying: ‘You can do this!’ “It was hard for the people we support as well because the care workers wear masks and most of us have brown hair, which makes it hard for them to work out who we are. But after a couple of weeks, they recognise us, and you soon get the hang of things.” Camilla was pleased to discover that many of her existing skills were transferable. “Being a driving instructor means you meet new people all the time and you’re making conversation, making sure they feel comfortable, happy and confident, which is exactly what we do in this role, too.” The opportunity was a lifeline, she says. “The care work saved me financially over lockdown.” It has also proved rewarding. “It’s hugely uplifting because the people we support are so happy they can stay in their home environments and get that extra help. It’s uplifting for their families, too, because they’d been trying to do it all themselves. “If I’m on the evening shift, making sure people are comfortable and getting ready for sleep, I think: ‘I’ve helped them achieve that.’ Together, we’ve reached their goal of going to bed, safe in their own homes.” Having now resumed giving driving lessons, Camilla works part-time in each role – a combination she enjoys. “After being in the car for a couple of hours, you get a bit like: ‘Get me out of here!’ It’s good to have a change. “Driving can get lonely, so it’s been particularly nice being able to build relationships with those I support and with other care workers – everybody is lovely. I’m grateful to have had the chance to try something new.” What would she say to anyone considering taking a similar leap? “If it’s something you’re passionate about, try it and see – just give yourself that chance.” This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (“Care for others. Make a Difference”) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information on finding a job in the social care sector, visit everydayisdifferent.com