She caused a disturbance in church, challenging the vicar over an unpaid bill. For that, Mary Frances Heaton was declared insane and sent to a lunatic asylum in 1837. She never emerged into the world again, spending the last 41 years of her life locked up. But this weekend her life has been acknowledged with a blue plaque to “the tragic patient” unveiled in Wakefield, West Yorkshire. It highlights her small collection of needlework samplers, a legacy of her life in stitches. “She wasn’t mad, she was furious,” said Sarah Cobham who, along with other members of the Forgotten Women of Wakefield project, researched Heaton’s life. “She’s a reminder that women were very quickly assumed insane or hysterical. Mary didn’t stand a chance.” Heaton was born into an affluent family in Doncaster in 1801. But her father was bankrupted when she was 11, and she had to make her own way in life, becoming a music teacher. She lived and worked in London, returning to Doncaster to care for her dying father. After his death, she resumed teaching; among her pupils was the daughter of the Rev John Sharpe of St George’s, the Doncaster parish church. But the clergyman failed to pay for the twice-weekly lessons, and eventually Heaton had had enough. Interrupting one of the preacher’s sermons, she accused him of being “a whited sepulchre, a thief, a villain, a liar and a hypocrite”. Heaton was brought to court where she was judged to be “a lunatic insane and dangerous idiot”, and committed to the West Riding Pauper Lunatic Asylum in Wakefield. Cobham said:, “Women were deemed dangerous and insane during the 1830s for all sorts of reasons, none of which had anything to do with their actual mental health but had more to do with the lack of their perceived ‘womanly attributes’. “Speaking out, getting excited, challenging male authority and refusing to conform would quickly be used as evidence of insanity.” Such “irrationality” was thought to be connected to women’s menstrual cycles, Cobham added. “Hysteria” was also believed to be the result of unsatisfied maternal drive, sexual desire and bad habits. “It was much easier to blame hysteria for these things than to investigate women’s intellectual frustration, lack of mobility or needs for autonomy and control,” said Cobham. “The trio of men who had sentenced Mary decided she was insane simply because she was a woman.” In the asylum, Heaton was subjected to years of “treatments”, including electric shocks to her pelvis, purging concoctions and the ingestion of mercury. Her medical records describe her at various times as wild, flighty, excitable, ungovernable, extravagant, violent and abusive. Over time, Heaton’s mental and physical health deteriorated. Eventually, after a failed escape attempt and with her spirit broken, she became docile and “took to quietly embroidering her story as a way of preserving her memories,” according to Cobham. On one she stitched the words: “I wish the vicar would submit to arbitration my claim against him for music lessons given to his daughter, regularly, twice a week, during the years 1834 and 1835.” Other samplers included references to people and events in her life before she was incarcerated. Only a handful of samplers have survived, but Heaton made many that she presented as gifts to staff at the asylum and others. They were a form of art therapy, according to Cobham: “Any form of creativity enables trauma to be unlocked. It is paramount to mental and emotional wellbeing.” Towards the end of her life Heaton was transferred to another asylum in South Yorkshire, where she died in 1878 at the age of 77. She was buried in a pauper’s grave. Heaton’s blue plaque – on the site of the old asylum – is the 12th in the Forgotten Women of Wakefield’s campaign for parity with men, who have 37 blue plaques in the city. Another plaque will be unveiled this weekend to Lady Catherine Milnes Gaskell, a “champion of social justice” who spent much of her life supporting the health, education and wellbeing of Wakefield’s poorest communities. “Women have been written out of history and forgotten,” said Cobham. “In Mary Heaton’s case, she was disowned by her own family, who were wealthy and politically and socially active. Mary came from money and status but was thrown away.”