Among the overblown themes of sports writing, through all its stained and dog-eared lexica, the one that comes up most is surely redemption. Across the dirt of suburban outfields and the paint of city lanes, redemption and the seeking of it. Blessed is its pursuit. Something to be striven for, to be craved, to be grasped, to be squandered. Teams, athletes, entire nations take their turns to be redeemed. Someone somewhere is always hovering on its holy cusp. Some recidivists make it a cycle, a new fall before each corresponding lift, the trip through a spiritual carwash. Each time a crowd will assemble, dancing with the idea that now things could be different. The desire to see someone rise is unquenchable. We are a world of sporting sinners endlessly swimming towards the light. The concept lives way beyond sport. Action heroes wrestle their pasts, the prodigal son makes his passage home. We saddle up the Xbox to ride the range in Red Dead Redemption. Even our frequent flyer points get redeemed, becoming shitty appliances in a late rush before the airline goes bust. Hold on to this receipt, redeem this offer at any participating outlet. “I know that my redeemer lives, and that in the end he will stand on the earth,” says the Book of Job, and duly on a mountain above Rio de Janeiro you’ll find the firm footing of Christ the Redeemer, eternally signalling a wide. Sometimes the formulation fits. A team that wins the year after fumbling a final? A footballer slotting a crucial penalty after blowing it last time? The headline reflects the feeling. More broadly though, it’s applied to any success that follows any lack of success. In the churn of sport results this isn’t a narrative, it’s a sequence. But Lord, we love narrative. “One common thread runs through almost every major sports moment so far this year, and that is redemption,” wrote The Sport Digest in 2017. It could have been any other year. After the US men’s basketball team committed the sin of not winning gold at the 2004 Olympics, the narrative got so baked into their 2008 campaign that the Dream Team nickname became the Redeem Team. The other kind of redemption story involves off-field failings. Between all the world’s athletes, the money, the youth and the high-risk personalities, these form a substantial body of work. The basics are drink-driving, car crashes, messy nights on the town. These might aggregate into alcoholism or addictions to any of the substances ideal for those with a lot of ready cash and a need for a clean system in 12 hours. Transgression can get more boutique, like NFL player Michael Vick’s dog-fighting ring. It can be as mundane as sexual infidelity, as serious as sexual assault. There are often greater consequences for the former than the latter. Money and legal clout ensure those implicated in crimes are rarely convicted, and a lack of conviction in both senses is used to stifle the question of whether violence should prohibit a return to the public arena. There are unique redemption stories – Rubin Carter with a reputation as a fierce boxer, falsely convicted of murder, campaigning for his eventual release; South Africa after apartheid appearing in Rugby World Cups and cricket Tests and Olympic Games. Dopers, match-fixers and other cheats are their own genre, as their failings are personal but take place within the sport. Former match-fixers can come back to win without suspicion but never lose. Drug cheats who win are assumed to be still on the gear and when losing are derided as nothing without it. Any Australian bowler generating reverse swing will generate suspicion as long as David Warner is in the side. The academic Alex Parrish parses the redemption cycle into six stages: loss, shame, punishment, repentance, triumph and forgiveness. The first three are largely enacted through media coverage; parts four and six can be engineered through the same. There’s the newspaper double-spread with photos of domestic relatability, or the montage of sobs and synthesisers on a TV profile. Wholesome influences take the spotlight: childhood hockey coaches with wisdom carved into faces like Treebeard’s, family priests whose urging brought on a Damascene moment of prayer, mothers or fathers or their surrogates before whom our subject is at last humbled into gratitude. Babies and marriages become catalysts for a moral before-and-after picture. Any of these can apply to athletes current or retired. The retired need bigger arcs, like the autobiography addressing mental health or addiction. These are marketable where struggle contrasts with sporting success – as long as there’s an upbeat ending. The subjects can go through Hell itself but must come out the other side. People who live with mental health conditions know that these are only ever managed rather than cured. But those sorts of stories aren’t the ones that sell. Thomas Patrick Oates writes in Sport Documentary and the Politics of Redemption about portrayals of athletes who didn’t succeed at the top level. Despite that premise, each subject “ultimately overcomes his athletic failures in some significant way. Given the conventions of the documentary profile, it is perhaps unsurprising that these stories would be framed in terms that emphasise redemption. Because profiles so often involve the subject as the central participant, narratives documenting their failure usually end on a positive note, or at least allow the central subject to share some important insight on the human condition.” Those are a few of the ways through the six-part cycle. But for part five – triumph – current athletes have a direct option that the retired do not. They can get out and play. New success is an adrenaline syringe to the redemption veins. On a Monday in 2010, Lynn Zinser looked back at the weekend in her Leading Off column for The New York Times. “Having absorbed a day full of stories of redemption, the NFL has officially taken over the word. There was so much redeeming going on, it’s amazing anyone remembered to play football … Vick became King of the Redeemed, while also redeeming coach Andy Reid for making him the starter. In sports, this is how you re-write your reputation. Similarly, [Braylon] Edwards patched over that pesky little arrest for drunken driving and redeemed the Jets’ decision to wallop him with that whole quarter-long suspension with a touchdown catch that helped beat the Dolphins … The redemption of the Cowboys and the Vikings, two over-hyped teams avoiding 0–3 starts, saved them from being overtaken by waves of panic … Still awaiting his redemption opportunity is the suspended Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger.” This redemption is lightweight, painted polystyrene. It just means that the most recent public memory is no longer the most embarrassing – your profile photo is a cheery thumbs-up instead of you stapling your foreskin to a table. It gives minor actions a disproportionate emotional heft, like that very British practice where a footballer observes some basic piece of civility online and an infantry of accounts with club logos line up with the single-word reply: “Class”. Media expediency drives this stuff, but it works only with an audience. “There is something in us, as storytellers and as listeners to stories, that demands the redemptive act, that demands that what falls at least be offered the chance to be restored,” wrote the novelist Flannery O’Connor, whose protagonist in Wise Blood forever sought the same. Foundational to storytelling is progress. The cinema’s three-act structure needs a character to be confronted with a challenge and emerge from it changed. Greek myth has the twin concepts of miasma and catharsis: a shadow or a stain on the soul, then the purge of it that only an act of valiance can bring on. The same impulse echoes through our monotheistic religions: our visits to confessionals, our knees bruised on flagstones, our prayers made with lips or with strands of knotted rope. The secular versions are in gym sessions, self-help sections, therapy couches. This is our inexhaustible need: the idea that we can be forgiven, that we may mimic divine example by transcending our form and existing anew. The Jesus myth uses a different version: suffering without a preceding wrong, for the good of those who remain. “In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, in accordance with the riches of God’s grace,” says the Book of Ephesians. Earlier religions used the same structure for millennia, a sacrifice of a sacred figure for harvest or protection or appeasement. The most potent sacrifices involve youth, innocent and blameless. Likewise the Greek miasma might follow accident or misfortune rather than wrongdoing – not so much a moral judgement as a burden imposed by fate. Heracles is made to slay his family while possessed by a god, but must still perform his Twelve Labours to be cleansed. Those conventions remain with us: if an apocalypse movie plays in the forest but no-one dies to save the world, does it make a surround sound? Bruce Willis is Jesus on an asteroid, nailed by a nuke – a true muscular American Christianity. Other action movies with more localised scopes of damage still need the emotional ballast of a character saving the others, the ‘Go on without me’ moment: think Gorman and Vasquez in the air duct in Aliens, think Miles Dyson’s ragged final breaths as he holds up a detonator long enough for John and Sarah Connor to escape Cyberdyne Systems. It’s tempting to peg this modern prevalence as a substitute, interpreting like religious scholar Joseph Price that “contemporary secular rituals manifest fundamental religious proclivities of human beings and reflect the sacred rites and myths of previous, religiously oriented cultures”. This can be a chicken-and-egg argument, but the length of its history suggests that redemption symbolism had a power that attracted religious thought, rather than vice-versa. Secular redemption stories are as marketable under religious regimes as they are in the cliche of the godless modern city. One crossover area is repentance. Any banned athlete can show dedication to make amends by their physical preparation. Reports will include liberal use of the word “gruelling”, quotes from teammates about training the house down, numbers on how much muscle was added or weight was dropped. Sweat is an offering. In religious tradition, an ascetic was a holy person who refused comfort and luxury, leaving society to live as a hermit and concentrate on God. The word came via Latin from the Ancient Greek áskēsis, meaning an athlete’s training or exercise. Physical improvement was equated with the rigour of religious devotion. There turns out to be a short thread between John the Baptist chowing locusts and a Rocky Balboa montage. These options aren’t available to most of us. For a person of humble abilities, the only currency of repentance is time and effort, suffering and expiation. Normal wrongs are met with exclusion, prison, fines, shame, contrition. We need to hurt and be seen to have hurt. After the Freedom Summer murders in Philadelphia, Mississippi, the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr said, “Somehow I still believe that American suffering is redemptive.” Pain is a path to something better. For an individual to win back social standing, the route lies through charity, doing notable acts for others the way Jesus hopped up on the woodwork. This might still take years. To be seen as reformed without major good deeds, just by living a quiet and honourable life, might need decades. So the athlete takes their shortcut. Loss, shame, punishment, repentance, triumph, forgiveness – but triumph can be had in the arena even if the other five have nothing to do with it. Zinser put her finger on the obvious contradiction: “By scoring touchdowns, did any of these guys actually make amends for what put them on people’s Don’t Like List? … [It] was definitely a warped off-field message, but football success erases all doubts.” Swap football for your sport of choice. On the day that Steve Smith’s ban was handed down, in March 2018, the radio broadcaster Declan Byrne put up a post online. “I’ve saved everyone the time and created the front page of every paper in 15 months,” he wrote. Attached was a photo of Smith holding aloft his bat with a weary Stuart Broad in the background. “REDEMPTION” read a huge banner headline, with the subheading “Smith hits ton on Day 1 at Edgbaston to open 2019 Ashes”. That prediction wasn’t supernatural. The conventions and concepts were already set. If Smith played in the Ashes, that’s exactly how any success would be presented. Personal improvement or otherwise in his time away would mean squat. In May the following year, with the World Cup about to start, Smith stood with David Warner and Ben Stokes on the edge of exactly this promise. The big contests were about to start, and anyone who succeeded in them might get his slate polished clean. You had to avoid the pitfalls – the professional failures or personal failings that would double down the disapproval of the crowd. Succeed, though, and you would be folded into the endless redemption story, just one more comeback spun into a moral good. This is an edited extract from The Comeback Summer by Geoff Lemon published by Hardie Grant Books, RRP $29.99, and is available in stores from 2 December 2020