Bobi Wine, the popular Ugandan reggae singer and opposition presidential hopeful, was temporarily blinded by police when he was arrested in Kampala on Tuesday, moments after being successfully certified as a candidate in next year’s election. Heavily armed police and army officers blocked Wine’s vehicle as he was leaving the Kyambogo University cricket grounds on the outskirts of the capital. They smashed the vehicle’s windows with a crowbar and bundled the 38-year-old into a waiting police van. Wine, who is hoping to unseat Uganda’s long-time leader Yoweri Museveni, said police had directed pepper spray into his face amid violent scuffles with his supporters. “We were abducted by the police and military … They were the ones that smashed my car,” the singer, whose real name is Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu, told supporters. “They sprayed pepper spray in our eyes. I still can’t see properly. Very many people are in hospital in critical condition. This election is no election as usual – this is a revolutionary election. If it’s a boxing fight, it has begun.” Authorities frequently accuse Wine of planning rallies that could disrupt public order, which he denies. A police spokesperson said Wine had been planning an illegal procession that was broken up to preserve the flow of traffic and public order. “He was forcefully removed from his vehicle, and a fracas ensued in the process of transferring him to the police vehicle. He was eventually safely delivered to his home in Magere [a neighbourhood of Kampala],” the spokesperson said. Critics say President, Museveni, in power since 1986, increasingly depends on the armed forces to assert his authority. Museveni, who was nominated as a candidate on Monday, said afterwards that his government would not tolerate the activities of enemies plotting chaos. “They are planning all sorts of stupid things to disrupt the [election] process. The ones who want to disturb our peace, don’t try because we shall deal with you. Whoever tries will regret. Nobody should be intimidated by these crooks,” the 76-year-old politician said. “I am already president and want to come back … The [ruling party] fought to bring peace in this country. Nobody has more guns than us. But we don’t scare people.” The electoral commission has not fixed a date for the polls. Wine is one of a new generation of politicians across Africa who are challenging long-time leaders, hoping to harness deep dissatisfaction among younger, more educated and often urban voters. “We now enter the most critical phase of our liberation struggle!” Wine tweeted after having his candidacy certified. He broke into formal politics in 2017 when he won a seat in Uganda’s national assembly, and has been since been badly assaulted and detained many times. Those actions have reinforced a view among some Ugandans that the police serve at the behest of Museveni, who has rebuffed repeated calls to retire peacefully. Museveni is eligible to seek another term next year after lawmakers removed constitutional age limits on the presidency. The former rebel leader’s party insists he remains its most popular member. This east African country has never witnessed a peaceful transfer of power since independence in 1962.