After hijacking a Boeing 727 aircraft between Portland and Seattle on 24 November 1971, DB Cooper extorted $200,000 in ransom money, parachuted out the back of the plane and was never seen again. This fascinating documentary delves into the mystery surrounding Cooper – the alias used to buy the plane ticket – as dramatisations and testimony from investigators explore how his crime has become the only unsolved case of air piracy in commercial aviation history. Ammar Kalia Humans have been gazing up at the heavens since we began walking upright. This three-part series uses cosmic CGI imagery, astronomical artefacts and expert testimony to trace the history of that fascination. It all starts in ancient Babylon, where a clash of the gods gave birth to the Earth and sky. Ellen E Jones Josh Baker presents this remarkable documentary, filmed over the course of four years. It follows the decision of Indiana resident Samantha Sally to join Isis with her husband and young son, Matthew. Now in jail, Sally describes her time in Syria, while Matthew recounts his fears. AK With people of colour disproportionately seriously affected by Covid, the A&E medic Dr Ronx Ikharia investigates why so many ethnic minority frontline workers have lost their lives; 90% of doctors who have died from the virus were from an ethnic minority. Ikharia speaks to experts to try to find out how we can reduce such startling figures. AK The ABC correspondent James Longman and the epidemiologist Christopher Golden tour virus hotspots including Liberia and Turkey for a coldly terrifying survey of how the next, worse pandemic might emerge. The takeaway is a predictable one: greedy humanity needs to stop interfering with the animal kingdom. Jack Seale This hard-edged, but darkly witty, new Canadian drama sees an indigenous teen, Jared (Joel Oulette), discreetly dealing drugs to keep his estranged family afloat in a dead-end town. Then a talking raven appears and the trippy visions start, suggesting Jared may have a greater destiny (or some very strong pills). Graeme Virtue A Pigeon Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence (Roy Andersson, 2014), 1.50am, Film4As the Swedish auteur Roy Andersson’s latest magical masterpiece, About Endlessness, is released, here is the Venice Golden Lion-winning conclusion to his “living trilogy”, in which a pair of lugubrious novelty salesmen trudge through a bizarre series of tableaux. Paul Howlett Grand Slam of Darts 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Day eight tournament coverage, including semi-finals. German football: Osnabrück v Nürnberg 7.30pm, BT Sport 2. Bundesliga 2 clash from Stadion an der Bremer Brücke. NFL: Tampa Bay Buccaneers v Los Angeles Rams 1am, Sky Sports NFL. NFC match coverage.