There is an image so astonishing in this epochal exhibition you can hardly tear your eyes away. It is a self-portrait by the great South African photographer Zanele Muholi. The non-binary artist appears in profile like the head on a medal, lips white, skin black, against a grainy monochrome ground. Their hair flares upwards in flames so bright they appear virtually silver in the darkness. Or so it seems at first. Perhaps the effect is more like a towering crown, a luminous diadem or a highly patterned headdress. The cultural overtones keep on running, all the way from ancient statues to vorticist painting. But the moment you notice that this hair is in fact a complicated arrangement of afro combs, the political nuances start to ramify. The self-portrait deepens as you look. Muholi was born in Durban in 1972. Their self-portraits have extraordinary graphic force, increasing the contrast so that the artist appears stunningly black in all their regal strength and stoicism. Here is Muholi got up as a black-and-white minstrel, a tribesperson with coils of sinister rope nooses for hair, or with fuse wire around their neck. In one image, only the whites of the eyes are visible; in another, the artist appears in a miner’s helmet, with the implication that they have just risen up from the darkest depths of the earth, bearing the coal dust of their labour. This is an act of solidarity, an honouring of the 34 striking miners murdered by South African police at the Marikana mine in 2012. Muholi has also appeared in necklaces of tyres, and wearing a wooden stool on their head in sardonic pastiche of western ideas of darkest Africa. A tremendously strong self-portrait at Tate Modern looks like an ethnographic photograph taken by some Victorian explorer. It shows the artist’s head bristling with what might be bones or sticks, but are in fact pens. This double take is as mordant as the work’s title, Nolwazi, which translates as “knowledge”. The photograph refers to the dehumanising “pencil test” practice used by the South African government in racial classification under apartheid. If authorities weren’t sure whether someone was truly white, a pencil would be inserted in their hair. If it dropped out, the person “passed” as white. It would be an understatement to say these images make you think twice about race, colour, imperialist oppression, state cruelties – historic and continuous – of all kinds. Just to stand before any of the self-portraits in this lifetime survey is to be confronted by images of exceptional beauty – exquisitely lit, brilliantly conceived, in all their profound intelligence – yet never to be lost in simple admiration. This is an art of agency, meant to stir; this is portraiture as activism. It begins in the opening gallery, filled with images of such gentle grace you might not immediately realise that these are the victims of sexual violence. A curving thigh, stitched and scarred, but bathed in the soft light of Muholi’s vision; a figure bent down, trying to wash out something dark in a basin of water; the forearms of a patient braceleted with hospital name bands. These are some of the people subjected to the horrendous ordeal of “corrective rape” in a country still notoriously homophobic, and violently opposed to any kind of gender non-conformity. Kissing, twining, loving, deep in laughter or conversation, clothed and naked, young and old: this is the LGBTQIA community in South Africa, Muholi’s earliest and most enduring subject. These photographs, beginning around 2003, were intensely controversial because of the relationships they showed. But they would hold the power of revelation in any country, for they depict tender and jubilant love affairs with the utmost empathy. Muholi’s art is devoted to individual dignity; this is nothing like Nan Goldin’s bruised and weary Manhattan demi-monde. And among them are stunning photographs of what it is to have a body, struggle with it, care for it, even just to see it. One sequence shows the artist’s vertiginous view of their own feet, and the difficulty of getting a good view of one’s back. There are glorious gay weddings, courageous protest marches, bleak funerals held outside the city limits in hard-baked landscapes. A phenomenal photograph, magnified to billboard scale, shows gay beauty queens at the beach, a triumphant party nearly camouflaged (but for Muholi’s compositional lineup) among the seaside throng. In 2010, South Africa’s then minister of arts and culture, Lulu Xingwana, denounced as “immoral and offensive” one of Muholi’s shows because it included images of gay couples. One of their most celebrated series, Faces and Phases, rises as a magnificent retort. The walls of a vast gallery at Tate Modern are entirely hung with black-and-white photographs of numerous colleagues and friends. Lifesize and loving, each is a superbly concise portrait of the sitter, with a discreet observation of character. The long-weary minister, in clerical robes; the teenager, with razor cut and tense expression; the poet, the painter, the matriarch. Muholi is there too, belonging with them, commemorating their faces and personalities with all the subtlety and depth of a classical photographer such as August Sander. But these photos do not stand alone. They are united in a unique installation that registers the passage of time. Each sitter appears twice, years passing between the two images; except that here and there comes a space where a face should have been. You miss that portrait and that long-gone person. For the work is a monument both to the still living and the vanished dead. “We should be counted and certainly counted on to write our own history.” So runs the artist’s statement along one wall. And this tremendous exhibition (temporarily suspended, alas, but worth however long the waiting) records that history as a visual narrative evolving from room to room. Characters emerge, disappear and resurface later on. Sitters win your heart. The man who weaves a couple of metres of clingfilm into a costume fit for a silver screen goddess. The township boys delicately plucking a barbed wire fence as if it were a musical instrument. Above all, the artist themself. The last gallery is filled with self-portraits that stand somewhere between fiction and truth. Muholi bound up in a flag or concealed inside a striped prison blanket. Wearing electric cables, cowry shells or safety pins as ominous jewellery. Peering out, sorrowfully, from a strange wreath of rags that turns out to be the discarded luggage wrapping from a harrowing flight. Indelible in their burning blacks and whites, each image is as condensed as an epigram: once seen, never forgotten. Zanele Muholi is at Tate Modern, London, until 7 March 2021 (opening temporarily postponed)