Real Madrid claimed their first-ever win at San Siro on Wednesday, beating Internazionale 2-0 in the Champions League after the hosts’ Arturo Vidal was sent off for dissent in the first half. Eden Hazard converted an early penalty and Achraf Hakimi deflected Rodrygo’s shot into his own goal to seal an authoritative victory for Real Madrid that leaves them on course to qualify for the last 16, and Inter facing a second successive group-stage exit. “Win, lose or draw, the important thing is to play well. Today we deserved to win and we had the match under control until the end,” said the Real Madrid head coach, Zinedine Zidane. “It doesn’t change anything. We also played well the other day [in the 1-1 draw with Villarreal] and deserved three points.” Real were without striker Karim Benzema and captain Sergio Ramos, but were gifted an early chance to take the lead when Nicolò Barella clipped Nacho’s heels as he was about to shoot. Hazard stepped up and comfortably converted the penalty. Lucas Vázquez hit the post for the visitors shortly afterwards before Inter began to fight their way back into the game – only for Vidal to stall their momentum with a needless dismissal. The Chilean went down under a challenge from two players and was livid when the referee, Anthony Taylor, waved away his penalty appeal. He was booked for dissent and then shown a second yellow card after stepping forward to continue protesting. Inter had another penalty appeal waved away when Roberto Gagliardini went down early in the second half before Real struck again. Vázquez, given too much space, clipped the ball back from the byline and Rodrygo’s shot was deflected in off former Real Madrid full-back Hakimi. Real stayed second in Group B with seven points, one behind Borussia Mönchengladbach, who thrashed Shakhtar Donetsk 4-0 in the early kick-off. Goals from Lars Stindl, Nico Elvedi and Breel Embolo put the hosts in total control at half-time, before Oscar Wendt adding a fourth late on. Inter are bottom with two points and need to win their last two fixtures to have any chance of reaching the last 16. Bayern Munich secured top spot in Group A with a 3-1 home win over Red Bull Salzburg – their 15th straight win in the competition. The visitors had the better of the first half, but Robert Lewandowski was on hand to open the scoring just before half-time. The defending champions were lacking their usual spark and got lucky in the 52nd minute when Salzburg defender Max Wöber deflected Kingsley Coman’s shot into his own net. Marc Roca was sent off in the 66th minute before Leroy Sané settled Bayern nerves with a header. Mergim Berisha grabbed a consolation goal for Salzburg. In the group’s other game, Atlético Madrid were held to a 0-0 draw by Lokomotiv Moscow. In Group D, Ajax warmed up for their visit to Anfield with a 3-1 home win over Midtjylland. After a goalless first half, Ryan Gravenberch struck from long range moments after the restart, and Noussair Mazraoui added a second soon after. David Neres added another screamer from the edge of the area, before Awer Mabil converted a late penalty for the visitors. Marseille have been eliminated after Porto condemned them to their fourth straight Group C loss – and 13th consecutive Champions League defeat in total. Zaidu Sanusi’s goal and Sergio Oliveira’s penalty moved Porto to the cusp of qualification.