Slowly emerging from months of lockdown in Melbourne, the writer and beauty entrepreneur Zoë Foster Blake has had plenty to occupy her time. She’s released a new children’s book, Back to Sleep, illustrated by Mike Jacobsen, which is a role reversal of the typical bedtime story. And she’s been making playlists. A lot of playlists. I can’t imagine anyone hasn’t come across one of these but if you haven’t, it’s a washing-up brush with a refillable handle you fill with washing-up liquid, which then disperses through the scourer as you clean dishes. How does one wash up without this brush? Why would one want to? As a child, my chore was washing up and I would’ve done anything for sorcery like this to speed up the dang job. I even pack one on holidays, as it drives me bonkers when an Airbnb or serviced apartment doesn’t have one and I have four cereal-crusted bowls glaring at me and one stupid thin cloth and a pissy little sachet of liquid as my cleaning equipment. (I also pack heaps of cool, fun, sexy stuff, promise.) Jean-Michel Basquiat said: “Art is how we decorate space; music is how we decorate time,” and I love that so, so much. I grew up in a house where there was ALWAYS music. Classical at breakfast, jazz at night, Stevie, Supertramp and Steely in between. Now we are that house: I play music at all times, and which music is a very considered decision, though it’s almost always my own playlists, because I’m that arrogant. I curate playlists for different moods, and times of the day, be that breakfast with the kids, cocktails before dinner, gentle Sunday afternoons, lockdown mood-lifting, running, that unique and dizzying post-break-up bounceback, deep flow writing … the right music at the right time can make life better. I really believe that. You can use actual shower caps, but Mum got me on to Hercules Ezy Covers years ago: they come in different sizes, each with their own colour so you know which size it is at a glance, and they last for years. They cover anything cling wrap or foil would, and are washable and strong. I’ve tried other reusable food covers and find them too fiddly, unreliable and earnest. These ones are simple, cheap, fast and durable.