Republicans are newly confident they will keep control of the Senate, after turning back challengers in a number of states that had become unexpected battlegrounds but where Donald Trump ultimately prevailed. The backlash against the president and his handling of the coronavirus pandemic, had some Republicans bracing for a “bloodbath” in the Senate. But with each passing hour, the picture grew rosier for Republicans, who currently hold a slim 53-47 majority in the chamber. Senators Joni Ernst of Iowa and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, both fierce allies of the president, fended off serious and well-financed Democratic opponents who channeled deep discontent the president. Senator Thom Tillis appeared poised to hold on to his seat in North Carolina, a race that was viewed as tied to the president’s prospects in the battleground state. After shocking the political world in with an upset special election victory in 2017, Democratic senator Doug Jones of Alabama lost to his Republican opponent, Tommy Tuberville, a former Auburn football coach. “We don’t yet know which presidential candidate will begin a new term in January, we don’t know which party will control the Senate. But some things are certain already,” Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader and Kentucky Republican, told supporters in Louisville, after defeating Democrat Amy McGrath to win a seventh term. “We know grave challenges will remain before, challenges that could not care less about our political polarization.” Control of the Senate is critical to any president. Under the control of the Republican majority leader, Mitch McConnell, Trump appointed three conservative justices to the supreme court and more than 200 judges to lower federal courts, a legacy that will long outlast his presidency. Without the Senate, Joe Biden would face entrenched opposition to his agenda that could make it nearly impossible to pass any major legislation should the Democratic nominee win the White House. The political landscape has shifted dramatically under the Trump presidency. For four years, young people and people of color have mobilized in their communities while Republicans lose their standing in the suburbs amid a wave of defections, particularly by women. Senate Republicans were always prepared to play defense this cycle, but Trump’s unpopularity and widespread disapproval of his handling of the virus threatened to imperil their entire party. But by early Wednesday morning, it appeared Republicans were far less endangered than they feared. “Here’s the message I got: people like what I’m doing and I’m going to keep doing it,” a buyout Graham declared in remarks on Tuesday night. “I’m going back to the Senate with a purpose.” In total, 35 of the 100 Senate seats are up for grabs this election and more than a third are competitive, many in states where Trump won four years ago. Given their loss in Alabama, Democrats would need to gain at least four seats to control the Senate if Biden wins, which would allow a Vice-President Kamala Harris to break a tie. Democrats saw reasons for optimism across parts of the Sunbelt, where changing demographics and an aversion to Trump’s brand of politics in the suburbs cost Republicans a seat in Colorado and potentially a second seat in Arizona. Senator Cory Gardner of Colorado, a freshman senator who managed to win six years ago in an increasingly blue state, conceded to his Democratic John Hickenlooper, a former governor on Tuesday night. “His success is Colorado’s success,” Gardner said. Senator Martha McSally of Arizona, an air force veteran who was appointed to the seat after the death of Senator John McCain, trailed her opponent Mark Kelly, a former astronaut and the husband of the former Arizona congresswoman Gabby Giffords. “I’m confident that when the votes are counted, we are going to be successful in this mission,” Kelly said in remarks from Tucson. McSally and Gardner, among the most endangered Republicans, found themselves caught between a Trump-loving base and the more moderate swing voters who recoil from him. Yet both candidates chose to align closely with Trump despite the president’s unpopularity in their states. If McSally loses, Arizona will have sent two Democrats to the Senate for the first time in generations. In Georgia, one Senate race remained too close to call while another special election race was headed for a runoff in January after no candidate earned a majority of the vote. Yet in Texas, Republican John Cornyn will return to the Senate after a spirited challenge in a rapidly changing state where polling showed Democrats were competitive. Trump was projected to win the state. In another high-profile contest, Senator Susan Collins of Maine, known as a centrist willing to cross her party, is fighting for her political survival after drawing liberal outrage over her support for Brett Kavanaugh’s appointment to the supreme court and for the president’s tax cut bill. And in perhaps the most unexpected battleground of the cycle, the Alaska senator Dan Sullivan suddenly found himself fending off a serious challenge from Al Gross, a grizzly-bear fighting orthopedic surgeon who identifies as an independent but aligns with Democrats. Like the presidential election, a flood of early voting may delay the result in some races for days or possibly weeks. It is possible that the fight for control of the chamber may not be decided for months if the outcome hinges on Georgia.