The Bank of England has launched a fresh £150bn stimulus package for the UK economy amid the second Covid wave and the reintroduction of lockdown across England. Threadneedle Street’s nine-member monetary policy committee (MPC) voted unanimously to ramp up its quantitative easing bond-buying programme to soften the economic fallout from rising infections and tougher restrictions. New national restrictions are due to come into effect in England on Thursday, after MPs vote on them, and remain in place at least until 2 December. Government say the list is not exhaustive, and other permitted reasons for leaving home may be set out later. People could face fines from police for leaving their home without a legally permitted excuse. No, not unless they are part of an “exclusive” support bubble, which allows a single-person household to meet and socialise with another household. Parents are allowed to form a childcare bubble with another household for the purposes of informal childcare, where the child is 13 or under. People are allowed to meet one person from another household socially and for exercise in outdoor public spaces, which does not include private gardens. Up to 30 people will still be allowed to attend funerals, while stone settings and ash scatterings can continue with up to 15 guests. Weddings and civil partnership ceremonies are not permitted except in “exceptional circumstances”. Places of worship must remain closed except for voluntary services, individual prayer and other exempt activities. Most outbound international travel will be banned. There is no exemption for staying away from home for a holiday. This means people cannot travel internationally or within the UK, unless for work, education or other legally permitted exemptions. Everything except essential shops and education settings, which include nurseries, schools and universities, will close. Entertainment venues will also have to close. Pubs, restaurants and indoor and outdoor leisure facilities will have to close their doors once more. However, takeaway and delivery services will still be allowed, while construction and manufacturing will stay open. Parents will still be able to access registered childcare and other childcare activities where reasonably necessary to enable parents to work. Some youth services may be able to continue, such as one-to-one youth work, but most youth clubs will need to close their doors. Public services, such as jobcentres, courts, and civil registration offices will remain open. There is no exemption for grassroots organised team sports. Elite sports will be allowed to continue behind closed doors as currently, including Premier League football matches. Aaron Walawalkar In a move designed to lower borrowing costs to help struggling businesses and households, the central bank said there had been a rapid increase of Covid infections and its decision reflected the launch of stricter measures across the UK. The MPC left interest rates unchanged at 0.1%, the lowest level in the Bank’s 326-year history. Delivering its latest assessment of the economy as new restrictions come into force, it said: “Covid continues to hit jobs, incomes and spending in the UK. It has put a big strain on UK businesses’ cashflow, and is threatening the livelihoods of many people.” The Bank had been widely expected to take decisive action to provide additional support to Britain’s virus-stricken economy well into the new year, with the new measures taking the total amount injected into the QE programme to £895bn. It comes before the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, is expected to deliver a statement to the House of Commons later on Thursday to set out a package of economic support including an extension of furlough for parts of the UK where lockdown restrictions remain in place beyond this month. The Bank’s MPC said the government’s extension of furlough for one month during the English lockdown, and the chancellor’s plan to replace it with the new job support scheme would have a significant impact on protecting jobs. However, it warned unemployment would still rise dramatically, hitting a peak of about 7.75% by the summer of 2021, up from the current rate of 4.5%. Against a backdrop of heightened uncertainty over Covid, it said it expected household spending and GDP to accelerate in the first quarter of next year, but warned the end of the Brexit transition period at the end of December would weigh on the economy as businesses adjust to leaving the EU. Saying that it still expected an 11th-hour deal to be signed between London and Brussels to establish a comprehensive trading partnership from the start of January, the Bank said leaving the EU would nonetheless drag down GDP by about 1% in the first quarter because tougher trading rules would come into place and many businesses were ill-prepared. Threadneedle Street warned the British economy was heading for a double-dip recession as the resurgence of Covid and new restrictions drag down consumer spending and delay business investment. After a sharp recovery over the summer when the Treasury’s “Eat out to help out” scheme fuelled a rise in spending, the Bank said GDP was now expected to fall again in the final three months of the year. It warned Britain’s economy was now expected to shrink by 11% in 2020, more severe than the 9.5% drop in GDP forecast in August. Forecasting a gradual recovery next year, the MPC said it expected GDP to rebound by 7.25% in 2021, slower than previously anticipated.