I was visiting my boyfriend in country Victoria for the weekend. We’d been to the footy and the pub, and now we were in his parents’ living room watching 60 Minutes, like they always did on Sunday nights. The lead story was about an Aboriginal community where alcoholism and violence were rife. It followed the usual formula – something viewers at home could shake their heads at, then wash their hands of. I became increasingly uncomfortable. I could sense the dam of silence was about to break, that someone would drop the kind of low-key racist comment that, as a mixed race woman with pale skin, I always subconsciously braced for. I’d grown to feel on edge around strangers, in case the topic of Aborigines came up. This time was a lot worse than usual. “We should have shot them all when we had the chance,” my would-be father-in-law announced. “We wouldn’t be having all these problems now.” My boyfriend said nothing but his mum laughed nervously. “Don’t say things like that in front of Kate.” She didn’t know I was Aboriginal, but she knew I was a lefty law student. Passing for white makes you privy to casual micro-aggressions He carried on firing from his arsenal of bigotry, eventually landing on the classic: “I’m not racist. I have Aboriginal mates at work.” It was true there were Aboriginal guys at the factory where he worked, although I don’t know if they were mates. I’d never heard him mention them before. I kept my eyes glued to the TV and waited for it to be over. To the three of them it was just a rueful wish for an easier life; to me it was an exhortation to genocide that would have wiped out half my family. To be an Indigenous person who can pass for white is both a privilege and a burden, and the privilege and the burden are the same thing: people don’t treat you like you’re Aboriginal. In some ways you experience racism like a bystander experiences a car crash – it doesn’t happen directly to you, but it is still traumatic. Except in many of the ways that matter – mental and emotional impact – it does happen to you. Passing for white makes you privy to casual micro-aggressions from people you love, but who don’t think of you as ‘really’ Aboriginal. You’re exposed to the sort of deep-seated, disturbing prejudices most people only feel comfortable airing in the blue glow of their living rooms. At least until they know who you are. But there’s that privilege again – they don’t have to know they’re talking about you, unless you tell them. I did tell them, my boyfriend’s family, sort of. I told my boyfriend a few days later that I was, in fact, Yorta Yorta. I pointed out that I wouldn’t be here if his dad had got what he said he wanted. His responses were predictable. “But you’re white. You should have told me. He didn’t really mean it. He’s not racist.” The message was clear: I’d tricked him and his family into thinking I was someone I wasn’t. We broke up soon after. Twenty years later, it still hurts to think of it. And I still feel stuck between two warring cultures. (To be clear, I am only speaking for myself here.) Only much later did I begin to realise my identity had everything to do with where I came from I don’t know whether to call myself Aboriginal, Indigenous Australian, First Nations, Yorta Yorta, mixed race or Australian with x heritage (insert one of the above). Here in the UK it doesn’t seem to matter. I start with Aboriginal or Indigenous but explain more if someone shows an interest. Brits seem shocked by the way Indigenous Australians are treated today, without much acknowledging their own historic role. There’s limited awareness of modern pain points, a lot of people still wish me a happy Australia Day. However I label myself, I know I don’t automatically belong in either culture by mere birthright. I have to work at it, and there is always an aching worry I’m doing it wrong. In my naive youth I tried using colloquialisms like ‘deadly’ or ‘cuz’. But I hadn’t grown up saying them, so suddenly adopting them at 14 just sounded wrong, and made my parents look at me strangely. Only much later did I begin to realise my identity had nothing to do with how I spoke and everything to do with where I came from, where I felt at home, and who it was that recognised me as part of their community. This damp, dark English soil will never be mine ... I crave dust that can’t stay wet Since moving overseas 15 years ago, I’ve tried to maintain my connection to culture by following certain people online and reading a lot. But I’ve not played any sort of active role. When events like Naidoc Week or Australia Day roll around, I don’t always feel entitled to the pride or grief I undeniably feel. Sometimes, it’s hard to disagree with those who say I have no right to it. But I ache for Australia, especially this year. No internet connection on earth can replace my connection to country. No Google map can get me into the bush. There’s no streetview of the dirt track I rode my bike on in bare feet and togs, the gum tree I carved my initials in, or the biting ants that always got me somehow. My feet pine for the dirt. This damp, dark English soil will never be mine, even if my surname does come from Yorkshire. I crave dust that can’t stay wet, that gusts up from under my thongs and settles in my pores; dirt that, after it rains, bakes and cracks into those crunchy curls that are so satisfying to walk on. Lately I dream of striding into the Murray, the pebbly river sand beneath my feet giving way to silky mud, the gasp of cold water swirling up over my legs, stomach, shoulders until I’m immersed. I turn over, squint at the sky and float with the river like I did when I was a kid. I feel it all – the heat from above and the cold from below, the occasional terrifying brush of who knows what against my foot. This is where my grandparents – my white grandfather and my mixed Nan – brought me. They’d camp here for months every year, chasing fish and whacking snakes. But are these blackfella cravings or white ones? Why do I care so much? After breaking up with my boyfriend I retreated into my lefty uni student bubble, safe in the knowledge that the only Sunday night conversations I would have about Aborigines would involve wine, candlelight, well-meaning looks and entreaties for my ‘unique perspective’. My Nan’s relationship to her Aboriginality was complicated too In my efforts to feel more Aboriginal, I started hanging out at the Indigenous students’ centre. I went on marches and later, after switching from law to journalism I started writing a bit for the Koori Mail newspaper, which gave me a connection to community I’d never felt before, and honestly, probably not since either. When I went to visit the paper’s head office in Lismore to explore taking a job up there after graduating, I felt both instantly at home and completely alien. It hit me how little I knew about Indigenous culture, and it’s a feeling I never really got over. I felt it would be wrong to take the job, when I wasn’t qualified in the most important way. My Nan’s relationship to her Aboriginality was complicated too. She never said the A word, at least not to me. I didn’t even know there was a word for us. I’d noticed, of course, that her parents had much darker skin than everyone else I knew but, a bit weirdly I guess, it didn’t occur to me that they were Aboriginal until I went to my great-grandmother’s funeral and saw that actually, oh, everyone on this side of my family is pretty dark. As a teenager who dreamed of being a human rights lawyer, I’d get jealous of them in winter, when I went back to being white and they stayed the same dark honey colour. There is, of course, a whole lot of problematic exoticisation and privilege here that I’m still unpacking 30 years later. Nan never said the A word but she told me plenty of stories about ghosts and yowies. A few times she whispered in my ear that I was descended from a king and should not forget it. I never found out who, or what, she meant. She would take me out to Boat Rock, a cultural site about 15 minutes from our house where the local Bpangerang people once collected rainwater. While she sat there I’d run all over it, loving how the pockmarked granite felt beneath my hands and feet, thinking about the people who had done the same for thousands of years before me. I’ve been thinking about Boat Rock a lot this year as, like so many others, I face down nostalgia and other pandemic demons, made worse by being overseas and unable to get back. After the breakup, I never saw that boyfriend or his father again. But as I work to untangle my complicated feelings about home and identity, 20 years on, I am finally nearing something closer to peace with remembering who I am. And saying it out loud.