I married my husband in my early 20s, had two beautiful children: a girl and a boy. I was the luckiest woman alive. I thought I was blessed. My son died at age 19. It devastated us. What had been a very close family began to unravel. My husband was diagnosed with cancer soon after and for the next few years we battled. After being told he did not have long, he began to take drugs. I joined him not long after. He passed away in my arms in 2011. My daughter had moved in with her boyfriend and was trying to build a life for herself, so I found myself alone, vulnerable and not coping very well. Then someone introduced me to ice. Suddenly I could cope again – or so I thought. Very quickly it ravaged my body and I became very sick. Friends would come over and we would take ice together but I was the one who could get the best quality so I ended up getting it for all of us. That was a mistake. It made me a drug dealer. Soon my friends’ friends would also come over to my place, and their friends, and before long my place was like Pitt Street. I knew this could not keep going, my health was failing and I was dealing with very treacherous people. Then one day the police arrived with an arrest warrant. They had telephone taps of dealings going back for months. I was charged with drug supply, refused bail and remanded in custody. I was held at Silverwater Women’s Correctional Centre in Sydney for almost three years while my case went back and forth to court. Unsentenced inmates are not usually entitled to work but I managed to find work in the clinic otherwise I would have gone mad. I put my name down to see the doctor and the psychiatrist. I was struggling to cope. I couldn’t sleep and when I did I would wake up screaming from the very vivid nightmares. I saw a doctor and managed to get my medical issues seen to but it took 16 months to see a psychiatrist who spoke to me for a few minutes and put me on an antidepressant. Four days later I was taken to the clinic having a severe reaction as the antidepressant clashed with the medication I was on. I was locked in a cell overnight. I climbed the walls for the next four days and thought I was going to die. It has been five years since then and I still have anxiety attacks. I am on different medication now. They diagnosed me with post-traumatic stress. At Silverwater the routine is that if you work you are unlocked at 7.30am, but if not you stay locked in until around 9am. You are locked back in from roughly 11am to 1pm, and then locked in for the night at around 3.30pm. So you are out of your cell for approximately four hours. There are also many “lock-ins” where you don’t get unlocked at all. The reason for this is usually “short-staffed”. On those days the cells are not unlocked at all and meals are slid under the door. These lock-ins can sometimes last for weeks. By the time I was sentenced, my time had been served so I never got the privilege of being a sentenced inmate where you can access programs like rehabilitation or education courses, or move through the system to minimum security, work release etc. I was released in a rush to a barely appropriate halfway house as there was no time to find accommodation. I was given $50, a bag of underwear that had been sent in to me during my incarceration and told to go and see Centrelink and report to parole within 24 hours. I have been out now for two years. I’m still struggling with grief, anxiety and panic attacks. I am now in safe accommodation, but still looking for work. However, things are going well for me. I have remained clean. And I try to help other women who may be at risk of entering the justice system by talking to groups about my lived experience. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14 and support is also available at Beyond Blue on 1300 22 4636 and 1800Respect (1800 737 732). In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org