Extra LifeThe Chick PeepsEpiphanies (BBC Radio 4) | BBC Sounds There are plenty of important shows out there at the moment: podcasts or radio series that analyse politics, reappraise history, explain the world’s tectonic shifts of authority and personality in a way that casts light on contemporary power grabs. But this week I’ve been searching out some less serious listens. Nice chats with friendly people. Connections made by human beings who look for the similarities, rather than the differences, between each other. Here’s one. Extra Life is a brand new podcast about gaming. Hosted by the Guardian’s video games editor, Keza MacDonald, and Scummy Mummies podcast queen Ellie Gibson, this is essentially an interview show based around the interviewee’s history in computer games. Full disclosure: I do not play computer games. On rare occasions the kids can get me to join in on Mario Party, but that’s because it’s just a jumped-up board game that requires no controller skill whatsoever. You’re not racing/punching/shooting anyone. You literally take turns to have your go. Despite my lack of basic knowledge or, indeed, interest, I enjoyed Extra Life greatly. Actor Tony Way was an easygoing debut guest, admitting that his gaming had been severely curtailed since the arrival of his first child at the beginning of lockdown. He, MacDonald and Gibson chatted babies for a bit, then moved on to the games Way had played when young. His father bought him games and consoles at car-boot sales, and he told a very funny story about getting an Amiga 500 from his dad’s co-worker, who wanted to buy fishing equipment instead. After that, the show covered players becoming so involved in a game that they think they can actually do everything they’ve achieved virtually in real life (MacDonald believed that she could horse ride for a while); why the only way to play online games is on mute (too many idiot teenagers); whether Orson Welles did or did not write the lines for Monkey Island (he didn’t). In fact, Extra Life kept everything so light and funny, warm and welcoming that before long I found myself thinking: maybe I’m wrong! Maybe sitting in front of a screen manoeuvring a virtual person in a high-octane manner that makes me travel sick is the way to fill any free time I have! (It’s not.) What Extra Life showcases, other than MacDonald and Gibson’s presenting skills, is that a person’s interests are the way into their personality. You’re always going to get more out of someone when they’re enthusiastic about what they’re discussing. And another podcast based around people’s passions is The Chick Peeps. This is for vegans, or anyone inclined that way, and is hosted by actor Evanna Lynch (Luna Lovegood in the Harry Potter films) and a rolling cast of co-hosts: Momoko Hill, Robbie Jarvis (also in Harry Potter as James Potter) and Tylor Starr. Now in its third series, the show hops around between interviewing vegan celebrities, talking to vegan professionals (sports people, farmers, activists) and just chatting about veganism and associated issues. Its most recent straightforwardly celeb interview was with US comedian Preacher Lawson, and I liked Lynch and Jarvis’s preparation: they asked Lawson some quick-fire questions at the start before moving on to whether he’s a “vegan diva”. (He’s not: he knows that a lot of people simply don’t understand what a vegan actually is.) Another sweet aspect to this podcast is its acknowledgement of Lynch’s acting pedigree: there are three episodes that discuss veganism in the Harry Potter universe, going into wonderfully nerdy detail. Finally, Front Row’s John Wilson is known as a presenter and interviewer with a knack for getting creative people to chat. But Wilson is also a fine producer, and last week his half-hour Radio 4 documentary Epiphanies showcased this skill, as well as his interviewing chops. Five artists – David Bowie, stage designer Es Devlin, ballet dancer Tamara Rojo, composer Hannah Peel, writer-director Kwame Kwei-Armah – talk about a time when art changed their life. Wilson cut himself almost entirely out of the programme, merely announcing who was speaking when, and the result was a lovely thing: human beings recalling a pivotal, wonderful moment, a specific instance when they were so moved by art that they knew they had to do something about it. The Blindboy Podcast: Bernadette Devlin McAliskeyThis is its own thing, really, and I recommend it for many reasons, mostly Blindboy himself (Dave Chambers), who is engaging, funny, full of knowledge and art and situationism and meditations about death. In this long episode you get some of that at the start, but then you get his amazing interview with Irish civil rights activist Bernadette Devlin McAliskey, recorded at the Ulster Hall in Belfast a couple of years ago. Everyone should listen to Devlin McAliskey speak, and now would be a good time to hear her history lesson, with Joe Biden soon to become president and Boris Johnson playing silly buggers with the Good Friday agreement. Essential listening. Intrigue: MaydayJames Le Mesurier was an ex-British army officer who co-founded the White Helmets, an organisation working in Syria to defend the population during the war. He was found dead in an Istanbul street a year ago. This 10-part series, part of the BBC’s Intrigue strand, which brought us The Ratline and Tunnel 29, is brilliantly produced and thoroughly engaging. Chloe Hadjimatheou talks to Le Mesurier’s widow, his friends, army officers and other White Helmets to try to piece together what happened. Possible Russian involvement (Putin’s enemies often fall out of hotel windows), spy stories and misinformation make this a gripping listen about how much of modern war happens online. The Messenger Shiv Malik, an investigative journalist, tells the complicated story of his relationship with the supposed “al-Qaida insider” Hassan Butt, whom he met while researching Islamic extremism in the north-west more than a decade ago. Their story is, in the end, about the relationship between journalists and those they decide to write about: Malik is double-crossed by Butt, as are others, and it affects him deeply. A series that reveals not only the mad persistence of journalists, but also how their obsession with the truth (a slippery concept – Butt is often sort of truthful, sort of lying) can turn their lives into a nightmare. “You wanted to be taken for a ride,” Butt says to Malik. Did he?