A disconsolate Neil Lennon admitted he is on the brink of losing the faith of the Celtic board after pressure on the manager intensified with a League Cup defeat by Ross County. The Dingwall side ran out 2-0 winners at Celtic Park – a fifth defeat in 10 matches for Lennon’s team and the first time Celtic have suffered four home losses in a row since 1958. Afterwards, police intervention was needed as angry supporters gathered outside Celtic’s stadium to call for Lennon’s removal. “I think I should get more time at it but if not, then so be it,” said Lennon. Amazingly, this was Celtic’s first domestic cup tie defeat in 36 outings. Lennon said: “Yes, of course,” when asked whether his situation was now even more perilous. “Today’s result wouldn’t have helped,” he added. Lennon retained the backing of the Celtic hierarchy as recently as last week but there is now a rising sense change may be imminent. The lack of an obvious alternative to the Northern Irishman is pertinent but the toxicity around Lennon appears irreparable. The former Celtic managers Gordon Strachan and Martin O’Neill have been mentioned as possible short-term appointments, as has Lennon’s assistant, John Kennedy. Lennon was accepting of vehement criticism from fans. Celtic trail Rangers by 11 points in the Scottish Premiership but hold two games in hand. “I take it all, it’s my job as the manager,” he said. “I am the face of the football department. It’s my philosophy, my tactics. What I’m trying to work out is, this is more or less the same squad that was rampant last season. They are lacking a little bit of confidence, some of them. We are not playing anywhere near as well as we can and that’s on me. “The past doesn’t count for anything at the minute. You live in the present. There is expectation and a demand for excellence at this club. I am not standing here like a happy clapper saying everything is OK, because it’s not. We will do all we can, if I still have the opportunity, to turn things around.” Police reported that two of their officers had been injured during the protests. “A large number of fans started to gather outside Celtic Park to protest at around 4.30pm,” said superintendent Stevie Dolan. “An appropriate policing response was carried out and the group has now dispersed,” Dolan added. “No arrests have been made, however two officers sustained minor injuries as a result of the actions of the gathered group. We strongly condemn these actions and remind fans that enforcement options remain at our disposal.”