Paris police have fired teargas and rubber bullets during clashes with protesters at a banned rally over the death of a black man in police custody four years ago. Tuesday’s demonstration, which led to 18 arrests according to the authorities, came as protests swept the US over police racism and violence following the death of George Floyd. About 20,000 people gathered in the French capital to support the family of Adama Traoré, 24, who died in July 2016 after gendarmes arrested him. The rally was held in defiance of the police prefecture, which said it contravened coronavirus rules outlawing public gatherings of more than 10 people. The protesters used slogans from the US protest movement to call for justice after two differing medical reports into the cause of Traoré’s death were released, one exonerating the police and a second – an independent report commissioned by the dead man’s family – holding them responsible. There have been four investigations and various medical reports into the cause of Traoré’s death, with experts failing to agree whether he died of suffocation after he was pinned face down to the ground or whether his underlying medical conditions contributed to his death. Elsewhere in France, a further seven people were arrested and 10 police officers injured in other demonstrations against police violence. The protest in Paris started in the late afternoon outside a court in the north of the city, before projectiles were thrown and the police used teargas to disperse the crowd, AFP journalists witnessed. Sporadic clashes broke out near the city’s main ring road, with stones thrown at the police, who responded by firing rubber bullets. Some protesters burned bins, bicycles and scooters to set up flaming barricades on the streets. Christophe Castaner, the interior minister, responded by saying that “violence has no place in a democracy”. “Nothing justifies the behaviour that took place in Paris this evening, when protests on public streets are banned to protect everyone’s health,” he tweeted. Many of the protesters drew inspiration from the movement raging across the US over the police killing last week of Floyd, an unarmed black man, holding up slogans in English such as “Black Lives Matter” and “I can’t breathe”. Earlier in the day, Traoré’s elder sister Assa spoke to the large crowd. “Today we are not just talking about the fight of the Traoré family. It is the fight for everyone. When we fight for George Floyd, we fight for Adama Traoré,” she said. “What is happening in the United States is an echo of what is happening in France.” Other protests took place across France, with 2,500 people attending a rally in the northern city of Lille, 1,800 in Marseille, and 1,200 in Lyon. The Traoré case has long been controversial in France. Following a dispute over an identity check, Traoré, 24, was apprehended in a house where he hid after leading police on a 15-minute chase in 2016. One of the three arresting officers has told investigators they pinned down Traoré with their combined bodyweight. Traoré lost consciousness in their vehicle and died at a nearby police station. He was still handcuffed when paramedics arrived. On Friday, French medical experts exonerated the three officers, saying Traoré did not die of “positional suffocation”, ruling out the officers pinning him to the ground as the cause of his death. Instead, the experts found Traoré died of heart failure possibly brought on by underlying health conditions in a context of “intense stress” and physical exertion, as well as the presence of tetrahydrocannabinol – the active ingredient of cannabis – in his body. The findings, the third official report to clear the officers, dismissed a previous medical report commissioned by the man’s family that said he had died of asphyxiation. On Tuesday, an investigation commissioned by the Traoré family said his death was caused by the arrest technique used by the officers. The contradictory medical reports also echo the case of Floyd, whose preliminary autopsy said he died from pre-existing heart problems, while an autopsy arranged by his family found he died of asphyxiation from sustained pressure. Floyd’s official autopsy then confirmed he died in a homicide involving “neck compression”. The Paris police chief, Didier Lallement, who banned the protest, earlier on Tuesday wrote a letter to police officers defending their conduct. He said he sympathised with the “pain” officers must feel “faced with accusations of violence and racism, repeated endlessly by social networks and certain activist groups”. The Paris police force “is not violent, nor racist: it acts within the framework of the right to liberty for all”, he insisted in an email to the city’s 27,500 law enforcers. On Wednesday, Sibeth Ndiaye, a government spokesperson, said Traoré’s death was not comparable to that of Floyd and also warned against comparing the situation in the US to that in France. “I don’t think we can say France is a racist country,” Ndiaye said after a council of ministers meeting.