The Diomed Stakes, rerouted to Newbury from its traditional home at Epsom, is Saturday’s highlight and revolves around John Gosden’s King Of Comedy or, more precisely, what is between the four-year-old’s ears. He had several top-class runs to his credit at three and looked unlucky in the St James’s Palace Stakes. But his attitude deteriorated steadily as the season wore on and he appeared to throw in the towel in the QEII in October. He may have grown up for another winter – or he might be even more intractable. Odds of 9-4 look poor in the circumstances and a consistent performer like Tabarrak (3.35) could be the type to test the favourite’s resolve. Newbury 1.50 A small field but a strong race of its type and all five runners have a claim on the pick of their juvenile form. Likely favourite It’s Good To Laugh looks too short at around 2-1 and marginal preference at the prices is for Sir Mark Prescott’s Tell Me All at 5-1, a possible improver for today’s trip, as he is a son of Prescott’s 2006 French Oaks winner, Confidential Lady. Sandown Park 2.05 Another tight-knit field of three-year-olds. Surf Dancer has a similar profile to the probable favourite, Ascension, but disappointed on bottomless ground when last seen. Forgive him that and he has definite appeal at around 4-1. Newbury 2.25 Preening and Foxtrot Lady have run to a similar level at their best and either could be good enough here, but they are relatively exposed and the lightly raced Dancing Feet could be worth chancing at around 10-1. Sandown Park 2.40 Lazuli turns around quickly after putting up a career-best to finish second under top weight in a handicap at Newmarket last Saturday. That was his first start after a wind op and also after gelding and there should be further improvement to come here. Newbury 3.00 Cabaletta is an obvious favourite having beaten last week’s easy winner Frankly Darling on debut last season. That was on heavy ground, however, and there are some interesting opponents including David Simcock’s Oriental Mystique, a daughter of the trainer’s Group One winner Madame Chiang. She should come into her own over middle-distances this season. Sandown Park 3.15 Several have obvious potential to progress but Sir Michael Stoute has few peers with lightly raced older horses and Solid Stone, gelded over the winter, put up two big runs at this track last season off a similar mark to Saturday’s 94. Doncaster 12.00 Rebel At Dawn 12.30 Sports Reporter 1.05 Isle Of May 1.40 Longlai 2.15 Gale Force Maya 2.50 Danyah 3.25 Triple Distilled 3.55 Carlos Felix 4.30 Grain Of Sense Newbury 12.15 Tsar 12.45 Fortune And Glory 1.15 Edmond Dantes 1.50 Tell Me All 2.25 Dancing Feet 3.00 Oriental Mystique 3.35 Tabarrak 4.10 Russian Virtue 4.45 Manton Grange Sandown Park 12.55 Happy Romance 1.30 Manigordo 2.05 Surf Dancer (nb) 2.40 Lazuli (nap) 3.15 Solid Stone 3.45 Byzantine Empire 4.20 Leoncavallo 4.50 Be Fair Leicester 5.00 Isabella Giles 5.30 Esprit Rose 6.00 Able Kane 6.30 Vitare 7.00 Camouflaged 7.30 Born To Please 8.00 Kind Review 8.30 Straitouttacompton 9.00 Ten Chants Siskin, the 2-1 favourite, found his way out of a pocket two furlongs out to maintain his unbeaten record and give trainer Ger Lyons and rider Colin Keane their first Classic success in the Irish 2,000 Guineas at the Curragh on Friday. Keane appeared to have all sorts of problems as he was buried behind horses against the far rail when Lope Y Fernandez, the second-favourite, struck for home. Once Keane pulled out and found running room, though, Siskin quickened instantly to run him down and then beat the fast-finishing Vatican City by a length-and-three-quarters. The stewards looked at possible interference as Keane made his move but allowed the result to stand. “This means everything,” Lyons said. “To win a Guineas was always my number one and hopefully it’s the first of many. Full credit to Colin Keane, you don’t get a Guineas handed to you and they both stood up when it was needed. If there was a kink in that horse, then he wasn’t going to go through that gap. “He’s a very easy horse to train and no question he’s the best I’ve trained. We’ll probably go to Goodwood next for the Sussex [Stakes], but I want to keep Colin on him and hopefully the 14 days [quarantine] will be gone by then. We are definitely skipping Ascot. I know he gets the mile and I wouldn’t draw a line through 10 furlongs at the moment.” Vatican City, who finished with real purpose to take second place, was the main mover in the Derby market – 12-1 (from 20-1) with Betfair – following Friday’s race. The son of Galileo is a brother to the dual Guineas winner Gleneagles, out of a dam whose brother, the outstanding Giant’s Causeway, won at up to 10 furlongs. Joseph O’Brien’s Crossfirehurricane was a convincing winner of the Gallinule Stakes over 10 furlongs earlier on the card and promptly attracted quotes for the upcoming Classics, but seems unlikely to line up either at the Curragh or Epsom at this stage. “He’s an improving colt,” O’Brien said. “I was a little bit worried about experience and the trip coming here, but Shane gave him a lovely ride. The Tattersalls Gold Cup back here [on 26 July] is an option for him and he could have another run between now and then.” Admiral Nelson, one of three juveniles from Aidan O’Brien’s yard in the Tally-Ho Stud Maiden, seems likely to run at Royal Ascot next week after beating his better-fancied stable companion Merchants Quay by a length. “He could be a Coventry horse,” O’Brien said. “He won’t be doing anything after this because it is so close.”