The truth can be elusive in rugby union. Even in exceptionally unstable times there will always be those who dismiss it as simply a bit of light turbulence. So things must be serious when those with extensive knowledge of the game’s economics publicly query its future as a global professional sport unless its administrators wake up to the onrushing reality.Over in Japan some believe it may already be too late, regardless of the post-coronavirus landscape. With 30 years of experience in sports marketing worldwide, Robert Maes knows his subject and says rugby union’s rulers need to wise up. “The players are professional but the global management isn’t,” he says. “They bury their heads in the sand and think a shining knight will come on a big white horse and say: ‘Here is a billion dollars’. That’s what everyone is hoping for but that’s not running or organising a global sport.” Even seasoned onlookers at this month’s crucial meeting to discuss a global calendar were said to be staggered by the lack of mutual love and accord between those representing Premiership Rugby and the RFU, which is now seen as a bigger obstacle to a deal than the intransigent French club representatives. The response of Bill Sweeney, the Rugby Football Union’s chief executive, when asked this week if he is optimistic about a prompt resolution says it all.“I’m not sure optimistic is the right word,” said Sweeney, making no attempt to downplay the increasing gravity of the situation. “I think we’ve got to find solutions. It’s one of those moments in the history of the game, right up there with 1995 and the game turning professional. Rugby is not punching its weight and there’s a limit to how much you can save your way to growth. I think the next few days and weeks are very important.”Maes, who has operated extensively in athletics and football and knows Sweeney from the latter’s time in Japan working for Reebok, puts it even more starkly. “Rugby, as it stands, is not a fully professional sport. The sport has potential but it’s not being used. If you just want to play around and have fun with people who just love rugby that’s great. But if you want to build it into a professional sport, people expect more. You cannot just say ‘You like rugby, give us some money’. That is still how most of the money comes into rugby today.” Having recently been invited to raise funds for cash-strapped Asia Rugby, Maes is also highly sceptical of claims that last year’s World Cup in Japan will usher in an era of oval-ball prosperity across the region. “The JRFU are worse than World Rugby, which is hard to imagine. They never prepared for anything after the World Cup. It all looked very nice to the outside world but afterwards there is nothing left. Good luck trying to sell a rugby shirt here now. It’s completely finished.“In Japan we’re looking at the death of rugby. The future is very, very bleak. The clubs will still pay big salaries for a couple of years but it’s basically just a few rich companies pouring money in because they’re old school and their executives played rugby themselves. They talk about the World Cup legacy but the sport is shrinking in Japan.” This is absolutely not what World Rugby wants to hear. The governing body prefers to highlight the estimated wider economic impact of RWC 2019 to Japan of £3.9bn and research suggesting 49 million Japanese are now “interested” in rugby. Maes thinks there is too much wishful thinking in high places. “When I meet rugby people they all tell me they really love the sport. A guy like Bill Beaumont is a very nice man but the last chance for professional rugby was Agustín Pichot. He would have brought in some professionalism and realism. If you say: ‘We want to be a global professional sport,’ you need professionals running the thing. “I believe rugby can grow a lot in Africa and I’ve always believed it can work in the United States. But give me a pen and I’ll write you down 18 of the 20 countries who will play at the World Cup in France in 2023. You also have to change the way the game is played. There are too many dead moments for TV and the sport has become so physical that only a limited number of people can now enter it. In Asia it’s never going to get bigger than it was last year.” Even if he is wrong, it is thought-provoking stuff. Maes, furthermore, is unconvinced that CVC’s much-trumpeted entry into rugby will necessarily be a positive gamechanger. “It’s a good thing if people invest enough but CVC have a bargain, right? The league in England was in trouble. It was CVC or it was nothing. These guys don’t give presents. Everyone needs to hope that over the next five years CVC get back double what they paid for the rights otherwise it’s just going to die.” All of which propels the ball squarely back into the court of those opposed to change at World Rugby’s next big calendar meeting on 30 June. As Sweeney makes clear, however, doing nothing is not feasible. “The current situation is the least preferred option. Everyone knows the calendar doesn’t work at the moment. People have been saying it for years.” The truth is out there for those prepared to listen to it. The selection process to stage the men’s World Cup in 2027 and 2031 is due to be launched at the end of this month, with Europe potentially looking at a lengthy spell on the sidelines once France have done the honours in 2023. Australia have already applied to host the 2027 event (although joint bids will be considered) but an early decision will also be made on the 2031 tournament, with the United States understood to be firmly in the frame. It does not take a talent-spotting genius to see New Zealand have some seriously good up-and-coming youngsters. The hard bit is working out which one of Will Jordan, Caleb Clarke and Hoskins Sotutu will enjoy the most successful All Black career, having already lit up the early stages of Super Rugby Aotearoa this month. Any northern-hemisphere youngsters needing a pre-season dose of reality should check them out from behind the sofa.