Ryan Murphy’s Hollywood (Netflix), about the beginnings of the film industry, made me laugh and cry. It just made us see everything differently, and made me sad and angry in places. Watching it, you realise how difficult it must have been to be anything but a white, middle-aged man back then. There are nods to actual famous people in it, too, such as Vivien Leigh – I was staying up into the early hours Googling it all. I don’t know if this counts because it wasn’t officially cancelled, but Fleabag. It’s so amazingly written, and changed my views on feminism and being open and honest about things like sex. I saw the stage show, too – you wouldn’t think that just one person on the stage would make you feel all those emotions. I’m hoping that in years to come Phoebe Waller-Bridge does a special where we find out how the characters are getting along. I’m not a fan of Naked Attraction. Good on these people from having the confidence to strip off, but surely we shouldn’t be dating people off their penis alone. When I’m getting ready to go out, I always watch Law & Order in the bath. As soon as I hear the theme music, I just get all goose-pimply. I know I’ve been in the bath too long if I start watching a second one. I am absolutely obsessed with This Country. Daisy May Cooper’s character, Kerry, is so relatable, and someone you’re rooting for from the get-go. She’s stuck in her village, but she’s happy with that. Coming from a small village in County Durham, where it is a bit like Groundhog Day and you have to make your own entertainment, it’s very relatable. I remember going down to the river when I was younger and there were Barbie dolls down there in circles for six months. Everyone kept saying it was devil worshippers, but I think it was just kids being stupid. I’ve just watched the finale of RuPaul’s Drag Race which made me teary. I have lots of friends in the LGBTQ community and I know the difference that the show has made – by bringing drag mainstream and letting these amazing drag queens tell their stories about issues such as homophobia and racism. I think it has just made everybody think more about how they act towards other people. I’ll sound like a prude, but I don’t like a lot of sex scenes. Sometimes, I think they’re not necessary. That’s why I haven’t watched Normal People yet – I’ve heard there’s a lot of sexy time. I also love talking to the mum and dad about stuff I’ve watched. Even before Gogglebox, I would always WhatsApp my mum while we were watching a programme, or call her after, which might be a bit awkward with a show like that. I am a massive Doctor Who fan, and my favourite doctor was David Tennant, so if we could go back in time to that era and I could be somewhere in the background, that would be great. I would even stick myself inside a Dalek just to be there. I think Jodie Whittaker is an amazing Doctor. I find it hilarious that people can believe in things like cyborgs, but they couldn’t wrap their heads around the Doctor being a woman. It’s a science fiction show! Scarlett Moffatt Wants to Believe is available now on BBC Sounds