Jalil Muntaqim entered the US prison system in 1971, at the age of 19. A former member of the Black Panther Party, he received a 25-year minimum sentence after he was convicted alongside two co-defendants of the murder of two police officers. Half a century and twelve parole rejections since he last experienced freedom, he is sick with Covid and fighting for his life in a hospital bed, in a segregated ward for prisoners. New York state authorities have been warned of the risks of covid outbreaks in prisons. At one point, New York City jail Rikers had the highest infection rate in the US. But the department of Ccorrections has so far failed to follow public health guidance urgently advising the release of medically vulnerable people. In Muntaqim’s case, the state attorney general Letitia James went so far as to ask a court to strike down a judge’s order mandating his release. Sometimes it is hard to tell if the appalling US coronavirus response is the result of incompetence or malice; James’s extraordinary move seems like clear evidence for the latter. It is worrying that James has been appointed to lead an investigation into recent violence by the NYPD. Muntaqim’s life hangs in the balance as he awaits the results of an appeal that might at least allow him to recover from the illness and deal with its lingering effects outside of a prison cell. Meanwhile, in the outside world, the murder of George Floyd by Minneapolis police has sparked waves of uprisings and reminds us that the revolutionary work that Muntaqim’s comrades in the Black Panther party began decades ago has yet to be completed. As the coronavirus crisis expands, thousands of people have been released from prisons even by supposedly much more draconian regimes such as Iran and Turkey. The hard reality of the situation faces off with the lethal delirium of politics: an open letter to New York’s governor, Andrew Cuomo, signed by hundreds of doctors and other health professionals attests: “As Covid-19 continues to spread throughout New York state, it will also continue to spread throughout the state prison system. This will have devastating consequences for incarcerated New Yorkers, their families, prison staff, and entire communities throughout the state.” In light of this dire situation, Jalil Muntaqim, a 68-year-old with multiple health problems and a low chance of recidivism, should have been a perfect candidate for temporary release. But the extraordinary, pointless cruelty on display in Muntaqim’s case reveals a blighted system founded on anti-blackness. The strikingly undemocratic influence of the police lobby at every level of US political life has left even progressives scrambling to please reactionaries who guard police forces’ absolute right to violence. As an elected official, James should be accountable to communities, not cops. Minneapolis has shown one way forward, with civic institutions such as public schools openly cutting ties with the police department. Until divestment from policing becomes more widespread, the entire political system continues to be at the mercy of racist shock troops. Jalil Muntaqim’s past as a former Black Panther member makes him a target of state brutality. His life is the product of a struggle that flowered from deep roots in black American experience to dazzle the world in the 1960s and 70s. Today, the streets of Minneapolis vibrate with energies drawn from the same source. Chants of “I can’t breathe” echo back to the murder of Eric Garner in New York in 2014, and to Muntaqim’s sickbed. White supremacy has a kind of automatism to it, as if its practitioners cannot distinguish between pursuit and escape In its heyday, the Black Panther party pursued a thoughtful program of community support from legal observation to free health clinics for the oppressed. Unable to bear the prospect of militant black self-determination, the US government recommitted to brutal crackdowns and surveillance, taking on an openly colonial function in relation to black communities. In resisting the solution of autonomous black life, they fated future generations to an increasingly chaotic struggle between true and false freedoms. We live in this mess. We are experiencing overlapping outrages: co-morbidities associated with poverty make black people more vulnerable to Covid, and the vigilante-style policing associated with a white supremacist state makes black people more vulnerable to violence. Class and race. In their time, the Black Panther party drew links between police brutality and other forms of oppression – their famous 10-point program included a demand for “completely free healthcare for all black and oppressed people”. Had the US government let them flourish, the Panthers might have been able to make headway with a long-overdue process of healing. But white supremacy has a kind of helpless automatism to it, as if its practitioners cannot distinguish between pursuit and escape. The decision to respond to black liberation struggles with renewed violence back then is what has landed the country in the midst of yet another rolling wave of uprisings now. These high crises of white supremacy are destined to return again and again, with greater stakes each time, until black people are given the space to liberate themselves. Until then, black American life is stalked by the direct violence that killed George Floyd, the systemic violence that has left so many vulnerable to disease, and the juridical violence experienced by Jalil Muntaqim. Hannah Black is an artist and writer