Sarah Tetteh Mon 29 Jun 2020 12.11 BST


Last modified on Mon 29 Jun 2020 12.24 BST Frantically stuffing the last bits into my hospital bag, I rattled through the checklist before zipping it up for good. Nappies? Check. Babygrows? Check. Face mask? Check. Industrial strength anti-bacterial spray? Check. Not exactly the usual list of fluffy must-haves for a woman about to give birth! But I was facing the strange reality of having a baby during the coronavirus pandemic. I had to make sense of it and muddle on as best I could. My first two births seemed incredibly straightforward in comparison. Even though one involved an emergency C-section after my waters broke when, having interviewed the singer Usher (I’m a celebrity journalist), I was at dinner with his entourage. Having a baby in lockdown took things to another level, though. With anxiety levels off the chart, there was no way my partner and I were going into hospital anything but ready. It was with military precision that we marched in to have our baby. Face masks on, looking like a couple of Bonnie and Clyde-style bandits, it was indeed the most bizarre of birthing situations, one that thankfully we can now look back on fondly. Our third son was born exactly 12 hours after we checked in and, thanks to the brilliant midwives, the birth went well. Normally I’d loved to have stayed a night for my obligatory apple crumble and custard. But this time I couldn’t wait to get home. When my little bundle of joy met his big brothers it was love at first sight. Lots of kissing, squeezing, prodding, and “oops, I accidentally poked him in the eye”. You know ... The most significant difference this time round was the absence of a welcome home party. My mum is a retired midwife, and with my first two she was right there to help each one latch on as I started breastfeeding. This time, she met our new arrival over FaceTime – and the distance between us was heartbreaking. Mum is in her 70s and shielding, but even so was still able to deliver advice as lovingly as ever. I’d have given anything to hug her, though. Still would. My dad was in Ghana and not able to fly back during lockdown. I’m lucky to have a sea of brothers, cousins and friends but no one could actually meet the little man. I felt very isolated. Well, we were in isolation after all. But was this my new reality? Would my baby have turned into a toddler before he could get a cuddle with his grandparents? I had to find my inner strength to get through. I thought of my amazing ancestors, great-grandmothers who like warriors would lead entire tribes. I channelled my inner Beyoncé, flicking my slightly loose lockdown weave accordingly. Those who know me know I like to do things in style – normally I’d dress my newborn in cutie-pie outfits and spend hours sauntering through the park in the sun. Well, that was the plan. With stores shut by lockdown, my fashion dream took a hit, but my friends and family came to the rescue in the best way they could. They all chipped in to a PayPal Money Pool to send us gifts and, like little drops from heaven, the deliveries started to arrive. Dainty hand-stitched bibs with my baby’s name on them, gorgeous muslins too. Stunning floral bouquets that brightened up my day. A flower crown for every member of the family ... my joy was restored. Soon after, came another important celebration: my birthday. My lockdown birthday. I was dreading it, but the outpouring of love was incredible. After shelving plans to fly to New York to celebrate with my girls, gifts arrived from the US straight to my door. Beautiful balloons, gourmet chocolate brownies, perfumes, dresses and bouquets. They say the postman only knocks twice, but not in my case. Parcels kept coming until 10pm, as well as tear-jerking video messages from my friends and family. After my two-day stay-lebration (I like to drag things out), it was time for a reality check. I turned my attention to potty training my three-year-old and home schooling my eight-year-old. Our timetable of maths, English, science at our desks soon went out the window. It was replaced with relaxed French lessons in the park and learning times tables under the trees. We took it back to basics, making shepherd’s pie, baking cakes, and teaching my eight-year-old to wash up for the first time – which he did with gritted teeth while staring at the dishwasher next to him. During one of the most challenging times of my life, it’s fair to say that my sons have been amazing. To reward them for being such champs, I organised some surprises – paid for quickly using PayPal as I didn’t have to retype all my details – making the most of those precious seconds to myself. The looks on their faces when a Mr Greedy teddy bear arrived in April, followed by Mr Happy in May, and Mr Nosey in June was a joy to behold. Pooling resourcesFamily and friends can club together to buy baby gifts, or pay for a birthday gift, using PayPal Money Pools. Group collections made easy.