Ministers have been accused of playing down the gravity of the coronavirus pandemic after it emerged that more than 1,000 people died every day in the UK for 22 consecutive days – in stark contrast with daily tolls announced by the government. According to an analysis of official figures, the darkest day came on 8 April as the country prepared for Easter under lockdown, when a record 1,445 people died from Covid-19 in 24 hours. The figures – encompassing deaths in hospitals, care homes and private residences – are far higher than the numbers announced by ministers during that period at the daily Downing Street briefings, as the pandemic peaked faster than forecast. Critics say ministers should have more clearly underlined that the reported death tolls were underestimates of the true tallies as they only counted deaths in hospitals after positive Covid-19 tests, excluding thousands who died in care homes. It was not until 29 April that the government changed its daily data to include deaths in all settings, including those without a test. The Department of Health and Social Care has said it was technically challenging and time-consuming to collate the data and ensure the cause of death attribution was correct. On 9 April the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, standing in for the hospitalised prime minister, said the death toll had increased by 881 on the previous day. The actual death toll was 64% higher than that. At the start of Easter week, on Monday 6 April, Raab announced the death toll in the 24 hours to 5pm on Sunday 5 April had risen by 439. Official figures show that in fact almost three times as many people died on 5 April – a total of 1,210. At no time during the period in which more than 1,000 people were dying daily did the Downing Street briefing say the daily death toll had gone into four figures. The highest reported single-day toll announced at a government briefing was 980. In just over three weeks between 2 and 23 April, 26,566 people died – more than half the total death toll of 52,161 deaths to 5 June – and drove the UK to the status of the worst affected country in Europe. Sir David King, the former government chief scientific adviser and chairman of the independent Sage group, said the gap between the Downing Street figures and the true toll was “an attempt to play down the adversity that the country was faced with”. “They didn’t say we have to add on all these other numbers which would have been a more honest thing to say,” said King, who advised Tony Blair’s government on the foot and mouth disease epidemic. “They were saying things were more rosy than they actually were. The most important thing when you are running any crisis of this kind is truth and honesty. The only way to maintain the moral authority of the government. This is the most disastrous handling of any serious challenge to a government for 100 years.” A government spokesperson said: “Every death is a tragedy, and our deepest sympathies go out to all the families who have lost loved ones. We have always been transparent about the way we report Covid-19 deaths and it is wrong to suggest we would in any way attempt to play down the scale of this global pandemic. The government’s daily figures and the ONS data count different things, which we have always fully explained and clearly reported.” The DHSC has since published a back-series of daily death tolls. The peak just before Easter drove up the weekly death toll in England and Wales to the highest level since records began in 2000. It also came faster than many had predicted. Sir Patrick Vallance, the UK government’s chief scientific adviser, predicted a plateau starting early in the second half of April that would “go on for two or three weeks”. His estimate of the length of the plateau was right. But he made the prediction of a future plateau on 13 April, when the UK was already in the middle of its worst period. The Guardian is investigating how the UK government prepared for – and is responding to – the coronavirus pandemic. We want to learn more about recent decisions taken at the heart of government. If you're a whistleblower or source and with new information, you can email investigations@theguardian.com or (using a non-work phone) send us a Signal or WhatsApp to this number (UK) +44 7584 640566. (The number does not take calls.) For the most secure communications, use SecureDrop and for general advice on confidentially contacting the Guardian see our guide. Boris Johnson spoke repeatedly of “squashing the sombrero” to keep the peak under a level that would overwhelm the NHS, but the figures also show that the death toll rose more than three times faster than it fell, creating a lopsided curve that drove the overall death toll to more than 52,000. Across the UK, it took 18 days for Covid-19 deaths to accelerate from 139 in a day to their peak of 1,445 on 8 April, but it would be a further 58 days before the death toll returned to that lower level. Rowland Kao, a professor of veterinary epidemiology and data science at the University of Edinburgh, said this may have been because the ”R” number, which measures whether the virus is growing or shrinking in the community, hovered very close to one, meaning the decline was initially slow. “Even extreme lockdown means there is always some transmission ‘leakage’ – some people are moving about after all,” he said. “Plus the amount of activity was actually increasing steadily over the entire period. This is to be expected as it is typical human behaviour. People at first are very strict, possibly more than the regulations, then slowly increase their overall activity.” 