West Indies wicketkeeper Shane Dowrich has insisted the tourists would not trade any of their seam attack for England’s Jofra Archer. Dowrich, who like Archer was born in Barbados, hailed the England quick as an “amazing talent” but said West Indies were more than happy with their bowling lineup. Archer’s path from West Indies Under-19s omission to World Cup glory with England is well documented, but Dowrich believes the tourists are happy to take on their compatriot. “I know Jofra pretty well, he’s an amazing talent and I wish him well going into this series,” said Dowrich. “But at the end of the day when we cross that line, it’s the West Indies against England.” Asked whether he would rather have Archer in his lineup than face him, Dowrich replied: “No. I think he’s made his decision in terms of where his career is going to go, and I wish him all the best. But at the end of the day we have a wonderful bowling lineup and I’m happy with the team that take the field with me.” England’s three-Test series against West Indies will start at Southampton on 8 July, with the matches held behind closed doors. Dowrich believes the tourists’ pace options of Jason Holder, Kemar Roach, Shannon Gabriel, Alzarri Joseph and Chemar Holder can cause England a host of problems. “If you look at the main four in Shannon, Kemar, Jason and Alzarri, they all present different skills,” said Dowrich. “Kemar is probably the most skilful of all them in terms of being able to get a consistent line and length, and moving the ball both ways. “Shannon and Alzarri have a little more pace, and Jason is Mr Consistent; he can put the ball on a 10p piece. Then [we] have young Chemar Holder coming up, who is an exciting talent. The way he bowled in first-class cricket this season shows that. I think we have a well-versed attack and look forward to seeing them bowl in this series.” Dowrich is hoping to make a big impact with the bat, after admitting he found himself out of his depth the last time he toured in England three years ago. “The last time I was here was very tough for me, but it was a series that really changed around my career,” the 28-year-old said. “I was young, in unfamiliar territory and I really didn’t cope very well with it to be honest. But I’ve learned a lot from my experience of here last time. “I would love to score a Test hundred in England,” he added. “I think I’ve been putting in enough work … and I consider myself a different player to what I was three years ago. Batting in England will always be a challenge, but I think I’m ready.”