Sevilla are breaking the rules already but who can blame them? The leaflet of instructions handed to every club on the eve of La Liga returning to action insists “players should avoid or minimise physical contact with celebrations” yet when the time finally came, they couldn’t help themselves, a pile of players building in the corner before an empty stand where euphoria would normally erupt. There was still almost half an hour left in the Seville derby, Spain’s first game back, but a second goal had secured victory over Real Betis, the team they most like to beat at the Ramón Sánchez Pizjuán. They had waited a long time for this, and the goal that effectively ended this game was wonderful. Lucas Ocampos had opened the scoring from a debatable penalty soon after half-time and now it was Fernando, who couldn’t hear the drums but could hear his teammates shouting right in his ear, voices echoing round. Four first-time touches from a short corner had concluded with Ocampos’s clever backheel lifted into the path of Fernando, who finished with a glancing header. Ninety-three days after it shut down, Spanish football was back and Sevilla had a deserved 2-0 win on a night that was always likely to feel a little strange and in which it was victory enough to play. We will get used to it, but after three months away, attention was always likely to be turned as much on how everything looked and felt as on how the teams played. By the end, it felt good for Sevilla. At the final whistle Ocampos, who had been withdrawn to a smattering of applause, pulled off his mask and leapt on to Luuk de Jong’s back. “We dedicate this to the fans who couldn’t be here,” he said. At the start, the teams came out in single file, substitutes making their way to the stands in gloves and masks, occupying a handful of rows and sitting apart as the starters made their way to the pitch – a walk that looked a little lonely without the roar that’s supposed to accompany them, especially on a night like this. Giant lettering spelt out EL GRAN DERBI but there was little of what makes this game grand: the people. As the teams emerged and headed to their own half, no handshake and no posing for pictures, Sevilla’s anthem played – recorded in advance and ringing around the wide, red space. There was a minute’s silence before the game and then 90 minutes’ silence during it. Unless you were on the other channel, where Spanish TV offered recorded sound and computer-generated fans, who didn’t move much, more multicoloured backdrop than hardcore ultras. There was a game at least and it was good too, the pace quicker than might have been feared, the intensity announced by an early encounter between Sergio Reguilón and Emerson down by the corner flag. There was an early shout when Sevilla’s goalkeeper, Tomas Vaclik, picked the ball up suspiciously near the edge of his area, but most of what unfolded did so at the other end. A Sergio Canales shot that did not trouble Vaclik was all that Betis produced in the opening 45 minutes. Sevilla produced more. Ocampos and Munir El Haddadi especially impressed, as their team opened out the pitch and moved on to the front foot. Ocampos’s shot from a tight angle could be heard as it hit the bar after he wriggled through two challenges, and more chances followed. Jules Koundé headed just wide at the near post, more alone from the corner than he had realised. De Jong, too, headed past the post, supplied by Munir’s superb ball from the left. Just before half-time, De Jong turned cleverly and spread the ball to Ocampos, whose shot thudded against Joel Robles’s palms. Joan Jordán could not get his shot off, deep inside the area. Sevilla might have thought they would regret not taking those opportunities until 10 minutes later Antonio Mateu Lahoz – welcome back to Spain’s box office referee – saw something in a crowd of jumping players and blew for a penalty. Replays showed Marc Bartra might have had just enough of a forearm on De Jong’s neck to justify the decision, or at least to prevent the VAR overruling it. “Incredible,” Bartra called it. Ocampos scored and raced to the corner, while a sound engineer pressed the button marked cheer. He was followed by teammates, but not engulfed. That reticence soon evaporated when that magnificent second followed and Sevilla’s superiority was sealed. Betis did react, Diego Lainez showing flashes of quality, Emerson putting one shot wide and Joaquí­n seeing another blocked, but they had waited too long. Everyone else had waited three months and now, at last, the football is back.