A proposal to remove scrums when the season resumes in August could eliminate more than 1,500 instances of close contact between players per game, giving the sport the best possible chance of completing its domestic calendar as planned. Rugby league’s laws committee met on Wednesday with a number of rule changes discussed, including increasing the number of permitted interchanges, and a series of tweaks to align Super League with the NRL, most notably introducing the “six again” rule, which affords attacking teams a restart of the tackle count following a ruck infringement. However, it is potentially eliminating scrums that is most significant. Medical experts displayed evidence suggesting removing scrums would considerably reduce the threat of exposure and transmission of Covid-19, with the hearing informed that if a one-on-one tackle constitutes one occurrence of close contact, a single scrum represents 132 instances. With 12 scrums per game on average in Super League this season, that results in more than 1,500 occasions of close contact in every fixture. The laws committee will seek further clarification from Public Health England before a judgment is made by the Rugby Football League’s board. Discussions about the testing of players has also begun, with initial protocols suggesting once-a-week tests likely to be held on a Wednesday before a weekend game. Should scrums remain, a player who had played and then tested positive would likely lead to the quarantining of all players who came into contact with him for a fortnight, casting doubts over whether the season could be completed. With midweek fixtures seen as an inevitability when the season does return, further discussions are also due about increasing the number of interchanges. Clubs are allowed eight per game but there is a growing appetite among coaches to increase that number to reduce the demand on players who may be asked to play three times a week. “These are major recommendations but these are unprecedented times, presenting the game with unique challenges,” the RFL’s chief executive, Ralph Rimmer, said. “We believe rugby league is well-served by its agility, in terms of being able to consider and implement such significant changes.” The RFL is aiming to put the sport in as strong a position as possible to return safely and will even consider recommendations surrounding try celebrations and how players congregate behind the posts when tries are scored.