Rory McIlroy doesn’t need a new normal. The Northern Irishman’s reference to high comfort levels should have the remainder of the field at the Charles Schwab Challenge wondering if they may be playing for second. McIlroy, who had returned to the world’s No 1 spot on account of terrific consistency before coronavirus interrupted the season, was back in the old routine during round two in Fort Worth. A bogey at the 9th, his 18th, wasn’t likely to upset McIlroy too much; his 63 meant a march through the field to the point where he is once again contending. No spectators? No problem. “Even yesterday, once we got into the flow of the round, things started to become more normal,” McIlroy said. “When that first birdie putt went in and I didn’t get a clap, my hand was trying to go up to wave to someone in the gallery, but there’s obviously no one there. But once you get into it, it’s the same. We’re trying to go out there and play the best golf we can. I’ve been playing well at home and I’ve been hitting the ball the way I’ve wanted to. It’s just a matter of getting it to translate out on to tournament play and it’s nice that it has. “Look, I’d love there to be fans here this week. I think this tournament deserves fans considering the field that’s been assembled, but hopefully we can get back to playing in front of some big crowds soon. But it felt as normal as it can, I guess.” McIlroy’s nine under par left him just two adrift of Harold Varner, who is seeking a first PGA Tour win. Sandwiched between the pair is Jordan Spieth, who shrugged off a three-putt from 3ft at the 3rd, his 12th, to post a second 65 in as many days. Spieth, to his credit, took a considered view when revealing his thoughts as the Tour took another moment of silence to reflect on the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. “I’m playing golf with two of my best friends,” Spieth said. “We’re having fun, and then you sit back and you reflect. You’re like, there are bigger things that are going on right now. I think everybody wants unity throughout the country. It’s tough right now. I think everybody wants to come out of this better, stronger and together.” Justin Thomas added a 68 to Thursday’s 64 for an eight under aggregate. Danny Willett, at plus two, was among those to miss the cut.