Mosese Vesikara and his uncle, Kinikoto Mailautoka, are on the reef collecting sea urchins for lunch. Beneath the shifting skiff, the swelling water is clear despite Fiji’s bustling capital Suva sprawling along the next point, an easily walkable distance. When out collecting Vesikara and the other fishers carefully skirt the tabu – pronounced TAM-bo – a no-fishing zone demarcated by barnacled pillars embedded into the reef floor. These tabus are one tool of many for Fijian communities. Reintroduced to these waters after decades absent, they represent a return to traditional methods of reef and fishery management. The hope is that these traditional wisdoms, combined with modern science, can enable the growing village populations to subsist off the qoliqoli – fishing grounds – that they have for millennia. Oblivious to the zoning, schools of electric blue fish thread through the beige and twinkling coral thickets below Vesikara’s boat. The reef was not always so healthy. In the late 90s throughout Fiji, and across the Pacific, fisheries hit crisis point. Colonial modes of management stressed centralisation, and commercial exploitation had overseen a steady decline in fish numbers. “The fish were getting too small. The coral were dead because of the plastic pollution from Suva and the oil from boats,” says Hemo Marvela, chairman of this marine protection area. “You know the generation coming up. That’s why we want to protect them. That’s the only reason.” As a result a renaissance of traditional community management techniques began, with responsibility for monitoring the health of the qoliqolis returned to the local communities that lived off them. Austin Bowden-Kerby, a marine scientist who has spent a career in coral conservation in the Pacific and central America, recalls how the idea of tabus was revived during a community consultation. “There is one thing our grandfathers used to do that we haven’t been doing – we would make a tabu area. We will mark the reef with sticks and a coconut leaf tied on it. And that means you cannot catch anything on that reef. That makes it sacred. For 40 or 50 years this had not been practised.” In Fijian tradition a tabu is the temporary closure of a section of a community’s fishing ground for 100 days after a chief’s death, before a memorial feast is held. The idea of the modern tabu is to extend that closure indefinitely. And so, from this consultation, emerged a pilot of five permanent no-fishing areas. “They said ‘We are going to re-establish our culture,’” Bowden-Kerby says. Word of the resulting increased catches spread from village to village. Today Fiji has a network of 400 communities known as the Fiji Locally Managed Marine Areas (FLMMA), , which use customary management techniques that have often been ignored for decades. Marvela is chair of a four-person committee that governs the Navakavu reef through the traditional chiefly system. He says the reef is in robust health but there are still problems, in particular poachers. “They come at night – always at night. We want to reserve inside – where they [the fish] breed. These people are very smart but it’s unfair.” The committee responsible for governing the reef’s use struggles to monitor it. They had a boat to guard against poachers but it was stolen years ago. Marvela is fed up enough that he is looking to make Navakavu reef a gazetted marine protected area. This means the police can be called on to stop poachers. But it would also mean a government in Suva would again be managing their qoliqoli. Back at the village Vesikara and Mailautoka scoop out the sea urchin paste and eat them with sliced chilli and a squeeze of lemon. “These would cost about $25 each down at Suva market.” Mailautoka says. With such a payoff, the allure – and risk – of poaching is obvious, and a shift in global tastes could spell fast devastation for the qoliqoli. Already sea cucumbers, which clean and aerate the sands, have been fished to near extinction to satisfy the Asian market. Yet traditional wisdom reinforced by modern science could provide a bulwark to encroaching risks. Perhaps then the lunch-pot might still be full for the next generation.