As a national debate swirls around statues of Confederate officials, a new battle is brewing in the western US over the fate of monuments glorifying the brutal Spanish conquest of the Americas. They include effigies of Diego De Vargas, who ordered the execution of 70 Pueblo Indians and the enslavement of hundreds of women and children, and conquistador Juan De Oñate, who is known for ordering the massacre of 800 Acoma people and for the right feet of 24 captive Acoma warriors to be amputated. Last week, officials in Rio Arriba county, 40 minutes north of Santa Fe, New Mexico, removed the first, a statue of Oñate. The likeness was taken down just hours before a protest was scheduled to demand its toppling. “It’s a win,” said Luis Pena, who started a petition to remove the statue and stood near the concrete platform covered with blood-red handprints. “Symbols are important, they shape the way we ingest the world … In reclaiming these symbols, we get a chance to tell a side of history that has been left out of the books.” Over his shoulder, Than Tsídéh, a 19-year old from the nearby Ohkay Owingeh Pueblo, danced and sang atop the newly vacant platform. Yet the violence accompanying these protests is a reminder that, as elsewhere in the country, this historical reckoning is contentious. A few hours after Pena spoke with the Guardian, trouble erupted in Albuquerque, when a possible militia member shot a protester as the group attempted to tear down another statue of Oñate. The push to remove contested monuments began in the southern US, where 10 Confederate monuments have been removed in less than a month, according to Lecia Brooks, outreach director for the Southern Poverty Law Center, and four other removals are pending. Eight came down in the whole of 2019. “There is this groundswell from the public that has led people to say these are symbols of white supremacy and they have to come down,” said Brooks. New Mexico has become the center of this movement in the south-west. Oñate and his soldiers began the Spanish conquest of New Mexico, and the subjugation of its Indigenous peoples, in 1598. The state has long venerated its painful past. The names of conquistadors, like those of Confederate generals in the south, lend themselves to road names, schools, shopping centers and statues. In northern New Mexico, people grew up with the pageantry of Fiestas De Santa Fe, an annual festival celebrating Spanish culture and conquest that includes school visits by conquistador reenactors. As an elementary student in Santa Fe, Elena Ortiz, who is from the Ohkay Owingeh pueblo and is a member of social justice group Red Nation, refused to take part. “I remember being terrified they were going to try and get me to dance,” said Ortiz, referring to the parade through school that often involves the kids. “I knew this was not for us.” Until 2018, the Fiestas included an event known as La Entrada, which celebrated the reconquest of New Mexico by Don Diego De Vargas following the Pueblo revolt, an indigenous uprising in 1680 that expelled the Spanish from New Mexico for 12 years. After sustained pressure, La Entrada was dropped. “Who are we calling heroes?” asked Jennifer Marley, an indigenous activist who was arrested and then acquitted because of her protest against La Entrada. “It’s a celebration of genocide. An erasure of indigenous people.” . Oñate, New Mexico’s first colonial governor, is likely the most controversial figure of all. In the late 1990s, a group of activists used a power saw to remove the right foot of Oñate in the middle of the night, gesturing to his mutilation of the Acoma warriors. “We took the liberty of removing Oñate’s right foot on behalf of our brothers and sisters of Acoma Pueblo,” read a statement by the group. “We see no glory in celebrating Oñate’s fourth centennial, and we do not want our faces rubbed in it.” “There is a situation where people celebrate warped, Eurocentric versions of history that ignore or vilify indigenous people and mestizos,” said Frank Pérez, a professor at the University of Texas-El Paso. “By celebrating Oñate, we overlook the trauma people have and continue to suffer,” Proponents of the monuments have long argued that their removal equals an erasure of Hispanic culture. A right-wing blog recently launched an online petition asking the Santa Fe mayor to halt the removal of any more symbols of Spanish colonizers from the city, the Santa Fe New Mexican reported. The editor of the blog said it already has 1,500 signatures. “The statues are part of the history of New Mexico (like it or not) when you take down a piece of history you take down a piece of us,” reads one of the blogposts in defense of keeping the monuments. “Not the bad, but the culture, the unique culture, and how we got here.” Brooks, of the Southern Poverty Law Center, argued that the goal was not erasure, but rather a full accounting of the past. “We are, in fact, erasing history by allowing one side of the story to be told without offering any context,” she said. Last week the Santa Fe mayor announced the removal of three more contentious monuments in downtown Santa Fe. By Wednesday morning, the statue of Diego de Vargas had been removed from Cathedral park. Two obelisks – one dedicated in part to “heroes” killed in battle by “savage Indians”, another to Kit Carson, a renowned trapper turned army colonel who waged war against the Navajo Nation – are to be removed soon. They are located in or near a city plaza where hundreds of Pueblo men were lynched following the Pueblo revolt. For Ortiz, of the Ohkay Owingeh pueblo, what’s “finally” happening in New Mexico, reflects the larger national momentum around the issue of structural racism. “I think it signifies a shift in consciousness,” she said. “Images and symbols of racial violence and inequality are now more evident to the public. And it was all triggered by the slaughter of so many black people.”