This west London derby had been billed as a showdown between the Championship’s highest goalscorers, Aleksandar Mitrovic and Ollie Watkins, a pair with 45 league goals between them. But in a rusty display from two sides with Premier League ambitions, it was left to the substitute Emiliano Marcondes to inspire the visitors to a victory that lifts them back into contention for automatic promotion. When the Danish midfielder was introduced midway through the second half, the match seemed to be drifting towards a stalemate. But a brilliant assist to set up Saïd Benrahma’s 11th goal of the season two minutes from time and a smart breakaway finish ensured local bragging rights for Thomas Frank’s side. “We all knew how much it meant to our fans to win this game so we are very pleased,” said the delighted Brentford manager. “Maybe we lacked some of the intensity because there were no fans but you could feel the joy when we scored our goal at the end.” These two clubs are separated by four miles but did not play each other between 1954 and 1980 and again between 1998 and 2014 due to Brentford’s lowly status. The balance has been redressed somewhat in recent years thanks to some superb scouting and meticulous planning, with the visitors boasting the Championship’s best goal difference as they attempt to reach the top flight for the first time since the 1940s before their move away from Griffin Park. Construction of the 17,000-seater stadium just up the road was put on hold during lockdown but work has now resumed, although Frank’s hopes of leaving here with a victory were dealt a blow when the French forward Bryan Mbeumo tested positive for the virus before kick-off and was forced to sit out this match despite being asymptomatic. Tariqe Fosu, a January signing from Oxford, took his place alongside the exciting Benrahma and Watkins in attack. With his side still to play Leeds and West Brom in a perilous run-in, the Fulham manager, Scott Parker, knew three points were vital. In an eerie atmosphere that was accentuated by the Riverside Stand building site, the hosts created the more dangerous opportunities in the opening period, with Bobby Decordova-Reid striking the crossbar after a lovely disguised pass from Harrison Reed. Brentford soon settled into their rhythm, though, and Fosu was unlucky not to open the scoring in the 31st minute when Marek Rodak denied him with an excellent save. The 24-year-old then turned provider with a cross for Watkins but the striker’s header was off target. Christian Norgaard also went close on the stroke of half-time. After the gentle pace of the first 45 minutes, there was more urgency from the sides in the second half. Mitrovic had the ball in the net after good play from Neeskens Kebano but was frustrated to see the flag go up. Fulham began to dominate possession and Mitrovic came close again when his header from Joe Bryan’s cross was pushed away by David Raya. Watkins was the next to take aim from outside the box but his shot was nowhere near testing Rodak again. Brentford looked more likely to snatch the points late on as Benrahma fizzed a free-kick just wide and so it proved when the Algerian forward tapped home at the far post before Marcondes made certain soon after. With West Brom up next at home on Friday, Brentford’s supporters may just be daring to dream a little.