As the football lamps flicker back on across Europe, France remains in the dark. A glimmer of clarity came on Tuesday as the country’s highest administrative court upheld the decision made in April to terminate the Ligue 1 and 2 seasons but, with Germany, Italy and Spain having already returned to action and the Premier League due to restart on Wednesday, French football clubs are still not sure when and how they will play again. Three clubs – Lyon, Amiens and Toulouse – had been so angered by the cancellation of the season and the “arbitrary and unfair” decision to determine the final standings on a points-per-game basis, that they sought legal recourse. Lyon argued the league should have instead waited and explored ways of bringing campaigns to a natural conclusion without jeopardising public health or, failing that, simply voided the season. But on Tuesday the Conseil d’État declared the league had been within its rights to wind the season up as it did – but suspended the relegations of Amiens and Toulouse, at least until the league determined the structure under which the top tiers will resume. That opens up the possibility of Ligue 1 being expanded to 22 teams next season, with Amiens and Toulouse staying put while Lorient and Lens are promoted. “I think we have scored a victory for football’s values,” rejoiced the Amiens president, Bernard Joannin. “It’s very satisfying, I’ve always said the league’s decision was unfair and incoherent.” There was a similar sense of relief at Toulouse, who were 14 points adrift of safety with 10 matches remaining when the season finished. Tuesday’s ruling, however, left Lyon with nothing to smile about. They finished seventh according to the points-per-game calculation, meaning that, for the first time since 1997, they failed to qualify for European competition through their league place. For a club who cherish continental competition for financial and sporting reasons, that is a cataclysm. The club’s president, Jean-Michel Aulas, who had suggested that play-offs, at least, could have been held to determine the final standings, did not rule out taking further legal action and warned that the continued months of inactivity could be ruinous for many French clubs. For Lyon, however, there may still be a route back into Europe. Although the league season is over, the French Football Federation reckons the Coupe de France and League Cup finals could go ahead. The French government has banned public gatherings of more than 5,000 people at least until September, but the FFF hopes to stage the finals at the Stade de France either behind closed doors or with very few fans. The Coupe de France pits Paris Saint-Germain against Saint-Étienne. PSG are also in the League Cup final – against Lyon, who, if they were to win, would gain entry into the qualifying rounds of next season’s Europa League. There is, of course, one more way back into Europe for Lyon but it is not exactly smooth: they could win this season’s Champions League. When the competition was halted in the middle of the last-16 ties, Lyon held a 1-0 first-leg advantage over Juventus, with the away leg to come (PSG had already booked their place in the quarter-finals by ousting Dortmund). Uefa will meet next week to determine the schedule and format for the resumption of the competition, with an August restart likely. Juve returned to domestic action on Friday with an unimpressive 0-0 draw with Milan but they will have plenty of scope to get any rustiness out of their system before trying to turn the tables on Lyon, who may not have played any competitive matches by the time their duel comes around. In a bid to prepare for the showdown with Juventus and the League Cup final against PSG – and perhaps also to make a point to Ligue 1 authorities – Aulas revealed on Thursday that he plans to stage a six-team friendly tournament in July. He has invited PSG and other top French teams to take part and will award a trophy to the winners. He noted, pointedly, that he would have liked to open the tournament to other countries, but they are unavailable because they will all be in league action.