Photographer Matt Davis has portrayed children in uniform at home in Leeds to highlight the varying experiences of school kids on lockdown in one city. As a father of two young children I wanted to document what’s happening while children are in lockdown. I think it’s easy to fall into the trap of believing kids across the UK are having the same experience. I wanted to show the uniqueness of each child and their situation. Despite the challenges and restrictions, each of the children I photographed was having a positive experience and making the most of time at home before schools reopen fully. Jessica, eight, misses her diving training. She usually trains four times a week on her scholarship. She’s been doing lots of cooking with her sister at home instead. Milly (left) and Sofia, both nine, are being home-schooled by their dad while their mum works from home. They go on a family bike ride every day and love visiting the local animals in their village. Recently they saw a baby alpaca being born. Sahib, six, has been keeping up with schoolwork with his mum. In between studying he has been maintaining his taekwondo training, taking part in online classes and practising with his dad. He loves his mum’s cooking as well. Emelia, 12, has lived in the UK for one year. She loves dancing, cooking and maths. She recently won a Home Learning Champion award for the maths work she has been doing with her mum. Islay, seven, loves the lockdown. Her parents both usually work away from home during the week so she is very pleased to have them at home. She does the Joe Wicks workout with her dad and brother every morning. Brooke, eight, has been enjoying all of the nice weather. She keeps in touch with her friends on TikTok. Melody, 12, has been trying to keep up with her studies at home along with her brothers and sisters. She plays the piano whenever she gets the chance. William, 12, has been home-schooling himself and his brother because both parents have no choice but to work full time. A keen golfer, he misses playing with his dad, but he has been mastering his short game in the garden. Megan, 13, is learning at home with her brothers and sisters. She joins her sister on TikTok and leaves boxing and football to her brothers. Pixie (right) and Daisy, both five, are being educated by their mum who has been unable to work because of the restrictions. They love playing in their garden with their pet dogs and on the slide their dad made for them in lockdown. Sarah, seven, is home schooled by mum and dad depending on the day. After school she loves playing by the stream in her garden. She’s planning to pick elderflowers for her mum as a surprise. Eva, seven, loves climbing trees and drawing pictures. She prefers doing this to schoolwork with her mum, who usually teaches A-level maths.