In an era of virtual press conferences it is difficult to grasp body language or gather quite the same sense of emotion from managers, and more so when the soundbites are filtered through a translator who, in Marcelo Bielsa’s case, is his assistant, Diego Flores. But even second-hand, in response to a question about how Leeds would restore the kind of momentum amassed before the season was halted – winning five games on the spin without conceding – the answer was reassuring and the bounce in Bielsa’s voice telling. “We are ready to go,” he said, leaning forward ever so slightly. It is just over two years since Leeds lured the Argentinian to Elland Road – a beautiful reality supporters will never tire of – but the next six weeks will define the scale of the legacy he will, ultimately, leave behind. Not since Simon Grayson, eight years and 14 managers ago, has a Leeds manager lasted so long and, even with the caveat of the coronavirus lockdown prolonging an all-or-nothing season by a few months, an apparently meaningless two-year anniversary is significant given Bielsa’s previous form for abrupt stays: 205 days at Lille and just 48 hours at Lazio. Not since the early 1990s, while developing his reputation in Rosario, has Bielsa, the subject of covert sightseeing tours across Wetherby, stayed put at one club for so long. There is good reason for the love-in, too. Leeds are in a healthy place, at the summit of the Championship before the first of nine remaining matches at Cardiff on Sunday. After a painfully long wait, an end to Leeds’ 16-year absence from the top flight is suddenly in sight. Hope reigns and expectancy – as Bielsa’s predecessor, Paul Heckingbottom, knows only too well – comes with the territory. “The break probably takes away that one criticism people tended to have of Marcelo’s teams – justified or not – that they would fade away at the end of the season,” says Heckingbottom. “It is like starting again. Speaking to people there, the players are in fantastic shape and even fitter than they were before the break so I think they’ll be in a great position to see it through.” There is also an argument that the absence of an expectant crowd could help, should things begin to get uncomfortable at the top. Whether such a tetchy scenario arises largely depends on third-placed Fulham, who visit Elland Road next weekend, as much as it does Leeds holding their nerve. “If it turns into a bit of a procession and they’ve maintained the gap at the top, it will be a detriment to them that they have no fans there because the stadium can be a fortress. But if things are getting tight and jangly, with how much the fans want promotion to the Premier League, it can maybe hold the players back,” he says. “You saw it last season in the play-offs against Derby; as soon as they [County] had nothing to fear you could sense the apprehension in the ground.” Leeds have reaped the rewards, he says, of allowing Bielsa to streamline a bloated squad, as well as affording him time to condition the players to his rigorous methods. Bielsa tends to keep his players at arms’ length but, during lockdown, he sent a video message urging them to consider the sacrifice made by key workers and reminding them of the importance of staying in peak condition. Needless to say Bielsa was impressed by the physical data on return to training; one of his renowned drills is murderball, a non-stop 11 v 11 match whereby Leeds’ coaching staff double up as ballboys to maintain a limitless intensity. “People said to me Leeds were in a bad place and that it was a basket case of a club, but it wasn’t – it was really close-knit. There were a lot of good players, but there was also a lot of deadwood and it needed a real shakeup. It doesn’t matter how good a coach or player you think you are, if the environment is not right, it will drag you down. It was more important to get rid of people than it was to bring people in.” Ben White has proved a masterstroke of a signing on loan from Brighton, so much so that his performances have set tails wagging at both Manchester clubs, but the core of the team remains much the same. The captain, Liam Cooper, Luke Ayling and Kalvin Phillips, the latter in a quarterback role, have flourished under Bielsa. Heckingbottom says: “When I first went to Leeds, it was the first time both him [Phillips] and Ronaldo Vieira were getting a bit of stick from the home fans. Usually as a homegrown lad, and a Leeds fan, you get spared of that. But they had been coming under a bit of a fire and it was a case of getting their confidence back. “They were fantastic players with great ability but you have to step out of the shadows and not be that young lad with great potential – you have to go and run the team. Ronaldo got a good move to Sampdoria and Kalvin has shown what a brilliant player he is.” Aside from Jean-Kévin Augustin, who has struggled to get up to speed since joining on loan in January, long-term absentee Adam Forshaw and Pablo Hernández, who is scheduled to return to training on Wednesday, Leeds resume fine-tuned and at full strength. Disinfect the blue bucket for Bielsa and Leeds are almost back. “I think they are ready,” Heckingbottom says. “They are stronger mentally for the benefits of last season, in a fantastic position and I believe this break has does them good and allowed them to recuperate and I think it will play into their hands and they’ll go on and win promotion. I always remember at Arsenal, watching a Europa League game against Milan and chatting to Arsène Wenger afterwards. The first thing he said was: ‘Leeds, what a club, big club,’ and that’s the reputation it’s got all over.”