I showed my passport to a surly human resources director from County Leitrim in Ireland a few months ago. “When did you get it?” he muttered, spying my Protestant name. My reply, “after the referendum”, was met with raised eyebrows and a studied: “I see.” The eyebrow hailed from what Seamus Heaney would have called the “land of password, handgrip, wink and nod / of open minds as open as a trap”. It said: “Not proper Irish, then.” And it bothered me. I applied for my Irish passport in a panic over threats to free movement around Europe. But I didn’t speak a word of Irish, had zero interest in Gaelic football, and could barely recognise Ireland’s national anthem, let alone sing it. My decision wasn’t ideological but convenient. Four years on, however, I feel drawn to the south. For me, Ireland means EU membership, citizens’ assemblies and Sally Rooney novels. I have spent time living in Dublin, where I felt very much at home. And I even watched parts of last year’s All-Ireland final, feeling a strange affinity for rural, republican Kerry against the mighty Dublin. That feeling has strengthened in the face of the Democratic Unionist party’s retrograde conservatism, anti-abortion marches in Belfast, and the realisation that many conservative commentators and most voters would rather see Brexit happen than keep Northern Ireland – or Scotland – in the United Kingdom. Despite the changing circumstances, the arguments bandied around in support of a united Ireland remain stale and uninspiring. Matthew Parris, the Times columnist and former Conservative MP, thinks “a united Ireland would be good for everyone”. Given today’s political and economic climate, he says it “makes so much sense”. Liberal Protestants like me are the target audience of this “common sense” approach, because we could swing the tide for or against a united Ireland. Lots of noise has been made about a recent survey by Tory pollster Lord Ashcroft that found a slim majority for unification, with support from unionist remainers. But the poll is far from conclusive. And the experience of Matthew Parris and remainers like him proves that common sense doesn’t guarantee votes. Instead of focusing on economic and political convenience – volatile factors that are easily challenged – nationalists would do better to welcome us in. They should argue, as Irish taoiseach Leo Varadkar has done, that we will feel “more at home” in a modern, united Ireland. Common sense is having the freedom to choose what to call ourselves: British, Irish, Northern Irish or none of the above Inspiration for how it could be done is painted on the walls of Belfast’s Protestant and Catholic housing estates. There, keen-eyed observers will find both nationalist and loyalist murals of a figure called Cú Chulainn. One of Ireland’s mythological heroes, he was an invincible Ulster warrior who fought off hundreds of cattle-stealing invaders from Connaught. During the Troubles, nationalists adopted him as the epitome of the Irish underdog, bravely defying a larger fighting force. Unionists saw him as the defender of Ulster’s borders from the invading Irish. Today, I see Cú Chulainn as an example of the shared symbolism a united Ireland needs to develop, where national symbols can mean different things to different communities. The all-Ireland rugby team is an example of this shared symbolism, captained until recently by the Protestant Ulsterman Rory Best. Hockey and cricket teams also select players on an all-island basis, and sports such as football could follow suit. The Irish tricolour could also be reimagined. For nationalists, it is the flag hoisted above Dublin’s general post office in 1916’s Easter Rising. In a united Ireland, it can regain its original meaning. Green, white and orange: peace between Catholics and Protestants. Ben Kelly, a journalist from Derry, tells me: “Protestants may feel they are removed from the ‘Irish cultural experience’, but we have a lot of Irishness shared between us – if you look at the history of the Irish language for example, or our literary figures, or even the Protestants involved in the quest for Irish independence. We need to reclaim this shared past, as well as building a shared future.” This argument might seem idealistic to some. But if it combines with a commonsense approach, it could be a powerful vote winner. Common sense for moderate Protestants is having healthcare that is free at the point of use. It is peace between loyalists and republicans. For some, it is seeing the 12 July marches respected, though they may never think of taking part. It is having the freedom to choose which adjective to call ourselves – British, Irish, Northern Irish or none of the above. It is also watching BBC iPlayer without using a VPN, and walking through Belfast’s airports without passport checks. The most treasured aspects of Britishness should be protected – at least in the north – to ease Protestants through a challenging transition period. Irish southerners could then ask themselves if this reimagined nation works for them. Can they accept the redefining of “Irishness” that the Protestant north would bring? There are financial costs to consider too: Northern Ireland costs the UK taxpayer £10.8bn a year. An Ireland recovering from the economic effects of coronavirus would struggle to shoulder the burden. Kelly told me he is “very happy to see Protestants in Northern Ireland getting their Irish passports”. Others, like that County Leitrim HR chief, might be less so. In the Ireland of old, where scorn for our neighbours was par for the course, his smirk had its place. In a united Ireland, where we can all feel at home, it would have to go. • Ian Johnston is the winner of the 2020 Hugo Young award. He is a newspaper journalism student at City University and has written for the Times, the Irish Times, the Evening Standard and City AM