John Bolton, ahead of the release of his explosive new book about his 17 months at the White House, called Donald Trump not “fit for office”, claiming the president doesn’t have “the competence to carry out the job”. The former national security adviser made the comments in an interview with ABC News, the full version of which will be aired on Sunday. In a preview on Good Morning America Thursday, Bolton spoke to Martha Raddatz, chief global affairs correspondent, calling Trump a “stunningly uninformed” man whose ignorances could be easily manipulated by foreign adversaries. “He was so focused on the re-election that longer-term considerations fell by the wayside,” He said. “There really isn’t any guiding principle that I was able to discern other than what’s good for Donald Trump’s re-election”. As Trump’s longest serving national security adviser, Bolton was there during the president’s meeting with Russia’s Vladimir Putin, China’s Xi Jinping and summits with North Korea’s Kim Jong-un before resigning from the White House last September. When specifically asked about Trump’s three meetings with Kim, Bolton told ABC News: “There was considerable emphasis on the photo opportunity and the press reaction to it and little or no focus on what such meetings did for the bargaining position of the United States.” Bolton’s criticisms of Trump comes as he promotes his book, The Room Where It Happened, due out on 23 June, although the Trump administration is seeking to block it through the courts. In it he recalled being especially appalled at Trump’s diplomatic outreach to Kim. “I was sick at heart over Trump’s zeal to meet with Kim Jong-un,” he wrote according to an advanced copy seen by ABC, adding he would be “hard-pressed to identify any significant Trump decision during [his] tenure that wasn’t driven by re-election calculations”. Wacko John Bolton’s “exceedingly tedious”(New York Times) book is made up of lies & fake stories. Said all good about me, in print, until the day I fired him. A disgruntled boring fool who only wanted to go to war. Never had a clue, was ostracized & happily dumped. What a dope! Trump, who has often bragged about his strong relationship with foreign dictators, lashed out at Bolton in response to the prime time Thursday premiere. After telling the Wall Street Journal Bolton “is a liar” who “everyone in the White House hated”, he went on to call him a “wacko” whose “book is made up of lies and fake stories” on Twitter overnight. Trump later retweeted controversial conservative Dinesh D’Souza to promote his claim that both he and George W Bush fired Bolton. In his resignation letter last year, Bolton attributed his departure to months of disagreements with the president. The US Department of Justice filed an emergency restraining order Wednesday to block the book’s release. Joe Biden, Trump’s rival for the White House in the November presidential election, called the alleged actions by Trump “morally repugnant”. “If these accounts are true, it’s not only morally repugnant, it’s a violation of Donald Trump’s sacred duty to the American people to protect America’s interests and defend our values,” Biden said on Wednesday night.