The fall of Edward Colston’s statue in Bristol on Sunday has quickly become the defining image of the recent wave of Black Lives Matter protests across Britain. These protests were initially prompted by the killing of George Floyd in the US and systemic racism everywhere, but they may finally force us into a thorough examination of the British empire and its role in slavery.Born in Bristol in 1636, Colston was the preeminent slave trader of his day, and during the time of his involvement with the Royal African Company – between 1680 to 1692 – it is estimated that the company transported some 84,000 Africans to the Caribbean and the Americas, of whom 19,000 died on the way. In the decades that followed Colston’s death in 1721, another slave merchant rose to notoriety in Bristol: Samuel Span. Span headed the influential Society of Merchant Venturers, which had once petitioned parliament to lift the monopoly granted to the Royal African Company over the slave trade so that it could join it. Span resonates on a personal level, because not only did he own the Caribbean island to which my African forebears were brought to work as slaves, he himself was also my ancestor. Those clamouring for change must also make demands on behalf of those – in the Caribbean and beyond – who have been hard-hit by men like Colston and Span. They must begin to speak of reparations. In 1763, at the conclusion of the seven years’ war, France ceded to Britain the islands of St Vincent and the Grenadines, which included tiny Union Island, where my family have lived for generations. Span, then a naval chief, was rewarded with the island, giving him absolute control over its slaves. He set about transporting more Africans on Bristol-crewed vessels to work on the island’s cotton plantations. The island’s slave population reached a peak of 635 in 1822. Span named the island’s two main settlements after places in Bristol: Clifton and Ashton. Today, my late grandmother’s home faces the sea in Ashton, Union Island.When Span died in 1796, his vast fortune – which includes Union Island, and ran into the millions of pounds in today’s money – was left to his English children. Other descendants who worked to create the family’s wealth would not see a single penny. In the early 2000s I moved to Clifton, Bristol, for my undergraduate degree at the University of Bristol, which was founded with money derived from the sale of tobacco produced on plantations in the American south that once held slaves.That the university had failed to address the racism and elitism upon which it was founded seemed glaringly obvious. There were only a handful of black students. And over the three years I spent there, I did not see a single black academic. Last year the student union called on the university to commission an independent review into “institutionalised racism” after a slew of incidents.Racism still appears to loom large in Bristol’s recent history, too. It is worth remembering that the city’s African-Caribbean community, inspired by Rosa Parks’s refusal to give up her seat on a bus in Alabama, led a boycott of the local bus service in 1963, protesting against widespread racial discrimination in employment and housing.The boycott is considered to have been an influence on the passing of the landmark Race Relations Acts of 1965 and 1968, which outlawed racial discrimination in employment and housing – a reminder that direct action has brought about change. Failure to tackle poor housing and the over-policing of black communities were among the factors that led to riots in April 1980 in St Paul’s, an inner-city neighbourhood with historic importance for the African-Caribbean community (now the area is undergoing rapid gentrification). Today, Colston’s toppling and subsequent drowning in the waters of Bristol’s harbour, where his slave ships once docked, should force the city – and the country as a whole – into a wider reckoning about racism and empire.In fact, the process has already begun: last year the University of Bristol appointed Olivette Otele as professor of the history of slavery, with a mandate to investigate the institution’s and the city’s links to the trade. But what about Union Island? Unionites continued to live in poverty long after slaves were freed in 1838. The island had to wait until the 1980s to gain access to electricity, just after St Vincent and the Grenadines won its independence from Britain. Labelled the Tahiti of the Caribbean, because of its lush volcanic silhouette set in sparkling coral-laden seas, Union attracts an international cast of wealthy jetsetters – even though its 3,000 or so permanent residents find themselves grinding through a third year of recession. Unemployment and poverty are rife. Statues in tribute to the likes of Colston and Span in British cities rightly seem abhorrent to many. But the material damage they wrought was felt far beyond these shores – it is high time that the damage is fully accounted for. We in the UK need to begin a national debate on reparations for slavery, a crime which heralded the age of capitalism and provided the basis for racism that continues to endanger black life globally. It will follow a landmark US Congress hearing on the topic last year. Protesters making demands of British institutions and examining the individuals who profited from slavery, must also follow the money trail to places such as Union Island, and start calling for reparations. Our vision for change must be global because Britain, after all, was a vast empire. • Amandla Thomas-Johnson is a freelance foreign correspondent based in Dakar, Senegal