Donald ‘Reche’ Caldwell, a wide receiver who played seven NFL seasons with the San Diego Chargers, New England Patriots and Washington after a decorated career at the University of Florida, was shot and killed in what has been described as a ‘targeted’ robbery attempt on Saturday night in Tampa, his mother confirmed to TMZ. He was 41. Tampa police, who did not publicly identify the shooting victim after responding to the call late Saturday night, said the incident “does not appear to be a random act”. “He was set up,” Caldwell’s mother, Deborah, told the Tampa Bay Times. “I’m going to follow it all the way to the end. ... You get killed right here in your hometown? You made a statement here, and y’all just took it away from us?” Caldwell was selected by the Chargers in the second round of the 2002 NFL draft and played three seasons in San Diego before signing with New England, where he became Tom Brady’s most prolific wideout in 2006 with a team-high 760 receiving yards – only to be released after dropping two passes in a 38-34 loss to the Indianapolis Colts in the AFC championship game that helped cost the Patriots a trip to the Super Bowl. He retired from football after a one-year stint with Washington with 152 receptions for 1,851 yards and 11 touchdowns in 71 career games. Caldwell’s younger brother, Andre, who played eight pro seasons with Cincinnati and Denver, told ESPN The Magazine that he believed Reche was permanently wounded by his abrupt ending with the Patriots, saying: “The way the game kicked him to the curb like an unwanted stepchild hurt him mentally and haunted him.” A number of Caldwell’s former teammates offered tributes on social media as the news of his passing spread on Sunday. Wes Welker, who played alongside Caldwell in San Diego and New England, tweeted: “Reche’s smile and attitude were contagious! My thoughts and prayers go out to Bubba Caldwell and his family!” So sad to hear this! Reche’s smile and attitude were contagious! My thoughts and prayers go out to Bubba Caldwell and his family! https://t.co/CXBUdKGFJk Added former New England teammate Benjamin Watson: ‘Always kept us laughing and light hearted. Always had the biggest smile. Always had the greatest stories. Sad to hear about the passing of my teammate Reche Caldwell. May the Lord comfort his family during this time.”