They walk in, single file, a good distance apart, dressed in tailored Melbourne black. They sit down at tables, giggling a little at the novelty of it. The view is the same as it ever was at Montalto, one of the best-known restaurants and wineries on Victoria’s Mornington Peninsula. Lime-green grass, vines naked for the winter, the thin sun basking everything in soft beauty. John Mitchell watches the first lunch sitting of the day, on the first weekend his restaurant has opened since March. It’s offering lunch only on weekends for now: three sessions at 11am, 12.45 and 2pm. You have to book and there’s a set menu for $49. This room can hold 75 people. Now it will serve just 18. “We don’t want to rush it,” Mitchell says. “We are going to be careful and cautious and not overwhelmed, and then take it one step at a time.” As restaurants emerge from hibernation, a conversation is under way. The reopening is welcome but limited numbers are unsustainable in the long term. In Victoria, 20 diners can be in an enclosed space, a number that will possibly increasing to 50 towards the end of June; in New South Wales, it’s 50. In both states there must be 4 sq m of space for every person. That’s tough but industry figures including the Adelaide chef Duncan Welgemoed have raised deeper challenges: “The hospitality industry as we knew it was terminal anyway,” he wrote for Guardian Australia. The pressures were too great, the margins too thin, the expectations of diners for cheap food unsustainable. Mitchell, 77, is a former Nabisco executive who spent his money after he “retired” buying land at Red Hill and establishing Montalto nearly 20 years ago. It’s grown, with a fine-dining restaurant, a piazza overlooking the vines and award-winning wines. Montalto runs an annual sculpture competition. Writers visit to give talks and musicians perform on the grass. One review said the winery, a little over an hour from Melbourne, offered a “checklist to all the finer things in life”. Mitchell is not panicking about the pandemic, and he’s not complaining, but he does think this is a wake-up moment. “People keep harping on the fact that there’s no money in the industry or the margins are very thin,” he says. “Well, that’s dead right. There isn’t a lot of price elasticity. And [there’s] more and more expectation of wonderful food on the plate. It’s a tough gig to be in.” I don’t know exactly what those shifts are going to be but there’ll be some shifts He has 60 staff on jobkeeper, the employment retention program that pays employees $1,500 a fortnight. The shutdown in March involved a huge effort to bring down costs as revenue collapsed by between 80% and 90%. There were all kinds of shifts required, some of which Mitchell thinks will endure. Like many restaurants, Montalto offered takeaway for the first time – simple meals like pizzas. He thinks that will continue. It has put more attention into selling wine online. Some of the kitchen and front-of-house staff were trained in how to prune grape vines and work in the extensive produce garden. Some of the changes will be long-lasting for Montalto, and perhaps for the broader industry. “I don’t know exactly what those shifts are going to be but there’ll be some shifts,” Mitchell says. “The demand for à la carte fine dining to a very intricate level I’d say is very limited.” That trend began before the pandemic but will accelerate, he says. “I’m not talking about dumbing down. Having fresh, healthy, generous, tasty, well-presented food in a beautiful setting is to me more important than having a plate in front of you which if you were doing a review you would comment on the beauty of the positioning of the ingredients.” The new set menu, according to Mitchell, is “the deal of the century” but it’s more upmarket piazza-style than fine dining, offering bread, olives, grain and cauliflower salad, chargrilled spatchcock and dessert. Montalto was one of the first places on the Mornington Peninsula to become a “destination” restaurant. That’s common now, with regional restaurants around the country attracting top chefs keen to experiment with locally grown, seasonal produce, and diners willing to travel. It poses challenges. In places like the peninsula there is a big reliance on weekend visitors, and crowds go up and down with the seasons. For now, Mitchell is certain Montalto will get through this, if a little altered. It’s a well-established place with a good reputation. Jobkeeper has helped but is due to stop at the end of September. That will be a crunch moment. Mitchell estimates that the business has lost between $500,000 and $600,000 a month due to coronavirus, and deferred payments to suppliers are looming. He looks around the room and says that even when 50 people are allowed, the 4 sq m rule means that no more could fit in. That has to be addressed, he says. But he’s comfortable with the slow, cautious reopening. “You can quibble about different things but I think the rate has been fine,” he says. “I don’t want it to go faster. I want it to be measured and steady and successful.” Mitchell and his wife, Wendy, are less involved in a daily way with the business now but he’s found that during the pandemic he has stepped back in, holding daily Zoom meetings with his senior team. He’s had time to think about what he’s built and how important it is to him and his staff. Often around sunset, he and Wendy wander around the grounds and visit the gardens to pick some figs. “We wonder at the beauty of what we’ve got,” he says. • Postcards from the pandemic looks at how everyday Australians are coping with immense changes coronavirus has brought to their lives. We’d like to hear your story about how you are managing during this crisis. Email: postcards@theguardian.com