Crowds descended on a church in Texas to honor George Floyd after he returned to his childhood home town of Houston to be laid to rest next to the mother he called out for as he lay dying with a police officer’s knee on his neck. Radio stations observed moments of silence. City officials paid tribute on social media. In New York, traders at the stock exchange paused for eight minutes and 46 seconds to mark the length of time the Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin was filmed kneeling on Floyd in May, impervious to the man’s pleas for breath and mercy. And outside the church in Houston, where the civil rights advocate Al Sharpton was to deliver the eulogy, dozens gathered to honor their fellow Houstonian, wearing shirts reading “I Can’t Breathe” and “Black Lives Matter”, having invoked the metaphor at a memorial service in Minneapolis, where Floyd was living when he was killed, that society in America broadly needed to respect the black communities and “get your knee off our necks”. “The way his life was taken, he wasn’t able to go through due process,” said 35-year-old bystander Savant Moore. “We have to stand together to make sure that doesn’t happen again.” Since he was killed on the Memorial Day holiday, 25 May, millions around the world have watched the viral video of Floyd’s death, taken by a witness on the sidewalk, and listened to the 46-year-old struggling to say “I can’t breathe” as he was restrained by three officers on the street during an arrest attempt. The death of Floyd, who was black, after being pinned down by now-former officer Chauvin, who is white, has sparked protests across the US and elsewhere, and loud calls for reform to eradicate systemic racism and brutality in policing. In Houston on Tuesday were members of Congress, members of Floyd’s family and members of the public. Ben Crump, the civil rights attorney representing Floyd’s family, earlier led a press conference with families of other victims of violent policing: Pamela Turner in Texas, Trayvon Martin in Florida, Ahmaud Arbery in Georgia, Eric Garner in New York, Botham Jean in Texas, and Michael Brown in Missouri. A few representing many more. “George Floyd’s life mattered, and black lives matter,” Crump said. Floyd’s killing sparked demonstrations around the world, with millions taking to the streets to protest against police brutality and systemic racism, despite the risks of the coronavirus pandemic. Protesters claimed some victories – charges for all four now-former officers at the scene of Floyd’s killing, and a high bail for Chauvin, the officer who kneeled on his neck. The case is seen by many as the tipping point in an unjust system waiting to be tipped. Alongside Floyd’s name, demonstrators in cities across the country shouted the names of their own who had been killed by law enforcement officers, the overwhelming majority of whom kept their jobs and never faced criminal charges. The officers who shot and killed 26-year-old Breonna Taylor as she slept in her Louisville, Kentucky, apartment in March have not been charged. The weeks of unrest devolved into instances of looting and destruction on the fringes that prompted some jurisdictions to impose unprecedented curfews and call in the national guard for support. But the protesters coast to coast in the US have been mostly peaceful. Like Floyd’s killing, instances of use of force by police at these protests were captured on video. Officers filmed assaulting protesters were charged. Calls to defund police departments have led to some action by local leaders around the country, a change from recent history. In Minneapolis, the city council secured a veto-proof majority in favor of dismantling the entire troubled police force. Among the line of buses and cars at the front of the church, Savant Moore shared a sentiment he posted on Facebook in the aftermath of the killing: “It really took a global pandemic with no sports, no concerts, no vacations to get the world to sit down and have no choice but to watch what’s really happening to black people in America with zero distractions.” Moore was an army ranger who had been deployed four times, once in Afghanistan and another time in Iraq. But he said it was here in his home country that he is scared. “I have a college degree from Howard University. I’m an entrepreneur. And this is my America. Every day, I still have to worry about whether people will not like me because of the color of my skin, or if I might not make it back home to my children because I encounter a police officer for a routine traffic stop.” Joe Biden, Donald Trump’s Democratic opponent in November’s election, visited Floyd’s family on Monday and delivered a remote message at the funeral, calling for change. “Today, now is the time, the purpose, the season to listen and heal,” Biden said. “Now is the time for racial justice. That’s the answer we must give to our children when they ask why. Because when there is justice for George Floyd, we will truly be on our way to racial justice in America.” Tuesday’s funeral service was for family and friends only, but Tamecia Dogbe, 41, still drove two and a half hours from Austin with her sister and 12-year-old niece to stand outside the church in the sweltering heat and humidity. “It feels like a part of history, something I want my niece to witness,” she said. “Ten years from now, she might be able to see this in a history book.” She can only pray that in 10 years, these sort of funerals – services for victims of police killings – will be a thing of the past as well. Floyd’s golden casket was due to be taken by horse drawn carriage to the cemetery, where he will be interred next to his late mother.