Julia Kubis’s 81-year-old mother – a diabetic for nearly six decades – wanted to visit the Church of St Thomas Aquinas in Brooklyn, New York. Kubis conceded, even in the face of a coronavirus pandemic that has killed more than 109,000 people in the US so far, has ravaged the elderly and immunocompromised, and has claimed the lives of up to two dozen parishioners of St Thomas Aquinas and its sister parish. Her mom agreed to wear a mask and blue nitrile gloves, albeit amid some griping. “She hasn’t been out of the house in almost three months, and the first place I took her was here,” Kubis told the Guardian. Days prior, Kubis had requested the day off from work and walked a mile and a half to St Thomas Aquinas so she could be there when it reopened to the public. “It’s so pretty, it’s so special and so spiritual, just to be able to gaze at the crucifix and pray there,” she said. “It’s a wonderful feeling.” Covid-19 transformed traditional religious services and ceremonies into potential breeding grounds for infection, forcing churches across the United States to shut their doors for weeks. Political directives that temporarily barred large-scale assemblies, including faith-based gatherings, incited outright defiance and contentious court battles among pockets of the country’s Christian majority. One high-profile case, brought by a California church, has already divided the supreme court. Now, despite America’s confirmed death toll outpacing that of every other country, US towns and cities are beginning to re-emerge from a months-long hibernation. So too are religious institutions, encouraged by Donald Trump. Back in March, Trump envisioned teeming churches for Easter Sunday, even as the number of coronavirus cases swelled in the US. In the thick of the pandemic’s first wave, his suggestion ignited swift backlash and ridicule. And yet, in late May, Trump echoed his previous statements when he proposed that houses of worship be given the go-ahead “to open right now, for this weekend”. In an assertion that baffled legal experts, who challenged whether the president commanded such unchecked authority, Trump claimed he would “override” governors who ignored his call. “Some governors have deemed liquor stores and abortion clinics as essential, but have left out churches and other houses of worship,” Trump said at the time. “It’s not right, so I’m correcting this injustice and calling houses of worship essential.” Many state governments have moved to ease restrictions, though not necessarily in reaction to Trump’s decree. In New York, for example, governor Andrew Cuomo has said now said churches, temples and mosques can open at 25% capacity. But just because churches can reopen doesn’t mean they will, or that the community will feel prepared to immediately follow. Much like hair salons and universities, churches have shown they’re dangerously susceptible to the virus’ contagion, with sometimes lethal consequences. In hard-hit New York City, where some congregations have seen dozens of members die, the opportunity to welcome parishioners again has been met with uneven enthusiasm. In midtown Manhattan, St Peter’s Church remains closed. The church lies inside a building with art galleries, a theater company and a senior center. Its ministry is focused on communities that have been especially vulnerable during the pandemic, including immigrants, essential workers and people diagnosed with HIV/Aids. More than 40 members have died of coronavirus. “We are not at a place yet to have any kind of in-person gatherings,” said Christopher Vergara, the congregation’s president. “It’s still a very difficult moment, and I think that the protocols have to be very, very well established and respected. If not, we’ll continue with infection in our communities,” said Pastor Fabián Arias, who serves St Peter’s Spanish-language members. Felix Pinzón, a member of the church, lost his 45-year-old brother and his livelihood to the virus. He understands why St Peter’s hasn’t reopened yet, and the chaos one bad move could cause. But because of the hardship he’s endured, he also wants to be close to God. He likened mass to a football game: watching on TV isn’t quite the same as watching from the field, live. “You feel a different energy when you’re together with the rest of the people,” he said. In a YouTube video heralding St Thomas Aquinas’s reopening in Flatlands, Brooklyn, bright yellow caution tape blocked off some pews, and clear blue X’s marked others to enforce social distancing measures. Between 20 and 25 parishioners have died at the church and its sister parish during the pandemic, said Father Dwayne Davis, the pastor there. It’s still a very difficult moment. I think that the protocols have to be very well established and respected Among the casualties were a grandfather and father, who died around the same time and left behind a young son. Their family lived just two houses down from the church; Davis had baptized the boy years back. “That was really devastating for us,” Davis said. When the Brooklyn diocese initiated a phased reopening, Davis was nervous about long lines of people wanting to come back. But almost a week after the cavernous church started operating at limited capacity and reduced hours, those expected crowds never came. Only a handful of people filed in at once for private prayer. Amid all the uncertainty, families cancelled their baptisms and weddings. “I don’t think they’re gonna all run at the same time,” Davis said. “It’s gonna take baby steps to really make this happen, which I think is a good thing.” Kubis, a lector at the church, texted others, encouraging their return. But during a week of visits, she never once counted even 10 worshippers inside. “That’s the saddest part of all,” she said. “I thought I’d see people waiting to get in, but I think people are just really still too afraid.” Barely nine miles away, in the neighboring borough of Queens, is St Bartholomew Parish. The church sits mere blocks from Elmhurst hospital, a health care facility that was overwhelmed by the virus early on and quickly became symbolic of the country’s struggle to control the pandemic. At least 68 of Saint Bartholomew’s parishioners have died from Covid-19, and in the diverse immigrant community, out-of-work dishwashers and house cleaners without access to government benefits are going hungry. The local funeral home is still so overrun with corpses that it can’t host wakes, said Father Rick Beuther. The parish reopened for the first time last Monday morning, and Beuther was so excited the night before that he knew he would have a hard time sleeping. He opted against yellow tape markings around the church because he felt they were too evocative of a murder scene. In a more generous interpretation of the 10-person quota, he planned to allow ten families in at once. “I’m just trying to create an ambiance in the church, just to give people a little refuge, that it’s not a police state,” Beuther said. “We’re not gonna be patrolling, you know what I mean?” Although the three churches have come to disparate conclusions around reopening, they have rallied round their people during a time of incredible need. Through food vouchers, grocery deliveries and a new food pantry, they’ve been feeding members of the community. And as pastors blessed bodies, contacted the local hospital chaplain, or held intimate funerals, they cared for both the dead and the living, even amid a crippling public health emergency. “We are essential,” said Vergara. “We aren’t closed. And we continue to do the work of the church.”