French judges have sentenced the uncle of Syria’s leader, Bashar al-Assad, to four years in prison after convicting him of money laundering and misappropriating Syrian public funds to build up a €90m property empire in France. The court also ordered the confiscation of Rifaat al-Assad’s assets in France as well as property worth €29m in London. Assad, 82, a former military commander, was tried in December but was not present in court because of health reasons, his lawyers said. He has denied the charges. The case is one of a series of so-called “ill-gotten gains” trials being brought in France against members of foreign ruling families. The first involved Teodorin Obiang, the son of the president of Equatorial Guinea, who is appealing against his 2017 conviction and three-year suspended sentence for corruption. Rifaat al-Assad, nicknamed the Butcher of Hama for in 1982 allegedly commanding troops behind the brutal crushing of an uprising in central Syria, has been under investigation in France since 2014. He has denied any responsibility for the massacre. He left Syria in 1984 after organising a failed coup against his older brother, Hafez, the father of the current Syrian president, who ruled from 1971 until his death in 2000. Assad moved to Europe with his four wives and 16 children, and is said to split his time between Paris and London. His fortune is believed to include two Paris townhouses, one more than 3,000 sq metres (30,000 sq ft), a stud farm, a chateau and office space in Lyon. Prosecutors told the court most of the properties were acquired through offshore companies in Panama, Curaçao, Liechtenstein and Luxembourg. Assad and his family are also believed to own a £10m Georgian mansion off Park Lane in central London, and more than 500 properties in Spain. These were seized by the Spanish authorities in 2017, and the Spanish high court is pursuing him and 13 others in his entourage on allegations of money laundering, saying they acted in a “concerted manner” to hide the property acquisitions. Assad has denied all charges, saying most of his fortune was given to him by the Saudi royal family. His lawyers said on Wednesday they would appeal.