Liverpool are hopeful of agreeing a contract extension of at least three years with Georginio Wijnaldum after positive talks. The midfielder’s deal expires in June 2021 and he is keen at stay at Liverpool, whom he joined from Newcastle in 2016. The Netherlands international, who will be 30 in November, is in line for a contract to 2024 or 2025, with wages not expected to be a stumbling block. Wijnaldum wanted assurances he would continue to be regarded as a key player before entering into discussions to extend his career at Anfield. He has played 28 times in the Premier League this season to help Liverpool close on a first top-flight title in 30 years. The news comes as another Liverpool midfielder, Adam Lallana, confirmed he has agreed a short-term contract extension in order to finish the season at Anfield. The 32-year-old’s current contract was due to expire on 30 June but the England international has agreed to stay on and be part of Liverpool’s expected title celebrations. Lallana told Liverpool’s official website: “I am really pleased to have the chance to finish this season – it means a lot to me and my family. Of course, one of the big personal positives about committing to this short-term extension is that I will now get to say goodbye to the people who mean so much to me in the right way. “The gaffer has been different class and we’ve had an honest conversation about what my role will be in the remaining weeks. I want to contribute in the most positive way possible that helps him and the team, not just for the remaining matches of this season – but also what they’ll need to consider for next. “I’m totally at peace with what that looks and feels like, and I know the role I’ll be playing for this team will help in what’s going to be an extraordinary period – the likes of which none of us have ever experienced.” The manager Jürgen Klopp added: “I know how highly sought after Adam is in this moment by other clubs who want him for next season, so for him this is a commitment to us and we are very appreciative to him for it. This is absolutely how it should be, too, because I am so pleased he will be with us to finish the job this season and have the farewell he deserves so much.”