I am beyond joy. This means so much to me, my family and the city. My father Bo Tsang died of Covid in May. He was a massive Red and was waiting for this. Despite having memory loss, he never missed a match. He loved Firmino and Van Dijk. Last night I took my camera and walked into town. I drank Prosecco from a water bottle. The police let us celebrate with minimal intervention. The chants. The joy. The smiles. The hugs. The victory parades as a very young child were such a regular part of our life. If it wasn’t Liverpool, it was Everton. Then Hillsborough happened. And our city was devastated. We came close so many times after. My Dad used to take me to Anfield throughout the nineties. The spice boys. Stevie G. The nearly misses. The Newcastle game. The cups here and there. Then glimpses, never the domination of the past but little glimmers of hope. You cannot overestimate how important this win is to Liverpool, the city. Gina Tsang, 39, Art Teacher, The Bluecoat gallery, Liverpool I was a few months old the last time we won. It’s no exaggeration to say I’ve waited all my life to see this. It’s been a lifetime of hope, faith, anticipation, disappointment, anger, acceptance, resentment, belief, nihilism, vindication, victory and defeat. I don’t think any club has such a relationship with triumph and disaster. It’s going to take time to process this achievement and reconcile the emotion. Growing up with the stories of the great Liverpool sides of the 70’s and 80’s, I found it hard at times to look forward when they was a very real sense that our best days were behind us. Today I look at this team and I don’t think there’s any limit to what they can achieve. It’s easy to eulogise Klopp but he’s the driving force of this. Liverpool have worked hard, come from adversity, they’re not individual superstars but they have come together to become what they have. I lost my father, Edward George Foulkes to Covid in April, and Liverpool was a helpful light at that time – we were on the precipice of something good. Football is trivial but it’s also everything. With this team, now we’ve won it, it feels like a birth, a renaissance rather than we’re done. Jack Foulkes, 30, works in project management, Liverpool It feels wonderful and overwhelming. After winning against Crystal Palace on Saturday, I felt touched by everything the club has fought for over the years. It had been really building up to something great, and I’m really proud of the players and all the staff that have made it possible. Nothing can take away this feeling. It’s a running joke now that as LFC fans we are used to being disappointed. But since Klopp joined he’s been getting the team into back-to-back finals. That’s when I knew something special was brewing. It felt like a perfect culmination of everything we’ve hoped for. I will properly celebrate later when Jordan [Henderson] lifts the cup, but for now I have been singing Campeones and bouncing with another fan at the office. Dwiyanto Fadjaray, 40, editor, Jakarta, Indonesia The win felt inevitable from December but, now that it is here, I can scarcely believe that Liverpool are champions of the Premier League. Just writing those words give me goosebumps. How did this happen? How did the team that had so many heartbreaks and near-misses and even tragedy of Shakespearean proportions (the slip) manage to become a perpetual engine of entertainment and joy fuelled by the fire of self-belief? I am beyond happy, and I hope Jurgen Klopp stays as our manager until he’s ready to retire 30 years from now. The day that Klopp was signed – I remember saying that Liverpool should never ever part ways with this man. It almost feels like all the those weekends and nights of watching Liverpool somehow have led, in their own minuscule way, to this day. And that feeling is quite something. I celebrated with my wife and 18 month old daughter at home due to lockdown. My wife has been with me through my time as a Liverpool fan, so she knows well what this means to me. I tried explaining the whole thing to my daughter who looked at me intently through my 10 minute explanation. Then pointed at my shirt and said ‘red’. I think she got it. Sujan Dhar, 36, mechanical engineer from India, now living in Seattle, USA Last time Liverpool won the Premier League, I had just entered high school and Albania was still a communist country. Ironically, 30 years later I live, of all places, in south Manchester. Almost all of my church members and friends are Man United fans, but they still like me. The first game I vividly remember was the European Cup Final that took place on 30thMay 1984. Liverpool’s opponents were AS Roma who had the advantage of playing at home (Stadio Olimpico). The circumstances in which I watched that game were surreal. There I was with my dad and our next-door neighbours watching the game in secret on Italian television. We could only watch it muted, for fear of other neighbours reporting us to the secret police as foreign TV was considered to be propaganda. Though winning last night is terrific, it felt strange, as it happened on a game when the team weren’t playing and during the pandemic. But Liverpool have not peaked, it’s still a work in progress. Julian Kastrati, 45, pastor from Albania, now living in Manchester I’m ecstatic, vindicated, proud of my team and my city. Last night I was torn between jumping up and down crying or laughing, my son lives in the same street as me and when I went out, there was nobody there, so I danced in the middle of the road and I saw the neighbours hugging in the window, then they came out and other people came out with flags and banners and somebody in the next street set off fireworks. I’ve followed them since the days of Bill Shankly and Bob Paisley, they were glory days. Following that we had peaks and troughs and some times I felt like giving up on them. However I’m a scouser through and through and they were my team. This moment makes me feel like I’m ten foot tall and so proud I could burst. My dad would have been proud too. My 90 year old mother is over the moon. There’s that saying that Liverpool is the world in one city. Well Liverpool FC is the world in one team. How could you not be proud of them. Pauline Baker, 71, retired, Liverpool