Monday is always an important day at the south London warehouse in Streatham – the food parcels going out will have been sorted the previous week and are ready for our drivers. We’re then left with a big empty space to fill with donations, either from local retailers or individuals. Typically we deliver about 80 food parcels a day to people in need, whether that’s because they’re waiting for their first universal credit payment, or are unable to claim benefits as part of their leave to remain in this country. That’s 8.5 tonnes every week and it requires a huge amount of organisation. My day as a driver for the food bank begins at 9am, sorting the first deliveries, and I’ll generally do a few drops on my way home at 6pm. It’s a long day but I love it. When the lockdown was announced, the core team at the food bank managed to completely overhaul the system in three days. We went from distribution centres where people came to collect food, to home deliveries. It’s been a superhuman effort and we’re always looking at ways to make it more efficient so we can help more people. We’re very lucky to have support from British Gas, who have asked their furloughed drivers to get involved helping with deliveries. The company’s covering the cost of petrol and vehicle maintenance. I get a call from a woman, Linda, who asks for a food parcel to be delivered. She and her four children have coronavirus. Unable to get to the shops, she asked a neighbour to go for her. The neighbour took her card and drained the small amount in Linda’s bank account, leaving her without any money or food. The van I drive has food bank branding, so I frequently get stopped around town by people asking how they can get our help. We’re definitely seeing a general rise in need for food parcels across the board, but in particular from people who are new to the system. Lots of people aren’t sure how to access the help they need. We see so many people who have fallen through the cracks of state help – in low-paid, zero-hour jobs that are no longer tenable. Often the people we help have the added issue of a language barrier that can stop them seeking support. When I get to someone’s door and see children who are so excited to have food in the house, or when I deliver to someone vulnerable who’s been isolating and not seen a new face for a long time, I can see how important the job is. I leave the food on the doorstop but then step back and have a chat. Albert is one such recipient. He is approaching retirement age and has dementia. He called me as his debts were getting too high to afford food alongside the repayments. He tells me: “I was ready to call it a day. When there is no food, it becomes unbearable.” A lot of the places we deliver to are in extremely wealthy boroughs, and that’s where the disparity and inequality hits you. I worked in Calais in 2016 and 2017, distributing food, firewood and warm clothing to refugees where I also saw the disparity. These people came from a huge range of backgrounds, and many were highly educated. What they had in common was the need to escape from both the horror happening where they came from and their current situation. To see people do without food is such a difficult thing. It’s a basic need. I’m so proud to be part of a team doing such amazing work. The reality is we shouldn’t need food banks in this country. It’s a tragedy that we do. The writer works for Norwood & Brixton food bank. All names have been changed In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.