Why is race still a risk factor in the 21st century? Whether it is the merciless killing of George Floyd by police in the US or the brutal detention and deportation of Windrush black British citizens by the Home Office in the UK, the reality for black and minority ethnic people remains the same: racism is a matter of life and death. As though we needed a reminder, these racial inequalities have been emphasised by the alarming data on Covid-19 hospital cases and death rates among minoritiesin the UK (and the US). Almost every source of data on Covid-19 cases and deaths analysed by ethnicity – the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre, the Office for National Statistics, the Institute for Fiscal Studies and Public Health England among others – has found that minorities are over-represented. The message is clear: we may all be weathering the same storm, but we are not in the same boat. There is some variation in which ethnic minority groups – Bangladeshi, Pakistani or black Britons – emerge as the most vulnerable, depending on whether the data is drawn from hospital admissions alone or community and care home coronavirus cases. Analysis based on all Covid-19 deaths in England and Wales between early March and mid-May reveals that mortality risks are highest for black women and black men (1.4 to 2 times higher compared with white groups) after taking into account region, population density, socio-economic and household characteristics. Conversely, analysis of hospital Covid-19 deaths in England, Scotland and Wales by ethnic group shows that people from a south Asian background – including people of Bangladeshi, Indian and Pakistani heritage – are most at risk of dying after being admitted to hospital with coronavirus (with a mortality rate in hospital 20% higher than that of white groups). More alarmingly, a recent study in the British Medical Journal found that more than half of pregnant women hospitalised with Covid-19 across the UK between 1 March and 14 April were from an ethnic minority background. Black women are at particularly high risk as they are 8.1 times more likely than white British women to be hospitalised with Covid-19 during pregnancy. When you consider that black women are five times more likely to die in childbirth compared with white British women, the risks are terrifying. The question of why minorities appear to be at greater risk of dying of Covid-19 is contentious: it is clear that there is some confusion between causes and symptoms. And last week, a long-awaited (and withheld) report by Prof Kevin Fenton, Understanding the Impact of Covid-19 on ethnic minority groups, highlighted a pervasive concern: that the experience of racism, discrimination, stigma, fear and trust among black and ethnic minority communities, including key workers within the NHS, has made them significantly more vulnerable. A survey by the Royal College of Nursing in May showed that only 43% of ethnic minority nurses had reported that they had received adequate eye and face protection equipment, compared with 66% of white British nurses. What has often been misunderstood is that it’s not the fact of being a different “race” to the ethnic majority that has put black and minority ethnic people at higher risk, it is the experience of racism and racial inequalities, which are themselves largely the consequence of political and economic policy. The experience of longstanding systemic racism and structural inequality has meant that black and ethnic minority ethnic people are more likely to be among poorer socio-economic groups, and more likely to be over-represented in areas, housing, occupations and jobs that expose them more to coronavirus, and less protected. It has also meant that they more likely to have comorbidities (such as hypertension, diabetes or coronary heart disease) that make people more vulnerable to Covid-19. There is no one gene for being Asian or black, so comorbidities are not necessarily a result of biology: they are more likely to be a result of circumstances – of where you live, of what you can afford to eat, how much green space you have, how much exercise you’re able to take, and the stresses and strains in your life. Pre-existing economic and social inequalities have also meant that some ethnic minority groups have been worse hit financially by Covid-19 than others. Child poverty rates in Britain have been worsening since 2012, but currently nearly half of black children and well over half of children from Pakistani and Bangladeshi backgrounds are living in poverty. Covid-19 has amplified these inequalities. Bangladeshi, Pakistani, black African and black Caribbean men are all much more likely to have had jobs in shut-down industries, due in large part to Bangladeshi men being concentrated in the restaurant sector and Pakistani men being concentrated in taxi driving. Furthermore, a 10-year update to the Marmot review in February 2020 highlighted that people from disadvantaged backgrounds or deprived areas, and ethnic minority backgrounds, were not only more likely to have underlying health conditions because of their disadvantaged backgrounds, but they were also more likely to have shorter life expectancies as a result of their socioeconomic status. Bangladeshi men and Pakistani women were identified as the groups with the lowest life expectancy. Overcrowding is also a prevalent pattern among some ethnic minority groups. Only 2% of white British households in England have fewer bedrooms than they needed, in contrast to around 30% of Bangladeshi households, 16% of Pakistani households and 15% of Black African households. These overcrowded households are also much more likely to be multigenerational, making social distancing and self-isolation much more difficult, and increasing opportunities for within-household coronavirus transmission. All of this evidence points to one of the most urgent aspects of this epidemic – yet the government appears to be lagging far behind. When it comes to addressing issues of structural inequality or racism, the government’s kneejerk reaction is to commission a review. But at some point, someone somewhere will need to address the hundreds of recommendations on how to address racial inequalities that are still awaiting action. Social change does not come through rhetoric alone. • Dr Zubaida Haque is interim director of the Runnymede Trust