These Wolves belong in high-class company. They climbed to fifth thanks to Leander Dendoncker’s crisply struck goal, closing to within four points of Chelsea in the chase for Champions League qualification. Aston Villa, meanwhile, remain in deep peril in 19th position having played a game more than their rivals. Dean Smith said Villa’s lack of sharpness was partly down to fatigue. “We are the only team to have played four games in 11 days [since the restart]. Why this match wasn’t played on Sunday or Monday I don’t know. It’s ridiculous to ask players to play so many games in a short period.” At least Villa will have a longer rest before their upcoming matches. The problem is they are away to Liverpool and then Manchester United at home. Nuno Espírito Santo praised his players’ drive after they made it three wins and three clean sheets since the league’s resumption. “The most difficult thing to do is sustain your standards and remotivate yourself for every game, but the boys are showing their team spirit,” he said. Smith has more problems than he has been able to solve. He spent the lockdown mending Villa’s rickety defence. They have certainly looked more secure but that improvement has come at the expense of attacking menace and the chances of grinding their way to survival never looked bright. Even if there were no fans present to demand boldness in this derby, Smith opted for a theoretically more adventurous approach, deploying two strikers and a midfield diamond with Jack Grealish at its apex. As a result, Villa’s default setting was not as deep as in their recent outings and they played slightly more in the opposing half. But creativity was grievously lacking and penetration always looked beyond them. Rui Patrício was not forced into a save until the 37th minute, when he stopped a testing low shot from the left corner of the box by Grealish. Wolves had come closer to opening the scoring before that. In the 19th minute Ørjan Nyland needed two attempts to stifle the danger after a near-post header by Raúl Jiménez following a clipped free-kick from the right by João Moutinho. Five minutes later Matt Doherty loped down the same side, used Diogo Jota as a decoy and darted into the box, riding Marvelous Nakamba’s tackle with the help of a favourable ricochet. Feeling his luck was in, Doherty chose to eschew options in the centre and shot from a difficult angle. He blasted into the side-netting. Too often this season Villa have been at their most vulnerable when seemingly out of harm’s way, with sudden individual mistakes a painful affliction. So it was bizarre but not particularly surprising to see, in the 42nd minute, Nyland attempt to throw the ball to a teammate but fumble it to Jota instead. Mercifully for Villa’s goalkeeper, the forward’s first-time shot from 20 yards flew over the bar. The first 15 minutes of the second half were notable only for their listlessness. In that sense there could hardly have been better scene setting for the arrival of Adama Traoré, whose introduction on the hour promised a shift into turbo-drive. Two minutes later, Wolves took the lead thanks to a rapid counterattack. Traoré was inevitably involved, he and Jiménez combining on the left wing before the striker delivered a cross. Jonny Otto received it and laid it off to Dendoncker at the edge of the area, leaving the Belgian to rasp a low shot into the bottom corner. Dendoncker had an opportunity to double his tally five minutes later but shunted the ball wide of the back post after meeting a corner kick. Still Villa looked blunt. Their striking duo, Keinan Davis and Mbwana Samatta, toiled in vain, getting no change out of the defenders and paltry service from their teammates. The hosts did press back as the game wore on but never made Wolves truly uncomfortable. Otto made another important block in the 73rd minute to foil Grealish. When Anwar El Ghazi, introduced in place of Davis, deposited an inviting cross to the back post in the 84th minute, no Villa player could take advantage. Thus Wolves have beaten Villa home and away in a top-fight season for the first time since 1962-63. They may not have the chance to do it next season.