Skateboarding has been my life since I was eight years old. Before I knew how to stand up, I would sit on my cousin’s old board and roll down the hills of Cáceres, my home town in Spain. My mum always worried I’d break a bone. When I was at university, I heard about Skate-Aid, an organisation that builds skateparks for children in disadvantaged communities. I’ve always wanted to make a positive impact on the world, and if there was a way to do that through skateboarding, then I was in. Every project is different. In Rwanda and Kenya, I worked with orphans and children from very poor backgrounds. In Namibia, I taught kids who were visually impaired. Part of the reason skating is good for kids psychologically is that it is challenging. If you want to learn a new trick you have to practise, and if you persevere, you’ll get there. The philosophy is simple: get up and try again. It’s an amazing form of self-development. I got a call in early 2019 to say the next project would be in Syria. I was apprehensive. While I was living in Africa, I got used to walking past soldiers with guns slung over their shoulders, but Syria was a different story. When I told my family I was considering going, they thought I was crazy, but I wanted to see the country with my own eyes. We flew to Lebanon and drove the rest of the way, taking a half-destroyed road from Beirut to Damascus. We stopped at military checkpoints every few minutes. I was anxious – I didn’t understand Arabic, and all the men I could see were armed. But our driver would hand over water or cigarettes, and we’d be allowed through. Our destination was Qudsaya, a city 7km west of Damascus that was held by rebels until 2016. As we drove through the centre, the scars from the fighting were everywhere: roads were puckered with cracks; buildings covered in bullet holes, in which birds had built nests. I was immediately touched by people’s generosity. The area where we were building the skatepark had been largely destroyed, except for a small concrete structure where a family of four were living. They’d had to flee their home in the north. The mother was so welcoming, bringing us tea and coffee every morning before she even knew why we were there. It took our group 28 days to build the park. We’d get up early and spend all day working. Most people didn’t understand what we were doing at first – this was going to be Syria’s first skatepark – but once we showed them videos of our other projects, they wanted to help. We stayed in a house close to the site, and on the walk home from work we would buy falafels and fruit from nearby shops. Someone would always start speaking to us in French, Italian or German, because many locals had family abroad. The first time we went in, they wouldn’t let us pay. No tourists had been to the city in years and they were grateful we were there. We only had power once a day, so there wasn’t much electricity or hot water, but everyone in the area was in the same situation. We didn’t need luxury; our days were so exhausting we’d just come home and sleep. There were moments I’ll never forget. One night I was woken by a huge blast and told there had been a missile strike on a military store 50km away. You fear for your life in those situations, but then you look at the children and realise this is what they face every day. The kids would watch us skating down the street and were so excited. When we finished the bowl, I put them on a board one by one and they were amazed by the feeling of rolling along. One boy was a natural; he had never skated before, but within a week he was already dropping in from the edge. It can take kids months to do that. We stayed for two months, then local volunteers took over. I keep in touch with the kids on Facebook and they send me videos of the tricks they’ve learned. When we left, there were 400 children involved, going to the park every day. I’ve been to so many countries, but Syria was special. I built friendships with people even if we could only communicate with gestures. I’ll go back as soon as I can. • As told to Pip Cook. Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com.