Britain’s economy is likely to suffer the worst damage from the Covid-19 crisis of any country in the developed world, according to a report by Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. A slump in the UK’s national income of 11.5% during 2020 will outstrip the falls suffered by France, Italy, Spain and Germany, the Paris-based thinktank said. Germany’s decline in national income (GDP) will be 6.6% this year while Spain’s GDP will fall by 11.1%, Italy’s by 11.3 and France’s by 11.4%. Highlighting the task awaiting the UK government as it seeks to ease the lockdown, the OECD ruled out a V-shaped recovery for the global economy, saying the path back to previous levels of activity would be hampered by long-lasting effects of the pandemic. The forecast of an 11.5% drop in GDP this year is an improvement on the 14% fall in national income put forward last month as a likely “scenario” by the Bank of England, but will add to pressure on the government after the OECD found that even countries that have come under severe criticism for their handling of the pandemic will fare better than the UK. Brazil, the US and Sweden are on course for contractions in GDP of 7.4% or less, the OECD said, while China is likely to suffer a 2.6% drop and Russia an 8% fall. Defining the global situation as “dire”, the OECD said increases in government debt and the level of outstanding loans of private firms and banks will accompany the downturn which will average 6% across the world. Laurence Boone, the OECD’s chief economist, played down the significance of the UK contracting by the biggest margin in its 2020 economic outlook. She said it was difficult to be precise in the current situation and the exercise showed the UK would suffer a similar contraction to Spain, France and Italy, which were also forced to impose severe lockdowns. She warned that the world economy was “walking a tightrope” and could suffer a second outbreak of the virus, triggering a second lockdown and a more severe recession. The UK government has said that these five tests have to be met before they will consider easing coronavirus lockdown restrictions: Offering a forecast for both a single and double lockdown, Boone said the UK economy could contract by an unprecedented 14% if the government needed to impose a second lockdown later this year. She said: “These scenarios are by no means exhaustive, but they help frame the field of possibilities and sharpen policies to walk such uncharted grounds. “Both scenarios are sobering, as economic activity does not and cannot return to normal under these circumstances. By the end of 2021, the loss of income exceeds that of any previous recession over the last 100 years outside wartime, with dire and long-lasting consequences for people, firms and governments,” she said. Fearing an escalation of trade restrictions that will hamper the recovery, Boone said governments must prioritise cooperation, both in finding a vaccine and in providing targeted support for hard hit industries. “Global cooperation to tackle the virus with a treatment and vaccine and a broader resumption of multilateral dialogue will be key for reducing doubt and unlock economic momentum,” she said. “The international community should ensure that when a vaccine or treatment is available it can be distributed rapidly worldwide. Otherwise the threat will stay. Likewise, resuming a constructive dialogue on trade would lift business confidence and the appetite for investment. “Governments must seize this opportunity to engineer a fairer and more sustainable economy, making competition and regulation smarter, modernising government taxes, spending, and social protection. Prosperity comes from dialogue and cooperation. This holds true at the national and global level,” she added.