An Australian national has been sentenced to death by a Chinese court for drug trafficking, a verdict that could further inflame tensions between Beijing and Canberra. Already troubled relations worsened recently after China reacted furiously to Australia’s call for an independent investigation into the origins of the deadly coronavirus pandemic. The man, named in Chinese pinyin as “Kamu Jielaisibi” and identified by Australian media as Cam Gillespie, was handed the death penalty by Guangzhou intermediate people’s court on Wednesday, according to a notice posted on the court website. According to Chinese local media, the man was arrested at Guangzhou Baiyun airport, north-west of Hong Kong, in December 2013 with more than 7.5kg of methamphetamine in his checked luggage. The single-sentence notice revealed no details about the defendant besides his Australian nationality and that he would have all his property confiscated. Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said it was providing consular assistance to Gillespie. “We are deeply saddened to hear of the verdict made in his case,” a Dfat spokesperson said. “Australia opposes the death penalty, in all circumstances for all people. We support the universal abolition of the death penalty and are committed to pursuing this goal through all the avenues available to us. “Owing to our privacy obligations we will not provide further comment.” China is Australia’s largest trading partner, as well as a major source of lucrative international students and tourists. In an apparent response to the coronavirus probe demand, Beijing imposed tariffs on Australian barley, and issued travel warnings to tourists and students over virus-linked racism against ethnic Asians. The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, has dismissed allegations of racist treatment of Chinese as “rubbish”, adding that his government would “never be intimidated by threats” or “trade our values in response to coercion from wherever it comes”. Last year, separately, China sentenced two Canadian nationals to death on drug trafficking charges during an escalating diplomatic row with Canada over the arrest of top Huawei executive Meng Wanzhou. Canadian attempts to plead for clemency for Robert Schellenberg and Fan Wei have so far not been successful. China has additionally detained two Canadian nationals, including a former diplomat, on spying charges, widely believed to be in retaliation for Meng’s arrest. China imposes the death penalty for drug smuggling, and executions are usually carried out by firing squad.