Modelling studies estimate that up to 40% of coronavirus infections could be transmitted by people who have the virus but no symptoms, a World Health Organization expert has acknowledged after her comment on Monday that asymptomatic transmission was “very rare” caused a stir. But Dr Maria Van Kerkhove maintained that real world data suggested it could still be a rare event when she took part in a social media Q&A to explain herself, saying she was not referencing the modelling studies when she spoke. Van Kerkhove, the WHO’s Covid-19 technical lead, said that on asymptomatic transmission “we don’t have the answer yet”. Her comment at the WHO’s Monday press briefing about its rarity was based on two or three studies following up the contacts of asymptomatic people, and unpublished data shared by countries or experts with her organisation. “I used the phrase ‘very rare’ and I think that it’s a misunderstanding to state the asymptomatic transmission globally is very rare. What I was referring to was a subset of studies. I was also referring to some data that isn’t published,” she said. She said she did not mention the estimates of up to 40% because “those are from models”. It was certain that asymptomatic infection happened, she said, but how often was still one of the great unknowns about Covid-19 that scientists were investigating. One of the complications is that some people who appear to be infected but asymptomatic are in fact pre-symptomatic – they can go on to, for instance, experience a mild course of disease. “They may not register that they are sick,” she said. One of the critical issues is how long people are infectious before they develop symptoms and how infectious they are in the days before they are clearly ill. “It is not only who is transmitting to others, but when,” she said. “The data is very preliminary.” They were working with countries to get answers, she said. It is possible that asymptomatic people do not have high levels of virus in their body. The main source of infection is droplet transmission through the air, but until people are ill enough to be coughing, for instance, they may not so easily transmit the infection. “It appears that people have more virus in their body around the time they develop symptoms,” she said. That was different from the experience of Sars, which was an infection lower down the respiratory tract. “With Covid-19, the infectious pathogen is in the upper airway where viral loads are peaking just as you are starting to feel sick,” said Dr Mike Ryan, the head of the WHO’s health emergencies programme. There was a period of time when even a professor of infectious diseases would not be able to tell somebody they were ill without a test for the virus, he said, and they might feel fine but be at their most infectious. That was why the disease spread so easily, he said. “If this virus was easy to stop, everyone would have been doing it. It is not easy to stop,” he said. But, he added, “it is not so transmissible that you can’t suppress it”.