Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The fatalities from Covid-19 worldwide have reached 388,499, according to US-based Johns Hopkins University. The US accounts for 107,979 deaths, the highest of any country, followed by the UK with 39,987. South Africa said it had recorded 3,267 novel coronavirus cases in 24 hours, the biggest increase since the pandemic hit the country. Africa’s biggest industrial power has a total of 40,792 infections, the health ministry said. It saw a rise of 56 deaths for a total of 848 fatalities. Around 600 people attended a funeral mass in the Spanish city of Seville to honour those who have died in the pandemic. Many of the seats in Seville’s cathedral were reserved for families of the victims and authorities in what is one of the largest gatherings in Spain since the lockdown began in March. Turkey will impose a weekend lockdown in 15 cities as part of efforts to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus, the interior ministry said. The ministry said bakeries and certain shops could operate during the lockdown. Turkey has had 167,410 Covid-19 cases, according to Johns Hopkins University. New York governor, Andrew Cuomo, said several days and nights of demonstrations in the state after the killing of George Floyd could accelerate the spread of the coronavirus and urged protesters to get tested. He noted that an estimated 30,000 people have protested in the state. Cuomo said: “I’m not a nervous Nellie, I’m just looking at the numbers.” France reported 44 new coronavirus deaths in hospitals over the previous 24 hours, taking the official tally to 29,065 fatalities. The health ministry tally does not include deaths in care homes and other institutions with the latest inclusive update not due till 9 June. Nationwide, France now lists 1,163 serious cases of Covid-19 who are in hospital on a ventilator, 47 fewer than Wednesday. There were 88 new coronavirus fatalities in Italy on Thursday, up from 71 on Wednesday, bringing the death toll to 33,689. New infections increased by 177, down from 318 within the last 24 hours, according to the figures from the civil protection authority. Italy, which lifted restrictions on inter-regional travel and opened its borders to European tourists on Wednesday without the requirement to quarantine, has so far registered 234,013 coronavirus cases. Compulsory face-covering measures should be introduced to “all areas” where social distancing is not possible in the UK, the British Medical Association (BMA) said. Transport secretary Grant Shapps announced that wearing a covering will be mandatory on public transport in England from 15 June. However, face-covering measures can help prevent the spread of Covid-19 and “should not be restricted to public transport”, according to BMA council chair Dr Chaand Nagpaul. Three of the authors of an article that found hydroxychloroquine increased the risk of death in Covid-19 patients have retracted the study after concerns about the quality of the data in the study. They said that Surgisphere, the company that provided the data, would not transfer the full data set for an independent review and they “can no longer vouch for the veracity of the primary data sources.” The study was published in British medical journal the Lancet last month. Donald Trump said he took a two-week course of the drug as a preventative measure. Just 38 of a predicted 36,000 food boxes have been delivered under a $9.3m government initiative designed to deliver emergency food supplies to older Australians isolating. The Department of Health acknowledged that “demand is low” for the $9.3m program, which had delivered only 38 emergency boxes nationwide in the six weeks since it was announced.