Centrica, the owner of British Gas, is to slash 5,000 jobs as it looks to cut costs by simplifying its business structure. The company is removing three layers of management, with more than half of the job losses falling on leadership roles, including half its 40-strong senior team. The restructuring is expected to take place in the second half of 2020 following staff consultations. The group says it also intends to simplify its employee terms and conditions, as it has up to 80 different employee contracts, while some agreements have been in place for over 35 years. Centrica’s chief executive, Chris O’Shea, said the company’s “complex business model hinders the delivery of our strategy”, adding that the group had lost half of its earnings in recent years. “I truly regret that these difficult decisions will have to be made and understand the impact on the colleagues who will leave us. However, the changes we are proposing to make are designed to arrest our decline, allow us to focus on our customers and create a sustainable company,” O’Shea said. The coronavirus lockdown has virtually halted international travel and tourism, hitting airlines and other travel companies, aerospace and auto manufacturers and oil companies hard. As these businesses adjust to dramatically reduced revenue projections, job losses are starting to mount alarmingly. More than 40,000 redundancies have already been announced across these sectors, with more than 10,000 likely to be in the UK. Rolls-RoyceThe jet-engine manufacturer has confirmed that 3,000 job cuts, of a planned 9,000 worldwide, will be made in the UK. Rolls-Royce will make the first round of redundancies through a voluntary programme, with about 1,500 posts being lost at its headquarters in Derby, as well as 700 redundancies in Inchinnan, near Glasgow, another 200 at its Barnoldswick site in Lancashire, and 175 in Solihull, Warwickshire. BentleyThe luxury carmaker intends to shrink its workforce by almost a quarter, slashing 1,000 roles through a voluntary redundancy scheme. The majority of Bentley’s 4,200 workers are based in Crewe in Cheshire. Aston Martin LagondaThe Warwickshire-based luxury car manufacturer has also announced 500 redundancies. BPThe oil company plans to make 10,000 people redundant worldwide, including an estimated 2,000 in the UK, by the end of the year. The BP chief executive, Bernard Looney, said that the majority of people affected would be those in office-based jobs, including at the most senior levels. BP said it would reduce the number of group leaders by a third, and protect the “frontline” of the company, in its operations. British AirwaysThe UK flag carrier is holding consultations to make up to 12,000 of its staff redundant, a reduction of one in four jobs at the airline. BA intends to cut roles among its cabin crew, pilots and ground staff, while significantly reducing its operations at Gatwick airport. Virgin Atlantic Richard Branson’s airline is to cut more than 3,000 jobs, more than a third of its workforce, and will shut its operations at Gatwick. EasyJetThe airline has announced plans to cut 4,500 employees, or 30% of its workforce. RyanairThe Irish airline intends to slash 3,000 roles and reduce staff pay by up to a fifth. P&O FerriesThe shipping firm intends to cut more than a quarter of its workforce, a loss of 1,100 jobs. The company, which operates passenger ferries between Dover and Calais, and across the Irish Sea, as well as Hull to Rotterdam and Zeebrugge, will initially offer employees voluntary redundancy.  The restructuring and redundancies are O’Shea’s first major announcement since he was given the top job at Centrica, initially on an interim basis, where he was previously chief financial officer. In March, just before the coronavirus lockdown was imposed, the group ousted its former chief executive Iain Conn, who had been due to leave later in the year, amid deepening financial problems at the firm. O’Shea said his first three months at Centrica had been focused on “navigating the company through the Covid-19 crisis and identifying what needs to change”. Centrica slashed shareholder payouts after reporting a £1bn loss for 2019, while profits at British Gas slumped by 71% to £137m last year, the lowest level in the energy supplier’s history, sending the group’s shares to a 22-year low. At the time, the company blamed the government’s energy price cap for the collapse in profits at British Gas and said it had created an “unsustainable market”. Centrica’s share price has fallen by over 50% since the start of the year, and was 4% lower on Thursday morning. Centrica’s announcement adds to the mounting toll of corporate job cuts, including 9,000 redundancies at engineering firm Rolls-Royce, and the loss of 10,000 roles at BP.