Succession manages to combine the two key quarantine trends of 2020: insanely rich people acting in their own horrible self-interest, and really nice houses that you wish were yours. As such, it has been nothing short of a tragedy that we haven’t been able to watch the show in the UK while under lockdown, since it fell off the streaming services some time after season two aired. However, miracle of miracles, this error has now been rectified. As of today, both seasons of Succession – our Fleabag and Chernobyl-beating best show of last year, remember – are available to view again. If you haven’t seen it, you should close this page now and steam through every episode as a matter of urgency as there are spoilers ahead. But if you have, let me whet your appetite for a rewatch with a list of Succession’s best moments. The first season of Succession had to accomplish a lot. Not only did it have to introduce you to some of the worst, least sympathetic characters ever seen on television, but it also had to make you care about them. When the season finale managed to do this, it was like watching a magic trick. Kendall Roy – the closest thing the series has to a lead – involves himself in a fatal Chappaquiddick-style car crash. In the immediate aftermath, he finds himself being sucked back into his father’s toxic orbit, and his total helplessness in the moment is enough to smash your heart into dust. How unlikable are the Roy family? Glad you asked. We get a good idea of their complete awfulness in the first episode, when the family take a spontaneous trip to play a game of softball; an operation that involves fleets of helicopters and luxury cars. But when they find themselves a player short, Kieran Culkin’s smarmy Roman approaches the young son of some onlookers and promises him a million dollars if he hits a home run. The boy fails, Roman rips up the cheque in front of him and you have a brand new worst enemy. In season two, though, Succession hardened its gaze. It wasn’t just the Roy family in its sights any more; it was the entire online-content industry. One subplot involved the acquisition of Vaulter, a vaguely Vicey/Buzzfeedy/Gawkery website that was kept afloat on an empty wave of pure clickbait. The headlines that ran on vast screens in the background were perfectly judged – “Wait, Is Every Taylor Swift Lyric Secretly Marxist?”, “This Tinder for Pedophiles App Sounds Like a Really Bad Idea”, “5 Reasons Why Drinking Milk on the Toilet Is Kind of a Game-Changer” – even if they did hit a little close to home for a man currently employed to write a listicle of TV show moments for the internet. People often call Succession Shakespearian, and nowhere was this more evident than with Boar on the Floor, a game instigated by patriarch Logan Roy in season two. The rules of the game are simple: you pick your emotionally weakest dinner guests, and force them to them crawl around on the ground making pig noises while you throw sausages at them and chant: “Boar on the floor”. It’s both a power move and a Guantanamo-level act of total humiliation. When lockdown lifts, try it with your friends. A genius move on the part of Succession was to fold in elements of Brian Cox’s life into his character. For instance, in the second season it became apparent that Logan Roy, like Cox, was Scottish. An entire episode was set in his hometown of Dundee. In most shows, this might be an attempt to humanise a monster, but not here. In one scene, Roman reveals that he has bought the Scottish football club Hearts as an ostentateous show of love and loyalty; Logan responds by telling him that he actually supported Hibs, and the wedge between generations becomes even bleaker. The characters on Succession are all so broken that even romance ends up rotten and curdled. In the episode Safe Room, Roman rings his father’s counsel, Gerri, to complain about nothing in particular, and they quickly fall into a bout of excruciating phone sex. “You disgusting little pig,” she tells him as he masturbates on his bed. “You are a revolting little worm.” Just to compound the awkwardness of the scene, Roman later proposes to Gerri. This is why you hire Brian Cox. At the end of the second season’s sixth episode, Logan learns that a skin-saving multi-billion-dollar deal he has long been angling for with his rival Nan Pierce has fallen through. For most of the series, Logan is the gruff puppet master. But as the rug is pulled from beneath him and he realises that he cannot talk his way out of it, he loses control and erupts in an orgy of genuinely frightening anger. “We haven’t finished! We haven’t fucking finished!” he screams at Nan’s car as it leaves, with such intensity you assume it will end in a heart attack. The man deserves all the awards going. “Bitches be catty/ But the king’s my daddy / Rock all the haters while we go roll a fatty / Squiggle on the decks / Kenny on the rhymes / And Logan big ballin’ on Hamptons time / L to the OG / Dude be the OG / A-N he playin’ / Playin’ like a pro”. In years to come, this will be the moment that Succession is remembered for. In the meantime, it just appeared on Spotify. Tom might be the best character on Succession, an outsider who married into the family and simply cannot keep up with all their craven behaviour. In the season two finale, set aboard a comically extravagant yacht, he finally regains a scrap of control. Scared for his job and publicly humiliated, with his marriage in tatters, Tom (played by Matthew Macfadyen) sits down next to Logan and – without saying a word – grabs a handful of his food and rams it into his mouth. “It’s so batty and odd and so Succession, that moment,” Macfadyen said after the episode. “Tom’s really at a low ebb. He thinks, Fuck it, you know?” Finally, here’s the moment that will vault Succession into the future. The season two finale ended with Kendall decisively breaking away from the clutches of his father, by holding a press conference where he finally told the world the truth about all of Logan’s wrongdoings. On its own, the moment was utterly explosive. But then we cut back to Logan, watching the conference from the yacht. His unknowable smile – maybe pride, maybe contempt, maybe excitement at finally having a worthy foe – could send Succession in any direction whenever it returns. • Succession is available on Sky and the streaming service Now TV