Thought-provoking series following Glenthorne school in south London as it embarks upon a programme to tackle unconscious racial bias. It is amusing at first: “This is the most fun racist game I’ve ever played!” says one kid as he completes a video task. But it soon becomes seriously uncomfortable as children become genuinely upset at being asked to separate along racial lines and associate negative words with certain ethnic groups. Tough but necessary. Phil Harrison We know judging other parents is a popular national pastime, but has it ever before been packaged for entertainment quite so explicitly? In this final episode, the remaining parent-couples take in each other’s children overnight, offering one last demonstration of their competing styles. Ellen E Jones Does the Viennese food scene really rival Paris? It’s a bold claim from food writer Rachel Khoo as she introduces Fred Sirieix to its charms. But does Khoo’s boast stack up? Obviously there’s strudel. But there’s plenty more besides, including a schnitzel which approaches haute-cuisine masterpiece status. PH Quakerism is a long-standing bastion of progressive politics, despite largely remaining under the radar. This intriguing documentary explores the role Quakers have played in everything from the abolition of slavery to the women’s rights movement. PH Tonight, Dan Jones is exploring the Leeds and Liverpool Canal which linked Yorkshire and Lancashire in the 19th century and took advantage of the thriving industries of both counties. On the back of the innovative waterway, Liverpool became the busiest port in the world. PH The penultimate episode of a football comedy that struggles to penetrate. The team have a caretaker manager, and chairman Will Arnett reacts to their opening loss by organising a doomed meet-and-greet with fans. The new sports psychologist, meanwhile, is predictably incompetent. Jack Seale Rafiki (Wanuri Kahiu, 2018) 2.20am, Film4Wanuri Kahiu’s drama was the first Kenyan film to feature at the Cannes film festival – and was then promptly banned for “promoting lesbianism” in its home country. It’s the bittersweet tale of Kena (Samantha Mugatsia) and Ziki (Sheila Munyiva), whose love is further complicated by being daughters of political rivals. Paul Howlett AFL: Sydney Swans v Western Bulldogs 10.30am, BT Sport 1. Aussie rules action from Sydney. Premier League Football: Chelsea v Manchester City 7.30pm, BT Sport 1. Pep Guardiola’s City visit Frank Lampard’s Blues. Golf: The Travelers Championship 8.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. From Cromwell, Connecticut.