Panic buying aside, it’s clear that many households substantially increased their food supplies in the last few months. It was early March – just shy of three months ago – that the supermarket shortages kicked in, and toilet paper, rice, pasta and legumes became some of the hottest commodities in Australia. Luckily, most food stocks have returned for many Australians (though remote communities are still struggling) – but the three-month mark is a good time to check your pantry for any hidden supplies you may have forgotten. Australia already has a food waste problem, with 5m tonnes of food going to landfill each year. This includes simple things, such as frozen food that has spoilt, or packed food that has past its use-by date. Any meat that was bought and frozen in March should be used soon. Even if you just grabbed a few packs of pasta or frozen peas, being proactive with your food stocks is the best way to avoid waste. Start by doing the following checks: Refresh your knowledge of the difference between use-by and best-before dates. Check the use-by dates on any surplus food, and sort by what will expire first. If a food is close to its expiry date, make a bulk recipe you can freeze or give to family and friends. Plan a few meals ahead and use defrosted meat and fish instead of buying fresh. Assess the amount of surplus you have and consider donating it. Check for local street or community food pantries, or check in with a food rescue charity or resource centre that may need supplies. We’ve rounded up a few ways to use up your iso-stock without repeating the same meals over and over again. Meat and Livestock Australia advise that, depending on the cut, most frozen meat will last between one and three months before the taste is impacted. So if you stocked up in March, it’s time to get thawing. Sausages, mince, chops and casserole cuts will spoil first, while larger pieces such as beef and lamb roasts, or whole chickens, can go for four to six months. If your cut has held its quality, happy days. If it has suffered some freezer burn, you can still eat it, but a little love will help with the impacted texture and flavour. For sausages, slip off the skins and turn the mince into a ragu with tomato and herbs, use as a base for an Italian-ish soup with white beans and kale, or try Nigel Slater’s grilled sausages with herbed chickpea mash. Replicate a football stadium-style hotdog at home and go condiment crazy. Casseroles cuts already get the low-and-slow treatment, so just opt for really flavourful recipes you can adapt – a chunky chilli con carne, perhaps, or a hearty beef bourguignon. We’ve made it, we’ve survived the pasta-pocalypse – which means you can have at those family-sized bags of penne stashed for “just in case”. Let’s assume that bolognese and lasagne have been done to death. These four classics – garlic, oil and chilli; carbonara; tuna with tomatoes and olives; and cacio e pepe – should be added into rotation. Then, it’s time to get a little retro. Revisit the steamy, cheese pasta bake, start adding handfuls into your broth-y winter soup, or double down on the carb factor with this insanely comforting pasta and potato one-pot. For those dreading the back-to-school lunch box, try a pasta frittata. Cook off some pasta, dump into a casserole dish with a few beaten eggs and fridge finds (cherry tomatoes, bits of cheese, bacon, herbs, leftover sausage – anything tasty, basically) and cover with cheese. Cook the whole thing in the oven until set, cool and slice into wedges for lunch. Flour! What a lovely thrill to see you back on the shelf, after months of side-eying everyone posting their flour-hungry sourdough starters on Instagram. Plain flour is the working horse of the kitchen, for breads, cakes, cookies and all the basics. Half a kilo of the stuff is all it takes to make a really great focaccia at home. Self-raising flour – perhaps bought in a slight panic, after the plain disappeared from the shelves – is slightly harder to use up. It’s plain flour with a raising agent added in, so think fluffy: cakes, scones, scrolls and Victoria-style sponges. Add a handful of firm green olive cheeks, good feta and herbs to savoury cheese scones, or make a classic batch to have with new season lemon curd and cream. Flatbread recipes may call for plain but you can easily sub in any kind of flour you like, including self-raising or wholemeal, and work to a basic ratio of 500g flour to 300g cold water. Flatbread is incredibly easy to make – many kinds can be made in 30 minutes or less – and is very tactile and kid-friendly. Do you have ideas to fight food waste a home? Tell us in the comments below.