A 27-year-old community activist who helped train police officers on implicit bias was shot with a rubber bullet while attempting to de-escalate a confrontation between police and protesters during a demonstration in the wake of George Floyd’s death. Derrick Sanderlin, who for years has helped train police officers in San Jose, was shot in the groin as he held a sign that said “WE R WORTHY OF LIFE”, suffering injuries that could leave him unable to have children. Sanderlin told ABC7 News, the first outlet to report the story, that amid an escalating protest on 29 May he saw police officers firing rubber bullets at protesters from close range, some of them young women, and stepped in. “I really just couldn’t watch it anymore,” Sanderlin, who is black, told ABC7. “And just kind of made like a parallel walkover, put my hands up, and just stood in the line of the fire and asked them to please not do this.” The video shows officers leveling weapons at Sanderlin, who raised his hands and made no aggressive movement toward officers. Moments later, police unleashed rubber bullets, one of which struck Sanderlin in the groin, rupturing a testicle. “I pause for a moment like maybe this isn’t, maybe this doesn’t hurt and falling afterwards is like the most painful experience,” he told ABC7. The injury required emergency surgery and doctors told him he may no longer be able to have children, he said. Sanderlin retained an attorney, Sarah Marinho, who plans to file a claim against the city and police. “They were aiming for a body part that is prohibited when using those type of riot guns. You’re not meant to aim at the groin or the head ever,” Marinho said in a statement. Sanderlin has worked for years with the police department in San Jose, a major city in the San Francisco Bay Area, training new recruits on how to recognize implicit bias and uphold procedural justice. In 2019, Sanderlin’s wife, Cayla, called her husband “the gentle dissenting voice in the community”, referring to his years’ long effort to revamp police practices. Responding to news of Sanderlin’s injury, the San Jose police chief, Eddie Garcia, pledged to investigate what happened. “Derrick has been a real leader in our communities’ efforts to reduce bias and discrimination through dialogue. I assured him we will be investigating this incident,” Garcia said in a statement, adding that the department is reviewing its crowd-control practices. But the incident left Sanderlin wondering how effectively his messages to police have landed. “To see how the protest unfolded really, really disappointed me,” Sanderlin told the Los Angeles Times. “Because I was holding the tension of already knowing what police relationships were like and also hoping for a change, hoping for something new and good. And it seems as if they [the officers] just didn’t get that message.” The San Jose police department has recently become the subject of intense criticism for its treatment of demonstrators who have flooded streets in the name of Floyd, who was killed on Memorial Day in Minneapolis police custody. One of its officers, Jared Yuen, is facing an internal affairs investigation after surfaced videos appeared to show him antagonizing and swearing at protestors. Thousands of community members have subsequently demanded the police chief fire Yuen. “What happened to Derrick Sanderlin was wrong,” tweeted the San Jose mayor, Sam Liccardo, adding that he proposed a ban on police use of rubber bullets and encouraged a review of police tactics. What happened to Derrick Sanderlin was wrong. Yesterday, I proposed a ban on use of #rubberbullets, joined by @chappiejones @CM_Magdalena @CMRaulPeralez @LTDiep, & public evaluation of tactics by SJPD during protests, & public release of video https://t.co/UwMF8DyckC(1/2). Licarrdo, however, has split from city leaders in Minneapolis and rejected calls to “defund police”, arguing the step would disproportionately harm communities of color. “We have the most thinly staffed police department in any major city in the United States, and we need to ask ourselves whether defunding is going to help those communities that have been victimized by systemic racism in this city and this country,” he told San Jose Inside. “I think the answer is no.”