It’s a little after 6pm on Saturday and the first half of West Ham v Wolves is coming to an end. There have been no goals and little action, and just as it seems as if something exciting may be about to happen, West Ham’s right-back, Jeremy Ngakia, overhits a cross so badly it drifts out for a throw-in. As it does, I sink into the sofa, press my fingers into my temple and seriously start to wonder whether I have taken on too much in too little time. Watch nine games across three days was the brief after the first set of post-lockdown Premier League fixtures were announced and like a dog starved of treats for three months, I lapped it up. But as with many things in life, the reality was not as great as the idea, and as Ngakia sheepishly jogged back into position at what was pretty much the halfway point of my viewing schedule I felt a real desire to do something – anything – that didn’t involve “the football”. But I stuck at it and ultimately watched everything on offer from the start of Norwich v Southampton on Friday evening to the end of Everton v Liverpool on Sunday night, and before going for a much-needed walk there is a desire (as well as professional requirement) to reflect on this most full-on way of taking in English football’s big return. The first thing to say is we’re going to have to pace ourselves. Yes it’s exciting all top-flight games until the season ends on 26 July are live but, trust me, consuming every one is not compatible with a healthy lifestyle, mentally as well as physically. Nor is it entirely palatable, because as was the case pre-lockdown some of the stuff dished up by the self-styled “most exciting league in the world” just isn’t very good and that is especially the case now given the rustiness of the players. There really was some poor stuff, with the Merseyside derby, the supposed main event, arguably the worst of the lot. Performances will no doubt improve and there is still a lot at stake at both ends of the table, so while nobody should watch every game they should certainly watch some, and if my three-day binge is anything to go by, the way the fixtures sound is going to be as much a talking point as the way they play out. The pros and cons of artificial crowd noise was a constant topic of conversation on social media and something I thought about, and reacted to, throughout my virtual journey from Carrow Road to Goodison Park. You simply cannot get away from what a big deal it is to watch games either with the reactions of supporters who aren’t actually there or the authentic but uneasy echoes of an empty stadium. They are strikingly different and, in regards to the former, an advancement Sky, BT Sport and BBC have done well to have in place from the outset of Project Restart. Not that the process has proved perfect, and I for one found Sky’s artificial crowd noise somewhat incongruous on selecting it for the very first game back: Aston Villa’s goalless draw with Sheffield United on Wednesday. It came across as lacking in nuance and variation and far less authentic than the system deployed in the Bundesliga. Thankfully the sense of dissatisfaction didn’t last, and having stuck with the crowd noise for the game at Villa Park, as well as throughout the one between Manchester City and Arsenal later that evening, I found myself pretty much in tune with it by the time Norwich v Southampton kicked off 48 hours later. There was no doubt having crowd noise helped the nine games I watched feel more normal. The inclusion of chants from home and away fans was a particularly nice touch as were the specific sound effects that greeted key incidents, such as the perfectly timed and pitched “oooh” after Hugo Lloris made a smart save to keep out Marcus Rashford’s shot during Tottenham’s 1-1 draw with Manchester United. On some occasions the crowd noise was misplaced and, quite frankly, weird. But as performances on the pitch improve no doubt those in the audio studios will, too. In the meantime there is that option to turn off the sound, which in its own, stark way is equally absorbing. For starters there is the immature joy that comes from being able to hear players swear, something I was especially looking forward to and which was particularly noticeable during Newcastle’s 3-0 victory over Sheffield United. Being able to hear managers speak also proved fascinating at times, while more broadly watching games with no crowd noise meant being able to better gauge how exactly the teams involved were being affected by having to compete in near-desolate surroundings. For sure it took away some of the intensity normally present in a Merseyside derby, and in the preceding contest Villa appeared to be especially hindered by not having home backing as they desperately sought to hold a surprise half-time lead against Chelsea. There were other notable aspects of the coverage, most powerfully the sight of players and officials in each of the nine games taking a knee in a show of support for the Black Lives Matter movement, while from a scheduling point of view the first top-flight game to be broadcast on terrestrial television since 1992 was an obvious point of intrigue. The BBC had it and, overall, did a good job of helming a comfortable victory for Crystal Palace over Bournemouth. Before that, BT Sport had shown Brighton’s 2-1 win against Arsenal in that most unique of slots, 3pm on Saturday, and it will have done no harm to the cause of those wanting an end to the blackout that prevents games regularly being broadcast at that time of day that the match proved more than fit for TV; full of drama and, as far as Neal Maupay and Bernd Leno were concerned, conflict. Speaking of drama and conflict, Roy Keane’s rant during Spurs v United was something to behold. Utterly unsparing, needlessly violent, and for all the pearl-clutching that followed on Twitter and elsewhere, the type of thing you absolutely want to see more of in the next five weeks. What’s sure is that there is a lot more football to come, and while the amount I consumed on Friday, Saturday and Sunday was overbearing and often unsatisfying (not to mention awkwardly timed given it coincided with my wedding anniversary), there was enough there, in sights as well as sounds, to make the Premier League’s comeback a welcome and fascinating occurrence. Just don’t expect me to watch any of it for the next couple of days at least.