Britain’s top police officer has apologised for the actions of two Metropolitan police officers who shared “inappropriate” photographs of the bodies of murdered sisters in a London park. The Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, described being left “dumbfounded” by allegations that two of her officers took photographs at a murder scene and allegedly sent to a group of people that included members of the public. Nicole Smallman, 27, and Bibaa Henry, 46, were found stabbed to death in Fryent country park in north-west London this month. They were the daughters of a pioneering cleric, Mina Smallman, the Church of England’s first female archdeacon from a black and minority ethnic background. The sisters were reported missing after a birthday gathering on 5 June, and their bodies were found on 7 June. Police said several days later that they had been stabbed to death by a stranger who was likely to have been injured in the attack and who is still at large. The Guardian revealed on Thursday that a criminal investigation was launched after it emerged that two police officers had taken photographs at the double murder scene. The pair were arrested on suspicion of misconduct in a public office and suspended from duty. The allegations were reported to the Met’s directorate of professional standards, which referred them to the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC), which is investigating. Dick condemned the actions of the officers saying she was appalled by the allegations. “I don’t know all the details but if it is as it appears to be then it is shocking. It is disgusting and the whole of the Met would condemn what has happened here. If those officers’ actions have added to the families’ unimaginable distress, then I apologise from the bottom of my heart.” Scotland Yard said its directorate of professional standards was told last week about allegations that “non-official and inappropriate photographs” had been taken at the crime scene. Meanwhile, the IOPC, who described the allegations as sickening, said the pictures were allegedly shared with a small number of others, adding that the Met was “handling matters involving those members of the public who may have received those images”. The watchdog is separately investigating how the Met handled calls from the sisters’ relatives after they went missing. Henry and Smallman had gathered in a park with friends at about 7pm on 5 June to celebrate Henry’s birthday. They are believed to have stayed behind after their friends left just after midnight, and last had contact with family and friends at 1.05am. They were reported missing the following day. Police say phone calls to the two women went unanswered from about 2.30am. Detectives believe the killer suffered a significant injury during the attack. Dick said: “This is a horrible, horrible double murder of two beautiful young women. My heart goes out to their family. It is just appalling. We are doing everything we can to bring the people or persons to justice for this. We have an enormous investigation, very well resourced and using all the expertise not just in London but all across the country and beyond. “I am determined that we bring the killer to justice as soon as possible.” Anyone with information can call the incident room on 020 8721 4205, via 101 or tweet @MetCC quoting CAD 3160/7Jun. Alternatively, information can be provided online via this link. Information can be provided anonymously via the independent charity Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111.