Police have arrested a longstanding friend of Brazil’s president, Jair Bolsonaro, in connection with a corruption inquiry involving Bolsonaro’s son. Reports in the Brazilian media said civil police investigators arrested Fabrício Queiroz, a former police officer who has known Bolsonaro since the 1980s, on Thursday morning in Atibaia, a town 40 miles north of São Paulo. The property where Queiroz was arrested is reportedly owned by Frederick Wassef, a lawyer who represents Bolsonaro and his son Flávio. Queiroz previously worked for Flávio Bolsonaro, who is now a senator. A police chief, Osvaldo Nico Gonçalves, told the broadcaster GloboNews that Queiroz had been asleep when arresting officers arrived. “He handed himself over without any problems,” Gonçalves said. “The only thing he said was that his health was in a bad way.” In an indication of the potential significance of the arrest, the channel broadcast live helicopter images of Queiroz being taken into custody in a convoy of black police vehicles. Investigators also visited an address in northern Rio de Janeiro on Thursday morning to execute a search warrant relating to the same investigation. GloboNews said officers spent about an hour inside the uninhabited building, during which time the sound of hammers apparently being used to break walls could be heard, before the officers left with two bags of evidence. There was no immediate suggestion of wrongdoing on the part of the president. “I view today’s events with serenity,” Flávio Bolsonaro tweeted on Thursday. “Truth will prevail.” But his allies reportedly voiced concern he could be sucked into the snowballing scandal. The Folha de São Paulo newspaper described Wassef as a close confidant of the president and his family and reported that he had been in Brasília at Bolsonaro’s invitation just hours before Queiroz was arrested at his property. “Wassef is regarded as a kind of fixer for the president,” the conservative website O Antagonista reported, pointing to the lawyer’s regular appearances at the presidential palace. Cristiano Rodrigues, a political scientist at the Federal University of Minas Gerais state, said the morning’s events would not immediately end Bolsonaro’s administration or cause his impeachment. But they were yet another damaging blow to a president already suffering in the polls because of his globally condemned reaction to Covid-19, which has killed nearly 50,000 Brazilians, and because of investigations into key allies over the illegal dissemination of fake news. “The president is already very weak and this will weaken him further,” Rodrigues said. Queiroz’s arrest was particularly damaging for the rightwing populist who was elected in 2018, portraying himself as a Trump-style political outsider battling to rid Brazil of corruption. “The contrast between Bolsonaro’s words and his practices will be educational for voters – and this will erode his support base even more … because people will feel increasingly like they have been hoodwinked,” Rodrigues said. “Bolsonaro’s credibility, popularity and his ability to govern will be severely diminished.” Thursday’s operations are part of a long-running inquiry into suspicions that Flávio Bolsonaro ran a corruption racket during his 15 years as a state legislator in Rio. Queiroz is suspected to have played a key role in that alleged scheme. Reports in the Brazilian press have also linked Flávio Bolsonaro to members of a notorious death squad that one local broadsheet has called Rio’s “most lethal and secretive phalanx of hired guns”. The Bolsonaro family rejects the accusations.