Last month, with more time at home than usual, Charlotte Harris, one half of the landscape design duo Harris Bugg, decided to dig up her paved front garden in Newham, east London. “It was a discussion we’d been having for a while,” says Harris, who gardens with her girlfriend Catriona Knox. They’d already removed the paving from the back garden of their house, which is in a densely populated area of the city undergoing vast amounts of regeneration. “Around here every bit of green space feels precious,” she says. “Obviously there are parks, but I think each of us has to take responsibility for any space we have.” As you’d expect in a city, the new front garden needs to work hard to accommodate bins, bikes and a composting hot bin, but Harris is determined to plant as much as possible in the rest of the space, including a small tree (on the shortlist are a Sichuan pepper tree, hawthorn or a Chinese fringe tree) underplanted with perennials and bulbs. In an area where 50% of the front gardens have no plants, the ones that do provide moments of joy. Harris’s neighbours include a couple who boast “the most beautiful magnolia” in their shady spot, while on the opposite side another front garden has been turned over to an abundant veg patch complete with frames and climbing squash. “They were the inspiration, really,” adds Harris. “It’s a gift isn’t it? It’s the ultimate in gardening altruism, because your back garden is for you to enjoy, but your front garden is about improving everyone’s experience.” Over the past couple of months, the front garden has gained a powerful new significance. For many it has become the point of contact – a socially distanced greeting over the garden gate, a conversation with friends or family delivering supplies, or catching up with a neighbour you’d hardly spoken to before. It has become a safe place where you could still engage with the outside world or join in community events, such as clapping for carers. Earlier this year, before Covid-19 struck, the Royal Horticultural Society (RHS) highlighted this vital social space when it announced its Garden for Friendship, which was due to be unveiled at the Chelsea Flower Show in May. Designed by Jo Thompson, the scheme was based on an urban street with verdant balconies and window boxes filled with annuals, roses and beautiful multi-stem trees, as well as herbs and vegetables that could be shared with neighbours and friends. During the planning stages the RHS conducted a survey on gardening’s ability to combat loneliness, which found that it was the young who were suffering most, with 68% of 18 to 24-year-olds surveyed having felt lonely compared to 41% of over-55s. This semi-public space, the RHS argued, could help enormously. “Front garden spaces are so important,” says Thompson, whose concept was partly inspired by communal spaces in Italy with their clusters of pots and window boxes as well as the famously verdant Bonnington Square, in Vauxhall, south London. “They provide a common interest, a starting point for talking. But it also gives you the chance to be in the presence of people even if you don’t want to talk – just seeing someone is good for you.” Thompson chose plants that were easy and accessible including an exuberant mix of annuals – poppies, nemesia, cornflowers – that can be grown quickly from a £2 packet of seeds, and imagined that her gardens’ owners could leave out their excess flowers or produce – bunches of sweetpeas, punnets of tomatoes or a few courgettes. “That generosity, whether it’s sharing things or just knowledge, is so important,” she says. “More people are walking locally at the moment and they really do appreciate something pretty to look at. It lifts the spirits and changes the whole feel of a house and area,” says designer Alexander Hoyle, who creates gardens for private clients as well as displays for firms such as Hermès and Sibyl Colefax & John Fowler. He regularly posts images of his extraordinary flagstoned front garden on Instagram, charting its evolution through the seasons via an assemblage of chunky rattan planters, cast iron window boxes and trees, shrubs and roses. “Outdoor space in cities is at a premium, so why not use all you’ve got?” Similarly, the gardener and writer Arthur Parkinson uses his family’s front garden in Nottinghamshire for a year-round display in dolly tubs and galvanised baths (the shadier back garden is managed by his mum). Earlier this year his tulip extravaganza in rich Venetian colours was such a hit, it had its own segment on Gardeners’ World. “It’s really a defence against these dead zones of paving and Astroturf,” says Parkinson of his exuberant patch that is also a wildlife magnet. “People catch a glimpse of it and smile, and I hope it encourages them to just get pots and grow like mad.” Now that the spring bulbs are finished, he is busy creating a fresh display using snapdragons (the Sonnet series), Helichrysum ‘Dragon Fire’ and ‘Apricot Peach’ as well as sunflowers, dahlias, sweetpeas and the gorgeous cup and saucer vine, Cobaea scandens. In other words a t jungle of colourful planting that gives him a sense of privacy from his close neighbours. Meanwhile in Dorset Road, north London, a Victorian terrace of railway cottages originally built for workers at the nearby Alexandra Palace station, typifies how cottage garden style can work in urban settings. With fragrant herbs and shrubs, climbing roses, honeysuckles and, in some cases, raised beds for veg growing, these picturesque gardens are a soothing, restorative and sometimes productive antidote to city life. They are also great sources of inspiration and in a normal year this row of friends and neighbours would be opening collectively for the National Garden Scheme. This year would have been Dorset Road’s 12th year and they’ve raised almost £15,000 for the NGS’s charitable causes, which include Marie Curie and Macmillan Cancer Support. At this time of year, Instagram is rich with inspiration from other people’s gardens, as wisteria, clematis, honeysuckle and climbing roses flower in succession across the best-dressed homes. Front gardens, of course, have long been a source of pride, from formal Victorian townhouses to the sweeping front lawns of suburbia or the garden cities, such as Letchworth and Welwyn Garden City that emerged in the first half of the 20th century. “The front garden was traditionally where you showed the world your best face,” says Fiona Davison, head of libraries and exhibitions at the RHS. “And our version of what a front garden should be is very coloured by the Victorian ideal of a romanticised cottage garden.” As the suburbs developed in the 20th century it was labour-intensive bedding plants, such as petunias or exotic cannas and monkey puzzle trees, that were all the rage. “These were gardens where people would demonstrate their wealth, taste and respectability,” adds Davison. In other words, keeping up appearances. But the effects of these cared-for spaces on a sense of pride, community and wellbeing are huge. The RHS is currently trying to quantify the impact of front gardens with a controlled study in which the residents of one Salford terraced street are given money and advice to do up their front gardens. The study will monitor the mood and perceptions of those who pass by, as well as residents. In the past few decades, as car ownership has rocketed, the front garden has been usurped by characterless parking spaces. These grey areas are not just a depressing eyesore, they increase urban temperatures and diminish biodiversity by removing plants and habitat (in 2017 a study found that over the previous 20 years, butterfly numbers had fallen by 69% in built-up areas). Five years ago, when the RHS announced its Greening Grey Britain campaign, a quarter of our front gardens had already been paved over for parking. Covering front gardens with impermeable paving or concrete also contributes to flooding hotspots. When there are no borders, hedges and trees to soak up surface water it all drains into a system that was never designed to take such high volumes. In Edinburgh alone, around 11.3 hectares of green land (the equivalent to 15 football pitches) are lost each year, partly from the paving of private gardens. In 2018, researchers at Heriot-Watt university published a report on how valuable front gardens are in controlling surface water run-off and advised that homeowners should be encouraged to de-pave. Community groups, such as the Ealing Front Gardens Project, have formed to educate homeowners about the devastating environmental effects of paving; in 2017 they surveyed two years’ worth of pavement crossover applications in Ealing and found that 79% of these gardens had been almost entirely paved over. Last year grants were introduced to install home-charging points for electric vehicles, a green initiative but one which will further encourage front-garden paving. The car isn’t going anywhere, but there are ways to accommodate plants, wildlife and vehicles much more harmoniously. Jo Thompson has recently completed a gravelled front garden in the seaside town of Camber that has scattered, low-growing plants that can exist alongside cars. The plants seed themselves over time and create a more naturalistic look. What is certain is that the lockdown has given many of us time to take a look at the world on our doorsteps, whether we are lucky enough to have our own front garden or simply to look out and admire someone else’s hard work. “When I walk up the path of my neighbours’ garden that’s beautifully planted and green and cool I just think how much better you would feel if you came home to it each evening,” says Charlotte Harris. “What gardens have taught us during this time is how important they are at lifting our spirits and genuinely giving us all pleasure.” Focus on structure Think about evergreen foliage and seasonal interest. If you can only plant a few things into soil, then plant hedging, and add containers with other things in them. Nothing is low maintenance Do you have access to a tap or hose at the front? If not, choose slow-growing, drought-resistant plants, such as aeoniums, grasses, agave, succulents, lavender and rosemary (all of which will work equally well on a sunny balcony). Layer your plants Cover walls in climbers, such as clematis, honeysuckle or vines, add texture with grasses. Take the same approach to window boxes and choose trailing plants that will spread gracefully. Create a focal point Plants with structure – melianthus, euphorbias, ferns, Salix exigua – provide a dynamic backdrop and will work equally well in pots. Choose hard-working trees If you’ve got space, choose a tree for year-round interest. Hawthorn and crab apples offer spring blossom, fruits, autumn colour and stay a good size or can be pruned into a desired shape. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.