A 28-year-old man has been sentenced to 14 days in prison for outraging public decency after urinating beside the memorial to a murdered police officer outside parliament. Andrew Banks, of Stansted, Essex, was photographed on Saturday morning relieving himself near a plaque erected in memory of PC Keith Palmer during demonstrations in Parliament Square by football supporters and rightwing activists who claimed they were defending statues from Black Lives Matter demonstrators. He handed himself in to police on Sunday and apologised for his behaviour. Westminster magistrates court was told he was not aware of the memorial’s presence or its significance. He said he had drunk 16 pints during Friday night. Sentencing him, the chief magistrate, Emma Arbuthnot, said: “I accept that you are remorseful. You have explained you were so drunk you did not know where you were urinating. You explained that you had had 16 pints. You explained that you were with a group of football supporters who came up to Westminster to protect monuments. “The irony is that rather than protecting the monuments, you very nearly ended up urinating on one. The harm caused is the upset and shock felt by members of the public who saw the images that generated a strong sense of revulsion.” Arbuthnot said a community sentence would not be commensurate with the harm caused. She sentenced Banks to 14 days in jail, of which he will serve half if he shows good behaviour. She also fined him £128 and ordered him to pay £85 in costs. Banks appeared behind the glass security dock in court wearing a white T-shirt and grey tracksuit bottoms. He pleaded guilty to outraging public decency by relieving himself next to the memorial to PC Keith Palmer. Michael Mallon, prosecuting, said Banks was not spotted by police during the demonstration when he slipped through a barrier and urinated on the perimeter wall of parliament beside the plaque at 10.59am on Saturday morning. “Several rightwing and associated groups were in Parliament Square that day,” Mallon said. “Someone took a picture and that picture circulated on social media. The MP Tobias Ellwood [who attempted to save PC Palmer’s life in 2017 also tweeted it] saying this was abhorrent.” After returning home, Banks was confronted by his father. Banks admitted he was the man in the picture and said that he did not know what the memorial was for until his father explained it. The family then called the police. Mallon added: “Banks was with some football lads. He is a Tottenham Hotspur supporter. He had been out drinking all night and had consumed 16 pints overnight and that morning. He could not find a toilet. All the shops and bars were closed. He said he was very remorseful.” The court was told that in terms of sentencing precedents the only comparable recent case involved a woman called Kelly Martin who was jailed for seven months for deliberately urinating on a public war memorial in 2016. Stuart Harris, the solicitor representing Banks, said his client “apologised for what has rightly been described as abhorrent behaviour”. He added: “[Banks] simply did not know what he was urinating on. He has never been in trouble before. He says he has been battling with alcohol after a 10-year relationship came to an end. He was suffering from mental health issues.” Banks has no previous convictions. Palmer, 48, was killed while on duty during a terrorist attack near parliament in March 2017. In a separate case at the same court, a 35-year-old man from Sunderland who kicked a police sergeant in the back during Saturday’s protests has pleaded guilty to violent disorder. Daniel Allan, an electrician, had travelled to London, at the weekend. Jennifer Gatland, for the Crown Prosecution Service, said police had been deployed In order to prevent public disorder. “As a small group of police officers were walking though Bridge Street, they were abused and had missiles thrown at them. Mr Allan suddenly kicked out at Police Sergeant Richard Lambert [who was at the back column].“[Allan] kicked [Lambert] in the back with his right foot causing him to fall to the ground. This prompted the rest of [the demonstrators] to attack the officers.”Lambert picked himself up but was kicked again. His fellow officers circled to protect him. Allan escaped into the crowd but his picture was circulated. Because he was still wearing the “same luminous shorts”, he was easily identified and “captured” later on Saturday.In a statement read out to court, PS Lambert said he was in significant pain in his lower back.Eleanor Fraser, a barrister representing Allan, told the court that he felt the kick was in retaliation for having been struck by a police officer’s baton earlier in the day. She added: “He accepts that his actions were not lawful. His last conviction for violence was in 2010.”.The district judge, Nicholas Rimmer, told Allan, who appeared remotely by video link from Charing Cross police station, that his attack had “catalysed others to launch an attack on the police”. Denying Allan bail, the judge said that his actions were likely to result in a prison sentence of several years. He was remanded in custody to appear at Southwark Crown court for sentencing “at the earliest convenience”.