Jason Robert Brown’s musical is an ill-fated romance that reveals its sad ending right at the start. This lockdown version, made in isolation and streamed by the Other Palace, magnifies the pain of separation and feels peculiarly poignant in our times. It features a couple coming together, and splitting, over the course of a five-year relationship and tells its story two ways, with parallel narratives running at inverse trajectories to each other. Jamie, a successful writer, delivers his side chronologically, from their exhilarating first night together to marriage and break-up, while Cathy, a struggling actor, tells hers backwards, beginning after they have parted and tracing her steps back to the start. Lauren Samuels, as Cathy, and Danny Becker, as Jamie, recorded their parts in isolation, with Samuels also making her directorial debut. Clever film techniques are used to show the gap between their two stories; the image of an elated Jamie at the start of their relationship is superimposed, like a hologram, on to the vision of Cathy sitting sad and alone, at its endpoint, singing Still Hurting. A small image box is occasionally inserted on to the screen, resembling a thought-bubble, and signifies when one person is thinking, or dreaming, of the other. Romantic text messages are printed on the screen (“Had a great time. Can’t wait to see you.”) and backdrops are created imaginatively to conjure various settings, from hotel rooms to book launches and bars. There is only one moment of virtual meeting and that is on their wedding day. It is a touching scene in which they appear on a split screen, Cathy in a white dress, Jamie in a kippah, and they give the impression of interaction – she passes him a jacket, he twirls her around, they exchange rings and confetti falls on both their separate screens. Becker and Samuels are both energetic performers with distinctive voices but Samuels has an especially magnetising presence. The mix of rock and pop in the score sometimes sounds dissonant or whining, with only a piano as accompaniment, and the songs are not all instantly catchy, but they make up for it in drama and story, all strongly sung. The lyrics are astute too, deconstructing this marriage, step by step, to show all the things that have turned their love into a battleground, from career insecurities and rivalries to sexual infidelities. Its themes tread on similar ground to Noah Baumbach’s Marriage Story, presenting the emotional burden on both characters and making it hard for us to define any one side as the definitive ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ one. Not everything works smoothly in this isolated form; there is virtually no book, very little communication between the two actors, and without the flashbacks that feature the couple together and were such a vivid feature of the 2014 film adaptation (starring Anna Kendrick and Jeremy Jordan), the dual narrative arcs here feel more confusing and less discrete in their timelines. But for these losses there are bigger gains, from the many technical inventions to the encapsulation of all the shiny-eyed hope that a relationship brings at its start, and the everyday tragedy of its ending. • Streaming until 27 June. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.