We have spent more than a week experiencing turmoil, violence and soul searching following the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. Anti-racist groups mobilised people to support the Black Lives Matter movement across the US, and the rest of the world. In Britain, weekend protests culminated in Bristol with a statue of the slave trader Edward Colston being knocked from its plinth and thrown into the nearby harbour. Despair, pain and anger have been running high within black communities. The recent killings of Breonna Taylor, Tony McDade, and George Floyd echoed the deaths of Sandra Bland, Michael Brown and many others. These terrible events have ignited much more than mass demonstrations: they have triggered feelings that many within black communities have been suppressing for a long time, in order to simply be able to carry on living their lives. The issue of intergenerational trauma that is often explored when studying the history of slavery has resurfaced in the most violent way. What these killings and subsequent protests have also captured are the chaotic ways most former colonial powers have been avoiding an honest reckoning with the impact of the past. This is a story of the legacies that have shaped societies in the most dramatic way, putting black and brown people at the bottom of the social ladder. It is about the many forms of racism that have led to discriminatory practices. These have, in turn, prevented large swathes of society from having access to decent jobs or the ability to benefit from social mobility. Floyd’s death has pushed people into uncomfortable trenches, where they must reckon with a difficult history. In Britain, the death and protests were also followed by a mass show of solidarity from institutions and companies around the country. That seemed like a positive step – but it was also incredibly puzzling for those of us who have long been fighting for racial equality. Some of these institutions are routinely accused of lacking a multiracial representation among their staff members – while others continually fail to address endemic racism. The dissonance between these performative shows of solidarity and the inability to connect what was happening in the US with Britain’s own history of discrimination was uncanny. The disingenuous argument often used is that Britain doesn’t have the same record of police brutality – or that a series of race relations acts are proof that the UK is committed to racial equality. What is striking here is the failure to make a link between numerous pressing issues: the dispute over the release and findings of Public Health England’s report on the high number of coronavirus deaths within BAME communities; the ongoing Windrush scandal; the hostile environment and its inner contradictions; the lack of support for victims of the Grenfell fire; the resistance to teaching British black history and the continued glorification of the British empire’s legacies. Each deserves a full article, but let us try to disentangle the racialised knot at the heart of these stories and their links with policing black and brown bodies. Let us start by setting the record straight. Police brutality towards black people – as well as against Asian and other minority ethnic groups – has taken many forms over decades in Britain. We all remember the Macpherson report from 1999, following the murder of Stephen Lawrence in 1993, that established that the Metropolitan police was institutionally racist. Since then, several groups have done a tremendous amount of work to bridge the gap between communities and police forces. Yet trust still needs to be built – and police forces still lack officers from minority ethnic communities. Government austerity cuts have further eroded efforts to tackle this imbalance. In recent months we have even seen excessive fines against BAME groups for breaching lockdown rules during the pandemic. Yet the issue at the heart of our current situation is not the police, but poverty, exclusion, and accepted institutionalised and everyday racism. This has led many in the majority group to view black people as either exceptional – the “chosen one” who has shown remarkable abilities and therefore deserves to be praised – or as a criminal, a member of the underserving poor, or finally as a foreigner, even when their ancestors have contributed to the wealth of this nation. How do we move past the current dangerous moment where young black people are caught up in places of despair and rage? How do we offer a potential for hope? Some argue that we can’t fix a system that isn’t working and that the police should be abolished; others support the idea that local and community collective endeavours are the answer to failed leadership. My belief is that governments, institutions and organisations have a lot to learn from those grassroots movements. The task is enormous but let us imagine how genuine joint efforts could transform our cities, towns and country. People in cities have already shown that they can take this difficult history into their own hands. On Sunday, those protesters in Bristol toppled the statue of Edward Colston, responsible for the transportation of nearly 85,000 African captives in the late 17th century. The statue was erected in 1895, long after his death, in honour of Colston’s philanthropic deeds towards parts of the community in Bristol. He was for generations of Bristolians one of the fathers of the city. However, the presence of the statue has been a source of division for many years, with previous efforts to have the statue removed continuously stalled. At the weekend, young people removed the bronze statue in the most dramatic way and then threw it into the harbour, to cheers from onlookers. The home secretary, Priti Patel, described the event as an act of vandalism. The reality was a much more complex history, in which a very specific local past and a present marred by decades of appalling racial and social inequalities finally collided. What happens next is unclear: many other slave traders are still celebrated in Bristol, while poverty, racism and all forms of inequalities are, more than ever, in urgent need of being tackled. • Olivette Otele is professor of history and memory of slavery at the University of Bristol. Her forthcoming book is entitled African Europeans: An Untold History (Hurst, 2020)