After two weeks off, Trevor Noah returned to the Daily Show on Monday night and addressed the protests against anti-black racism and police brutality which have erupted nationwide after the police killings of George Floyd and Breonna Taylor. The movement has spread across the world; as a protester in London told American news: “We’ll keep fighting the same fight that you are.” “That right there is why this movement has become as big as it has,” said Noah, “because everyone is now realizing that we’re all in the same fight. Like these protests may have been sparked by one killing in one American city but the truth is that if you are a black person, or a minority, or a poor person in many places around the world – in London, Berlin, Seoul, Cape Town – you understand what it means to be a target of the police and the target of a system that is designed to keep you down, with violence if necessary.” People aren’t just demanding statues of racists and confederate leaders be taken down, they’re doing it themselves. pic.twitter.com/cZQMveI5gX And whenever there are protests, he added, “there are always going to be people who stand on the sidelines. There’s always going to be people who sit in their newspaper offices or their TV news studios and say, ‘I sympathize with you, but this is not the way to get what you want, this is not the way that you should be doing it, protesting is a waste of time, it turns people off, it’s just performative, it doesn’t accomplish anything.’ Well, you know what? I hope those people are hungry, because they’re going to be eating their words.” Noah recapped some “incredible results” after just two weeks of protests, such as the widespread removal of Confederate statues and racist monuments which have been argued over for decades. For example, the Robert E Lee monument, which stood for 130 years in Richmond, Virginia, will be removed, and Philadelphia took down its large monument to a racist police commissioner of the 1960s. As for people out there who maintain that the statues are necessary for people to “learn their history”, Noah had one message: “Read a book, motherfucker! That’s how you learn history. “The bubonic plague was a major event in history, but we don’t go around putting up statues of rats,” he added. The protests have also sparked a rush on books about race and racism, and while “I know a lot of people might say it’s too little, too late, why are you only reading now?” said Noah, “I think at the same time we’ve got to be happy that people are reading now. How many times have we seen a video, how many times have we seen a protest, and no books have been bought, no conversations were had?” And it’s working, Noah continued, because people are speaking up, and saying the words Black Lives Matter in public. “Black Lives Matter has become the phrase that people admit needs to be said,” Noah said, as everyone from Mitt Romney to fans of the K-pop band BTS to brands such as Gushers and Bud Light, corporations like Amazon have spoken up against systemic racism. “I don’t know if these companies are actually going to do something to show that they believe Black Lives Matter other than just saying it,” said Noah, “but it is still a major step to have American corporations who just a few years ago were terrified of that phrase saying it as part of their corporate ethos.” But the movement has to be larger than performative slogans – “we all agree that posting statements, taking down statues and selling books is not enough,” said Noah. “It’s part of it, but it’s not enough. Companies have to hire more black people. Companies have to stop not hiring people because they’re black. The culture has to amplify more black voices, and of course, cities have to end racist policing of black people.” There’s encouraging news on that front, too, as Noah recapped the growth of “defund the police” as a movement, which advocates for redirecting massive police budgets to non-punitive resources such as social services, education and mental healthcare. “It makes sense – prevention is always better than the cure, especially when the cure kills black people,” Noah said. On Late Night, Seth Meyers dismantled Trump’s attempt to distract from the protests and Black Lives Matter movement by boasting about the stock market. “As 40 million people have filed for unemployment and over 100,000 people have died and police are violently beating peaceful protesters, maybe the stock market hitting an all-time high doesn’t actually mean that we as a country are at an all-time high,” Meyers said. “We used to hear that the stock market hates uncertainty, and I don’t know what clearer sign of uncertainty there could possibly be than unemployed Americans putting on industrial masks and stepping over empty teargas containers on their way to cash a $1,200 government check. “Maybe this is your hint that the stock market is actually bullshit,” he added. Meanwhile, “the mass demonstrations have had a powerful impact on public opinion,” Meyers continued, citing a poll in which Americans favor the protests by a margin of two to one. “You have to remember that millions of people, most of them over the age of 90, see this shit every night,” he added before playing a clip of Tucker Carlson scaremongering about celebrities supporting “looters”. “The privileged and the powerful – the people served by a racist system of predatory policing – see that the public overwhelmingly supports the protests. And that’s why they’re lashing out,” he explained. “If lawmakers can learn anything from these crowds, it’s that mild reforms won’t cut it,” Meyers said. “As we’ve seen, police will abuse their authority under any circumstances – it’s a fundamentally corrupt system.” “What a time it is to be alive,” said Jimmy Kimmel on Monday night. “Two weeks ago we were on Instagram teaching each other how to make no-knead focaccia, now we’re dismantling systemic racism. I think that’s progress.” The nationwide protests, he continued, are “like the president’s suits – they just keep getting bigger and bigger,” regenerating day after day in both America’s big cities and small, overwhelmingly white towns. Meanwhile, the Utah senator and “America’s whitest man” Mitt Romney marched with protesters in Washington over the weekend, and “you’ll never believe this – Republicans are mad at him for it,” said Kimmel. It was an “interesting reaction”, he continued, since “so many of these people claim they’re fine with peaceful protests, they just don’t like looting, or they don’t like violence, or they don’t want the disrespect to the flag. But what we’ve learned now, without a doubt, when a Republican who marches is considered a traitor to his party, is that a lot of these people just don’t agree that black lives matter. “You need to ask yourself, if you belong to a party that castigates one of its most prominent members for standing up for civil rights, maybe your party sucks,” Kimmel added. “Hopefully Romney will continue to stand up in the Senate, where it really counts.”