Saudi Arabia has said only Muslims living in the country can take part in this year’s hajj pilgrimage, while Germany has locked down an entire district, as several countries around the world responded to fresh outbreaks of Covid-19. Saudi’s hajj minister, Muhammad Benten, told a virtual press conference that the annual pilgrimage to the Islamic holy sites of Mecca and Medina, which usually draws 2.5 million visitors, would be limited to a few thousand residents. The number “may be in the thousands”, Benten said. “We are in the process of reviewing, so it could be 1,000 or less, or a little more.” Over-65s will not be permitted and all pilgrims, and those serving them, will be quarantined before and after. There had been speculation this year’s hajj would be cancelled altogether after the country recorded 161,000 cases of coronavirus and more than 1,300 deaths. A three-month 24-hour curfew has just been lifted, but international travel is still banned. Germany put an entire district into a local lockdown for the first time since easing its restrictions in early May, after 1,553 employees at the Tönnies meat processing plant in the western city of Gütersloh tested positive for the virus. About 360,000 people in the area will be affected by newly enforced physical distancing rules and closures of bars, museums and swimming pools. The state premier of North-Rhine Westphalia, Armin Laschet, said the second lockdown could be relaxed after 30 June “as soon as we have control over the infections”. The Gütersloh outbreak caused Germany’s “R” number to shoot up to 2.76, but Lothar Wieler, president of the Robert Koch Institute disease control agency, said he viewed the rise as a blip rather than a sign of a second wave of infections. Overall, the number of new cases remained low, Wieler said, adding that Germans should nonetheless “continue to be watchful. The virus is still in our country, and if we give it a chance to spread, it will take it.” France’s much heralded phone app for tracking coronavirus cases, meanwhile, has proved a flop, with just 68 people informing the platform they had been infected and only 14 alerted that they were at risk because of their contacts with them. The digital affairs minister, Cédric O, admitted the number of downloads paled in comparison with Germany, where 10 million people downloaded the app compared with fewer than 2 million in France – 460,000 of whom subsequently uninstalled it. French workers, however, will reportedly return to their places of work next week, with the employment minister, Muriel Pénicaud, reportedly set to announce this week that working from home will cease being the norm except for those at particular risk, or who live with someone at risk. In Sweden, where the government adopted a light-touch approach to the virus without a strict mandatory lockdown, a new poll suggested public confidence in authorities’ ability to manage the crisis had fallen as the toll rose. Sweden’s total of 5,122 Covid-19 deaths, while representing a lower per-million toll than Spain or Italy, for example, is many times higher than that of its Nordic neighbours, and many countries now opening up to tourism have barred Swedes from entry. An Ipsos poll published in the Dagens Nyheter newspaper showed that in June, 45% of respondents had “strong confidence” in authorities’ ability to handle the crisis, down from 56% in April. The proportion of those who had “little confidence” had risen from 21% to 29%. “The differences are big enough that we can say with certainty that there has been a real change. The view of authorities’ capabilities has taken a clear negative turn,” Nicklas Källebring, an analyst, told the newspaper. Moscow’s 12.7 million inhabitants were able to visit restaurants, cafes, libraries, playgrounds and gyms again on Tuesday after the city’s mayor, Sergei Sobyanin, said life in the Russian capital could largely return to normal, although residents have been urged to continue wearing masks and gloves and observing physical distancing rules. Sobyanin’s critics have accused him of rushing to ease the lockdown in time for a Red Square military parade on Wednesday and a 1 July referendum that could potentially extend Vladimir Putin’s rule until 2036. The Victory Day parade celebrates the defeat of Nazi Germany and has grown to outsize proportions in the years since Putin came to power at the turn of the century. Elsewhere, the virus continued to spread. Iran reported 121 new deaths on Tuesday, its highest daily toll in over two months, as it battled to contain the Middle East’s deadliest Covid-19 outbreak, which has seen a total of 9,863 deaths. Iran has not imposed a mandatory lockdown, but closed schools, cancelled public events and banned movement between the country’s 31 provinces in March, measures the government has been progressively lifting to reopen its sanctions-hit economy. New Zealand reported two new cases, both returning travellers who were diagnosed in quarantine facilities during routine testing. One flew to New Zealand from the US on 18 June, while the other arrived from India on 19 June, health officials said. The government announced it was stepping up testing at the border for those who work there, with all incoming travellers to be tested on days three and 12 of their isolation. New Zealand now has 10 cases, all imported, after several days with no known active cases following the country’s stringent early lockdown. In Brazil, a judge ordered Jair Bolsonaro to rectify his “at best disrespectful” behaviour and properly wear a face mask in Brasília, saying the president was not above the laws of the federal district, which contains Brazil’s capital, and would face a daily fine of 2,000 reais (about £330) if he continued to break the rules. China, where the virus originated, reported 22 new infections on Tuesday, including 13 in Beijing. Authorities are restricting movement of people in the capital and stepping up other measures to prevent the virus from spreading after a series of local infections.