More than a million hectares of threatened species’ habitat was cleared for agriculture in New South Wales and Queensland without referral to the federal environment department for assessment, according to new analysis by WWF Australia. Data for land-clearing in both states suggests the department is failing to ensure developers and farming operations are following environmental laws, according to the analysis. Under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act, anyone undertaking activities likely to have a significant impact on nationally listed threatened species and habitats is required to seek federal approval. Two major reports on how effectively the act is working are due over the next week, including an Australian National Audit Office review. That will be followed by an interim report of the statutory review of the EPBC Act. WWF Australia’s analysis used publicly available geospatial data held by state and federal governments to analyse land-clearing in the two states in the period from 2004-2017. The analysis examined known clearing for each year, its ascribed purpose and whether it occurred in known or likely threatened species habitat. It was then cross-checked with the federal environment department’s referrals database to determine which clearing activities had been lodged for assessment. The analysis found 1.19m hectares of known or likely threatened species habitat was cleared in the 13-year period. The vast majority of that land (87.4%) was cleared for agriculture without EPBC referral – only 1,499ha (0.12%) was cleared for agriculture with referral. Martin Taylor, a conservationist scientist with WWF who analysed the data, said the results suggested large amounts of agricultural clearing in areas that could harm endangered species simply weren’t being referred for environmental assessment. He said the department had only undertaken enforcement action in a minority of cases. “You’ve got massive amounts of destruction, vast areas of habitat that have been mapped by the commonwealth that have been destroyed without even an attempt to seek authority,” Taylor said. “The act itself is being ignored on a vast scale by agricultural developers and the department is doing nothing about that. They’re not enforcing the act.” A review last year of how conservation laws affect  agriculture  found that farming activities accounted for 2.7% of referrals to the federal environment department since the introduction of the EPBC Act in 2000. The report made several recommendations, including better outreach to assist farmers in understanding their obligations under both state and federal laws and the establishment of a $1bn trust fund to help farmers to protect the environment. In its submission to the audit office, WWF said it was concerned about “pervasive failures” to refer actions that could affect threatened species and a corresponding lack of enforcement action to redress or prevent these failures. Guardian Australia approached the National Farmers’ Federation for comment and did not receive a response. In its submission to the EPBC review, the federation said the act had delivered poor outcomes for the agriculture sector. “The act is cumbersome, punitive and does not provide certainty for farmers seeking to understand their obligations, especially for environmental outcomes that have not materialised despite the intrusion of the regulatory regime,” the submission states. One of its recommendations to the review is for more market-based incentives that would reward farmers financially if they protect the landscape. You can’t claim sustainability while destroying habitat on this scale Glenn Walker, a campaigner at the Wilderness Society, said consumers were increasingly demanding food that was produced sustainably. “But you can’t claim sustainability while destroying habitat on this scale,” he said. “It’s inevitable that markets will eventually shift away from these deeply damaging practices, but until then we call upon the federal government to properly enforce the law in places where it’s been so clearly broken.” An environment department spokesman said the department undertook enforcement activities in keeping with its published compliance policy but that state and territory governments had primary responsibility for land management. “EPBC approval is still required for those actions that will have a significant impact on a matter of national environmental significance, other than where agricultural development constitutes a lawful ongoing activity that commenced or received the required approvals prior to July 2000,” he said.