A tech entrepreneur has pledged to “make up for every penny any racist donors pull” after those angry at an Oxford college’s decision to remove a Cecil Rhodes statue said they would stop giving money to the institution and called for it to return donations. Husayn Kassai, who founded the verification company Onfido with three others as a student at Oxford, pledged to step into any breach left by the withdrawal of donors after Oriel college voted to take down the statue of the imperialist politician. The college had reportedly been nervous in the past about removing the statue after donors apparently threatened to withdraw millions of pounds in contributions or legacies if it did so. Kassai, a Manchester-born entrepreneur whose company helps businesses verify people’s identities and raised $100m (£80m) of funding in May, said he was proud of the move by Oriel, adding: “Cecil Rhodes is the most savage Brit who ever lived.” “I’ll make up for every penny any racist donors pull. All racist status and symbols belong in museums, where we can safeguard our history, in all its gore and glory,” he tweeted. Kassai said his pledge was partly prompted by the backlash against the college’s decision, which included a call by a former Brexit Party MEP, Ben Habib, for Oriel to returns Rhodes’s endowment to his family. Daniel Hannan, who studied at Oriel and is a former Conservative MEP, said he would stop donating to the institution. “Rhodes’s generosity allowed thousands of young people to enjoy an education they could not otherwise have had,” he tweeted. “The first black student won a scholarship 5 years after his death. Why would anyone give to an institution that treats its benefactors this way?” Kassai, who already provides some support to Oxford University, said: “When I saw that there were suggestions that some people might pull their donations then my position was that I would increase mine to compensate, if I can. “One reason why I’ve held back is because of [the university’s] arms investments but now, as I’m seeing them take the right steps, I will, I suppose, consider increasing my contribution.” Kassai, whose company has more than 400 employees and is expanding in the US, was the president of Oxford University’s entrepreneurs society while studying economics and management at its Saïd business school. He was recently named in a Financial Times list of the top 100 minority ethnic leaders in technology. Jordan Poulton, an Oxford University alumnus and BBC Apprentice contestant who founded the startup Pwny Labs, said: “I think my generation, and many ‘progressively minded’ people in the tech industry are keen to support organisations that share our values – in this instance in regards to social justice. “But similarly in areas like their endowment funds being used to fund climate damaging organisations, arms manufacturers or predatory private equity.” In 2016, it was reported that a leaked internal memo by the development director for Oriel, a registered charity, claimed wealthy alumni had rewritten their wills to disinherit the college after it emerged that the removal of the statue was being considered. Sean Power reportedly warned staff the long-term impact on fundraising was “potentially extremely damaging”. The college and the university did not respond to questions about whether the decision to remove the statue had caused any donors to withdraw their support. Rhodes’s other memorial at the university remains at the Rhodes Trust, which administers the famous Rhodes scholarship endowed by the mining magnate using wealth he obtained in Africa. Elizabeth Kiss, the warden of Rhodes House and a former Rhodes scholar, said Rhodes’s original benefaction was now a small percentage of their endowment. “Difficult legacies of racism and oppression shape all our lives, institutions and societies. At the Rhodes Trust, our name and our history are a daily reminder of the moral obligation to engage with these issues and to affirm our human interconnectedness in its pain and its hope.” The trust will hold a series of meetings with past and present scholars on race and legacy, as well as working with academics – including those active in the Rhodes Must Fall campaign – to “critically engage with the Rhodes legacy”.