“It’s incredible,” Kelly Cates says at the end of a tumultuous week when football and politics have brushed up against each other and there has been a clear winner. Rather than Boris Johnson and his ministers, who have been backtracking and U-turning when not talking about Harry Potter or Game of Thrones, Marcus Rashford lit up a desperate situation with clarity and compassion. Football returned on Wednesday, in an eerie Premier League restart behind closed doors, and on Sunday evening Cates leads Sky Sports’ coverage of Everton and Liverpool on a free-to-air basis. As Kenny Dalglish’s daughter, Cates is candid enough to admit Liverpool will always be her club. But, even with Liverpool two victories away from winning their first league title in 30 years, when Dalglish was their manager, Cates has been immersed in real life. “That a young man has this power and the ability to effect such change for the good is incredible,” Cates says of Rashford and the way the 22-year-old Manchester United striker forced the government to back down from their insistence they would no longer offer food vouchers in the summer for 1.3 million disadvantaged children in England. “There’re lots of inspiring people in that maligned generation. Marcus Rashford, Greta Thunberg and the young women who started Black Lives Matter. They’re tackling issues beyond politics. They’re basic questions of humanity.” It is fitting Cates, who grew up in the shadow of Hillsborough, should find the right tone. She loves football and it consumes her working life on TV and radio, but she never forgets that it’s just a game. When considering Johnson’s claim that he only heard of Rashford’s campaign a few hours before he announced the U-turn, Cates shakes her head. “It doesn’t stand up. He’s really not keeping up with basic news headlines? It doesn’t ring true.” We have a little laugh at the other governmental mishaps, which included the health secretary, Matt Hancock, referring to Daniel Rashford before blaming his mistake on Harry Potter. “Oh my God,” Cates says, “and then Dominic Raab.” On Thursday, the foreign secretary suggested a symbolic cornerstone of the Black Lives Matter protests was a sign of “subordination” and had been taken from, as Cates says with an incredulous exclamation, “Game of Thrones! I don’t know whether it’s just a lack of knowledge about popular culture but, really, you should know where taking a knee comes from. “I’ve got no interest in being polite about Matt Hancock, but we’ve all called someone the wrong name by accident. But it’s telling when you don’t even know why Colin Kaepernick came to take the knee and the battle he fought.” This month, Cates responded on Twitter to Julian Knight, the Conservative MP for Solihull, after his familiar dig at football. In reference to a claim that Premier League clubs could lose a billion pounds because of Covid-19, Knight tweeted: “To put into context, charities, which help millions of people, face a shortfall of £4bn.” Cates replied: “To put into context, a footballer @MarcusRashford is helping to feed vulnerable children over the summer that your government won’t.” She then tweeted Knight’s voting record, which showed that, on all 31 occasions, he had voted against increasing benefits. “It was frustration,” she says, “because football has been used politically throughout this crisis. It was either that footballers should be doing more – only footballers and not the billionaire owners – or that football has to come back to boost the morale of the nation. “In between all that you had Marcus Rashford doing the most extraordinary things with FareShare [as they raised enough to provide 3m meals to vulnerable children] while Jordan Henderson set up the Players Together union that contributes to the NHS. You have all these different players speaking out on racism – whether it was Raheem Sterling on Newsnight or Tyrone Mings on the Black Lives Matter march. “Julian Knight made an excellent point about charities. I know it’s happened to the charity my parents work for. But he was making a good point while scoring a cheap point. It was lazy and showed a complete lack of understanding of how people responded to this pandemic to help others.” Cates also laments the way the government characterised teachers. “I found it inaccurate and unkind, as though teachers were lazy for not wanting children to go back. It’s deliberate misinformation. I feel very angry on teachers’ behalf because we entrust our children to them. To chip away at what they do is counterproductive, at best, and cruel.” In all the political deception and incompetence, against the backdrop of covid and protests against racism, the Premier League resumed. Cates worked at the game between Aston Villa and Sheffield United and describes the experience as: “Good fun but, also, really strange with a very odd atmosphere. I don’t know if we’re ever going to get used to it. I know this should be more than slogans and gestures. It should be about action. But that was particularly powerful “In the same way that the absence of football disrupts the rhythm of your week, so not having fans disrupted the rhythm of the day. Just before handing over to the commentators we’re used to this swell of noise. Villa put some music on but it wasn’t the same as tens of thousands of people.” The players were on firmer ground as they took a knee before kick-off. “Even without wanting to use an overused word, it was breathtaking. I’ve spoken to people watching at home and my one friend said he got goosebumps thinking about it. I know this should be more than slogans and gestures. It should be about action. But that was particularly powerful.” Cates stresses: “Sky have made a pledge to do better in representation at different levels and that’s absolutely right. We’ve all been part of campaigns before, using the hashtag and slogans, but none of it means anything without change. On a personal level, you have to change yourself. So I’m doing a lot of reading. And I’ve got the White Fragility audiobook because I’m going to be driving quite a bit. It’s listening, hearing and believing. “We’re not talking about two sides to the coin. We’re talking about equality as a fundamental. It’s inarguable. In the past I’ve worried about speaking out on someone else’s behalf when I haven’t lived their life. So it’s about listening and then thinking: ‘What do I do?’ Lots of people are very uncomfortable about this discussion. But every step should feel uncomfortable. That’s how you make progress.” Cates, who is 44, has spent half her life in the media as she started at Sky in 1998 after quitting her maths degree. She has worked for the BBC and continues to do so on Radio 5 Live, as well as ITV, Setanta, TalkSport, Channel 4 and Channel 5. She returned to Sky in 2016 and says: “I’ve not experienced direct sexism. But I’ve seen more subtle forms of sexism. In the early days of Sky Sports News, if there was a tennis story a picture of Anna Kournikova would be used because all the boys fancied her. When that’s all day, every day, a very clear message is being sent that we only value women for how they look. That drip, drip creates a culture. “But there are more women now in sport. So the overt sexism goes because guys don’t want to be sexist in front of women. Then women become more comfortable in saying: ‘I don’t like that.’ Sometimes a look can be enough to make someone understand. When I started at Sky we were all in our early 20s. So there was a different attitude and we were friends. I appreciate I was protected. Once I went out into the big bad world of press boxes and press conferences, I had that confidence. I know my experience is not the same for other women. “But it is getting better. Alex Scott came to the fore as a pundit at the [2018] World Cup. She prepared well and read up about these teams that nobody seems to know anything about. She gained respect immediately because she did more homework than many. Sue Smith, Emma Hayes, Karen Carney and Lianne Sanderson are all doing really well.” Cates must also suffer abuse – especially as a woman connected to Liverpool. “I’ve just upped my filters on social media,” she says with a smile. “It’s a contradictory way to behave – to say I don’t care what these people say, and then reread it. So I just don’t see them by simply putting a quality filter on Twitter. If even Twitter thinks you’re an idiot, I’m not going to waste my time on you.” The routine excellence of Cates’s work is underlined poignantly by the interview she conducted with her dad in the wake of the 2016 Hillsborough inquest, when the real truth about the death of 96 Liverpool fans was confirmed publicly. An outsider would have had no idea Cates was interviewing her father as she gently probed the hurt that he and, especially, the families had endured for 27 years. It was only at the very end when she pushed her dad on the personal cost that their bond was made obvious. He said: “I wouldn’t change anything. And I wish I could have done more.” Cates ended the interview with a simple: “Thanks very much, Dad.” She had been at Hillsborough that tragic afternoon, aged 13, and her dad took her and her brother Paul to stand on the Kop a few days later. She believes Dalglish never addressed his own grief as he was so intent on helping the families, but did she also bury her feelings? “I didn’t process it. I wasn’t emotionally mature enough … but I remember driving to work when the verdict was announced. I had to pull over on to the hard shoulder. I was sobbing.” Cates looks up. “I’d spoken to so many people who had so much trauma. They had gone through so much and at its heart was this basic need just to tell their story, and be believed. I thought about it on the anniversary of Grenfell [last Sunday]. The first time people experienced those emotions, of the state not working for you, was around Hillsborough. “Watching from the outside it gives you a sense of, not quite mistrust, but scepticism. I always believe what people who were there are telling me. I know how easily, and how quickly, that story can be rewritten wrongly. For my dad and mum, who went to the funerals, it’s so much deeper. But I know what it’s done and the damage it’s caused. It’s something that never leaves you.” When Liverpool win the Premier League, will it be hard to keep her professionalism and curb her delight, especially as she will be working at their next two games after Sunday’s derby? “It will come later. I remember that Champions League game against Barcelona last year. When the fourth goal went in people were grabbing me. But I was still. I almost went into shock. “I watched it again in lockdown. I could barely remember it because I had concentrated so hard. I went into that exam mode. I just knew I had to get the story out. It will be the same this time with the title. Afterwards it has time to breathe and settle. That’s when the glow comes.”