This new series of 15-minute shorts provides comic relief in the form of sketches written and filmed in lockdown by some of the nation’s finest comedians. Up first is After Life’s Kerry Godliman, who is trying (and failing) to have a lockdown party with her teenage daughter, while Bob Mortimer revives Train Guy – his annoying, loud commuter alias. Elsewhere, Rhys James gives us an insight into his lockdown musings on everything from cultural appropriation and therapy to bubble wrap. Ammar Kalia Brainboxes Eric Monkman and Bobby Seagull end their time-travelling tour through Britain’s greatest scientific breakthroughs with a focus on the Victorian era. They begin with the building of the Crossness pumping station in east London in 1858 before looking at the works of Charles Darwin. AK A two-parter on foundlings begins with David, a man in his 60s who has known nothing of his parents since being abandoned as a baby in Belfast in the 60s. The revelations coming his way are, even by this show’s heart-wrenching standards, emotional. Episode two is tomorrow. Jack Seale An estimated 60,000 weddings across the UK have been affected by the lockdown. In this one-off special, First Dates’ Fred Sirieix tries to make one London couple’s dreams come true by organising a surprise virtual wedding, with all their guests in digital attendance. AK Anyone who has found themselves in A&E after midnight will know the challenges it presents for NHS staff. In this behind-the-scenes series from Hull Royal Infirmary we encounter a bloke who has punched through a pub window and a flirty patient with a head injury who is determined to leave. Ali Catterall This feature-length Sky News film follows Alex Crawford as she traces the effects of plastic waste on the Nile, travelling from Kenya to Egypt. It feels like vital reporting on an ecosystem in peril and Crawford literally dives into her story, plucking trash from the murky depths of Lake Victoria by the Kenyan city of Kisumu. Graeme Virtue Pal Joey (George Sidney, 1957), 2.45pm, BBC TwoA scintillating Frank Sinatra leads George Sidney’s 1957 Rodgers and Hart musical. He is brash Joey Evans, aiming for the top in San Francisco clubland. Admired by waifish chanteuse Kim Novak and wealthy Rita Hayworth, he smooches his way through The Lady Is a Tramp and My Funny Valentine. Paul Howlett