Just as trailers for the BBC’s Windrush drama Sitting in Limbo were released at the start of this month, Anthony Bryan, who was wrongly imprisoned for five weeks after mistakenly being classified as an illegal immigrant, and whose story is dramatised in the film, received an interim offer of compensation from the Home Office. It was two and a half years after officials first realised they had made an error, and more than two years since the then prime minister, Theresa May first apologised for the Home Office’s mistakes. The compensation letter came exactly a week before the film was due to go out on television, and the timing of its arrival made him very thoughtful. A few days before Sitting in Limbo was broadcast, emails and calls started coming from the private office of the home secretary, Priti Patel, asking if Bryan would join a video call with her just an hour before the film went out. The home secretary is “actively thinking” about “giving a voice” to the Windrush generation, one email read, “and feels it vitally important to hear directly from affected members of the community, such as Mr Bryan”. Bryan felt sceptical about the timing of this invitation, and declined. Meanwhile Home Office staff were pestering the film’s makers to let them have an early preview – without success. These are standard Home Office damage-limitation manoeuvres, without any effective action to address the underlying problem. (And none of the other 30 Windrush claimants being supported by the North Kensington Law Centre, which has been helping Bryan, received compensation offers this month or had invitations to have phone calls with the home secretary, staff there told me.) Clearly the unfolding Black Lives Matter protests and the focus on Britain’s own difficulties with racism are making ministers particularly anxious to be seen to be doing the right thing on Windrush. They will be uneasily aware that not enough has been done to put things right. This is not a centuries-old problem that can be shrugged off as history, but the direct consequence of hostile environment measures that remain a central part of government policy. Of course, giving people a voice and listening is great, but much careful listening has already been done, and those affected by the scandal have for months been saying that now is the time to move on to action. A forensic 275-page analysis of what went wrong, based on detailed interviews with hundreds of those affected, was submitted to the Home Office in March. One of the key recommendations made by its author, Wendy Williams, was a call for a full review of the government’s “hostile environment” measures. But none of the policies that caused the Windrush scandal have been repealed, and Patel has made no commitment to reverse them. She tweeted new apologies as the programme was broadcast, lamenting the “unimaginable suffering endured by the Windrush generation”, but seems to have shown little interest in looking again at the structure of immigration legislation, which continues to cause so much suffering to thousands of people living entirely legally in the UK. In this regard, her stance echoes that of Nick Timothy, May’s former special adviser, and one of the key architects of the hostile environment, who last week breezily asserted that it was a “sensible” policy. He added that he was “certainly never warned” that there was a cohort of people who might get trapped in its embrace because they were unable to prove that they were living in the UK legally. Both of these points are highly questionable. After all the life-shattering problems the policies have caused, “sensible” seems a peculiar word to have chosen. They deliberately made life impossible for tens of thousands of people without documentation, introducing workplace immigration checks, and eligibility checks for healthcare, bank accounts, pensions, driving licences, rental contracts and benefits. It was the hostile environment that caused Bryan to get the sack from his job as a decorator, and saw him formally categorised as an illegal resident (despite having lived in London since arriving as an eight-year-old in 1965), arrested, detained and booked on a flight back to Jamaica, a country he hadn’t visited in more than 50 years. The hostile environment policies introduced new levels of spite into society; the government set up the National Allegations Database, designed to make it easier for people to make tip-offs about immigration offenders to the Home Office. But it’s not even clear that these “sensible” measures have succeeded in their stated goal of addressing illegal immigration, as a handful of reports from the National Audit Office, the Borders and Immigration Inspectorate and the Home Affairs select committee concluded. What is clear is that large numbers of people who came to the UK legally, but who struggle to prove their status, are still being denied healthcare, formal employment and stable housing; the policies institutionalise cruelty and drive people underground. Timothy’s assertion that he was never warned is contradicted by so much evidence that it feels disingenuous. His own department’s impact assessments warned that these policies could hurt people who had been in the UK for decades, but who had no documentation. Every migration and race organisation united to warn that racially discriminatory consequences would follow. A Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants lawyer remembers a junior immigration minister rolling his eyes at her warnings when she gave evidence in parliament. They were warned; they just didn’t want to listen, she says. Timothy’s comments matter because the government continues to cling on to these cruel policies in spite of their damaging impact on so many, including thousands of the key workers who have been supporting Britain throughout the pandemic. The hostile environment also gave us the NHS surcharge in 2015, which, until a sudden U-turn last month, required doctors and care workers to pay for the right to access the care they were providing, and which they were already paying for through taxation. It has also increased visa charges so exponentially that families are pushed into destitution as they try to pay recurring immigration costs. Many are forced into illegality because they cannot afford the exorbitant cost of regularising their status. The Home Office has spent two years in a legal battle over whether the rent to right policy – which requires landlords to check on tenants’ immigration status – is racially discriminatory. The high court said it was; the court of appeal agreed it could be, but ruled that the scheme was nevertheless “justified”; a new appeal is under way. In her review into what caused Windrush, Williams makes it clear that officials should be actively educating themselves. The department’s failings on Windrush demonstrate an “institutional ignorance and thoughtlessness towards the issue of race and the history of the Windrush generation” that is “consistent with some elements of the definition of institutional racism”, she concluded. The scandal was able to happen, she added “because of the public’s and officials’ poor understanding of Britain’s colonial history … and the history of black Britons”. Two years ago, the then home secretary, Sajid Javid, promised to review the immigration system to ensure it was working in a compassionate, fair and humane way; we are still waiting for that review. Only 60 people have received Windrush compensation payments – which is why last-minute invitations to video chats with the home secretary do not feel welcome. • Amelia Gentleman is a Guardian reporter. Her book The Windrush Betrayal has been shortlisted for the Orwell prize, and can be listened to here