If the arrival of all seven series of Buffy the Vampire Slayer on All 4 has not quenched your thirst for the undead, the second season of Taika Waititi and Jermaine Clements’ vampiric comedy should do the trick. Kayvan Novak and Matt Berry are on reliably hilarious form as Nandor and Laszlo, vampires attempting to navigate the strange world of Staten Island with their new human familiar, Guillermo (Harvey Guillén). In this opening episode, Guillermo tries to keep the vampire assassins, and a new rival, at bay. Ammar Kalia The latest series of Kemp’s social issues strand begins with a two-parter examining the impact of dementia on the UK. He catches up with the partner of his screen mum Barbara Windsor to hear how they have coped with her Alzheimer’s, then embeds with an affected family. Graeme Virtue Anita Rani’s Crufts-for-parents experiment continues, with mums and dads showcasing their best child-rearing tips. This week, home schoolers Becky and Ben take on Richard and Emily, who run a highly regimented programme for their kids, and Andi and Jon, fans of “structured chaos” and piñatas, because why not? Hannah J Davies Rylan Clark-Neal entrenches his dominance of the light reality TV format with this makeover series. Armed with a team of stylists and a Topshop-style set, he gets the chance to transform a group of underdressed members of the public, who walk away with their choice of a new wardrobe. AK More real-life NHS dramas from Merseyside control, including a stroke patient, traffic incident victims, a self-discharging overdose patient, a patient with cocaine-induced chest pains and a woman with cardiac arrest, who sadly is not going to make it. Ali Catterall Delving back into the traumatic 2016 US election cycle, this four-part documentary charts the rise of Hillary Clinton from lawyer to first lady, politician and then presidential candidate. This opening episode looks back at Clinton’s entry into the 2016 race, as well as her political beginnings. AK Lucy (Luc Besson, 2014), 9pm, Film4With its trashy concept, assured action and ferocious heroine, this is like a return to his Nikita days for the director Luc Besson. Scarlett Johansson makes the most of her Avengers days as Lucy, who ingests a new narcotic that boosts phenomenal cerebral powers – messing with time and the cosmos, for instance. Paul Howlett 