The “big five” UK publishing houses have separately acknowledged that “change is not happening fast enough” and that they must do a lot more to address racial inequalities in the books world, highlighted earlier this week by the newly formed Black Writers Guild. The BWG, which counts major black British authors from Malorie Blackman to Bernardine Evaristo among its members, wrote an open letter to British publishing on Monday. Coming after years of reports exposing the racial inequality in the industry, the letter called for numerous measures, including an audit of books published by black authors and of black publishing staff, and for the companies to address the lack of black executives on their boards. “We are deeply concerned that British publishers are raising awareness of racial inequality without significantly addressing their own,” said the letter, in the wake of a slew of Black Lives Matter-related social media posts from the publishers. On Wednesday, the UK’s major publishers all separately welcomed the demands. The five – Penguin Random House, Macmillan, Hachette, HarperCollins and Simon & Schuster – said they would be addressing the points raised by the BWG, which was set up by publisher Sharmaine Lovegrove, journalist Afua Hirsch and author Nels Abbey. Tom Weldon, chief executive of PRH, the UK’s largest publisher, said the company was “looking inward to decide how we want to respond, as a company and as individuals”. In 2016, PRH dropped its requirement for job candidates to have a university degree, and runs the WriteNow scheme to mentor authors from under-represented communities. “Addressing and better understanding the issue is an important first step but it is not enough,” said Weldon. “Doing something about it is the true test.” “We have been working on our inclusivity strategy for a number of years and we have made some important achievements along the way. But the truth is that change is not happening fast enough and we need to address that with urgency and intent,” he said. “I want Penguin Random House UK to be better so we can make genuine meaningful and long-lasting change that tackles the systemic inequality currently existing in our industry.” David Shelley, chief executive of Hachette UK, which is home to Lovegrove’s imprint Dialogue Books, said that “the industry could and should do a lot more – and that we could and should do a lot more at Hachette”. Shelley said that a new working group of “senior leaders” will be proposing practical solutions to the BWG, including reporting publicly on author remuneration and representation, and improving representation in all areas of its business. “It is clear that we still have a long way to go before we become the fully representative and inclusive publisher we aspire to be. We intend to roll up our sleeves and work constructively and hard to make this a reality,” said Shelley. Macmillan, Simon & Schuster and HarperCollins also said they would be working to improve diversity. Simon & Schuster CEO Ian Chapman said it was “conducting robust analysis of our current situation” including staffing, publishing programmes and marketing budgets, “with a view to making meaningful, concrete and deliverable commitments. Black Lives have and will always matter to us at S&S. Now is the time for urgent action across our business to redress the imbalance.” HarperCollins chief executive Charlie Redmayne said: “The guild is right in suggesting that action will ‘help nurture a thriving literary culture in this country’ and we support that aim – access to our literary culture is not equal, and that should not be the case. This is something all of us in this industry must work together in partnership to correct.” The responses come a day after Reni Eddo-Lodge became the first ever black Briton to top the UK book charts, with her 2017 book Why I’m No Longer Talking to White People About Race.