“I can’t explain how deeply I trust you, but I want you to know.” For an oncologist, there could scarcely be more gratifying words. Or more terrifying. To know that not only have patients chosen to trust you, but also it has helped them is an endorsement that one alternately desires and discourages; for although the rewards are wonderful, the disappointments can be crushing. I first experienced this as a locum for a respected oncologist. Day after day, I gave my very best to his many patients but although uniformly polite, the flash of concern and even occasional panic on their face was unmissable. I realised that it wasn’t just professional expertise they cared for but something as intangible as it was powerful: a bond of trust forged over time with one individual. I later grumbled to the oncologist that his patients felt short-changed because they had longed to see him and got me instead. One day it will happen to you too, he smiled. I thought he was generous and mistaken. But years later, his prediction came true and strangely enough, now I muse at its consequences. The pandemic has touched every aspect of our lives. Most of us can hope to resume some form of normality one day, but for terminally ill patients and their carers this has been an impossibly difficult time. In their final months, my sickest patients see me more than their relatives because there are so many conversations we need to have. Whether to have a treatment of last resort or preserve quality of life; when and what to tell the kids; whether to bring a marriage or a vacation forward; what dying involves; where to die. Emergency physicians often encourage oncologists to have these conversations earlier because the alternative is unfair. First, there is the matter of the glare of lights, machines and crashing vital signs and then, the awfulness of having a complete stranger interrogate patients about their final wishes. These are some of the most important and consequential conversations in all of medicine and it takes all of one’s tact, courage and compassion to get them right. Just because these conversations are important doesn’t meant they aren’t intensely sad. Humans are surprising resilient but when the news is bad, the depletion of hope is real and it takes every bit of mutual trust to navigate the future. I have seen the inadequacy of a shaky video link or a halting phone call instead of a real visit like the ‘old times’ So, what happens when very long relationships of mutual liking and trust end with the patient’s death? Mostly, the grief is private and the agreed price one pays for the privilege of being a doctor. But each year, I accept an invitation to some funerals, the reason for which is best summed up by a paediatrician who confesses that she goes for the family but also for herself because sometimes, no other closure will do. This has always struck me as a genuine and respectful reason to slip into the very back row of mourners although over the years, I’ve been mortified to find how many people want to say thank you. It’s sobering to think how many people must refer to their oncologist in their discussions. In turn, I have learnt to admit my own fondness for the patient and be unafraid to say how much the relationship enriched me. “Oh my God, she is on multiple screens at the same time! Guys, you have to take a look!” The triumphant shouts of my youngest child reverberate around the house as his siblings race to the table. This, on a resplendent afternoon when I have lectured them about the importance of switching off their device and getting some sun. The kids catch me red-handed with a laptop, tablet and smartphone arranged in a semicircle. “What are you doing?” “I’m busy.” “On three screens?” More guffaws followed by a peek over my shoulders, then awkward silence. “Oh.” I shrug because there is a lump in my throat. Two screens are live streaming funerals while the third scans death notices. Incantations in different languages fill my ears as I try to make out the faces. Is that his dad or brother? Is her son crying and where is his sister? Will her husband manage the eulogy? While we won’t forget those who are gone, our patients would want us to pay it forward During the pandemic, I’ve lost several patients although none from an infection. But in my heart, I can’t help feeling that the unprecedented shock of global circumstances caused them to lose that extra little zest and hope that had kept them going. It may be unscientific but then, I have seen the inadequacy of a shaky video link or a halting phone call instead of a real visit like the ‘old times’, when I could draw my chair closer, smell fear, sense regret and most of all employ trust to acknowledge distress and open avenues of hope. As it turns out, I could barely even visit my dying patients given the restrictions on visitors and hours. Every extra minute I spent at the bedside was a minute less for the family to coalesce. No Zoom meeting ever replaced the solace of grieving with relatives. Everything felt unfair and uncertain and yet my brave patients never protested, instead thanking me via text. This would have been the time to attend a string of funerals and honour these patients but when numbers are limited, it’s time for the oncologist to bow out. We have seen footage of exhausted doctors and nurses sobbing in the corridors because they were not able to offer the care their patients deserved. Lacking ventilators, masks and other essential equipment, they are struck by impotence and a mad grief terrible to watch and must be worse to experience. But in countries like Australia that have avoided such in-your-face tragedy, there is another kind of sadness that is less raw, less loud but just as soul-destroying. It comes from losing long-term patients who thought we’d accompany them until the very end but then we got locked out. That unspoken contract became impossible to honour but the regret won’t go away because the head says it should. Trust is a matter of the heart and these things take time. Meanwhile, we will need to be gentle with ourselves and each other knowing that we’re fragile even though we may hate to admit it. Because heal we must since there are many more patients who will need our help and while we won’t forget those who are gone, our patients would want us to pay it forward. • Ranjana Srivastava is an Australian oncologist, award-winning author and Fulbright scholar. Her latest book is called A Better Death