Hong Kong is bracing for another tense day as its legislature prepares to pass a controversial bill criminalising mockery of China’s national anthem, which coincides with the anniversary of the 1989 Tiananmen square crackdown. Activists plan to defy a police ban and hold a candle-lit vigil in a downtown park to mark the event 31 years ago. Many fear this year’s Tiananmen commemoration might be Hong Kong’s last, as looming national security laws imposed by China on the semi-autonomous city would prevent and punish “acts and activities” that threaten national security. Local media has reported that more than 3,000 riot officers will be deployed to enforce a ban against the vigil and other gatherings. Amid widespread opposition, Hong Kong’s legislative council, dominated by pro-Beijing lawmakers, is poised to pass the national anthem bill later Thursday. Once enacted, the law will prohibit behaviours that “insult” or misuse the Chinese national anthem, including “publicly and intentionally” altering its lyrics or score, and playing or singing it in a “distorted or disrespectful way.” Offences are punishable with a fine of $6,500 (HK$50,000) and up to three years in jail. The bill also stipulates that the anthem should be included in school education to teach students “the history and spirit of the national anthem.” Critics fear that the vague definitions of terms like “insult” and “derogatory” in the proposed law could threaten freedom of expression in Hong Kong. The legislation coincides with plans by Beijing to force a sweeping national security law on Hong Kong to stamp out anti-government protests, which started a year ago. The proposed laws would punish “acts and activities” that threaten national security, including secession, subversion and terrorism and foreign interference. Opposition lawmakers have argued that patriotism cannot be forced. Some Hong Kong football fans have booed the national anthem during World Cup qualifiers in the past, prompting Beijing to order legislation. The anthem, titled The March of the Volunteers, was written in wartime in the 1930s and calls on people to “arise, ye who refuse to be slaves!”. Protestors fear the new law will threaten freedom of speech in Hong Kong. Thousands demonstrated against the bill on 24 May and again last week when its second reading resumed in the legislature. Protesters were dispersed by police who fired pepper pellets and used water cannon. Tens of thousands of Hong Kongers are expected to mark the 31st anniversary of the military crackdown on the Tiananmen pro-democracy movement in their own localities after police banned an annual candlelit vigil that has taken place uninterrupted for 30 years, citing public health concerns. The Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements of China, which has organised the vigil for the past 30 years, asked Hong Kongers to hold individual commemorations through lighting candles wherever they are in the city on the anniversary. Fearing commemorations might soon be barred under the national security laws, the alliance said its members still planned to gather at Victoria Park to light candles in groups of eight, in order not to breach the government’s social distancing restrictions, and planned to stream the event live online. Rights groups say the government is using Covid-19 as a pretext to stifle freedom of expression as numerous restrictions, including on swimming pools and religious gatherings, were recently lifted due to low numbers of infections.