Fans of Hollie Doyle will be interested to learn that the in-form rider has picked up a very useful spare ride at Royal Ascot on Wednesday. The 23-year-old has been booked by Roger Charlton for Win O’Clock in Wednesday’s King George V Handicap, the 13-2 joint-favourite with most firms. “Bit of a last minute thing, he just got in the race, I think, so I was lucky,” Doyle said after racing on Sunday. “Great ride to pick up from Mr Charlton. I haven’t had a chance to speak to anyone about it yet, I only heard today.” Win O’Clock was ridden to a recent success by Jason Watson but has only eight stone to carry in Wednesday’s race, which is lighter than Watson generally does. Doyle came close to Royal Ascot success a couple of years back when second in the Sandringham aboard Ortiz. Making the most of your opportunities is the key when it comes to big weeks like this one and she certainly did that, as Ortiz was a 66-1 shot. Unfortunately he bumped into a well-treated and well-backed winner in Agrotera. Frankie Dettori and Ryan Moore soak up a large proportion of the best rides in Royal week. Last year they had 12 of the 30 winners between them, so it is hard for others to get a look-in, and of course it has been famously tough for female riders to get a win there, Hayley Turner becoming the first for 32 years when she won the Sandringham last year. Asked for a ride she’s keen on this week, Doyle mentioned her mount for one of the new races, Friday’s Palace Of Holyroodhouse Handicap. “I’m really looking forward to riding Maystar. He’s stepping back to five furlongs, which is going to be really quick for him, but he’s in good form and he always runs a big race. “I’m really looking forward to riding Mighty Gurkha in the Windsor Castle for Archie [Watson]. He was obviously impressive first time out but it’s an open race, we don’t know how good any of them are. “He’s by Sepoy and they can be quite challenging sometimes but we’ve never had an issue with him. He showed a little bit of temperament in the gates last time but that should be under control this time.” Doyle has had 14 winners since racing resumed a fortnight ago, at an excellent 22% rate, and I see punters on social media who are obviously looking out for anything she rides. But the competitive nature of this week shows in the fact that, after eight rides at Chepstow tonight, she is limited to one ride at Ascot on Tuesday, aboard Glen Shiel in the Buckingham Palace. “It’s good to be back,” she says. “Physically, I feel absolutely great. The driving is tiring. It’s long days with 10-race cards and I’m riding out every morning. It is tiring but I can’t complain. It’s full on. But it’s got to be done.” Master Spy has become a non-runner at Goodwood, having cut his leg this morning, so we’ll have to wait to see if he really has landed on a decent mark for handicapping. In his absence, Lost My Sock (12.20) appeals in the opener at Pontefract. The chestnut was “nearest finish” and showed promise when third on his debut at Newcastle on racing’s second day back a fortnight ago. He comes from the Tim Easterby stable, whose runners generally benefit for a first outing, and should know a lot more this time. He is 7-4 from the opening 3-1. Goodwood12.00 Dark Company 12.35 Rusper's Lad 1.10 Treacherous 1.40 Basilicata 2.10 Sir Roderic 2.45 Variyann 3.15 Master Spy (nap) 3.45 StagiairePontefract12.20 Lost My Sock 12.50 Bowman 1.20 Corvair 1.50 War Defender 2.20 Makthecat 2.50 Antonia De Vega 3.25 Revolver 3.55 Kaylen's Mischief 4.25 Bahkit 5.00 Embrace The MomentKempton4.30 Wolflet 5.05 Takeonefortheteam 5.35 Yuri Gagarin 6.05 Float 6.35 Jellystone 7.05 Monsieur Fox (nb)Chepstow4.55 Coul Queen 5.25 Red Bravo 5.55 One Night Stand 6.25 Oeil De Tigre 6.55 Bartat 7.25 Ametist 7.55 Captain Kissinger Later, there has also been support for Kaylen’s Mischief (3.55), down to 6-1 favourite. He had a productive summer on turf for a new yard last year, most recently scoring at Chepstow in July, and is only 4lb higher here. There has been some variety to his tactics but he generally goes forward and he is well placed to do that from stall three. There are more likely winners at Kempton tonight but Monsieur Fox (7.05) is in danger of being underestimated at 20-1. His mark having tumbled to 46, he was beaten less than a length when stepped up to this marathon trip in March and he ought to be competitive again.