Williams, 70, moved into his off-grid farmhouse in the 70s, with his then wife and his daughter, Ceilidh, after falling out with his landlord in Aberdeen. When the marriage ended, he stayed on alone, but he is philosophically optimistic about a future relationship: “I was once married and I may well be married again. It’s a big house to be rattling around in by myself.” Jake Williams at home with his cat. Down a remote forestry track in Aberdeenshire, his house has no mains electricity, water or conventional sewage system. For a hermit, he is not averse to fame: he featured in the cinema documentary Two Years At Sea by Ben Rivers, appeared on a Frankie Boyle television show and plays folk music at open mic nights. I was once married, and I may well be married again. It’s a big house to be rattling around in by myself Williams with his daughter, Ceilidh. With no electricity, Williams uses lanterns for light. Williams at work on his land. Sara Maitland on the moors with her border terrier, Zoe. Maitland, 70, is a successful author who writes books about religious fantasy and solitude, informed by her Roman Catholic faith. She spent increasing amounts of time alone when her marriage broke down in 1993. “I went to live in the country. It was here I started to practise solitude and it grew from there. I found I loved it.” She has lived in the remote moorlands of Galloway since 2006. Maitland’s cottage in Galloway. She recognises that living alone in remote countryside could become difficult as she gets older, especially if she becomes unable to drive. She needs a car to fetch supplies and to remove rubbish, as there is no bin collection. Maitland’s cosy living room. Davy McDonald’s tent by the side of the loch. McDonald, 65, moved into a tent in 2007, after he was diagnosed with a critical heart condition and told he needed a transplant. He decided to self-isolate on the edge of a loch, to the east of Fort William. “I thought: if I’ve only got a short life expectancy, I’m just going to come out and live in the wild, which is what I was going to do when I retired.” Living in an area without a phone signal or roads, and few hikers, he has become resilient and self-sufficient. Shopping for supplies involves a round trip of 10 miles walking and 50 miles by train. McDonald by the loch where he has settled. McDonald brings back supplies to his canvas home after a 60-mile round trip. Ken Smith in the wilderness he loves. Smith, 74, is known as the Hermit of Loch Treig. He has lived alone in an isolated log cabin, lacking all modern amenities, since 1984. Once a month, he hikes along an active train track to his nearest station, then takes an hour’s ride to Fort William for food and medical supplies. His one concession to modern life is an emergency locator beacon, which he activated in February 2019 after becoming ill – the distress signal was routed via Houston, Texas, to the coastguard and then Lochaber Mountain Rescue; he was airlifted to hospital by helicopter. A newspaper cutting about Smith’s rescue. Smith on his monthly shopping expedition. Smith relaxes in his cabin.