The UN has removed the Saudi-led coalition fighting in Yemen’s war from an annual blacklist of parties violating children’s rights, despite the fact its own investigators found the coalition killed or injured hundreds of children last year. António Guterres, the United Nations secretary general, said on Monday the coalition of Arab nations supporting Yemen’s exiled government would “be delisted for the violation of killing and maiming, following a sustained significant decrease in [casualties] due to airstrikes” and the implementation of measures aimed at protecting children. Coalition operations killed or injured 222 children in Yemen in 2019, Guterres wrote in his report to the UN’s security council, but the toll had fallen since an agreement signed last March. The coalition’s Yemeni government partners were found to be responsible for 96 child casualties, and the Houthi rebel movement, against which both are fighting, was responsible for 313. Both the Houthis and Yemeni government forces remain on the blacklist. The move was met with anger from campaigners who said the coalition’s removal from the report leaves Yemeni children vulnerable to future attacks. In a statement, Human Rights Watch said the decision “ignored the UN’s own evidence of continued grave violations against children”. Inger Ashing, of Save the Children, called the decision “shocking”. 24m people – 80% of Yemen’s population - require some form of humanitarian or protection assistance. 3m people forced to flee their homes. 85,000 -  Save the Children estimate that this number of children under the age of 5 may have died through hunger and malnutrition. 1m cases of cholera in 2017, the largest outbreak of the disease in recent history. 2,200 people died during it. A resurgence of the disease saw more than 137,000 suspected cases and almost 300 deaths in the first three months of 2019. Over 91,600 fatalities since the conflict started in 2015, as measured by the Armed Conflict Location and Event Data project. 18,292 civilian casualties, including 8,598 killed 4,500 military strikes recorded that directly targeted civilians - outlawed by the Geneva conventions. 67% of the deaths caused in these attacks were by the Saudis and their coalition, with Houthis and their allies responsible for over 16%. 19,990 recorded air raids since the conflict began £770m - the amount of foreign aid given by Britain in food, medicines and other assistance to civilians over the last half a decade. £6.2bn - the amount of money Britain has earned in the same period selling arms to the Saudis and their coalition partners. Zero - despite being 527,970 square kilometres, Yemen has no permanent rivers. Just 2.9% of Yemen’s land is considered to be usable arable land. Countries and parties are listed in the annual report on children in conflict zones for offences including killing, injuring or abducting children, recruiting child soldiers, denying aid access and targeting schools and hospitals. Those listed are not subject to action: the UN instead uses the “name and shame” tactic to push parties to take steps to limit violations of children’s rights. Saudi Arabia was first included on the blacklist in 2016, but the decision was reversed after the country threatened to cut off funding to UN programmes. The following year, the coalition was placed in a sub-section of the report created for those making efforts to avoid deaths of children. It remained there in 2018 and 2019. The secretary general’s envoy for children and armed conflict, Virginia Gamba, said the UN had come “under no pressure” from Riyadh this year and that the removal from the list was based on data. The coalition will be subject to a further year of monitoring and “any failure” to further decrease child casualties would result in it being listed again in 2021, Guterres added. Yemen has been mired in conflict since the Houthis forced the Yemeni president, Abd Rabbu Mansour Hadi, to flee to neighbouring Saudi Arabia in 2014. The war escalated in 2015 after the Saudi-led coalition intervened in a bid to restore his government. Both the coalition and western governments who supply it with arms have been repeatedly criticised by rights groups and conflict monitors for bombing campaigns that have hit schools, health facilities, funeral gatherings and wedding parties. The UN estimates the combined death toll in Yemen’s war from fighting and diseases such as malnutrition and cholera is 230,000 people.