Like all comedy clubs, the Angel in London is closed and faces a precarious future caused by the Covid shutdown. The doors to its stages at the Bill Murray and Camden Head pubs may be closed but it is now a virtual venue, hosting regular live streams including Chatty Hour at 5pm, with octogenarian American Lynn Ruth Miller talking about how she became a standup at 70. Hosted by Rob Mayhew. Free but donations and Patreon membership welcomed. The NextUp comedy site offers various subscription plans to stream pre-recorded sets by acts including Rachel Parris, Archie Maddocks and Thenjiwe. During lockdown they have also been streaming shows on Twitch, YouTube and Facebook Live channels. In Juliette Burton’s Happy Hour, at 9pm, the fringe favourite welcomes special guests Georgie Morrell, Sooz Kempner and Tiernan Douieb. Free but donations welcome. Jayde Adams hosts a weekly half-hour Couch Cabaret on Facebook Live (from 7.30pm) from her fabulously decorated living room, with her gimpsuit-clad accomplice Pudding (aka comedian Rich Wilson). This week she is joined by singing sisters Flo & Joan, Steve Bugeja, Brett Goldstein, Kate Lucas and “artist and hussy” Lily O’Farrell, creator of Vulgradrawings on Instagram. Free but Adams offers ways to support each artist. Knock2Bag, the reliably uproarious night at the Moth Club in east London, is streaming a prerecorded show from 8pm with new material and sketches from some of its favourite acts including Tim Key, Natasia Demetriou, Lou Sanders and The Pin, whose sharp lockdown sketches have been a treat on Twitter. £5 but free to NHS and key workers. The Gilded Balloon, beer-soaked palace of Edinburgh fringe comedy, is one of the many festival venues that will be eerily quiet this summer. However, on Friday nights they have been hosting the Sofa Set List, with gags from changing rosters of isolated standups. You can catch up with the last one, hosted by Thanyia Moore, on YouTube. Free but donations welcome. Hosted by the mighty Kiri Pritchard-McLean, Comedy at the Covid Arms has become a lockdown favourite for its first-rate lineups mixing established stars and top names from the circuit. The next show (tickets must be bought before 5pm on 6 June) features Frankie Boyle, Dane Baptiste, Fran Lobo and Dan Nightingale. Money raised goes to the performers and to the Trussell Trust. £2 and upwards; for £10 you get a “front-row seat” letting you interact with the performers. This year’s Cheltenham Science festival has gone entirely online with a series of live and pre-recorded events on its YouTube channel from 2–7 June. It ends on Sunday night with Robin Ince and Josie Long’s Cheltenham Shambles, mixing music, science and standup with some special guests. Free but donations welcome. The live comedy industry is reeling from the effects of the lockdown and until comedians and fans can get together again in the same room there are many initiatives to support performers and promoters. One is to buy an “advance ticket” to a show that hasn’t yet happened, which you can redeem for the gig of your choice once lockdown eases. Show and Tell, Berk’s Nest, Fight in the Dog and Stamptown are all offering such schemes.