When I first watched Summer Heights High, seeing the character of Jonah – a lazy, dumb, breakdancing, Tongan teenager – I was mortified and struck dumb by the fact that in 2007 brownface was allowed on Australian TV. This week it was revealed that Netflix had quietly pulled four of Chris Lilley’s television shows, specifically those that featured Lilley in black- or brownface portraying Tongan schoolboy Jonah Takalua and African American rapper S.mouse. Chris Lilley’s “Jonah” is not from Tonga, I am. I’m the same age as Chris Lilley, mid-forties, woman of colour, born in Sydney on the ancestral lands of the Cadigal people. I’m a Tongan woman, indigenous to the Kingdom of Tonga, the last remaining indigenous monarchy of the Pacific. I’m also Australian. Both my mother and I have had lifetime careers in Australian media and arts sectors. Two whole lifetimes of working towards sharing our Tongan voices and yet, Chris Lilley’s “Jonah from Tonga” is what most people know, here and abroad. Watching Summer Heights High more than a decade ago, I felt sick with disgust that a white man was commissioned to depict a specific diasporic Tongan identity of a young disadvantaged boy of low economic status and challenging circumstance. I couldn’t believe that any funding body thought that this was a good idea. I wondered - who were the human beings behind making these decisions? What might their motives be? I was particularly mortified that the other Pacific diasporic actors who played alongside the Jonah character, were co-opted into the brownface act and became publicly complicit in aiding overt racism that ultimately damages their own personal identities. Being a performer, I understand that a gig is a gig. But, I worried about them. I worried that they might believe that the only way you can get actor work is if you betray your own identity or that working comes with relinquishing any dignity. They wouldn’t be the first performers to do this, but I hurt on their behalf. It’s difficult to describe the emotions when one is confronted with such disrespectful imagery of one’s collective identity, but when the Jonah From Tonga series came out, naming our country in the title, it felt like a stab in the guts. I was winded, because I grew up in an Australia where people constantly asked me where I’m from and had no idea where Tonga is. At primary school I had a T-shirt that said “Where on Earth is Tonga?” to help abate schoolyard racism, only to have a brown-faced Chris Lilley answer that question on TV. Tongan community members did respond when the Summer Heights High spin-off, Jonah From Tonga, came out. Some groups unleashed a social media movement #iamnotjonah in an attempt to reclaim Tongan dignity in the face of brownface. After that first encounter with Summer Heights High, I purposefully did not watch it or study it. As a Tongan-Australian, I have no need for Chris Lilley to whitesplain my own people to me as entertainment and, in the interest of self preservation, I choose to steer well clear of racist works, knowing how harmful that imagery can be. Netflix’s decision to remove Chris Lilley’s shows from its platform is welcome and I for one, can breathe better for it. Lilley’s Jonah character is a racist construct. But like any construct, it can also be dismantled. This is what we are witnessing now, I hope. Seini F Taumoepeau is a performer, presenter and educator based in Sydney.