China has sharply criticised Canada over its comments about two Canadians charged with spying, blaming its leaders for “irresponsible” statements and calling on Ottawa to end its “megaphone iplomacy”. Chinese prosecutors this month charged Canadians Michael Kovrig, a former diplomat, and Michael Spavor, a businessman, over allegations of espionage and providing state secrets. In response, Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau called on Beijing to cease the “arbitrary detention,” and US secretary of state Mike Pompeo also called for their release. But a statement posted on the website of the Chinese embassy in Ottawa on Saturday said the evidence against the two Canadians was “solid and sufficient”. The two were arrested in December 2018 – a few days after Canada detained the financial director of Chinese telecommunications giant Huawei, Meng Wanzhou, at the request of the US judicial authorities. The charges against the two Canadians have been criticised as being retaliation for Meng’s arrest. China denies the allegation, while Trudeau has repeatedly called the detention of the two men “arbitrary”. “The accusation of so-called ‘arbitrarily’ detaining Canadian citizens is totally groundless,” the Chinese statement read. “Chinese judicial organs will continue to handle the above cases strictly in accordance with law, and protect the two Canadians’ lawful rights,” it added. Meng’s detention, on the other hand, was itself “arbitrary,” the statement continued, describing it as “a grave political incident concocted by the United States to suppress Chinese high-tech enterprises and Huawei, and Canada is its accomplice” “Stop making irresponsible remarks on cases of Michael Kovrig and Michael Spavor, and exerting pressure on China through ‘Megaphone Diplomacy’,” the Chinese embassy statement said. “At the same time, Canada should reflect on its mistakes in the Meng Wanzhou incident, stop political manipulation, immediately release Ms. Meng Wanzhou and ensure her safe return to China.” Some 20 Canadian officials, as well as Kovrig’s wife, recently called on Trudeau to intervene to stop the extradition process of the Huawei executive in order to facilitate the release of the two Canadians. But the prime minister, who has regularly affirmed the independence of the Canadian judicial system, categorically ruled out this possibility on Thursday, believing such a decision would put other Canadians in China and around the world at risk. While on probation in Vancouver, Meng is accused by Washington of circumventing US sanctions against Iran. Spokespersons for Trudeau and deputy prime minister Chrystia Freeland could not immediately be reached.