With space in our homes at a premium, even the tiniest outdoor plot provides solace. We’ve never needed nature’s salve more. So, for anyone lucky enough to have a garden, now’s the time to treat your backyard with the same decorative care as your front room. We asked five decorators and designers to share their tricks for creating the ultimate outdoor retreat, from furniture to table settings. “If you do it well, a garden is an escape into another little world,” says Beata Heuman. The Sweden-born interior designer, whose own London plot features a conservatory-style garden house, suggests adding a simple string of filament-bulb lights outdoors. “It’s so atmospheric,” she says. “At night, it really heightens the sense of space.” If you do it well, a garden is an escape into another little world Heuman treats the garden like a room. “Think about how you want to use it throughout the day,” she says. Consider whether you’ll need to provide shade, or if you want to face the sun. With furniture, Heuman errs on the side of caution. “It can be quite sad looking out on lots of empty chairs in winter,” she says. “But a garden bench looks nice all year round.” Inspired by the wall tattoos at Jean Cocteau’s French Riviera home, Heuman has plans for a terrace mural in her own garden. “It gives depth and a sense of something to discover,” she says. Her holy horticultural grail is the Sicilian poolside in Luca Guadagnino’s 2016 film A Bigger Splash. “People aren’t imaginative about gardens,” she says, “but it’s a great place in which to be creative.” beataheuman.com For Atelier Vime founders Anthony Watson and Benoît Rauzy, outdoor living can be organised into a trio of spaces: somewhere to dine, somewhere to read and a place to lie in the sun. The pair have been spending their days on their farm in Brittany, where they’re growing their first crop of wicker, the base material for their creations. “Garden reading is an activity that requires a comfortable chair and a low table for your book, carafe and glass,” says Rauzy. “I’m a big fan of the outdoor bookshelf – ideally somewhere sheltered from the rain.” For outdoor flooring they love scourtin, the circular rugs made out of coconut fibre that were once used as extraction filters in the production of olive oil. Made in La Scourtinerie, a small factory in Provence, the rugs are “so sweet underfoot”, says Rauzy. Watson and Rauzy dine at a round rattan 1960s table topped with tiles by the French ceramicist Roger Capron. They’ll arrange large rattan armchairs and sunbeds together with giant planters and lanterns of their own design. The key to the outdoor idyll is practicality. “Everything has to be easy to live with,” says Rauzy, “so less is definitely more.” ateliervime.com/en Simplicity is the essence of Nathalie Farman-Farma’s garden style. The textile designer’s terrace on the roof of her London studio draws on the botanical aesthetic of traditional Russian dachas (cottages). “Nothing should compete with nature,” she says of the richly layered tapestry of vegetables, herbs and climbers in terracotta pots. The most important addition is her white wooden café table with foldable chairs. But the style should be dictated by the context, she says. She’ll use vintage scarves, or antique folk textiles as a tablecloth, topped with small Japanese ikebana basket planters. “I love things to feel a little overgrown,” she says of her rooftop’s romantic, yet unfussy look. For guests she’ll pull out cushions and Bessarabian kilims from indoors. “I like the continuity between the outside and in,” she says. “It’s nice to blur the boundaries.”decorsbarbares.com Matilda Goad has turned her modest north London plot into a series of little havens. It’s partitioned both by foliage and flowers, and old railway sleepers found on eBay, to build borders, paths and a bench. “It creates a sense of discovery even in a small space, which is exactly what I like to do indoors,” says designer and consultant Goad, who created the space under the guidance of the garden designer Butter Wakefield We so rarely have amazing weather, it makes sense to think about pieces to pull into the garden from your sitting room Rather than splurge on furniture, Goad plans to build a concrete- topped dining space. “We so rarely have amazing weather in this country, it makes sense to think about pieces to pull into the garden from your sitting room,” she says. Long wooden benches and little stools work just as well outside as in, especially when teamed with Hungarian linen cushions and Mexican rugs to pull everything together. Goad makes an exception for bistro tables and chairs by the French maker Maison Drucker and Parisian-style park benches – the brighter the hue, the better. “An acid-yellow bench really pops against a brick wall and greenery.” Try eBay, Pamono or Selancy for similar vintage pieces and smarten up with a lick of paint. “If you have a small terrace or garden, why not paint it Yves Klein Blue or use a bright tone on the exterior doors?” suggests Goad. “The garden is a place where you can be brave.” matildagoad.com “Furniture is a great way to change a garden without altering the whole infrastructure,” says Ula Maria, landscape architect and author of Green: Simple Ideas for Outdoor Spaces. “It’s such a basic thing, but if there’s a chair outside, you’re more likely to go out and sit.” The smaller the space, the bigger the impact. “Furniture can be used as sculpture,” says Maria. She likes online second-hand store 1stdibs for quirky finds. The aim is to create harmony. “Keep to a particular style,” she says. “In a contemporary garden with minimal planting, you’d have clean-lined furniture. But in a more romantic, English garden where the plants are whimsical, go for something vintage or classical.”ulamaria.com