Katori Hall’s acclaimed play The Mountaintop, set on the eve of Martin Luther King’s assassination, is to be presented online. The two-hander will be directed by Roy Alexander Weise, joint artistic director of Manchester’s Royal Exchange theatre. “Covid-19 is the latest pandemic to strike but we’ve all been dodging a virus for centuries – the sickness of racism,” said Weise. “The pain and rage felt by black people around the world today is not new. The deaths and violence are not new. For black people, I offer this story for catharsis. I see you. I grieve and scream and feel and do with and for you. For white people it’s an opportunity to listen, really listen, and to learn; with your families and those you are connected to.” The online reading of The Mountaintop will reunite the two actors Weise directed in the play at the Young Vic in London in 2016, Gbolahan Obisesan and Ronke Adékoluejo. Obisesan plays King and Adékoluejo plays a maid he talks to in his hotel room on the night before his assassination in Memphis in 1968. The scale of the ensuing protests has been echoed in the last week after the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. “We are on the cusp of something that could change the story of humanity and the quality of life for every human being to walk the earth from this point forward,” said Weise. “We all have a part to play. As we think on the life of Dr King, may we also think of the lives lost and those sacrificing theirs right now for the lives of all our children and their children yet to come.” The Mountaintop will be streamed for free on the Royal Exchange’s YouTube channel on 10 June and will be available until 15 June. Donations are invited, with funds raised to support the legal costs incurred by protesters who are incarcerated. The theatre says the production is designed to “bring communities together through incisive storytelling and because Black Lives Matter”. The reading will be introduced by Weise and Hall, who in 2010 won the Olivier award for best new play for The Mountaintop, beating Lucy Prebble’s Enron and Jez Butterworth’s Jerusalem. Her later plays include the sensational Tina Turner musical and Our Lady of Kibeho, which explores the apparent visitation of the Virgin Mary to a trio of Rwandan schoolgirls in 1981.