Until recently, you would have most likely found Jenny van Sommers analysing the fruit aisle of her local Sainsbury’s in Bermondsey. Four years ago, she took up painting and, after a brief foray into rock studies (“the rocks didn’t give much back”), bananas became her obsession. “Bananas are my muse”, she says. “The banana paintings have saved me from a million types of despair and boredom. I love them. I love painting them and listening to records. Life makes perfect sense when painting bananas. I am thinking, ‘Be the banana’.” Her paintings are stylistically simple, with a dirty humour reminiscent of artists such as Sarah Lucas and Rebecca Warren. Van Sommers, the child of two academics, describes her mother as a “classic tree-hugging, bra-burning feminist”, who encouraged her not to learn to cook, sew or type. Her father is an artist and professor of psychology who used Jenny as a test subject in the puzzle and drawing experiments featured in his books on art and the brain. He spent time in a boy’s home when his mother couldn’t feed him during the 1930s depression in Australia, so when it came to his daughter’s career, he was keen she found a vocation that allowed her to support herself. Since 1998 when she moved her life from Sydney, Van Sommers has carved out a career as one of the most sought after still-life photographers in London. She’s shot ads for Calvin Klein and Prada, and worked for Vogue. “I became a still-life photographer because it’s a solo pursuit – just a shape and how to light it … how to see it.” In recent years, she has made the time to put down the camera and pick up the paintbrush. Her new works shares some of the characteristics of her well-known photographs. She probes the depths of stillness through a exploration of shadows, surfaces and reflections. She says painting is a welcome respite from the crazy speed of living. “I have spent the last 20 years in London chasing things that ultimately didn’t mean much. Paintings are, for me, a way of going back to the slow pace – taking time over something,” she says. “Sometimes I paint over them again to make the paint thicker so there is a three week drying time between layers. Stopping to change the record and sit and look at the painting for a while is good too.” Painting might be a new way to work for Van Sommers, but her passion is voracious. “It’s late in the day to start out as an artist, I did my first painting when I was 50. I figure if I paint every day I can make up for lost time eventually.” When the noose of lockdown tightened, she had a giant banana commission to accomplish. However, like many of us, the new and unusual feelings that came with isolation led to procrastination and walking – dog walking in her case. As she stalked her local streets she began eyeing up the walls of a nearby kebab shop and, with the blessing of Raoul, the owner, she got to work painting it. Now the property is the colours of Liquorice Allsorts and covered in vessels and cocktails. “I started painting gin and tonics because, like many people, I’ve been drinking more lately. I wanted to do something ordinary and domestic because I felt that my world has gotten much, much smaller with lockdown. My street feels like a tiny place in a massive city and it’s cosy now with no one else around.” The irony, then, is that Van Sommers’ solitary painting brought a new intimacy with her local community. “My street is tiny and a bit run down, so no one minded me painting the colours and the drinks. I moved in 15 years ago but it’s doing this has made me get to know everyone – and I love that. When I walk my dog I have a little chat with the neighbours through their window. It’s a very nice feeling and a totally new one for me. I think that is the lockdown effect, everything gets localised.”