The prime minister, Justin Trudeau, says newly released video showing a forceful arrest of a Canadian Indigenous leader is “shocking” and raises serious questions. Chief Allan Adam of Athabasca Chipewyan First Nation alleged last week that Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) beat him in March during an incident involving an expired licence plate. This week, Adam’s lawyer filed RCMP dashboard video in a court application to stay legal proceedings for resisting arrest and assaulting police. In the 12-minute clip, Adam grows increasingly frustrated at the police officers, accusing them of harassing his family after they prevented his vehicle from leaving the parking lot early in the morning of 10 March. The vehicle, which police allege was using an expired licence tag, had previously been impounded by police on an unrelated matter and released back to Adam a few days before. As Adam swears at officers, they repeatedly tell him to get back in his vehicle. One officer briefly grabs Adam’s wife, Freda Courtoreille, as she stands near the back of the truck. Adam yells at the officer not to touch Courtoreille, who has late-stage rheumatoid arthritis. As Adam becomes increasingly distressed, the officer tries to grab his arm. Moments later, a second officer appears on the scene and tackles Adam, allegedly punching him in the head as he lies on the ground. “Fuck you, don’t resist arrest!” the officer yells, along with: “Don’t resist! Don’t resist!” The officer then applies a chokehold. As police hold Adam on the ground, Courtoreille and bystanders are seen pleading with officers to stop. Adam is cuffed and led away bleeding. Trudeau said in Ottawa: “We have all now seen the shocking video of Chief Adam’s arrest, and we must get to the bottom of this. I have serious questions about what happened.” RCMP was not immediately available for comment, but the public safety minister, Bill Blair, who oversees the RCMP, said he would follow the investigation closely. The RCMP, which previously reviewed the video, has said the use of force was reasonable. An independent Alberta agency has begun an investigation. There have been global protests since the death in Minneapolis of a black man in police custody last month. Indigenous people have also been outraged about two other recent incidents with Canadian police. Trudeau has said Canadian police should be equipped with body cameras.