In January we paid Irish Ferries £486 for a return trip to Dublin from Holyhead, for a holiday on the west coast of Ireland in June. At our age – I’m 81, my wife is 74 – we always pay extra for the flexible cancellation option. Because of coronavirus, the trip was off. We contacted Irish Ferries for a full refund under the terms of the cancellable ticket. However, on 29 April we received an email that said “no refund applies”. We would only be given a voucher. We responded that, as we had taken the flexibility option, we did not agree with being offered a credit in place of a refund. I realise that you must be inundated by complaints and queries about refunds but hope you will investigate as to whether my experience with Irish Ferries is typical of the manner in which they are dealing, or rather failing to deal, with requests for refunds. Is their lack of response a deliberate attempt to avoid their responsibilities, or simply poor and incompetent customer service? CS, Wirral You had a right to a full refund, so it is distressing that Irish Ferries treated you the way it did. The fact that you paid extra for the right to cancel – the “flexibility” option on Irish Ferries typically costs an additional £22 – and met all its terms and conditions should have meant you received a refund almost immediately. It is also disappointing that Irish Ferries did not, as you say, acknowledge or engage with your letters and emails after you were wrongly told a refund did not apply. Coronavirus has resulted in many travellers being sent vouchers and credit notes, even though they are legally entitled to a cash refund. It was doubly upsetting for you that a refund was not issued after you paid extra for the cancellation flexibility. We suspect that many companies are indiscriminately issuing credit notes, irrespective of the terms and conditions on an individual ticket. But HMS Consumer Champions has rescued you from peril. After we approached Irish Ferries, its head of customer services rang you with a “fulsome” apology and you have now been refunded in full. You are lifelong readers of the Guardian – as well as regular customers of Irish Ferries. We do hope that if, and when, coronavirus is conquered you get another chance to visit Westport in County Mayo, your intended destination. It’s a splendid part of Ireland’s Atlantic coast. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions: http://gu.com/letters-terms 