Now for the interesting bit. If the absence of spectators for the first three rounds of the PGA Tour’s much-heralded return has been nothing more than a point of reference, how a tightly packed field will respond to a lack of electricity as they pursue glory over the final 18 holes of the Charles Schwab Challenge is a genuine source of intrigue. It may be that Jordan Spieth, in seeking to scale the mountain once more, will benefit the most from the absence of thousands of expectant fans in his native Texas. Spieth doesn’t exactly need added attention. It seems remarkable that Spieth has not won since the Open of 2017, with his subsequent on-course struggles widely recognised. As a Dallas native, Spieth knows Fort Worth’s Colonial Country Club better than anyone else in the field. He begins day four just one from the 13-under-par lead held by Xander Schauffele. Should Spieth prevail, the upshot is sure to be emotional. His attempts to do precisely that are guaranteed to prove fascinating. “I think as the week has gone on it’s felt weirder, in my opinion,” Spieth said of the unorthodox backdrop. “Going in, I thought that Monday to Friday would be somewhat normal and then Saturday and Sunday would be a bit odd. Today definitely felt a lot different for it being a Saturday afternoon in the last group, when you kind of think about the situation you’re in, you just don’t feel like you’re actually out there doing that. I just felt like I was playing a normal round.” Spieth again looked far from his best during a third round of 68, with his putting something of a saving grace. He has Collin Morikawa, Branden Grace, Gary Woodland and Justin Thomas for company on 12 under par. Schauffele made birdie on the last for a 66 to ensure he carries the slimmest of leads into the final day. “Today was a day where I look at the last couple years and potentially say that would have been a two or three over and taken me all the way out of the tournament,” Spieth said. “I like the progression I’ve been able to make. I feel comfortable going into tomorrow that I can shoot a good score.” Rory McIlroy also hopes his bad day is now removed from the equation. The world No 1, who signed for a wonderful 63 on Friday, was unspectacular during a subsequent 69. McIlroy is three shots off the lead. Justin Rose and Patrick Reed – who produced a 63 of his own on Saturday – have matched McIlroy’s 54-hole aggregate. That this promises to be quite the charge towards the finishing line is emphasised by the fact 14 players, including six major champions, are within three of the unflappable Schauffele. “For a Saturday afternoon being in contention on the PGA Tour, it felt sort of weird out there,” McIlroy said. “The first couple of days it was fine, but definitely today it’s feeling strange. I’m sure tomorrow will feel pretty strange, especially with so many guys in and around the lead.” McIlroy knows what he has to improve on. “I’ve been leaving a lot of putts short,” the Northern Irishman said. “You’d think after three days you should adjust but it’s still tough to get yourself to hit them.” Ian Poulter moved to seven under courtesy of a 67. Brooks Koepka is two shots further back after adding a 69 to back-to-back 68s.