Rory McIlroy has risked rancour on the fairways by insisting he has no sympathy for European players who have opted not to earn world ranking points during the PGA Tour’s restart. Tommy Fleetwood and Francesco Molinari are among those who have remained in Europe despite the PGA Tour returning to action last week. Two weeks of quarantine are necessary upon entering the United States. The resumption of the world ranking system along with the PGA Tour irked Fleetwood. “It is wrong and unfair that ranking points are starting when players are playing on one continent,” he said. Lee Westwood has also hinted at similar sentiments. McIlroy, the world No 1, disagrees. “If I were in their shoes and I was asked to come over to the States and shelter in place or quarantine for two weeks before these tournaments, I would have done that,” said the Northern Irishman. “If you really care about your career and care about moving forward, you should be here, I think. “I get there’s different variables and families and stuff involved, but we all have the means to rent a very nice house in a gated community in Florida. It’s not a hardship for two weeks to come over and quarantine. My caddie, Harry, came over and did it. He stayed in our guest house. The two weeks flew by. I honestly don’t understand the guys complaining because there is a solution to it. You can come over here and do what needs to be done.” McIlroy added that he “does appreciate” family circumstances but his stance is a firm one. “Most kids, it’s sort of the end of the school year,” said McIlroy. “I know a few kids that went back to school. Again, you can bring your family with you. We all have the means to do that. It might seem a little harsh, but I don’t get that mindset, especially if you care about your career and you want to advance.” McIlroy, who is in the field for this week’s RBC Heritage event in South Carolina, shrugged off the outspoken comments of Nick Faldo last weekend. As McIlroy struggled in the closing round of last week’s Charles Schwab Challenge, the Englishman asserted during television duties that the four-times major winner “lacks a Plan B”. McIlroy is unperturbed. “Commentators are put in positions where they have to say something,” McIlroy said. “I respect Nick a lot. Nick’s been really good to me growing up, as a junior golfer and even into the professional level. I’ve learned very quickly out here that you don’t take anything personally and you just move on.”