The Jacksonville Jaguars marched from their home stadium to the steps of the local sheriff’s department in protest of inequality and police brutality on Friday, joining an unprecedented groundswell that’s brought together some of the NFL’s biggest stars. “Today we say no more,” wide receiver Chris Conley said. “Today we see a nation that can’t await change, a city that won’t sit still or be quiet.” Players were joined by their families, coach Doug Marrone and general manager Dave Caldwell. The @Jaguars players, staff, coaches making their way toward @JSOPIO - Led by most tenured Jags player @JUSTAB3 and also here is Myles Jack and @JoshAllen41_ plus former Jags player @DenardX @ActionSportsJax @ActionNewsJax @ESPN690Jax @WOKVNews pic.twitter.com/HM5bTGi7ME The Jaguars started their march at 9:04am local time to signify the local 904 area code. The protest came two days after owner Shad Khan spoke against racism in a letter on the team website. He promised then the franchise would work toward a “timely response.” Conley, wearing a Black Lives Matter T-shirt, spoke at the Jacksonville sheriff’s department. He said he cried when he saw the video of the shooting death of Ahmaud Arbery, a black man who was jogging when killed on 23 February in Georgia. Hear the message from @FlightConley on the steps of @JSOPIO ⤵ pic.twitter.com/CnbD7w4Fkc Marrone said the Jaguars are working on actions they they believe can make a difference. He also challenged the white community to take a step back, listen and learn. The team also posted videos from quarterback Gardner Minshew, linebacker Joe Schobert and defensive end Aaron Lynch. “Let’s not make the same mistakes we’ve made,” Marrone said. “We need to stand together white and black to make this movement work.” With the NFL allowing only coaches to return to their offices Friday and players still working remotely because of the pandemic, several Jaguars could not take part in the march. The demonstration took place less than 24 hours after Patrick Mahomes, Saquon Barkley, Michael Thomas and more than a dozen others NFL stars delivered a passionate message to the league about racial inequality. The 70-second video was released on social media platforms Thursday night and includes Odell Beckham Jr, Deshaun Watson, Ezekiel Elliott, Jamal Adams, Stephon Gilmore and DeAndre Hopkins, among others. #StrongerTogether pic.twitter.com/sfwF9Uvgaa Thomas, the New Orleans Saints wide receiver who has led the league in receptions the past two seasons, opens the video with the statement: “It’s been 10 days since George Floyd was brutally murdered.” The players then take turns asking the question, “What if I was George Floyd?” The players then name several of the black men and women who have recently been killed, including Floyd, Arbery, Breonna Taylor and Eric Garner. “I AM George Floyd,” Hopkins says. Adams follows with: “I AM Breonna Taylor.” The video closes with the players insisting they “will not be silenced.” They also demand the NFL state that it condemns “racism and the systemic oppression of black people. ... We, the National Football League, admit wrong in silencing our players from peacefully protesting. ... We, the National Football League, believe black lives matter.” In a statement, the NFL said: “This is a time of self-reflection for all – the NFL is no exception. We stand with the black community because black lives matter. “Through Inspire Change, the NFL, Players and our partners have supported programs and initiatives throughout the country to address systemic racism. We will continue using our platform to challenge the injustice around us. “To date we have donated $44 million to support hundreds of worthy organizations. This year, we are committing an additional $20 million to these causes and we will accelerate efforts to highlight their critical work. “We know that we can and need to do more.”