The UN nuclear watchdog’s 35-nation board of governors has called on Iran to stop denying the agency access to two suspected former sites and to cooperate fully with it. The endorsement of a resolution that was tabled by the European powers is the International Atomic Energy Authority’s first such criticism of Iran in eight years, and comes as the foreign ministers of France, Germany and the UK met in Berlin to discuss the nuclear issue. The IAEA’s director general, Rafael Grossi, has reported repeated denials of access to the two sites, and the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, has accused Iran of unprecedented obstruction. China, often a backmarker on Iran nuclear issues, joined Iran’s criticism of the resolution, suggesting China’s growing conflict with the west is now spilling into the Iran nuclear arena. In the runup to Friday’s meeting, the French foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, stressed that he did not want to see Europe abandon the 2015 nuclear deal altogether. France, Germany and the UK – the “E3” – in theory still have the option of putting the issue of Iranian noncompliance further into the nuclear deal’s formal dispute mechanism, a process that could lead to the deal unravelling. The E3 have so far said they do not wish to escalate the issue by referring it to the UN security council. Iran has already taken successive steps away from the deal, but has allowed the inspections process to continue, except at the two contested sites. It claims the request for access to the two small-scale research sites breaches IAEA statutes, and stems from fake evidence provided by Israeli espionage. The IAEA says it believes it has seen evidence of efforts to clean up the sites, and this might relate to secret activities before the nuclear deal was agreed. In a statement after the Berlin meeting, the E3 said they remained committed to the nuclear deal, but for the first time expressed reservations about lifting the UN arms embargo in the autumn, as proposed in the deal itself. “We believe that the planned lifting of the UN conventional arms embargo next October would have major implications for regional security and stability,” they said. “We recall that the EU embargoes on conventional arms exports and missile technology will remain in force until 2023.” The US has put pressure on the E3 not to lift the UN embargo on arms sales to Iran. The embargo is part of the original nuclear deal, but the US has said it is not conceivable that the embargo should be lifted at the UN security council at a time when Iran is not in compliance with the deal and poses such a threat to regional security. The US itself pulled out of the deal in 2018, and privately recognises that there is little or no chance of Iran renegotiating the deal until after the US presidential election in November. On the issue of inspections, the IAEA director general has been complaining for weeks that its inspectors have been denied access to two sites. Speaking to reporters after the resolution was passed, Grossi said it would be “absolutely unacceptable” if an example were to be set that states can be selective in their implementation of agreements with the UN agency. “There are no exceptions. There is no Additional Protocol a la carte,” Grossi said, referring to the agreement under which the IAEA requested access to the sites. “I intend to sit down with Iran very soon and to try to solve this as soon as possible.” US officials, often isolated on the Iran issue, were delighted that the vote had been passed by 25 to 2. Jackie Wolcott, US ambassador to the IAEA, said: “Iran should not look at this board meeting closing as a free pass until September. If they don’t promptly act, the board will have to consider next steps.” Referring to the fact that China and Russia had voted against the resolution and eight other countries had abstained, Christopher Ford, a US assistant secretary of state, said the result revealed China and Russia’s true status “as protectors and enablers of the Iranian proliferation threats and safeguards problems”.