Greatness is often contested territory. Rough and Rowdy Ways, Bob Dylan’s 39th studio album, is awash with pre-eminence, both in its actual and its more unstable forms. “I’m the first among equals, second to none,” harrumphs Dylan mischievously on False Prophet, one of three excellent songs that trailed this album. A roguish twinkle in his eye, Dylan is very much flirting with his own status as the marquee bard of the 20th century here, the kind of guy who can’t quite break the internet, but just slow it down a mite when he puts out a new song. It’s not the last of Dylan’s winks and feints. Over 10 tracks, he seeds Rough and Rowdy Ways with deep musical and lyrical erudition, witticisms and considerable panache. References abound, to artists, songs and historical figures. On Murder Most Foul, his 17-minute broadside on the assassination of John F Kennedy, allusions accrete as he widens his scope and lays out an alternative history of the 20th century in song. When women’s names appear, very often they are the fictional creations of men: Mary Lou, Miss Pearl Elsewhere, conspiracies pile on top of curses, a rich and deep collage of references, hints, names and quotes, steals and homages on topics that Dylan holds dear – the Bible, the classics, the blues. He weaves a most powerful spell from them; the layering effect is like that of an incantation. None of Dylan’s meanings is stable: he throws things together because they sound good as often as he sets up oppositions only to toy with them. He’s not this and he’s not that. But for all the learning on show, the opaque and entertaining threads linking Anne Frank to Indiana Jones to the Rolling Stones (as Dylan does on I Contain Multitudes), you come away from Rough and Rowdy Ways considering not only its accomplishments, but the discourses in which it participates. Dylan’s learning tends towards the canonical – unimaginatively so. Shakespeare, the classics, Beethoven and Chopin; various saints are well represented, generals Sherman, Montgomery and Scott too. He’s forever crossing Rubicons, wondering what Julius Caesar would do. Were it not for the presence of bluesmen, jazz men and rock’n’rollers, Dylan, a one-time quaker of the social order, would emerge as a rather square and fusty autodidact. He remains mired in the goings-on of the 20th century and longer ago, an unexamined position of high boomerism (or just before: Dylan was a war baby). Although Dylan has spoken of his respect for groundbreaking female creatives – most recently, in a New York Times interview, he mentioned Ella Fitzgerald – there is precious little airtime afforded to women in the album’s pantheon. Yes, we hear, fleetingly, of Anne Frank, Etta James and Stevie Nicks; On Murder Most Foul, Lee Harvey Oswald’s infamous declaration “I’m a patsy” opens the goal for a Patsy Cline name-check. The scales, though, are weighted far, far in favour of all the old dudes. When women’s names appear, very often they are the fictional creations of men: Mary Lou, Miss Pearl. One nocturnal prowl, the entertainingly gothic My Own Version of You, is drenched in as much gore as Murder Most Foul. Like the album that surrounds it, it is also an ardent act of bricolage. Dylan sends his first-person protagonist on a tour of morgues (and, weirdly, monasteries) to gather enough female body parts to build a new woman – someone who can “save” him, “someone who feels the way that I feel” – the kind of stuff feminists have met with eye-rolls since for ever. The song soon expands into an arena where Dylan can rhapsodise over Al Pacino and Marlon Brando and invoke saints Peter and Jerome. There are bit parts too for Freud and Marx, Shakespeare and Liberace. Dylan’s Frankenbride is some ghoulish fantasy of a woman without aesthetics of her own, much less a mind. It can be unwise to judge the artists of the past by the standards of the present. In so many ways, the fact that Rough and Rowdy Ways sounds the way it does is a tribute to Dylan’s unbending solipsism: he is who he is. This is to be treasured. Few care more about the Great American Songbook than Dylan. His last three albums, 2015’s Shadows in the Night, 2016’s Fallen Angels and 2017’s Triplicate, mined its nooks and crannies compulsively. Here, beautiful songs are played with discretion and near-telepathy; a luminosity hovers above the slow miniatures, such as I’ve Made Up My Mind to Give Myself to You; a Spanish guitar spook haunts the riveting Black Rider. While peers such as Paul McCartney or Mick Jagger continue to strive, with varying degrees of dignity, for contemporary resonance, Dylan’s lack of interest in modernity is a default: he shrugs at the young in the New York Times interview (“they’ll believe anything”). If Rough and Rowdy Ways has an overarching theme, it is “the long, strange trip of the naked ape”. If Dylan contains multitudes – as per the song of the same name – mankind’s flaws are legion. These are magnificently dissected here, often with self-deprecation. It’s a shame, though, that agency, good and bad, seems to be reserved for men on what is – still – a great album by a great artist. “Sing your hearts out, you women of the chorus,” husks Dylan on Mother of Muses. Uh-huh.