“I wanted to carry him on my shoulders and swing him round and make him dizzy,” Oisin Murphy said of Kameko’s trainer, Andrew Balding, after recording the first Classic success of his career in the 2,000 Guineas at a spectator-less Newmarket on Saturday. “But first of all, I’m not big or strong enough to do that, and secondly, there’d be a lot of bad press tomorrow morning.” In this time of physically distanced racing behind closed doors, however, a back-slapping celebration was the only thing missing fortrainer and jockey, on a day when their belief in Kameko was fully vindicated. For Murphy, meanwhile, there was the added satisfaction that victory came in the colours of Sheikh Fahad al-Thani’s Qatar Racing operation, which retains him as No 1 rider and supplied several Group One successes aboard the outstanding Roaring Lion in the jockey’s breakthrough season at the highest level in 2018. Newmarket: 1.15 Haseef 1.50 First In Line 2.25 West End Charmer 3.00 Trefoil 3.35 Millisle 4.10 Zhui Feng 4.45 Eastern World 5.20 Sunray Major 5.55 Bronze River 6.30 Motagally Haydock Park 12.55 Country 1.30 Bucephalus 2.05 Vivionn 2.40 Sangarius (nb) 3.15 Safe Voyage 3.50 Sarsaparilla 4.25 Maid In India (nap) 5.00 James Park Woods 5.35 The Throstles 6.10 Maori Knight Lingfield 1.05 Spark Fury 1.40 Pharoah King 2.15 Lexington Warfare 2.50 Yes My Boy 3.25 Cemhaan 4.00 Annie Quickstep 4.35 Kennocha 5.10 Equally Fast 5.45 Street Life All the attention beforehand was on Pinatubo, the highest-rated juvenile for a quarter of a century after a perfect six-from-six campaign in 2019. William Buick had Pinatubo in an ideal position to extend his winning run with a quarter of a mile to run, but it soon became apparent that his overwhelming superiority over last year’s two-year-old crop had not survived the winter. The burst of speed at the end of a well-run race that carried him nine lengths clear in the National Stakes in September was missing and it was Kameko, at 10-1, who found an extra gear in the closing stages as the 5-6 favourite could only stay on into third place with Aidan O’Brien’s Wichita a length in front of him and a neck behind the winner. As is often the case for a Guineas winner, Kameko was immediately promoted to the head of the market for the Derby, to be run at Epsom on 4 July, though there is little in his pedigree to suggest he will appreciate a step up from a mile to a mile-and-a-quarter. Like Roaring Lion, who died of colic last year after a single season as a stallion, Kameko is a son of the American stallion Kitten’s Joy, and Roaring Lion’s failure to get home when third at Epsom two seasons ago is still strong in the memory. Yet the lure of Epsom may well prove irresistible. “To me it looks the obvious choice, there would be a stamina doubt but there’s only one way to find out,” Balding said. “Probably his optimum trip would be a mile-and-a-quarter, but I think for one day only, he might be able to stay a mile-and-a-half. I would be slightly reluctant to run him back at Ascot [in mid-June], so we will see what is on offer for him. He will certainly get a mile-and-a-quarter, but there is a certain race over a mile-and-a-half in July that would be quite appealing.” While Kameko may wait for the Derby, the beaten favourite could attempt to redeem his reputation at Royal Ascot. “Pinatubo travelled well into the race but when he made his move he got up to their girths and just didn’t go any further forward,” Charlie Appleby, his trainer, said. “Obviously I’m disappointed as it’s the first time the horse has been beaten in his career, but at least he hasn’t fallen out of the back of the telly. He’s had a normal blow after that and we’ll take him home, but the first impression would be to take him to the St James’s Palace Stakes.” On a busy day of trials for Royal Ascot and the Epsom Classics, Terebellum gave Frankie Dettori his first success in Godolphin’s royal blue colours since his split with the operation eight years ago in the Dahlia Fillies’ Stakes at Newmarket. The winner shortened in the betting for the Prince of Wales’s Stakes at Royal Ascot but is more likely to wait for other Group One targets later in the season and the short recovery time before the Royal meeting could also prevent Far Above, a hugely impressive winner of the Palace House Stakes, from lining up at the Royal meeting. “It’s only 10 days [to the King’s Stand Stakes] and sadly that’s too short,” James Tate, his trainer, said. “He wouldn’t be the easiest to train so we’ll have to look further down the line.”