Beijing has tabled a draft of the Hong Kong national security laws before its top lawmaking body, indicating it intends to rush through the contentious legislation which promises to drastically increase Chinese control over the semi-autonomous region. State media reported the draft law was put before the standing committee of the National People’s Congress (NPC), charged with drafting the law, for a three-day session beginning on Thursday. Typically bills should go through three rounds of deliberation by the NPC committee, a process that could take six months but can be shortened if special sessions are called. Chinese officials said last month that the laws would be implemented “without delay” and state media reports have said it could be enacted within a month. The report by the state news agency Xinhua gave little detail on the draft, but said it clarified the four major offences – including secession, subversion of state power, and terrorist activities – and the associated penalties. Beijing appears to have strengthened the wording of the fourth offence relating to foreign involvement, and what was previously criminalising “foreign and external interference in Hong Kong affairs” now criminalises “collusion with foreign and external forces” to endanger national security. In late May, Beijing’s parliament rubber-stamped the proposal to introduce national security laws, which could establish mainland security agencies and secret police in Hong Kong. The decision drew condemnation from pro-democracy and legal figures inside Hong Kong and globally, and has caused alarm among businesses and media. This week all G7 nations issued a joint statement expressing deep concern about the laws, and urging Beijing to reconsider. In response they were met with a sharp rebuke and indignation by the Chinese foreign ministry, and were told to stop interfering in “Chinese affairs”. “China’s determination to push for a national security law in Hong Kong is unshakeable,” China’s top diplomat, Yang Jiechi, told the US secretary of state at a bilateral meeting on Thursday. “China resolutely opposes the US interference in Hong Kong affairs and the G7 foreign ministers releasing a statement on Hong Kong,” he said. Under the 1997 joint declaration signed by Britain and China at the handover of Hong Kong, the city was guaranteed 50 years of a high degree of autonomy, under the “one country, two systems” principle, and governed by its own mini-constitution, the Basic Law. The Hong Kong government says it has failed on a Basic Law obligation to enact its own national security laws and is unlikely to do so in the near future, and so it supports Beijing’s decision to promulgate the laws itself. Legislative elections are scheduled for September in Hong Kong. Hong Kong’s secretary of justice, Teresa Cheng, on Thursday revealed she did not know the detail of the law, only what she had read from the news. Opponents have noted that other obligations, such as the promise of universal suffrage by 2007, have also failed to be delivered, and that Beijing is increasingly overreaching in its attempts to control the city and snuff out a growing pro-democracy movement driven by a year of mass protests. Just one of the protest movement’s five core demands has been met, with the withdrawal of last year’s bill to allow extradition to mainland China. However, that too now seems lost, after a senior official said this week that people charged with exceptionally serious crimes under the new laws could be extradited “if the [Chinese] government thinks it is necessary”. Claudia Mo, a high-profile pro-democracy politician, said the laws seemed a “fait accompli”. “Every time in Hong Kong you think things can’t get worse, things will get worse. So we’re almost numbed to it,” Mo said. “Under this new law anything can come under their prescribed crimes. You do or say anything and you can [face] trumped up charges.” Mo was sceptical of assurances that extradition would only be used in exceptional circumstances. Martin Lee, a former legislator considered the father of Hong Kong’s democracy, said Beijing’s actions “make a nonsense of the safeguards contained in the Basic Law”. “This is the single most terrible thing which has happened since 1997 but it’s part of the overall plan.” Lee said if the law allowed extradition then it undid the work of the pro-democracy movement and threatened all those who protested. More than 9,000 protesters – including Lee – have been arrested, and only about 1,300 have come before the courts. Lee said there were not enough prison cells to hold everyone. “Will they put us in concentration camps like Xinjiang?”