If you were going to write a novel about a bigoted southern Republican senator eager to turn the US into a military dictatorship, it would feel heavy-handed to name the protagonist Tom Cotton. The only thing less subtle, perhaps, would be calling him Tommy Plantation. But this is real life, I am afraid, not a dystopian novel – and real life in 2020 does not seem interested in subtlety. Nor does Cotton. The Arkansas senator attracted ire last week for a column he wrote in the New York Times urging that the military be brought in to deal with protests against police brutality. “Send in the troops,” the headline bluntly declared. “The nation must restore order,” it continued. Nothing says “land of the free” like turning your troops on your own people. Cotton wanted a coup and he got one. After widespread criticism of the article, including from Times journalists who argued it endangered the safety of black employees, the paper issued an apology; James Bennet, its editorial page editor, who had originally defended the decision to publish, resigned. The turmoil seems to have played well for Cotton, who went on Fox News on Sunday to criticise the paper for caving to the “woke child mob” (which would make a great name for a punk band). According to a Washington Post reporter, Cotton has “quintupled his fundraising” since the fracas started. He has also garnered the public approval of Donald Trump. Cotton’s moment in the spotlight has passed – but he will almost certainly be back there soon. Despite having the charisma of a soggy bag of lettuce, the senator is hugely powerful: Cotton has influenced many of Trump’s decisions, including cuts to legal immigration and the banning of commercial flights between the US and China during the early days of Covid-19. He is also the guy who told Trump it would be a great idea to buy Greenland. When not urging the acquisition of the world’s largest island, Cotton can often be found fanning the flames of racism and xenophobia. He has repeatedly used the phrases “China virus” and “Wuhan virus” and has floated the conspiracy theory that Covid-19 was created by the Chinese government in a weapons lab. Cotton may look like an American Alan Partridge, but he is no buffoon; he is a dangerous man with dangerous ambitions. Indeed, a number of experts believe he is angling to be the heir to Trumpism. His popularity among conservative activists seems to have been boosted by the Times controversy and it looks increasingly likely he will be a Republican presidential contender in 2024. The idea of a President Cotton should terrify us all. Cotton has Trump’s appetite for authoritarianism and a similar disdain for a free press – in 2006, while serving in Iraq, Cotton wrote an open letter calling for the prosecution of two Times reporters who had broken a story about a secret government programme. He appeals to the Trump wing of the Republican party, but, crucially, he also has strong ties with the establishment. “How many guys in town can give a speech at the Council on Foreign Relations and also get kudos in the pages of Breitbart?” Steve Bannon asked the New Yorker in 2017. “The answer is, one guy.” That guy? Cotton. We will eventually see the end of Trump’s presidency, but it will be far harder to get rid of Trumpism. The question is: how will Trump’s legacy evolve? Will it fade into the fringes or take on a more serious, more sinister, facade? Trumpism is largely defined by incompetence and farce, but Cotton could spin it into something a lot more terrifying and even more tragic. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnist