The Japanese, Singapore and Azerbaijan grands prix will not take place this year, Formula One has announced. All three meetings were under consideration to be part of the season’s flyaway rounds when the sport leaves Europe. F1 remain confident, however, that they will still be able to host between 15 and 18 races this year. The sport made the announcement that the meetings would not form part of the new calendar on Friday morning. F1 intends to publish its full, revised race schedule for 2020 before the Austrian Grand Prix opens the season on 5 July. F1 issued a statement explaining that the restrictions due to the coronavirus outbreak had made the meetings untenable. “These decisions have been taken due to the different challenges our promoters face in those countries,” read the statement. “In Singapore and Azerbaijan the long lead times required to construct street circuits made hosting the events during a period of uncertainty impossible and in Japan, ongoing travel restrictions also led to the decision not to proceed with the race.” The F1 sporting director Ross Brawn believed the sport would still deliver a strong calendar. “We have lots of different options,” he said. “We’re very confident we’re going to have a great second half of the season, but there is no point making the statement yet as there are still some moving parts we need to put together.” The Baku grand prix had been scheduled for 14 June but was postponed because of the coronavirus. Singapore had been set for 20 September with Japan due to take place on 11 October. The sport is understood to have considerable interest from new venues in hosting meetings. F1 currently has eight races set to take place in Europe. Bahrain and Abu Dhabi are set to close out the calendar and Bahrain may host two races, using one of its alternative configurations. “There’s a nice sort of almost oval track that would be quite exciting, and all the layouts have a grade one licence with the FIA, so that is an option,” said Brawn. The remaining flyaway meetings that are in the mix to make up the schedule from the current calendar include Canada, Russia, China, USA, Mexico, Brazil and Vietnam. There is also ongoing discussion for F1 to host further races in Europe. “There are a number of good European tracks where we could add another one or two races on to make sure we have a comprehensive season,” said Brawn. “We’re not going to declare it yet, as it’s still a work in progress.” The Mugello circuit in Italy is reportedly in the frame to host a race, with MotoGP having recently withdrawn its meeting set to be held there. The track is owned by Ferrari who use it for testing and it holds a grade one FIA license. F1 has never raced there but when the sport held an in-season test at Mugello in 2012 it was highly praised by the drivers. Hockenheim in Germany is also already under consideration to host races as is Portimao in Portugal and Imola in Italy.