Deep in the bowels of English football, York City are preparing to become the unfortunate answer to a pub quiz question: can you name one of the two men’s clubs to finish top of their league but miss out on the title because of the coronavirus pandemic? York’s potential fate is the punchline to two decades of decline that have taken the club from beating Manchester City at home in the league to a position where they are about to lose the National League North championship on a points-per-game basis to Kings Lynn Town. Lower divisions were annulled altogether, with the seasons deemed to have never existed, but pending a decision on applying the points-per-game rule, which is being discussed on Thursday, York will join Crewe Alexandra as a club denied a league title. Which, on the face of it, does not matter to anyone other than the few thousand fans of a struggling former Football League club. There is still a good chance of York being promoted. But as Sky, the government, and the Premier League proudly boast that football is back – and lower-league clubs dependent on income from gate receipts whisper “no it’s not” – what is the the post-pandemic future for clubs like York? This is a club that finished last season 139th in the pyramid yet still maintain a full-time squad – giving York a good claim to be one of the lowest-ranked professional football teams in the world. Will this be sustainable? And it poses deeper questions about the purpose of a club at this level – is it to produce a competitive team or to act as some sort of cultural civic glue for the local population? This was supposed to be the club’s final season at Bootham Crescent, probably the only football ground in the country to have both been briefly named after a chocolate wafer and to have its executive boxes face over the car park rather the pitch. The ground is in such a state of neglect it was recently decked in swastika drapes and used by Bollywood film-makers as a stand-in for a 1930s Nazi sports stadium. Now, with a functionally bland out-of-town stadium almost complete, coronavirus may have stolen the chance for York’s fans to say goodbye to its city-centre home of 88 years. Supporters have turned to telling anecdotes. There was the club’s “building for the future wall” – buy a brick in the memory of your deceased relative – which began to collapse, with bricks left smashed on the ground. Or when the manager Jackie McNamara sacked himself only to be immediately appointed as the caretaker while helping with the search for his successor. Sales of books commemorating the ground have boomed. The club’s decline has come as York has transformed itself from a mid-sized northern industrial city making Chocolate Oranges and railway carriages to a financially-booming educational and tourist centre stuffed with Harry Potter shops. What is the role of a lower-league club in a city where increasing affluence – and a potential role as the home of the House of Lords – comes with accompanying inequalities and housing shortages? Is it realistic for clubs at this level to have budgets in the millions of pounds with only a few thousand people turning up to watch and no TV deal? And is it worth paying to maintain a youth set-up that produced Premier League players, including Ben Godfrey, when dozens of clubs are going to be offloading talent on the cheap? York’s staff and players have been furloughed, the business effectively put into cold storage. Many contracts run out at the end of June and recruitment plans have gone out of the window. There is no clear route back to matches this year. Even when football restarts – title or no title – it’s possible it will be in a new stadium, with new players and physically-distanced fans. Which leaves us with the supporters. One of the seats at Bootham Crescent was regularly taken by John Sentamu, the recently retired Archbishop of York, who could be seen brandishing his spectacles at the referee, blessing the pitch, and mixing his administration of the Church of England with enthusiastic tweets on tactics. Very proud of you Minster Men! We are York! We are York! We are York! Get the song out loud and clear! And stay top of the League: Composure! Pace! Attacking Football ⚽️! And playing it Wide and on the Ground! With You! Sentamu 👊🏾 “They know how to disappoint sometimes,” he said, describing his relationship with the club in his final interview with the Yorkshire Post. He then confirmed his intention to renew his season ticket when the opportunity arises.