Galaxy Quest was the low budget 1999 film parody of Star Trek fandom which has since earned cult status amongst Trekkies and the uninitiated alike. This feature-length documentary interviews key cast members and screens behind the scenes footage as leads Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver and Alan Rickman navigate a set fire and a studio head who is struggling to work out how anyone would enjoy this bizarre film about the cast of a fictional sci-fi series being visited by aliens. Ammar Kalia After returning last week, the racing magazine show is now truly back in the saddle, previewing meetings across the UK this weekend and looking ahead to the much-altered Royal Ascot schedule. Host Oli Bell is joined online by experts Matt Chapman and Jason Weaver. Graeme Virtue More shiny floor fun in another compilation of ‘best bits’ of McIntyre’s Big Show. This week, Bradley Walsh gets his phone confiscated in Send To All, there’s a rude awakening from “Bob The Sponge” for Gino D’Acampo, and Doreen from Yorkshire gets a surprise. Resistance is futile. Hannah J Davies Following Harry and Megan’s move to the US, the royal documentaries turn their focus to the remaining Britain-based royal couple: William and Kate. The talking heads analyse the history of their relationship and debate how they might affect the future of the monarchy, if at all... AK The semi-final of the 1990 World Cup remains one of English football’s most resonant occasions. It’s often argued that the doomed grandeur of England’s defeat captured new audiences and birthed the gentrified modern game. This doc looks back with some of the key players. Phil Harrison If you are still yearning for more tales of Joe Exotic after the success of Netflix’s Tiger King, then this is the archive-laden feature for you. Featuring masses of b-roll footage from Exotic collaborator JD Thompson, this documentary aims to establish how Exotic became the notorious zookeeper. AK Westworld, 9.20pm, TCM Movies In 1973 Michael Crichton’s sci-fi tale of a Romano-medieval-wild west theme park where lifelike androids indulge humans’ fantasies was an extreme flight of fantasy; now, in the age of HBO’s precision-tooled reboot, it’s all quite familiar. But Richard Benjamin’s fight for survival still grips. Paul Howlett