Church bells rang out across Budapest, public transport came to a halt and people observed a moment of silence as Hungary commemorated the centenary of the treaty of Trianon on Thursday. Signed in the aftermath of the first world war, the treaty still forms a major part of Hungary’s national identity and memories of the harsh settlement have helped fuel the nationalist agenda of the current prime minister, Viktor Orbán. László Kövér, the parliament speaker and a close ally of Orbán, said young Hungarians should “engrave in their hearts and minds” the lessons of Trianon. “We Hungarians can’t change the past, we can only change its most painful consequences,” he said, in a special parliamentary session devoted to the anniversary. The treaty, formalised on 4 June 1920, was one of several signed after the first world war and imposed by the victorious allies on the defeated Central Powers. It stripped Hungary of three-fifths of the territory, and two-thirds of the population, it had controlled as part of the Austro-Hungarian empire. “Trianon – the word and the subject matter – has been stirring passions in our country for a hundred years,” said Gábor Koltay, the director of a rock opera about Trianon that premiered in Budapest two years ago. A huge monument to “national solidarity” constructed near Hungary’s parliament in central Budapest was to be unveiled on Thursday, but the ceremony was postponed due to coronavirus restrictions. It bears the Hungarian name of every settlement in “Greater Hungary”, the majority of which are now situated in neighbouring countries. “Trianon trauma” is felt across the political spectrum in Hungary, but Orbán has harnessed these feelings during the past decade and used them in his quest to show Hungary as a resurgent nation, and to keep out migrants and supposed “globalist influences”. While never speaking directly about reclaiming lost territory, Orbán’s government has made Hungarian minority populations in neighbouring countries a cornerstone of its foreign policy, pumping money into cultural centres, media outlets, churches and football clubs in the region and handing out Hungarian passports to those who want them. Hundreds of thousands of ethnic Hungarians have taken up the offer, and the vast majority have cast votes for Orbán’s Fidesz party, cementing its control over Hungarian politics. Last month, Orbán caused consternation in a number of regional capitals by posting a map of historical Hungary on his Facebook page as part of a post wishing students good luck with their history exams. Slovenia’s president, Borut Pahor, expressed “rejection and concern” over the map. The rights of Hungarian minorities have caused tension in relations with both Romania and Ukraine in recent years. Opposition politicians have also condemned Trianon as unfair but said that, 100 years later, the discussion should move on. “We don’t need to forget Trianon. That would be impossible,” said the Democratic Coalition, an opposition party, in a statement. “But mourning about Trianon can no longer be the focus of Hungarian politics, because, apart from the fact it leads nowhere, it paralyses, makes it incapable of action; it also consumes the moral and political power of the homeland.”