Peterborough and Tranmere were left incensed after League One clubs voted to curtail the season because of coronavirus, with promotion and relegation decided according to points per game and play-offs to be held. Coventry have been promoted as champions and Rotherham as runners-up but Peterborough were bumped out of the play-off positions by 0.02 points and the club’s director of football, Barry Fry, said adopting such a “Mickey Mouse” framework was a “disgrace” and called it the worst day of his 60 years in football. “How the hell can you apply PPG willy-nilly without looking at the fixtures, and whether a team plays home or away?” Fry said. “It’s Mickey Mouse. There’s so many clubs in League One that could have gone up. I cannot understand how the EFL has come up with this solution and, most of all, I cannot believe so many clubs voted for PPG to end the season because it’s so, so unfair. We had one of the division’s best records at home and five of our remaining nine games were at home, seven of which were against bottom-10 clubs. “I’ve been in the game 60 years – at Peterborough for nearly 25 – and I’ve got the greatest respect for our game, from non-league all the way through, but this is the worst day of my life because I think we’ve been cheated out of a place in the play-offs. I feel sorry for [the co-owner] Darragh [MacAnthony] and [manager] Darren Ferguson, who has built a squad and had a team challenging for promotion. It’s a disgrace.” Wycombe, who jump from eighth to third, are joined in the play-offs by Oxford, Portsmouth and Fleetwood. Tranmere, three points behind AFC Wimbledon with a game in hand, are relegated with Bolton and Southend. Four clubs voted to continue. League Two clubs agreed to use the same method to end their season, with only Forest Green Rovers voting in favour of playing on. Swindon are the champions, with Crewe and Plymouth also promoted. The two-leg play-offs, which in League Two will be contested by Exeter, Cheltenham, Colchester and Northampton, start on 18 June and both finals are set to be at Wembley. One club are due to be relegated to the National League but the situation is complicated by disciplinary proceedings brought by the league against Macclesfield, who are three points above the bottom club Stevenage but stand to be deducted points if found guilty by an independent commission. A suspended two-point penalty would be triggered if Macclesfield are found guilty, and any further points deduction would relegate them. The club are contesting the three charges, which include failing to pay several players their March wages on time. The EFL said relegation would be implemented only if the National League provides assurances it will start the 2020-21 season. The National League board is set to convene on Wednesday to determine the final table. It is likely it will follow the EFL in using a points-per-game model, and it is understood there remains clamour for the play-offs. Points per game could promote two teams in the event that play-offs are not played. Forest Green’s owner, Dale Vince, said: “The vote didn’t take too long. It wasn’t a surprise because I think the decision had been made by most clubs over a month ago but this was just confirming it. We know where we stand now. We’ve been looking at what things will look like next year.”Vince said the club were considering following Hibernian in operating a cashless stadium and were hopeful of reaching fans despite being resigned to matches being played behind closed doors until the turn of the year. “We’ve got a growing global fan-base that we want to do more for,” he said. The EFL votes came after the 71 league clubs agreed to adopt the EFL board’s framework, rejecting alternatives from Barnsley and Tranmere. Championship clubs agreed to relegate three teams if their season, due to resume on 20 June, is not completed. Amendments to the EFL board’s framework put forward by Ipswich, Lincoln and Stevenage were rejected. League One and League Two to be settled on points per game after the seasons were ended. League One Promoted: Coventry City (champions), Rotherham United Play-offs: Wycombe Wanderers v Fleetwood Town, Portsmouth v Oxford United (dates tbc) Relegated: Tranmere Rovers, Southend United, Bolton Wanderers League Two Promoted: Swindon Town (champions), Crewe Alexandra, Plymouth Argyle Play-offs: Thursday, 18 June: Semi-final first legs Colchester United v Exeter City (17:15 BST) Northampton Town v Cheltenham Town (19:45 BST) Monday, 22 June: Semi-final second legsExeter City v Colchester United (17:15 BST) Cheltenham Town v Northampton Town (20:00 BST) Final: Wembley, 29 June Relegated: Stevenage**Macclesfield may go down instead if they receive a points deduction League 1 play-off details to be confirmed The shadow sports minister, Alison McGovern, and shadow secretary of state, Jo Stevens, have called for an urgent meeting with the government and EFL. A letter to the secretary of state for digital, culture, media and sport, Oliver Dowden, expressed grave concern at the “acute” challenges facing lower-league clubs. “I fear a lot of clubs will go out of business now,” Fry said. “Clubs cannot compete without any gate receipts… For us 20-35% of our income is gate receipts. And now we can’t play in front of anybody for who knows how long.”