The former England captain Chris Robshaw has signed for the San Diego Legion in Major League Rugby, the Guardian can confirm. The Harlequins flanker, 34, had been linked to a team on the opposite coast, Rugby United New York. In February he flew to Manhattan to meet coaches, owners and supporters. But having recently agreed to complete the coronavirus-delayed 2019-20 season with Quins, he has signed to play for the Legion in 2021 and 2022. In a statement, Robshaw said: “Each season the MLR has grown and advanced its reputation in professional rugby circles. I have been looking at my options to play in the MLR over the last 12 months and there have been plenty of rumors about where I might play. “In the end, it really was an obvious and easy choice for me. In a short period of time, SD Legion has built a reputation as being a world-class organisation. I am very excited [about] being part of that organisation and helping continue to advance its reputation both on and off the field.” Robshaw won 66 caps from 2009 to 2018 and captained his country from 2012 to 2015, when England fell at the pool stage in a World Cup they hosted. Only Will Carling has led England on more occasions. The Legion reached the MLR championship game in 2019, the league’s second season, losing to the double-champion Seattle Seawolves. Before the coronavirus curtailed season three, San Diego led both the western conference and the overall standings, winning all five of their games. On the field, the double World Cup-winning All Blacks centre Ma’a Nonu turned out this year. Legion chairman Darren Gardner told the Guardian Nonu was like other players “in the process of re-signing” for 2021, having made “a huge difference on and off the field, which is certainly what we’re anticipating from Chris”. The Legion have also employed the Italy second row Josh Furno. Off the field the former Scotland lock Scott Murray was recently named co-coach, with the former US wing Zack Test. As it happens, the Lions prop Alex Corbisiero, a former England team-mate of Robshaw, now lives in San Diego and works in US television. “We’re very focused on building a world-class organisation,” said Gardner, an Australian with roots in the Eastern Suburbs club in Sydney. “And part of that is having world-class players. Few of those could have a bigger name and a bigger impact than Chris Robshaw.” Asked how Robshaw came to sign for San Diego rather than New York, Gardner said: “From a positional and a talent availability perspective, Chris was always a player that we were interested in signing. When I made the inquiry we struck up a terrific conversation and explained what we were doing here and how. We’re fortunate that he was interested in moving to California and playing MLR. “There’s nothing I can really say about New York other than that they didn’t sign him and obviously we’re very pleased that he’s come to play for us.” Sources in New York said RUNY had opted to concentrate on American talent in a well-stocked back-row department. Other major names to have played in MLR include the England full-back Ben Foden and France centre Matthieu Bastareaud, for New York; World Cup-winning South Africa prop Tendai Mtwarira for Old Glory DC; and New Zealand wing Rene Ranger for the Colorado Raptors. Gardner said Robshaw would by his presence alone help develop talent both in the squad and in youth rugby in the a catchment area which includes Old Mission Beach Atheltic Club, or OMBAC, a power of the US game. “I think we have one of if not the leading flanker in the US in Psalm Wooching,” Gardner said, “and I think the opportunity to play with and learn from Chris is going to take Psalm to the next level, and he’s going to be a world class No7 for the US at the next World Cup.” Wooching, 26 and born in Hawaii, shone as a linebacker in college football with the Washington Huskies but passed on the prospect of an NFL career. In 2017, he had a brief trial with Quins. “Psalm’s a force unto himself but some of those soft skills he can learn from Chris are going to make him quite spectacular,” Gardner said. MLR is now a 13-team league, Colorado having withdrawn but two new teams having entered. The Los Angeles Giltinis are the second MLR team, after the Austin Gilgronis, owned by Australian investor Adam Gilchrist and named for a yet-to-exist cocktail. The Dallas Jackals ownership has links to the Dallas Mavericks NBA franchise. The LA team will be coached by Australians including Stephen Hoiles, a former Brumbies, Waratahs and Wallabies back row. Dallas have appointed as head coach Allen Clarke, a former Northampton, Ulster and Ireland hooker and Ospreys coach. Salaries in MLR are very low by world standards and the whole US game remains in a parlous position following the bankruptcy of governing body USA Rugby, amid financial damage wrought by the coronavirus pandemic. MLR did however hold its first college draft last weekend, the Legion picking up two of 24 players brought into the league. In his announcement of the Giltinis name – which has not proved universally popular – MLR commissioner George Killebrew, a former Mavericks executive, said: “Given these uncertain times with the current global crisis, we feel fortunate that MLR is still rapidly growing and being positioned for success in 2021.” 