Manly were denied a thrilling final-minute win over Parramatta after controversially being pulled up for a forward pass late in their 19-16 loss at Bankwest Stadium. After they trailed 18-6 early in the second half, the Sea Eagles worked the margin back to three with three minutes to play on Saturday night. They looked to have the match won when Tom Trbojevic put Rueben Garrick over the line from 20 metres out, only for referee Ben Cummins to rule the pass forward. Replays appeared to show the ball had gone backwards out of the hand before travelling forward in the air, making it a legal play. “I thought I threw it back,” Trbojevic said after full time on Fox League. “I didn’t get to see too much of it. You get those ones, disappointing one but that’s footy I guess.” The call overshadowed what was a real litmus test for the Eels in the first match against another genuine contender this season. The win kept them atop the ladder, with their best start to a season in 31 years and just the fourth time in their history they have gone 4-0 to start the competition. Maika Sivo was the star as he set up two first-half tries with offloads, before Mitchell Moses held his nerve with a late field goal. Usually renowned for his bullocking runs, Sivo twice showed nice hands to give the Eels two unanswered tries in the opening 40. The first came when he popped one back to Michael Jennings in the 31st minute just as Trbojevic looked to make a try-saving tackle on the line. Nine minutes later he was in the action again to give the Eels a 12-2 half-time lead. Moving to centre for a nicely worked centre-field scrum play, he threw a one-handed offload for Dylan Brown to cross. And when Kane Evans made the most of a Manly error in the first set after the break to make it 18-2, it looked as if the Eels had the game on ice. It was then the Sea Eagles awoke. Tom Trbojevic put Jorge Taufua over from a mid-field scrum to reduce the margin to 12, before Dylan Walker ran it on the last to make it 18-12 with 26 minutes to play. After Moses nailed a field goal with six minutes remaining to make it 19-12, Taufua barged over again to make it a three-point game with three to play. The Sea Eagles again had all the running in the final minute, before Trbojevic’s ball was called forward just as Garrick forced his way over the line. Cronulla overcame a pre-game temperature check drama to claim their first win of the 2020 NRL season. The Sharks got one over former player Valentine Holmes as they secured a thrilling 26-16 victory over North Queensland in Townsville on Saturday night. The win came after six members of the Sharks team, including halves Shaun Johnson and Matt Moylan, all failed temperature checks upon arrival at Queensland Country Bank Stadium. All of the players subsequently passed a second test and after withstanding an opening barrage by the Cowboys, the Sharks powered to a deserved five tries to three win. Centre Jesse Ramien, the player of the match, and winger Ronaldo Mulitano scored doubles for the Sharks with Briton Nikora also notching a four-pointer for the visitors. Kyle Feldt grabbed a double of his own for the Cowboys, including a 75m breakaway effort in the second half, with Justin O’Neill the other tryscorer for the home team. Both teams also had tries denied by the bunker, with Ramien having an effort scratched just before halftime while a potentially vital effort by Esan Masters in the second half for the Cowboys was ruled out after the officials spotted a knock-on by Shane Wright. Holmes, facing the Sharks for the first time since he walked out on the club in 2018 to pursue an ultimately unsuccessful NFL career, could only manage 101 running metres and made three errors in a quiet display. Cowboys coach Paul Green will lament his team’s sloppy performance, completing just 24 of 41 sets while making 18 errors to the Sharks’ nine. Already without wrecking-ball forward Jason Taumalolo due to a knee injury, the Cowboys also lost Mitchell Dunn (concussion) and John Asiata (knee) in the first half to leave them two short on the interchange bench. Green will be eager for his team to bounce back when they play the Warriors at Central Coast Stadium on Friday, while the Sharks face the St George Illawarra at Campbelltown Stadium next Sunday.