The government has been accused of “cultural and moral insensitivity” for sending pork sausages and bacon to clinically vulnerable Muslim families who are shielding during the coronavirus pandemic. Pork products, including tins of beans and sausages and lentil and bacon soup, which are forbidden for Muslims, have been sent to the most at-risk households under a £104m government contract run by a private firm. Tins of Fray Bentos meatballs and chicken pies are included in the generic “care packages” sent to people who cannot leave their homes due to coronavirus, including those from Muslim, Sikh and Jewish communities, many of whom only eat meat prepared in accordance with their religions. The Labour MP Imran Hussain said his most vulnerable constituents were having to choose between eating and their religious or ethical beliefs. In a letter to Robert Jenrick, the communities secretary, Hussain wrote: “I want to be clear that this is unacceptable and deeply insensitive to our religious communities. “The inclusion of these products is also not just culturally and morally insensitive, forcing some in the most vulnerable positions to choose between compromising religious or other sincerely held beliefs and eating, but yet another display of the structural and institutionalised racism in our society – where the views of minorities are either not considered at all or regarded as not significant enough to warrant intervention.” The food boxes are delivered to people considered “extremely clinically vulnerable” due to underlying health conditions, meaning they cannot leave their home and cannot rely on help from family or friends. The government said more than 3m food boxes, or 290,000 a week, had been delivered under its contract with the wholesalers Brakes and Bidfood, which launched at the end of March. It said the boxes were standardised and might not meet dietary or religious needs, but added: “All boxes provide appropriate levels of nutrition for one person for one week. People with special dietary needs which are not met by the packs they receive should contact their local authority for further help and advice.” Other products in the packages include coffee, tea, biscuits, cereal, fruit, potatoes, pasta, pasta sauce, canned fish and canned vegetables. The meat products usually make up four or five tins, or a significant portion of someone’s weekly food, according to charities. Hussain was alerted to the issue when a community group in his constituency, Bradford East, noticed dozens of unopened tins of meat products outside people’s houses this week. Bradford Moor Pass said it collected more than 40 meat tins on one day. People did not want to complain or appear ungrateful but also did not want the items to be wasted, it said. A Pass representative said he contacted Bidfood, which delivered the boxes, and was told it was “one box fits all” and there were no vegetarian, halal or kosher alternatives. When approached by the Guardian, Bidfood said its role was to pack and deliver the boxes and that inquiries about the contents must go to the government. Bidfood, one of the largest food wholesalers in the UK, was awarded a £104m government contract in March along with Brakes, another distributor, as part of a £208m initiative to deliver food to the most vulnerable. The companies said at the time the boxes would “contain the same items, irrespective of whether they receive the delivery from Bidfood or Brakes”.