MusicPaul Weller Delayed by the pandemic, On Sunset finally comes out this week, offering both familiarity and experimentation from the restless, evergreen singer-songwriter. Out on Friday. Kitty Empire FilmLynn + Lucy British director Fyzal Boulifa progresses from Cannes-laurelled shorts to this gutsily moving debut feature, a working-class suburban drama about two best friends split by unspeakable tragedy and neighbourhood gossip. Released digitally from Thursday. Guy Lodge MusicJanelle Monáe US TV network HBO is hosting a series of performances in honour of Pride month, including “an intimate musical performance” by singer Janelle Monáe, very late on Monday UK time (it’s free, too). Monday 29 June, 1.30am GMT. KE ArtWhoever Heard of a Black Artist? Britain’s Hidden Art History Thoughtful documentary presented by Brenda Emmanus following the multi-disciplinary artist Sonia Boyce as she creates an exhibition for Manchester Art Gallery featuring black and Asian artists, including Yinka Shonibare and Lubaina Himid. Thursday, 11pm, BBC4. Laura Cumming ComedyNextUp comedy festival Buckle up for the biggest comedy festival of 2020 via Zoom. The NextUp comedy festival has launched a 31-day “Edinburgh fringe-style” virtual comedy festival with 31 comedians, including Tim Key, Josie Long and Prince Abdi, performing a series of intimate nightly shows. Starts on Wednesday. Individual tickets or festival pass available. Kadish Morris. FilmLast and First Men Directed by the late Jóhann Jóhannsson, and streaming as part of the Edinburgh film festival online, this extraordinary sci-fi combines grainy footage of brutalist sculptures, Tilda Swinton’s narration and Jóhannsson’s music. Simply stunning. Streaming 3–5 July at curzonhomecinema.com. Wendy Ide TheatreToast Crumbs (sorry, irresistible pun)! Huddersfield’s Lawrence Batley theatre promises not just an online adaptation, but a full, sensorama experience with this radio play-cum-animated film. Audiences are invited to touch, taste and smell the dishes around which Observer food writer Nigel Slater’s memoir of his life is crafted while they watch and/or listen to this new adaptation (featuring the original West End cast, including Giles Cooper as Nigel). Fork out £16 for a ticket to be sent a selection of Nigel’s recipes and rustle yourself up a truly immersive experience. This smokin’ event runs throughout July. For menu, etc, go to www.thelbt.org. Clare Brennan TheatreWhen… Little Angel, the supreme puppet theatre for children, has joined with Pinwheel theatre to stream an adaptation of Emma Dodd’s book about a bear who wants to be “clever and funny, wild and free”. Puppeteer Lori Hopkins, who performs from her home in lockdown, can be seen on Little Angel theatre’s YouTube channel from today until 30 September. Susannah Clapp DanceDancing at Dusk: A Moment with Pina Bausch’s The Rite of Spring One casualty of the Covid-19 lockdown was a remarkable collaboration between Tanztheater Wuppertal Pina Bausch and École des Sables in Senegal. Dancers from 14 African countries had been recruited to perform her 1975 piece The Rite of Spring, which was to open in Dakar and then come to Sadler’s Wells and other European venues. But out of this, the film-maker Florian Heinzen-Ziob has salvaged something wonderful: a film of the final dress rehearsal on the beach near the production’s base in Toubab Dialaw, with the dancers moving across the white sand as the light fades to dusk. This film is being screened by Sadler’s Wells as part of its digital stage – £5 a ticket throughout July. Sarah Crompton ClassicalSusannah San Francisco Opera offers, free online, Carlisle Floyd’s melodic and powerful opera Susannah, popular in the US but hardly known here. In New Hope Valley, Tennessee, an innocent teenager is wrongly condemned by her church community. Patricia Racette sings the title role. 4-5 July. https://sfopera.com/. Fiona Maddocks This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.