Jim and Jane Henson’s ludicrous puppets have embodied joy and wonder ever since they debuted in 1969. The Muppet Show, running for five seasons from 1976, became a multi-award winning classic and is still held in the highest regard now. Not to mention a slew of Hollywood hits, starting with The Muppet Movie in 1979 and most recently Muppets Most Wanted in 2014. Then, of course, you have The Muppets Christmas Carol, an undisputed festive classic if there ever was one. Plenty of people have new ideas for how the Muppets can continue to make classic stories their own (Muppets Les Misérables is my partner’s suggestion). The Muppets have survived for as long as they have because they manage to mean different things to different people, as well as remaining a source of light entertainment for adults and children alike. Now, the Muppets are needed more than ever. Watching The Muppet Movie one lazy Sunday evening, a stirring sense of glee builds deep inside my heart as Kermit the Frog unassumingly starts plucking away at his banjo. He drifts gently into his defining musical number, The Rainbow Connection – a song that since its release has been covered more than three dozen times, by everyone from the Carpenters to Gwen Stefani, and which was revived by Kermit himself last month to provide a badly needed moment of serenity. Kermit’s song is a reassuring pat on the shoulder. An iconic amphibian is effectively telling you that there are always some bright moments in even the darkest days – what’s not to love about that? Kermit is an idol for these times. He is a model of selflessness. All his actions are motivated not by self-interest, but by what will bring the most happiness to as many people as possible. It’s a relentless altruism that once or twice gets the better of him, but that doesn’t make it any less commendable or heart-warming. The rest of the Muppets also do their bit to make these times a bit more bearable. Fozzie Bear’s unbearable jokes are a warm bear hug around my shivering shoulders (just because I’m home more now doesn’t mean I can afford to pay more on heating bills). The Swedish Chef’s unintelligible rambles are the quirkiest of bedtime stories, and Gonzo the Great’s never-ending escapades are an inspiring reminder to try your hardest even when the odds seem stacked against you. Whenever I’m with the Muppets, I’m watching them with the biggest grin on my face and, just occasionally, a tear in my eye, none more so than when enjoying their lauded 2011 big screen return. Disney has picked a good time to make some (but for a number of complicated reasons, not all) of the best Muppets content available on Disney+. Their iconic brand of bliss is especially pertinent now. The Muppets both remind me of better days spent laughing away at their adventures when I was a child, and more importantly are a reassuring presence during a global pandemic. Nothing quite shatters the spell of a dark day than watching Kermit and Miss Piggy reignite old flames or Animal launch into an epic drum solo. They are a source of reassurance, comfort and optimism. As Walter puts it, “As long as there are Muppets, for me there’s still … hope.”