Dozens of broadcasters and actors, including many of the BBC’s own stars, have written to the corporation asking it to stop proposed cuts to English regional television programming. Stephen Fry, Benjamin Zephaniah, Sir Lenny Henry, Dominic West, and This Country star Daisy May Cooper are among those who have signed an open letter calling for the BBC to save the current affairs show Inside Out, which has 11 regional editions. The programme is facing the chop, along with the BBC’s Sunday morning regional politics shows, as part of an effort by the corporation to save money. In some regions the programmes are the only substantial current affairs output by the BBC. BBC presenters who have signed the letter – addressed to the outgoing director general, Tony Hall, and his replacement, Tim Davie – include Samira Ahmed, Mark Radcliffe and Chris Packham. The letter, organised by the NUJ, said: “We are extremely concerned that the BBC regional current affairs programme Inside Out has had its forthcoming series cancelled and the future of all 11 regional departments in England is under review and could even be cut completely. “All of those who have signed this letter have had the privilege of working or appearing on the respected, award-winning Inside Out or one of the many other documentaries the regional units make for broadcast both locally and on BBC networks. Never has in-depth investigative journalism, holding people to account and reflecting the regional diversity of England, been more important.” The BBC has said it has little choice but to consider all options as part of a review of funding. On Wednesday, the national broadcaster said it would ask all of its UK-based public service staff if they were interested in taking voluntary redundancy, as it prepares to make an additional £125m of cost cuts as a result of the coronavirus outbreak. The pandemic has hit profits at the BBC’s commercial arm and also caused a delay in the introduction of the licence fee for most people over 75. Politicians, often regular guests on the regional programmes, have repeatedly raised their concerns about the proposed cuts. Some staff on regional editions of Inside Out accept there may be a case for changing how the show works to make it more suitable for a digital age, but have concerns that if the programme is ended jobs will be lost and nothing will replace it. Many also draw comparisons between the relatively high investment in the BBC’s current affairs operations in Wales and Scotland compared with its commitment to regional programming in England. Cracker writer Jimmy McGovern, who signed the letter, said: “As Boris demonstrated recently when he eased the lockdown despite the virus still raging in Liverpool and Manchester, ‘whatever suits London suits the country’. It doesn’t. That’s why you need regional television.” The threat to the shows comes despite a pledge by the BBC to have two-thirds of its staff working outside London by the end of this decade. There are concerns that progress on this aim could be delayed by the pandemic, with an impact on other regional broadcasting hubs. In Northern Ireland, the SDLP assembly member Matthew O’Toole has written to the BBC to seek clarity on whether a previously announced investment in the corporation’s Belfast base has been delayed as a result of the pandemic.