Marvin Rees, the directly elected mayor of Bristol, has trod a very delicate line this week. He could not – and would not – condone the spectacular attack on the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston. But nor did he hide his satisfaction that it was hauled from its plinth and thrown off a quayside where Colston’s ships would have docked close to a bridge named in honour of the 18th century Bristol slave Pero Jones. “I cannot condone criminal damage. I’m a political leader. We need order in the city,” he told the Guardian. “But I can’t pretend the statue is anything but an affront to me. Not just as a Jamaican heritage man but as a human being.” Describing the act as a “piece of historical poetry”, he said: “The world is full of contradictions and truths that are difficult bedfellows. I have to uphold order at the same time as being honest with people and saying I’m not going to mourn the loss of the statue to the plinth.” Asked if he was proud of the Black Lives Matters activists who tore the statue down, Rees said: “I don’t know who they are, what their motivations were. What happened is the statue became a lightning rod not just for BLM but for a lot of other issues and frustrations, not just in Bristol but nationally and internationally.” Rees, who was out for a walk with his children when the statue was torn down, rejects any notion that the activists acted in a thuggish way. “No one tore down a statue to Queen Victoria or Neptune. This wasn’t mindless violence. It was minded, intentional. It was focused on Colston. There was meaning and purpose.” Rees identifies as black and of mixed heritage, having been born in Bristol to a Jamaican father and white mother. As a boy growing up in a working class area of the city in the 1970s and 80s, racism was a common occurrence. “It didn’t cause us any surprise for people to drive past and call us coon. It used to happen outside my school, it used to happen if we were in the wrong place at the wrong time. That was just life. “My primary caring family are white. That didn’t cause me confusion or sleepless nights, it was just the reality I lived with. That’s informed my approach to identity, belonging, conflict, reconciliation. You live with difference, you live with contradiction. That’s the city I navigated.” An important moment for Rees came in the mid-1980s. “One of my friends said to me: ‘Marv, in a war between black and white whose side are you going to be on?’ I couldn’t answer that. I was a 13-year-old. In many ways it wasn’t a real question, in many ways it was a ferociously real question because physical threat, physical conflict was a reality of race in the city at the time.” Rees was repeatedly asked this week why in the four years of his mayorship he had not removed the Colston statue. “There is sometimes that thing that happens to black political leaders. You’ve been in now, didn’t you solve it? The BBC asked me: ‘Why didn’t you take down the statue?’ I said: ‘Wait there, it’s been there for X number of years, I turn up and suddenly it’s my fault there’s a statue to a slaver in the middle of the city. How do you work that one out?’” Rees, who worked in the media and health sectors before entering politics through Operation Black Vote, said he believed that his becoming mayor had a positive effect on people from BAME and working class communities in Bristol. “I’m the first directly elected black mayor in Europe, which makes a difference. My deputy mayor is a Rasta woman, that makes a difference. I think if you talk to black and Asian people in the city they’ll say it makes a difference. Their children are talking about becoming political leaders.” But, he said, racism was built into politics. “Racism is bigger than an individual’s ability to pass policy. Racism is built into the fabric of our system. “It’s tied in with social immobility. Once we’ve found a solution to social immobility, we’ve got a solution to racism. Social immobility is the thing that confines you to the circumstances of your birth irrespective of your talent or ability. That’s one of the ways racism works. “Has our political system found a way of delivering non-racist outcomes? Let’s have that discussion. Have we managed to produce housing systems, education systems, criminal justice systems, health systems, economic systems, that deliver race equality? I think self-evidently we haven’t. I’m not making an emotional statement here, I’m just saying look at the numbers.” The thinktank Runnymede has judged Bristol to be one of the most unequal cities in the one of the worst places in the UK when it comes to racial equality. “This is a very wealthy city but we have a lot of poverty and inequality,” said Rees. He stresses that many white people are also being left out. “Talking about white privilege does not mean that all white people live lives of privilege – they don’t. That’s where race and class are bound up together. They are not the same thing and they should not be confused as the same thing, but you can’t talk about race without talking about issues of class and you can’t talk about the future of working class white people without talking about the fight against racism.” On whether Neville Lawrence’s assertion this week that policing was still institutionally racist, Rees said: “There’s no institution in the country that isn’t institutionally racist. Unless you can point to me an institution or structure that churns out race equality in which the outcomes for people with black and brown skin are the same as everyone else.” He praises how Avon and Somerset police handled the demonstration that ended with the Colston statue being thrown into the harbour. “There were 10,000 people and no violent confrontation, no big smash-up of shop windows, no lines at accident and emergency. “What they have left us with is a platform for us to have a constructive conversation about our city’s future. If we had had war on the streets over the weekend, we’d have been talking about smashed windows, revenge. We’re not; we’re having a mature discussion about who we are and who we choose to commemorate.” Rees has asked for city historians and other academics to produce a detailed study of all the local memorials and places linked to the slave trade to inform a city-wide conversation on their future. He will not be drawn on what he thinks should happen to the statue or what should be done with the space where it stood. “I think now we have the opportunity for the people of Bristol in a meaningful way to determine what is in that space and I want us to take that.” There are bound to be tensions during the process. Police are investigating a suspected bleach attack on the statue in Bristol of the black poet, actor and playwright Alfred Fagon, which some residents believe is a response to the hauling down of the Colston statue. Rees is cautious about heralding what is happening in the US, Bristol and around the world as a crucial moment in race relations. “I don’t know. We’ve had massive moments. World war one was a massive moment, the war to end all wars. Then we were in world war two. Then the cold war and nearly blew ourselves up. You’ve got the civil rights movement sweeping around the world, in the 80s you’ve got the riots, then the Macpherson report. We’ve had these seminal moments many times, they feel all encompassing, they feel in the moment, this is the time it’s going to change. Some things change but our political and economic systems, our social hierarchies have an incredible resilience.”