The UK government is introducing legislation to protect businesses that are key to public health from foreign takeovers. The changes will give the government the power to protect companies that could be critical in helping the country in future health emergencies but which may be financially struggling to weather the current coronavirus pandemic. The new powers, introduced on Monday, will cover firms such as pharmaceutical and technology companies. “These powers will send an important signal to those seeking to take advantage of those struggling as a result of the pandemic that the government is prepared to act where necessary to protect our national security,” said Alok Sharma, the secretary of state for business, energy and industrial strategy. The government already has the power to investigate takeovers for reasons such as national security and on financial grounds, including the ability to block a takeover or seek assurances from a buyer about future plans for a business. The changes to the Enterprise Act 2002 will mean that the government could take action if a business that is crucial to responding to a pandemic, such as manufacturing personal protective equipment (PPE) or virus tests, is the target of a takeover by a foreign firm. The changes in legislation will also expand the government’s ability to investigate takeovers involving companies in the technology sector, such as artificial intelligence and encryption. Last month, Boris Johnson indicated during prime minister’s questions that new measures were to be introduced, saying that the UK needed to “protect our technological base”. He said MPs were “right to be concerned about investment” and right to be “concerned about the buying up of UK technology now by countries that may have ulterior motives”. The government is yet to stop a deal based on national security grounds but it has imposed conditions on buyers. The legislation will bring the UK in step with countries including France, Germany, Italy and Spain, whose governments have more strict control over potential takeovers. “The UK is open for investment but not for exploitation,” Sharma said, adding that the financial impact of the pandemic “may mean that some businesses are more susceptible to takeovers”. In April the EU announced plans to help block foreign takeovers of firms struggling because of the economic impact of Covid-19. Potential measures include governments investing, and taking a stake, in “weak” companies. The European commission called the plans “measures of last resort” and is consulting member states.