While I understand the financial ramifications of not returning, football behind closed doors holds very little appeal to me. I follow West Ham home and away – my first game at Upton Park was 50 years ago with my dad – and not being able to see them play in the flesh means the return is a turn-off for me. I won’t be watching. It would be far too frustrating, not being able to share the emotion and stress with friends I travel with who have the same passion and attachment as me. I’ll be taking some long walks when West Ham are on TV – with no access to social media! Neil Thorogood, 55 I’m a Sheffield United supporter and after 43 minutes I was shouting at the TV, the referee, the referee’s assistant, technology and the moon – which wasn’t even out. It has been a long time. The crowd noise was better than the early Bundesliga games and Arsenal were suitably Arsenal. It was normal enough. After 12 weeks of lockdown, even Norwich v Southampton seems appealing. Matt Gambrill, 49 I’m a lifelong Newcastle fan who, like any football fan, was pleased to see the return of the Premier League. However, it was far from ideal. The football wasn’t up to much and the lack of atmosphere turned it into a damp squib. The only relevant action in the first game was chalked off the incompetence of Hawk-Eye! It can only get better. I will keep watching, but with much less anticipation and enthusiasm. Tim Shotton, 74 I don’t think it should be back. The only reason it returned is to abate Sky TV and for money. There is no health or other imperative for these games. I miss the routine and camaraderie of going to football. If you can’t go then is there no point – and the crowdless atmosphere more or less confirmed that. I thought it was like watching training matches. Each attempt to inject atmosphere was more desperate than the last. Guy Bailey, 48 While the first game was a bit dire, my family WhatsApp group was abuzz with talk of the ghost goal. I’d not really considered that I missed talking about football more than I missed watching it, but that game showed this is absolutely the case. We bond very heavily over football in my family and during the shutdown we’ve missed the escapism and the debate. The nation’s mental health will surely benefit and so will those who have little else to talk about. Joe, 29 The artificial chanting was very well done and a vast improvement on the usual clunk-clunk of the ball that you get behind closed doors. Otherwise, I’m a Villa fan so I thought it was great. It was nice to see old faithful David Luiz in fine form too. Simon McMenamin, 51 As a Liverpool fan, I have been been waiting a long long time for this season – and now we’ve had to wait even longer. I’ve missed football so much. I cannot wait for the Everton match on Sunday. And, anyway, what else is there to do?! Sally Rogers, 49 The return of the Premier League showed us how important fans in the stadium are. Clubs would do well to remember that when selling season tickets. The “best league in the world” owes much of that doubtful tag to the atmosphere in stadiums. The sound effects are laughable. Another illusion, another attempt to hide truth, another attempt to anaesthetise us into thinking nothing has changed. It has. Andrew Carter, 49 I was looking forward to it as a possible antidote to the grind of lockdown, but the experience was disappointing. Perhaps surprisingly, the small-screen viewing experience is clearly dependent on the stadium atmosphere. Without that, it feels antiseptic and fails to hold the attention. I tried the canned atmosphere, but found I couldn’t suspend my disbelief sufficiently to make it work. Simon Sturgess, 56 Anyone expecting the Premier League to resume at a frenetic pace was kidding themselves. Games will improve as we go on but, oh my, it felt good to have it back! The quality and intensity will return as the fitness does. Let’s hope the quality of the simulated crowd noise follows a similar upward trajectory. Bonny Dellow, 28