Before covid, the surf rock duo Hockey Dad would usually launch a new album with a string of record store shows. “But obviously we can’t do that right now,” says the band’s drummer, Billy Fleming. So for their new LP, Brain Candy, they’re trying something different: a drive-in gig. On their July release date they’ll play from a stage at Wollongong’s Bulli showground while 400 carloads of fans watch from behind their windscreens. “We haven’t been to one of these, so we don’t know if they’re any good or not,” vocalist Zach Stephenson says. “But just the idea of playing a gig – we’d play a gig for an empty room, really. We’re super keen to get out there.” Theirs is just one of many drive-in gigs set to take place next month as Australia slowly begins to reopen. For three nights from 10 July, drive-in festival Airwaves will set up on the Sunshine Coast with a line-up led by the Chats. In Melbourne a “live entertainment precinct” called The Drive-In will take over Flemington racecourse, offering weekly live music as well as comedy and movie nights. Another offering, Drive-in Entertainment Australia, plans to launch around the country next month. Drive-in gigs have emerged as a creative solution for an industry in crisis. The pandemic has indefinitely halted traditional live shows, music’s financial lifeblood. Large public gatherings sardine-packed with sweaty bodies will be among the last things to return: Splendour in the Grass, which was previously rescheduled from July until October, announced this week its 2020 event will not go ahead. And while major events like Falls festival plan to proceed with local line-ups in December, some are predicting festivals as we know them won’t be able to return until late 2022. With thousands out of work, the industry is lobbying the government for financial assistance including business grants and an expansion of the jobkeeper scheme. Everyone is just screaming out for work. But gigs like Hockey Dad’s allow audiences to remain in their car, safely spaced from others and circumventing restrictions on public gatherings. Punters only get out to use the toilets, where physical distancing measures will be in place. Hand sanitiser will be distributed and ticketing will be contactless. It’s a format that has been tested and proven successful in European countries like Denmark and Germany. These shows will be the first paid gig many people in the industry have had since March. Airwaves’ event director, Cindy Jensen, says organising her event has highlighted how desperate the music industry is for work. “Since we launched [last Monday] I’ve been inundated – and I mean inundated – with calls from production houses, foodies, market stall holders asking: ‘Have you got this sorted?’ Everyone is just screaming out for work.” She thinks drive-in gigs are a positive first step: “Hopefully [they] will kickstart the industry a lot sooner than they expected.” These events have been pulled together at warp speed: while festivals typically have a lead time of a year, planning for Airwaves began only five weeks ago. Many promoters are still working with authorities to determine if they’ll be able to sell food and drink, and the uncertainty about when restrictions will unwind further presents logistical complications. “Even now we’re planning for an event where the maximum number of people who can be outside, say, lining up for the toilets, is changing on a weekly basis,” says Jensen. “So it really does make it difficult.” While they wait to iron out the finer details, festival organisers are focused on delivering the best production they can. Hockey Dad’s show and Melbourne’s The Drive-In will stream sound through an FM radio transmission. Airwaves is using FM radio as a wet weather back-up plan, but hopes to be able to have punters roll down their window and listen live. “We want to provide the most live music experience possible,” Jensen says. “If you go through radio, there’s a bit of a delay with sound. So we’re praying for great weather.” The company behind The Drive-In, Untitled Group, also run festivals including Beyond the Valley. Its director, Christian Serrao, says the Flemington racecourse gigs will run “just like any other event like ours”. “We’re going to have the exact same stage as we do at Beyond the Valley; we’re using the same crew. It’s all what you would expect from a typical live show,” he says. Still, it’s uncharted territory here. Hockey Dad know it won’t be quite the same as the real thing, but they’re keen to find out how the shows feel. “Usually you interact with the crowd, the energy is there and you feed off that a bit – you know when to go a little bit heavier or softer. But that engagement is just going to be people beeping their horns,” Fleming says. “I don’t know what it’s going to be like yet,” Stephenson adds. “I guess we’ll figure it out as soon as we walk out and there’s just a million windshields looking at us.”