For the last few years I’ve been attempting to write a book about the role of transport and mobility in society, only to find in the last three months that the biggest question of the day is not how we move around, but what we do when we’re forced to stay still. For this reason, there’s never been a better time to return to the 1960 novel Border Country, by the Welsh cultural critic Raymond Williams. Williams’ novel is a world in one book: specifically, an intimate history of 20th-century working-class rural lives. It deals with migration, borders – both geographic and psychological – and the effects of industrial change on communal life. On first reading Border Country, I felt immediately bound up and connected with this story of a society powered not by crabby disaffection, but by love, deep connection and hope. I’ve spent my whole writing life fascinated by how individuals interact with the spaces where they find themselves: how much they love them, hate them, try to propel themselves away, or are drawn back. And Border Country is about precisely this: it maps the knotted consciousness and social interdependence of a young man, Matthew Price, summoned from his academic life in London to visit his ailing father in the Welsh border village where he grew up. The novel prises apart the relationship between two generations of a family grown distant through geographic and social mobility, showing how – to paraphrase the American sociologist C Wright Mills – the lives of individuals and the society they inhabit can’t be understood without understanding both. Its opening line – “As he ran for the bus he was glad” – sets a tone of movement, of propulsion away from one thing and towards another, that defines the whole book. Harry Price, Matthew’s inscrutable father, arrives in Glynmawr in 1920 to work as a signalman on the railway that carries passengers and vast amounts of coal out of the valleys and across the border between England and Wales. Hybart, Harry Price’s landlord, regrets the changes brought about by the railway. He asks the younger man – rhetorically but pointedly – what it’s all for. “We do it to make work. Like you now, on the line. Where do they want to be going, all them up and down in these trains? They only go, after, to come back.” Harry seems closed and preoccupied where once, in Glynmawr, everyone was open. They shared houses while Harry wants one of his own. In the rush to get on in life, what does everyone begin to miss? Williams foregrounds the relationship between Matthew and Harry Price, exposing the flashpoints and slow suffering that bind them. Then he restores it, slowly and beautifully, to reveal the whole that is shared. The work of human connection is a craft, Williams suggests. You don’t just make one connection and leave it there: you use the one you’ve made to build more, getting better at it as you go along, both deepening your own understanding of life and offering the connections you’ve made as a contribution to others. The Price family’s fate is shadowed by that of Harry’s workmate, Morgan Rosser, a Labour party activist who organises a blockade of the railway through Glynmawr during the miners’ lockout and general strike in 1926. Rosser, a widower, needles Harry relentlessly: to be more open about his thoughts, to be more politically active, to join him in business when Rosser opens a jam factory in the village. Rosser becomes wealthy after Harry turns his offer down. He berates Harry for his lack of ambition, while harbouring a deep envy for his unshakeable principles. My favourite part of Border Country is when another generation is added to the story, a lifeline thrown back to a more anarchic, more autonomous time. Jack Price, Harry’s “quick, excitable, incalculable” father (and Matthew’s grandfather), comes to live with the family in Glynmawr in retirement, helping the family maintain gardens and allotments, growing fruit and vegetables, raising chickens and keeping bees. One day the whole family descends on a “gathering brown cloud” of honeybees which they corral into their ever-growing mass of hives. Matthew’s mother, Ellen, rushes out of the house “carrying a zinc bath full of pans” for them to begin “a furious drumming and clattering”, stunning the bees into Harry’s trap. For the first time in the book, Harry seems truly happy, “laughing exultantly” next to his overturned bicycle about his good luck. Nature has been harnessed, his efforts rewarded. This is where you understand what Rosser means when he insists to Matthew that Harry, despite their differences, is the one who’s really lived. “He took his own feelings and he built things from them. He lived direct, never by any other standard at all.” Rosser laughs bitterly at the gap between his socialist beliefs and the way he has lived, having sold his jam business to the highest bidder, but you forgive him. The failure of the 1926 strike represented “a slow and shocking cancellation of the future” from which he could only measure recovery in material terms. But it’s Matthew’s realisation, at the end of his father’s life, that he can reconcile his decision to move away from Glynmawr with the values Glynmawr instilled in him, that gets me every time. Reading it for the first time made me realise such a thing was possible: that you can work towards acceptance of the decisions you’ve made by understanding fully the context in which you made them. Matthew was raised to leave Glynmawr just as he was raised to love it: it’s what Harry and Ellen had always wanted for him, if not for themselves. • Lynsey Hanley is the author of Estates: an Intimate History and Respectable: Crossing the Class Divide