On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert examined the resilience of the protest movement in the wake of George Floyd’s killing by police officer Derek Chauvin in Minneapolis. Polls show the majority of Americans support the movement; one poll found that support for the Black Lives Matter movement among Americans has jumped to 53% from 42% a month ago. “So, just over half of American voters believe Black people have the right to live,” said Colbert. “Good news…? It’s a start.” After three weeks of protests, “now it’s time to put our money where our mouth is…just as soon as we take the slave owners off the money”, said Colbert, who noted that the moment of economic and social turmoil offered America a “tremendous opportunity, but to do what?” There’s incremental reform, such as a bill introduced by House Democrats to ban police chokeholds. And there’s more radical reform, such as the popular call to “defund the police”, meaning to divert funding poured into police departments to other community resources such as mental health services, social services and education. “Right now, because those other services have been under-funded for years, all of that eventually falls to the police,” Colbert explained. “And that’s way too many things for them to be doing. It’s like in the Middle Ages: it wasn’t a good idea that your barber was also your dentist and your surgeon. And saying ‘defund the barber’ doesn’t mean no one’s getting haircuts —– although admittedly right now, no one’s getting haircuts.” Meanwhile, Donald Trump’s approval rating has dropped to 38%, according to the latest CNN poll, and the president is “desperate to turn things around”, to the point where he’s reportedly considered delivering a speech to the nation on race and unity. “Yes, they’re considering it – a heroic contemplation of the possibility of leadership,” said Colbert. “It reminds me of Dr King’s immortal words: ‘I’m thinking about having a dream.’” While Trump contemplated, Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden spoke up, delivering a moving virtual eulogy for George Floyd at a memorial service in Houston on Tuesday. “You see, President Trump? It’s possible to bring people to tears at church without having to release pepper spray,” Colbert said. “And the Vice-President did the one thing that the President fears the most: Biden didn’t mention the name Donald Trump once. Let’s hope very soon, we can all do the same.” On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah parsed the differences between the response by congressional Democrats and Republicans to the Black Lives Matter protests across the nation. Earlier this week, Democrats led by House Speaker Nancy Pelosi kneeled in honor of George Floyd wearing kente cloths, an indigenous Ghanaian fabric. “I understand the symbolic gesture of kneeling to remember George Floyd. What I don’t understand is needing to dress like extras from Coming to America 2,” said Noah, adding the gesture “felt like they were trying too hard”. Today in No, Not Like That: Team Trump brags about getting 8% of the Black vote while the Democrats dress like extras from Coming to America 2. pic.twitter.com/OQqYGOk4zA “Now, to be fair, the Democrats weren’t just kneeling and wearing kente cloth,” he said. “They also unveiled police reform legislation that would make some pretty big changes,” such as banning no-knock warrants in drug cases, which allowed police to enter into the home and kill Breonna Taylor in Louisville in April, and make chokeholds a civil rights violation. And it would make it easier to prosecute police who use excessive force, which is virtually impossible now. “Like now, you need to catch them on video, then have a [District Attorney] that’s willing to prosecute them, then have a jury that actually wants to hold cops accountable,” Noah explained. “Then, after all that, you still need to find the cops Horcrux and destroy it, otherwise they just get to go right back out on the force.” Meanwhile, Trump doubled down on his backing of police, telling reporters: “I say 99.9, but let’s go with 99% of [cops] are great, great people.” “Yes, 99% of all police are great people. And I guess it’s just unlucky that protesters happen to keep meeting with the bad 1% over, and over, and over again,” said Noah over recent images of police brutality against protesters. “I’m not saying that all cops are bad. But the problems with the police are much more widespread than Trump is acknowledging,” he continued. “Because every single time – every single time – a police department gets audited, or investigated, the results that come back time and time again show deep rot and systemic issues often from the top. It’s like turning on a black light in a hotel room – there’s no way you’re only going to find one stain.” And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel responded to reports that Trump has dismissed polls placing him behind Biden as false. “If you think he won’t contest the election if he loses – he won’t even accept the meaningless poll he’s losing,” Kimmel said. “They’re going to have to drag him out of that White House by his heels.” “It makes sense that Trump doesn’t get it. He’s like a lot of soft-brained 73-year-old men who watch nothing but Fox News,” Kimmel continued, cutting to Tucker Carlson arguing on Fox News that America is not a racist country. “Right, but didn’t you want to build a wall to keep those immigrants out of … oh, nevermind. He’s right! America’s fine, we have no problems at all,” Kimmel deadpanned. “Those people marching in the streets? They’re just getting exercise.” Kimmel also touched on Trump’s propagation of a conspiracy theory that Martin Gugino, the 75-year-old man in serious condition with a skull fracture after Buffalo police shoved him to the ground during a protest last week, is an Antifa covert agent. “Just to recap, the theory here is that a 75-year-old man was using his cell phone to scan police communication equipment in order to black it out,” Kimmel explained. “I think anyone who’s tried to Zoom with their grandparents knows there’s no possible way that’s true. But our president? It takes a special kind of monster to see a peaceful 75-year-old man shoved to the ground by police so hard he bleeds from the ears and take the side of the concrete, but he does – our un-Founding Father.”