The prospect of an England side spending the 500 days leading up to a home World Cup without a single game is certainly unusual but these are unprecedented times. Few sporting events capture the public’s imagination more than an Ashes series and the cancellation of the rugby league series is a blow for more than just England’s plans to lift the World Cup next year. “It’s a real miss for the game,” says the former Great Britain captain Paul Sculthorpe, who works for the Rugby Football League tasked with delivering success for the England men’s, women’s and wheelchair sides at the World Cup. Trying to achieve that would have been difficult enough ordinarily and the hiatus has made things far more complicated. With Super League’s calendar set to change dramatically between now and the World Cup there is a chance England may not play a meaningful game before the opener against Samoa at St James’ Park in October next year. How does the England coach, Shaun Wane, replace that lack of competitive action? Sculthorpe admits it will be a challenge. “Look, it isn’t ideal, but losing the Ashes is just as big for Australia as us. There’s clearly nothing like playing games but we’ve made the most of the extra time we’ve had. We wouldn’t get much access to the players with the demands of Super League anyway but the camps we have next year will be more important than ever. “Shaun is going to leave no stone unturned in that regard. The ideal scenario would be to get at least one game but we’ve gone into other competitions before without games. How we interact with the players between now and then is going to be important if we’re not going to be playing games.” The uncertainty surrounding rugby league’s future has caused problems for the World Cup organisers as well as the host nation. “Losing the Ashes is huge for us; it was a great opportunity to showcase international rugby league to the public and whet the appetite for the World Cup,” the tournament’s chief executive, Jon Dutton, says. Wednesday marks 500 days until the World Cup starts in Newcastle and Dutton and his team will make a series of announcements, some of which had been planned to have been unveiled by now. So how far behind schedule is the tournament – and with Super League set to run later than projected in 2021, could the World Cup be rescheduled? “That won’t happen,” Dutton says. “We’ll work with Super League to ensure we’re good to go in October 2021.” Tickets were to go on sale this summer but that has been pushed back to September. The organisers will give away 20,021 tickets to key workers, retaining their original ambitious target of selling 750,000 tickets – the highest in World Cup history. “We’ve had to rewrite things somewhat,” Dutton says. “Ticketing prices were fixed three months ago and we’re now having a second look at that due to the financial limitations people may have post-Covid-19. We have to monitor flights for all the competing nations, too, so there’s a lot to do but I think we’re still on track.” One of those nations are Jamaica, who are making their World Cup debut. They will miss out on four warm-up games this year, a blow not only for the team but their wider goal of reaching out to communities in the north of England who could be inspired by their story. “It’s a real-life Cool Runnings story,” their operations director, Alex Simmons, says. “It’s a chance for us to engage a totally disengaged audience. Rugby league is disconnected from the black community. We can’t do some of what we’d planned this year but we want to play games in England next year in the run-up to the tournament to help leave a legacy for young Jamaicans.” The World Cup had the sporting stage all to itself in 2021 but with the Olympic Games and football’s European Championship pushed back to next summer it means the tournament is one of many big events next year. For Dutton, though, that is a positive. “We’ve forged a fantastic relationship with the FA and we’re going to learn from what they’ve had to go through with rearranging the Euros. Both events will hopefully be stronger because of the working groups and collaboration we’ve now got. There will be an enormous appetite for sport in 2021 and we think that’s good to be a part of.” From an England perspective, the goal set in the wake of the 2017 final defeat has not changed. “The target is to win three World Cups: the men’s, the women’s and the wheelchair events,” Sculthorpe says. “The route to that goal is different than we’d originally envisaged but we’ll have to adapt, much like everyone else in the world.”