So now we have not one global crisis but three. Minneapolis, Covid-19, Hong Kong – race, health, geopolitics. How do you find the hope in that lot? My response, when people ask why the news is always so hopeless, is to make three points. First, it is important to remember that things are newsworthy because they are outliers, extreme moments, exceptions to the rule, the rule being that most people often lead unremarkable, gentle, agreeable lives. Second, the grimness of news helps society correct course. Revelations of scandal may result in prosecution; exposés of incompetence lead to better performance. Campaigns about wrongdoing enable us to see the faults and fix them. Third, these swirling times of foment and despair often produce dynamics from which better things can surely come. A global movement demanding fairer treatment of minorities may actually do something to advance that cause. Confrontation and resistance generates real jeopardy for the autocrats and bullies who would trample over people’s rights. And yes, a global health scare forces us to evaluate what is important, to take steps to improve our own health, to pull together, to look for the silver lining. As I’m sure you’ve noticed, the Guardian has published more optimistic journalism over the past three months that at any time in recent years. Just this week we had: • How lockdown helped asthma sufferers. Two-minute read • The return of open-air cinema. Three-minute trailer • Covid 19’s whirlwind romances. Not long • Denmark’s reemergence into an agreeable new normal. Two-minute read • Moments of peace and hope amid the protest. Five-minute video • The crowdfunding campaign that paid for an army veteran’s brain surgery. Two-minute read • The inexorable triumph of sun over coal. Two-minute read And a gratuitous, contentious list to finish with: • The greatest UK No 1 singles. Six hours of music At 1pm London time, we’re live and listening if you’d like to join us for an event about hope, optimism and community in the time of coronavirus. Membership Event: The Upside: Kind hearts and coronavirus For two days this week Spain, once the deadliest country in Europe for Covid 19, reported not a single death. Meanwhile, Germany unveiled a formidable coronavirus recovery package – €130bn of tax cuts and spending measures designed to steer the country out of recession. This comprehensive piece in the Financial Times sets out how Germany got its response to coronavirus just right. If you read one thing this week … Also in Europe, this is an interesting initiative by the Spanish government – a basic income to tackle poverty, as reported by Al Jazeera. A good accompaniment to our own piece about moves towards a Europe-wide minimum wage. Many of you got in touch with nominations for Covid-19 community stars, including … Marguerite Newman is a fan of her local food bank: I would like to tell you about Colin, who is a volunteer at Lincoln food bank. Colin is a regular volunteer, who has stepped up to organise the day to day running of food Bank since activity was ramped up to cover extra demand. He opens up every day, 7 days a week, coordinates the volunteers and what needs doing, processes what comes in from lots of different sources, and manages what goes out. Colin is always cheerful, friendly and approachable. He loves a chat, and doesn’t let things get him down. It can be physical work and I’m tired after a two-hour shift, but he’s often there four hours a day, trying to get on top of the warehouse work. I don’t think Colin would see himself as a local hero, but I do, and I know others do too. Ellie O’Mahoney salutes a generous charity: Lauren Ezekiel who founded the charity We C U and donated over a million pounds worth of beauty and body care products to NHS workers across the country. Roslyn Byfield who is full of admiration for a cafe owner: Hello, I’d like to nominate the owner of our local tiny cafe, which Abs is keeping open for the community and doing a good trade when much of his usual trade has stopped because of local workers working from home, etc. A few of us meet (suitably distanced) to have coffee and chat every morning, Abs and his assistant Natalie are lovely, very welcoming to customers, and it’s a boon especially given enforced lack of social life and those living on our own. Abs supplies food for a homeless project nearby and is an excellent cook so is regularly taking orders for his pies, quiches, lasagnes and quiches. He also makes cakes. He’s known as Abs but his full name is Abdeslem Belhadef and his place is Cafe Corso on Ringslade Road, London N22. In France with the return of cafe culture: