Conor McGregor has announced his retirement from UFC at the age of 31. The controversial Irishman, formerly featherweight and lightweight champion and one of the biggest names in the business, tweeted the news following the conclusion of the UFC 250 event. “Hey guys I’ve decided to retire from fighting,” McGregor wrote. “Thank you all for the amazing memories! What a ride it’s been! Here is a picture of myself and my mother in Las Vegas post one of my world title wins! Pick the home of your dreams Mags I love you! Whatever you desire it’s yours.” McGregor, who bows out with a 22-4 record, has made similar announcements in the past – previously ‘retiring’ in 2016 and 2019 before making his way back to the octagon. He was just one bout into his latest comeback, having reversed his earlier decision to take on Donald Cerrone in a welterweight contest at UFC 246. McGregor won via TKO in just 40 seconds, his first success in more than three years. Hey guys I’ve decided to retire from fighting.Thank you all for the amazing memories! What a ride it’s been!Here is a picture of myself and my mother in Las Vegas post one of my World title wins!Pick the home of your dreams Mags I love you!Whatever you desire it’s yours ❤️ pic.twitter.com/Dh4ijsZacZ A fight against fellow UFC great Anderson Silva had been on the cards this year, with the latter publicly touting the bout over the weekend. Other potential opponents included long-time rival Khabib Nurmagomedov and Jorge Masvidal, with his second fight of 2020 initially planned for July. “The game just does not excite me, and that’s that,” McGregor told ESPN on Sunday. “All this waiting around. There’s nothing happening. I’m going through opponent options, and there’s nothing really there at the minute. There’s nothing that’s exciting me … I don’t know if it’s no crowd. I don’t know what it is. There’s just no buzz for me. “I had my goals, my plans, the season. I had everything laid out,” McGregor said. “Obviously the world has gone bleeding bonkers at the minute. There’s f-all happening at the minute. They want to throw me up and down weights and offer me stupid fights. I don’t really give a fuck. I’m over it.” The UFC president, Dana White, who has received criticism from McGregor in the past and who has recently clashed with Jon Jones over a pay issue, said he is happy to let the Irishman retire. “Nobody is pressuring anybody to fight,” White said. “And if Conor McGregor feels he wants to retire, you know my feelings about retirement: you should absolutely do it. And I love Conor … There’s a handful of people that have made this really fun for me. And he’s one of them.” In 2017 McGregor took a high-profile detour into the world of professional boxing, going down in 10 rounds against Floyd Mayweather in a showpiece event in Las Vegas.