Global coronavirus cases have passed the 10 million mark, with mounting concern over dangerous resurgences of the disease in numerous countries, most prominent among them the US, where infections were rising in 29 of 50 states. The pandemic has claimed almost 500,000 lives worldwide in seven months. US states reported record numbers of new infections, even as the vice-president, Mike Pence, claimed “remarkable progress” in the Trump administration’s chaotic fight against the disease. After several days of record infection rises in the US, Israel’s government was warned by a panel advising the National Security Council on the coronavirus outbreak that it had “lost control of the pandemic” amid its own spike in new cases. China has also announced it is imposing a strict new lockdown on nearly half a million people in a province surrounding the capital, Beijing, on Sunday to contain a fresh coronavirus cluster, as authorities warned the outbreak was still “severe and complicated”. Most concern, however, has focused on the situation in the US, which reported 44,000 new cases by 4pm on Friday, its biggest daily increase in the pandemic. Record numbers of infections were reported in five states. Pence called off campaign events in Florida and Arizona this coming week as the states experienced a surge in new coronavirus cases. Pence said on Friday during a briefing by the White Houses coronavirus taskforce that he would be visiting Florida, Texas and Arizona to receive a ground report on rising numbers of cases across the region. The three states’ Republican governors have come under criticism for pushing for aggressive reopening after lockdowns. North America, Latin America and Europe each account for around 25% of cases, while Asia and the Middle East have around 11% and 9% respectively, according to a Reuters tally, which uses government reports. The new peaks emerging in numerous countries have underlined the continuing hazards posed by the disease as countries have tried to ease restrictions for lockdown-weary populations and jump-start their stricken economies. The first cases of the new coronavirus were confirmed on 10 January in Wuhan, China before infections and fatalities surged in Europe, then the US, and later Russia. The pandemic has entered a new phase, with India and Brazil battling outbreaks of more than 10,000 cases a day, putting a major strain on resources. The two countries accounted for over a third of all new cases in the past week. Brazil reported a record 54,700 new cases on 19 June. Some researchers said the death toll in Latin America could rise to more than 380,000 by October, from around 100,000 this week. Commenting on the highest number of infections in a fortnight in Ireland, the country’s chief medical officer, Tony Holohan, described an increase in infections among younger people – recently noted in other countries and attributed to loosening adherence to social distancing requirements – as a “worrying trend”. Countries and regions have been rushing to reimpose restrictions to try and control emerging clusters. The Australian state of Victoria said on Sunday that it would implement mandatory coronavirus tests for returning travellers after a sharp rise in infections over the past two weeks. The state’s leader, Premier Daniel Andrews, said he would consider potential stay-at-home orders and suburban lockdowns to contain several coronavirus clusters in Melbourne, after another 49 cases of coronavirus were detected on Saturday – the highest daily number since April. China, which at one stage stage had largely brought the virus under control, has recently been battling new clusters, with hundreds infected in Beijing. Cases have emerged in neighbouring Hebei province in recent weeks. Health officials said on Sunday that Anxin county – about 90 miles from Beijing – would be “fully enclosed and controlled”, the same strict measures imposed at the height of the pandemic in the city of Wuhan earlier this year. A record increase in daily new coronavirus cases in the Czech Republic, centred on an eastern mining region, saw health authorities move to reimpose restrictions – recently lifted – on gatherings there. Almost half of the country’s new recorded cases, 122 out of 260, were identified in the Karviná region in the east of the country, where a hotspot had appeared among miners, the health minister Adam Vojtech said. “We are conducting rather massive testing in the most-affected region, Karviná. It is mainly about [the mining company] OKD,” Vojtech said in a live debate on Prima television. “It is not a question of a blanket rise across the whole country, it is still about local hotbeds.” South Korea has also battled to control cluster outbreaks, with 62 new cases on Sunday amid eased social distancing rules. It takes the country’s total infections to 12,715, with 282 deaths, which is remarkable given the population of 52 million.