New Zealand, 1866. A rugged coastline. A distressed lady in a voluminous pink dress running through the woods. Then two men on horseback. Then a native New Zealander, who is shot by one of the two men on horseback as the whole cast converges on a shack. Distressed Lady reaches the doorway, looks in, sees a dead body, looks down at her hands covered in glittering dust and faints. The shot man recovers, saved from the bullet by the large metal pendant he is wearing, and watches the lady being carried off to the nearest town by the men on horseback. Credits. This is the beginning of Eleanor Catton’s six part adaptation of her 2013 Booker-shortlisted novel The Luminaries (BBC One). It promises to be as addictive as it was in its original form. What is the televisual equivalent of a page-turner? A binge-watcher? That, anyway. Characters-with-a-capital-C everywhere, more plot than you know what to do with, hares set running at every turn, lavish period detail and lighting replicating the novel’s gorgeous staginess, and a convoluted murder-mystery. All set against the endlessly febrile atmosphere of the country’s 19th-century gold rush. Oh, also – opium, obstacle-strewn paths to true love, business double-dealing, racism, fortune-telling, brothels, questions of fate and astrolabes. It is glorious escapism, perfect for our times. It matters not at all, for once, that so much must be lost from a book in its translation to screen. The detail in Catton’s original was there largely to make us think about the act of reading, about what we want and expect from a novel constructed along 19th-century literary lines. The story was the wire along which that question was strung. Having wisely decided not to ask viewers the question of what they want and expect from their 21st-century television drama about the 19th-century series, what we are left with is simply a rollicking yarn with expert set dressing, demanding nothing too much in the way of emotional investment. Which is, of course, exactly what we want and expect from our 21st-century television dramas about the 19th century. In flashbacks to nine months before the whole dead-body-in-the-shack debacle, we learn that the Distressed Lady is Our Heroine, Anna Wetherell (Eve Hewson). She is a spirited young woman who has taken herself alone from London to New Zealand for reasons that will, when the plot requires it, become apparent. (Incidentally, I would like very much to watch a series about an unspirited young woman of yesteryear. There is something about the idea of six hour-long episodes of her sitting at home getting increasingly mardy over her embroidery frames, but doing nothing about it, that makes me hysterical while also speaking to me very deeply.) On the ship, Anna meets Emery Staines (Himesh Patel), our hero. There is, as he will later tell one of the Characters-with-a-capital-C (Francis Carver, ex-convict, employed by the local madam who is inveigling Anna into prostitution to do away with him – do try to keep up), “a kind of magic” between them “that is absolute”. We will see what the fates have to say about that. Thanks to a pickpocket, Anna’s illiteracy and the madam – Lydia Wells, played by Eva Green, who dominates every scene she is in – who knows a good recruit when she sees one, our hero and heroine’s plans to meet once docked are thwarted. Thus the seeds are planted for the disaster that is unfolding in the present. In said present, Anna has been thrown in jail, suspected of being a prostitute, at the very least. She manages to pay her bail because, it turns out, there is gold in them there voluminous dress folds. Her memories of the night of the dead body are confused, but they seem to involve a now opium-addicted Emery, the gold-digging husband of Lydia Wells, political machinations and more minor nefariousnesses than you can shake a prospecting stick at. Does The Luminaries have a deeper meaning? Emotional significance? Points of moral instruction or illumination of the human condition? I am not too far into it yet, but my hopes are high that it does not. A cracking, challenging read has become a cracking, unchallenging series and both do their jobs perfectly. Joy.