How does Sunday start? With my daughter using my cranium as a trampoline at 5am – she jumps and screams until I take her downstairs for breakfast. I have a decaf coffee – I’d prefer a normal one, but I’m preggers – and then I put on whatever she wants to watch on TV (probably Finding Nemo for the thousandth time) otherwise there’s total chaos. Are you venturing out? For the same bloody walk to the same bloody river where we live in the Cotswolds. My daughter is so bored of it that she refuses to come, so we have to carry her kicking and yelling. We take a crabbing line for crayfish – not that we ever catch anything. How are you coping? By going bonkers on Amazon. We bought a paddling pool, but our outside tap wasn’t working. We filled it up with buckets from the kitchen sink, which took ages, and just as it was ready my daughter emptied a pot of soil into it. I just stood there staring, trying not to cry. Your best lockdown buy? An amazing book called Haunted Healthcare, about the ghosts that nurses and doctors have seen working in the NHS. It’s well-known that medical professionals see ghosts in hospitals as they’re such a honeypot for paranormal activity. I’d highly recommend it. Are you working? I was trying, but it was impossible. Instead, I’m making stupid videos of me doing sexual dances to well-known TV theme tunes and putting them on Instagram. It’s shameless attention-seeking, but at least it’s creative. Sundays growing up… Were really dull. My brother Charlie and I would go to the Tesco car park by our house. Charlie’s friend would make him jump into the paper recycling bank to look for porn magazines. I’d spend the day being pushed around in a shopping trolley. Once Antiques Roadshow started I’d realise I still hadn’t done my homework and I’d prepare to pull a sickie. Sunday night? We’ll watch another Pixar film: probably Finding Nemo, again. After my daughter goes to sleep I’ll get into bed to watch Ghost Adventures with Zak Bagans. My husband might try and have sex, I’ll tell him to fuck off, and that’s that. Three series of This Country are available on BBC iPlayer