The Premiership season will resume on 15 August, six weeks later than intended, but clubs still aim to play out the campaign in full even though the play-off final would be held in the middle of November. There are nine league rounds left with two play-off weekends to follow. With the three European Champions and Challenge Cup knockout rounds earmarked for September and October, the season would take 14 weeks to complete meaning the 2020-21 campaign would not start until December, nearly three months late. But there may not be an overrun with talks between the unions in the north and south about a global calendar making more progress in the last two months than in the whole of the professional era. The next round of talks, which will involve clubs from the three major leagues in Europe, will be held on 15 June with two plans being discussed that would be implemented next season. Previous attempts to synchronise rugby’s calendar have collapsed largely because of the refusal of the Six Nations to move from its February start date, but the European unions are now willing to put it back a month and play it in tandem with the Rugby Championship. If that happened next season, league rugby would not start until January and, pausing when the two championships were played, would finish in September. Then after a short break, a two-month Test window would be played. By resuming in August, the latter rounds of the Premiership, including the play-offs, will clash with international weekends but the issue for clubs is less who will be playing for them than that they are playing again having been inactive since March. One or two grounds will be used for all the matches which, under current government regulations, will be played behind closed doors. “Nothing will happen until it is safe to do so but we will do everything we can to resume the campaign on 15 August,” said the Premiership Rugby chief executive, Darren Childs. “We won’t take risks with people’s health, and rugby has unique challenges due to levels of proximity and impact, but with a number of clubs moving to Stage 1 training, it is important for us to give players, coaches and clubs clarity on when they can look to return.” The lockdown has exposed the financial weakness of a league that has cumulative losses of £50m. Clubs have started talks about reducing the salary cap by at least £1m next season, which would likely make the current 25% pay cuts permanent, and ending the provision for two marquee players outside the salary cap. Meanwhile the England scrum-half Ben Spencer has agreed to join Bath from Saracens for next season, with the Leicester lock Will Spencer and the South African prop Juan Schoeman also signing for the West Country team. Spencer is leaving relegated Saracens after nine years at the club and has agreed a three-year deal at the Recreation Ground. “I’ll treasure the memories that I’ve made at this club for the rest of my life,” Spencer told Saracens’ website.