Hong Kong’s pro-democracy movement has struggled to reconcile the support it has received from Donald Trump with his administration’s brutal crackdown on protests over the police killing of George Floyd. In the past few weeks, unprecedented Black Lives Matter protests, renewed by the killing of George Floyd by a white police officer, have spread to every US state and to countries across the world, regardless of pandemic restrictions. But in Hong Kong, where year-long mass protests share many similarities with those in the US, there was no mass rally. An attempt at organising a BLM event on Sunday failed after pro-democracy protesters expressed concern about whether it had police approval and if attendees would be safe, given the history of police brutality. The organisers, who were not connected to Hong Kong’s movement, said the police had been “amazing” and supported their BLM rally but could produce no approval. Eventually it was cancelled, with organisers accusing people of being “agitators” and “pushing their own agenda”. A second attempt at a BLM rally is under way, hoping to address and move on from last week’s failure. The controversy comes amid a complicated debate about the commonalities and differences of the two protests, and whether Hong Kong demonstrators were reluctant to join in pushing back against their biggest single ally – Trump. Both the US and Hong Kong protests are decentralised human rights movements with a huge focus on police brutality, with rallies marked by police attacks on the press. Both have enormous international support. But the most powerful supporter of Hong Kong’s protests is also arguably the BLM movement’s biggest detractor – Trump. A protester in her mid-20s, who asked to be referred to as M, said many Hong Kong protesters knew of and disagreed with the US president’s domestic policies but some were reluctant to criticise him. “They know to some level that they are being used – but after years of silence, any support from an American president feels like success,” M said. Hong Kong’s movement contains a spectrum of political views, and Trump has at times been hailed as an ally for his tough stance on China. When the US government passed the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act last year, demonstrations held placards giving thanks to the president and his government. Members of the Hong Kong movement who spoke to the Guardian said the reasons for Hongkongers’ muted response to the US protests were complicated. People in Hong Kong have been understandably focused on the immediate threats to pro-democracy activism, as China seeks to increase its control. They said many Hongkongers weren’t aware of the history and politics of the BLM movement, or US politics, and were reluctant to comment. The city also had to have a reckoning with its own racism, others said. Some also said support for Trump was largely predicated on the fact that he and the Hong Kong protesters shared a common opponent – the Chinese Communist party – and that protesters felt the president and other Republicans had been the most visible in their support for them. When the US protests started, Hong Kong internet users shared tips with Americans on how to protect yourself in a crowd, how to defuse tear gas canisters, how to “be water” when overwhelmed by riot police. Many identified strongly with the movement. But when coverage began highlighting violence, looting and arson, as Trump railed against the protesters and police used teargas, pepper spray and excessive force, people with competing ideologies, including the Chinese government tripped over themselves in a tangled web of rhetoric and accusations. There were those who supported Trump and the Hong Kong protesters, or those supported China and US protesters, those who supported the protesters but no leaders, or any other combination of views. Some quibbled over death and arrest tolls, others engaged in contorted assessments of causes and tactics, or amplified the views of far-right agitators. Online, some shared the view of student activist Sunny Cheung, who told the Guardian that he obviously condemned the police brutality, but that Americans had mechanisms such as free elections through which to hold officers and governments accountable. “Police brutality exists and we condemn that, but at the same time the government did punish those police,” he said. “We can never see that in Hong Kong.” Some Hongkongers distanced their movements from the destruction of the US protests by saying Hong Kong protesters didn’t loot, appearing to suggest there was more justification in the US police crackdowns, while also ignoring that there had been some vandalism and violence in Hong Kong. Looting and indiscriminate destruction of private property ... are mere distractions from what’s really at stake: systemic racism When far-right figure Avi Yememi, an Israeli-born Australian anti-Muslim agitator, seized on the destruction and said it was “disgraceful” to compare the two protests, Hong Kong pro-democracy activist and media tycoon, Jimmy Lai, thanked him for “speaking up for HKers”. Protester M said there was a strong international narrative that Hongkongers were “model protesters”. “There’s a desire to be like ‘hey we’re not like them! We’re still good! If you support them, why not support us? We don’t break rules!’,” she said. Responding to calls for a statement on the US protests, Joshua Wong, the high-profile young activist and leader of the Demosisto party, said he stood with Black Lives Matter and against police brutality “wherever it may be”. His Washington-based Demosisto colleague, Jeffrey Ngo, said he acknowledged the Hong Kong movement was imperfect and there was a “small but vocal” group of far-right pro-Trump people in the movement who celebrated his rhetoric. “Others may be reluctant to speak up because they see such imperfections of the US movement as looting and the indiscriminate destruction of private property,” Ngo said. “But I believe these are mere distractions from what’s really at stake: systemic racism.” In a widely read op-ed on Thursday last week, leftwing literary site Lausan warned Hong Kong people that Trump was no friend, and that the movement’s relationship with the US political right was increasingly untenable. “Just as these politicians don’t care about black lives, they don’t care about the lives of Hongkongers either,” it said. “Instead, their support for the Hong Kong movement has always been contingent on their broader geopolitical goals and is as fickle as the whims of US foreign policy. “In truth, US support for Hong Kong was never meant to benefit the Hong Kong people. The city was only ever a way for the US to punish the CCP [Chinese Communist party], even if it meant sacrificing it.” M said people largely knew this but were desperate. “It’s important to ask whether we are conflating ‘supporting Trump’ with ‘supporting America’, or ‘supporting whoever will stand with us and do something but unfortunately it’s only Trump, so Trump it is’. “They’ve begged for help from the world for years – the 2019 protests are hardly the first time Hong Kong has tried to fight.”