There were effectively two different versions of the Pointer Sisters. There was the 80s hit machine, a trio whose sound existed somewhere between soul and shiny synth-pop, authors of the ubiquitous I’m So Excited and Jump (For My Love). And there was the Pointer Sisters that existed before them, when Bonnie Pointer was still a member, who were a very different and far more intriguing proposition: a quartet, dressed in a chaotic, charity-shop approximation of 1940s glamour, whose sound zigzagged wittily and unpredictably between jazz, soul, blues and country. They could make music that matched their outfits, sounding like an African-American equivalent of the Manhattan Transfer, or of Bette Midler belting out The Lullaby of Broadway and Boogie-Woogie Bugle Boy to the delight of the patrons of New York’s Continental Baths. Alternatively, they could turn out a tough take on Willie Dixon’s Wang Dang Doodle or the humid New Orleans funk of Allen Toussaint’s Yes We Can Can. They could do disco, as on 1977’s Waiting on You; equally, they could win a Grammy for the best country performance by a duo or group, as they did for Fairytale (1974). They had hits, but they were nowhere near as commercially successful as their latter incarnation, perhaps because the 70s version of the Pointer Sisters kept wrongfooting their audience, or rather their audiences: there may have been some crossover between the crowd who bought tickets to see the post-blaxploitation comedy Car Wash – in which they appeared serenading Richard Prior’s corrupt evangelist Daddy Rich – and those who turned up to see them play Nashville’s Grand Ol’ Opry, the first black vocal group ever to do so, but it doesn’t seem terribly likely. It was Bonnie Pointer who formed the band, initially as a duo with youngest sister June, before elder siblings Anita and Ruth joined. They worked as backing vocalists for an eclectic range of San Francisco-based artists – Boz Scaggs, Sylvester, Jefferson Airplane’s Grace Slick – and recorded a couple of singles for Atlantic: Don’t Try to Take the Fifth and Destination No More Heartaches. The A-sides were solid if unremarkable examples of early-70s soul, but the B-side of the latter, Send Him Back, had a distinctly retro flavour that meant it was eventually rediscovered by northern soul DJs. But it wasn’t until they signed to Blue Thumb that the Pointer Sisters came into their own. It was an impressively eclectic label – its roster included Captain Beefheart and Sun Ra, and it gamely attempted to interest America in the Pointer Sisters’ former employer, Sylvester and the Hot Band, audiences proving resistant to the idea of an androgynous black man belting out Neil Young’s Southern Man in high heels – and the Pointer Sisters’ stylistic rethink made them fit right in. The 40s affectations were surprisingly timely – fashion was undergoing a retro moment that found its expression everywhere from women’s platform shoes and halter dresses to the GI look sported by Bryan Ferry – and their stage show was campily theatrical enough that San Francisco’s Opera House, previously closed to pop artists, hosted a performance by them (captured on a 1974 live album). Both their eponymous debut, which featured backing from another Blue Thumb act, the blues-rockers Hoodoo Rhythm Devils, and its follow-up, That’s A-Plenty, went gold in the US. But even Blue Thumb seemed startled when Anita and Bonnie wrote Fairytale, a song inspired in equal part by Jackson Browne and the country songs they remembered being sung by their older relatives, who had moved from Arkansas to California. Blue Thumb lacked a country department to promote it, so handed it over to their sister label, Dot. It made the country charts, won a Grammy and was subsequently covered by Elvis Presley. The band toyed with making a country album, but instead recorded Steppin’ – home to both a medley of Duke Ellington songs and How Long (Betcha Gotta Chick on the Side), a superb funk track again co-written by Anita and Bonnie that became another hit. On the surface, Having a Party (1977) appeared more straightforward, dialling down the swing-era influences, but was still both witty – “Take off your socks, I don’t wanna see no socks, baby” protested the fabulously slinky Don’t It Drive You Crazy – and musically varied: disco next to old Sam Cooke covers and the reggae-inspired I’ll Get By Without You. The following year, Bonnie Pointer married Temptations and Chairmen of the Board producer Jeffrey Bowen and was spirited away for a solo career on Motown, under his aegis. The Pointer Sisters were never the same again, although you could occasionally detect a hint of their old eclecticism – they had a hit with the Bruce Springsteen song, Fire, and there was definitely a country song lurking somewhere beneath the production gloss of their 1981 ballad Slow Hand. Motown, meanwhile, appeared slightly at a loss as to what to do with Bonnie Pointer. The big idea on her two albums for the label seemed to be getting her to record disco versions of the label’s vintage hits – Jimmy Mack, Nowhere to Run (Nowhere to Hide) – with Pointer multitracking the vocal harmonies. It was an approach that yielded a solo hit with an updated version of the Elgins’ Heaven Must Have Sent You, but it gave them a whiff of novelty and meant the fresh material she performed was overshadowed. The best track on either album was Free Me from My Freedom, mid-tempo disco complete with an unlikely banjo solo, that was given a particularly fantastic extended 12-inch version, but it failed to cross over from the clubs to the chart. Radio programmers were apparently put off by the lyrics’ vague undercurrent of S&M. Pointer fell into contractual dispute with Motown and didn’t release another album for five years: the sense that If the Price Is Right (1984) was an attempt to mimic the style that had brought her sisters multi-platinum success was hard to escape, although she remained a live draw for the rest of her life, performing in Vegas and Atlantic City and sporadically reuniting with her sisters on stage. Her final album, Like a Picasso (2011), had its moments – the single Strangest Day was an impressively raw rock-soul hybrid, decorated with bluesy harmonica. But her reputation rests on the music she made in the 70s, particularly with the Pointer Sisters, back when you never quite knew what the Pointer Sisters would do next.