The 236th Merseyside derby will take place at Goodison Park after Liverpool city council’s ground safety advisory group met on Wednesday and approved a safety certificate for the stadium. Anfield was also given the go-ahead, which means both Liverpool and Everton can play their remaining games on their own grounds without the need for neutral venues. Liverpool could theoretically win their first title in 30 years at Everton on 21 June, which was why the national chief of football policing recommended a switch to a venue where supporters might not be quite as tempted to congregate and celebrate in defiance of physical-distancing rules. As recently as Tuesday Southampton’s St Mary’s Stadium was still being suggested as a possible venue, though once the Merseyside police and then the Liverpool council threw their weight behind keeping the game local most objections were overcome. Liverpool’s mayor, Joe Anderson, thanked both clubs for making it clear to supporters that their presence at or near the ground would not be welcome. Councillor Wendy Simon, the deputy mayor of Liverpool and chair of the council’s safety advisory group, said: “We are satisfied that the considerable evidence provided by the government, Everton and Liverpool football clubs, public health colleagues and Merseyside police will ensure that the outstanding fixtures for the Premier League season can be safely and securely played at both Goodison Park and Anfield. “A lot of factors have been taken into consideration, especially the safety of the players, match officials and staff. We are confident the measures in place will allow the matches to be held behind closed doors without detrimental impact. We would advise that everyone, wherever they may be watching these fixtures, strongly adhere to the guidance on social distancing.”With regard to the derby, which will be broadcast free to air, the Merseyside assistant chief constable, Rob Carden, said: “Working together with both teams, we want to ensure everyone enjoys the game from the safety of their own home. In relation to crime and disorder we have no objections to any of the home fixtures being played at their respective grounds, the main concern was always public health. “It is not the role of the police to make operational decisions on the basis of public health, we have been guided by experts and the government. We are still in unprecedented times and there are strong concerns in Merseyside and the wider north-west due to the fact the R-rate here is still higher than in the rest of the country. For that reason we would urge supporters to do the right thing – stay at home and keep your family, friends and neighbours safe.” The supporters’ groups Blue Union and Spirit of Shankly were represented at the safety group meeting and welcomed the decision. A statement said: “Building on the magnificent community work both sets of fans have done throughout this pandemic, we are confident supporters will respect safety advice and avoid visiting stadia. We fully understand the importance of lockdown as a measure to control Covid-19 and would encourage fans to stay away.” Everton have confirmed that Theo Walcott will miss the restart after undergoing abdominal surgery. The 31-year-old was taken to hospital on Monday after developing symptoms on the club’s return to training and is expected to be able to resume training in four weeks. Andre Gomes is expected to be fit to face Liverpool after recovering from a minor injury picked up in training.