A morning routine? Sitting in bed with my partner, Pav, while BBC Radio 6 Music plays, both reading the news on our separate phones and occasionally shoving our screens into each other’s faces. Then it’s into the car with the dog for a walk in the West Pennines. Your Sunday speciality? Pav is a far superior cook; I’m too lazy. When I’m in a show and mates come up to stay, he’ll do asparagus and eggs on sourdough for breakfast. Honestly, who am I to be eating sourdough? If it was down to me it would just be crumpets. If you don’t want a crumpet, you’re not having anything – that’s my cooking motto. Have you been working? I’ve done a few bits: Talking Heads for the BBC and a film for Refuge. I’m co-writing a musical, but find it hard to stay motivated. I look at social media and see people posting about all the things they’ve done with their day. I’m like, ugh good for you, it’s 2.30pm and I’m having a nap in the garden. Sunday memories? Making mischief in the field out the back of my childhood home, running through hay to provoke the farmer, into coming out before we’d run away screaming that he was going to kill us. And waking up in bed with my nan if my parents had been out, and my step-grandad Jim appearing with tea and gingernut biscuits. The sound of Sunday? Our eclectic record collection. We always kick off with Mike Oldfield’s Tubular Bells, and then it could be anything. As soon as I hear the Drifters, Al Green or the Four Tops on a Sunday I’m taken back to being aged seven again. And a smell? Fresh-cut grass: Sunday afternoons were when my grandad got his posh push-blade lawnmower out. We had a running joke that it was all I’d get in his will, and in the end I got it. I’ve gone up in the world and upgraded, but it’s still in the garage. How have you been coping? You don’t want to sound disrespectful, but I’m loving being at home. Usually I’m living out of a suitcase, I haven’t been here for this long in forever. Pav and I spend a lot of time apart; it’s my goal in life for us to just potter like an old retired couple. And now we are. The film Fanny Lye Deliver’d is out on digital on 26 June