A number of League One and League Two clubs are uneasy about starting next season behind closed doors because of the financial shortfalls of playing without fans, raising fears of the 2020-21 campaign beginning after the planned September date. The EFL is understood to have outlined a three-week window, ending on the weekend of 12 September, for proceedings to begin broadly in line with the Premier League. But several would rather not play until supporters return and the picture, particularly in League One, is one of vastly diverse motivations that will be difficult to reconcile. Some clubs have also expressed concerns that, given the proposed timescale, planning for 2020-21 has been insufficient. The issue of organising next season has been raised on league calls between clubs. The collage of views is distinctly mixed, with some more relaxed than others about the prospect of beginning without fans and Gillingham’s owner, Paul Scally, saying a “period of hibernation” may lie ahead. Many are resigned to playing without a full crowd before January but some clubs are more optimistic fans could be introduced on a staggered basis in the autumn. The EFL chairman, Rick Parry, has acknowledged the serious financial challenges facing clubs. Conversations are ongoing about implementing salary caps across the Championship, League One and League Two squads, with the EFL suggesting a £1.25m cap for the fourth tier and a £2.5m cap for the third tier. The Professional Footballers’ Association would oppose any caps. Squad sizes may also be limited. A source from one high-profile League One club said they perceived a groundswell of opinion towards waiting for fans to be admitted. They voiced concern about the possible consequences of falling out of line with the top two divisions and suggested the league faced its biggest existential challenge. Another club that would expect a promotion push accepted that playing without crowds would be untenable for most of the division and suggested they were looking to October as a potential time to welcome supporters. The Wycombe chairman, Rob Couhig, said: “In the event that we are not promoted, playing without crowds would be a struggle. We expect attendances to contribute approximately 45% of annual revenue. If we started the season knowing we would play the first 10-15 of our games without crowds, we can survive. Much more than that and every home crowd lost will be a significant step towards financial jeopardy.” One League Two owner said playing without fans in the short term was not “the end of the world” and urged clubs to explore other revenue opportunities, with some hopeful streaming incomes could help recover the absence of gate receipts, which make up around 30% of income at most clubs. A League One owner also urged a degree of positivity. “We don’t believe no fans means no income. I don’t think it will be the financial nightmare that people think it would be. We will be back before crowds sooner than people think.” Andy Holt, the Accrington owner, has made it clear he is against starting next season without fans. “I do not want to play behind-closed-doors games,” he said. “For me, football is about the community and fans.” Even when the government relaxes restrictions around mass gatherings, there is an awareness clubs will be affected differently. In League One, clubs such as Sunderland, Ipswich and MK Dons would have few problems accommodating a limited number of physically distanced supporters. But Accrington and others have capacities of less than 7,000 and would be hard pressed to feel the benefit of any partial readmittance. National League clubs will vote on Monday on whether to curtail the season via the points-per-game formula. If the vote is passed as expected, Barrow will be promoted and six teams will contest the play-offs as normal, though the final is set to be away from Wembley on the recommendation of the Football Association, owing to the expense. One club is thought to be reluctant to partake in the play-offs given the cost of testing, estimated to be more than £100,000 per club. There would be no play-offs in the National League North or South but the leaders on PPG – Kings Lynn and Wealdstone – stand to be promoted.