The government’s lockdown rules to control coronavirus are easing on 4 July in England to allow many more businesses, as well as leisure facilities, to reopen, with other measures also relaxed. A new “1-metre-plus” concept has been introduced. This means it is now possible to be 1 metre away from someone outside your household instead of 2 metres, so long as there is another mitigating factor in place, such as a screen or face-covering, or hand-washing facilities. The changes also allow one household of up to six people to spend time with another household indoors, including staying the night, but they should remain physically distant. Pubs and restaurants in England can reopen both outdoors and indoors in what the government calls a “covid-secure way” with more hand-washing, ventilation and table service indoors, rather than customers standing at a shared bar. People may be asked to give their names but pub landlords will not check the exact makeup of an individual household that comes into the venue or request to see identification. They will not be asked to wear face-coverings. A household will be able to meet with one other household at a time in a pub or restaurant, then choose another household on another occasion. Nightclubs will not yet be reopening, nor will casinos, and the government has said there will be taskforces to ensure more businesses can open as quickly as possible. Hotels, bed and breakfasts, holiday homes and campsites and caravan parks and boarding houses will be able to reopen. Campsites will be given guidance on how to be “covid-secure” in shared areas such as shower, toilet and washing-up facilities. Work remains to be done on how hostels, where there are shared sleeping spaces, can reopen safely and they will not be ready for 4 July. Instead of keeping a distance of 2 metres from other passengers, it will be possible to travel 1 metre apart so long as another mitigating factor is in place, such as a face-coverings which are mandatory. This will help more people get on to trains, buses and trams. They will be able to reopen but not for live performances, as the government say they want to protect the health of performers. They could show previous work on a screen. Cafes, bars and restaurants associated with the venue would be able to reopen, however. Museums and galleries can also reopen. Concerts and outdoor music festivals will not be permitted as mass gatherings are still banned. Gyms, indoor studios, indoor sports facilities, swimming pools and water parks will not be reopening yet but outdoor gyms in parks – many of which have been taped up by councils since March – will be. Popular events such as park runs, and large running groups, are not due to make a comeback just yet as they are classed as a mass gathering. The reason gym-like venues are remaining closed for now is the level of breathing involved, which is a risk factor in the virus’ spread. These have been open for private prayer since 13 June but the changes mean more of the congregation can attend so long as the building’s staff follow guidance on how to control the virus. Singing will be banned, so there could be a Sunday church service but held without the hymns. Weddings can be held as places of worship reopen. However, after the service the couple will only be able to go to a hospitality venue with one other household – making any celebration small-scale and forcing couples to chose between different sides of a family. At the moment, the maximum number of people from one household that can mix with another household in an indoor venue is six. Hairdressers and barbers can open and have been booking in clients for a number of weeks anticipating the change. Nail bars, massage and tattoo parlours will not be reopening because of concerns about the risk of transmission. However, the government says it hopes to get them reopened within weeks and that they are working closely with the sector on how this could be possible. Funfairs, theme parks, adventure parks, amusement arcades, model villages, aquariums, wildlife centres, zoos and safari parks can all reopen on 4 July, which will give families far more scope for days out. However, bowling alleys, indoor skating, indoor play areas including soft play will not be reopening for now.