Magical Bones has got me ripping up playing cards in my living room, which he promises will be worth it. After tearing four cards in half, I’m instructed to place one of the shredded pieces to the side, before shuffling the remaining debris in various ways. I chant as I do this, along with Magical Bones, throwing the pieces one by one over my shoulder until I reach the last one. It’s an ace of hearts – well half of it – but I’m left astonished: it matches the other half of the card that I’ve set aside. This is the magician’s first live show on Zoom, staged in association with seven theatres nationwide, including the Pleasance in London and the Lowry in Salford. He has been on the scene for years, having made his name as a street dancer, but recently stunned judges in a Britain’s Got Talent appearance. His audition for the show was inspired by his 19th-century hero, Henry Box Brown, who escaped from slavery in Virginia by hiding inside a box and posting himself to a free state, before later becoming a magician. In tonight’s show, Magical Bones is friendly, warm and witty. It’s an interactive set, so he selects crowd members to join him for different tricks, and we hear about audiences’ lockdown experiences, from older couples to young families. Impressively, there are no technological slip-ups. A second camera is used for closeups and guest acts are seamlessly broadcast live from venues across the UK. The one-hour show is a catalogue of gripping tricks, each one full of imagination and flair. A highlight involves a pile of the magician’s old train tickets and an adorable hand-drawn flip chart. In another, Magical Bones arranges a Rubik’s Cube as directed by audience members. It has 43 quintillion possible configurations, he tells us, but the resulting arrangement exactly matches that of another cube that he reveals was sitting off-camera. Deception is rife, my amazement is constant. I still have no idea how he pulled any of it off. In place of clapping, the audience is asked to use Zoom’s emoji reaction buttons. In between his bits, there are guest acts. Closeup magician Brendan Rodrigues makes pens disappear, while TikTok star Magic Singh somehow pushes a coin through a glass without breaking it. There is a daring aerial silks performance from Shelley Baker, and polished body-popping from dancer Brooke Milliner. Plus, a final routine where Magical Bones executes a card trick to a hip-hop mashup by DJ Yoda. The virtual set-up may limit what Magical Bones can do but it’s a dazzling evening of hope and love. Performances online until 13 June.