1) Thirty-two years ago today, Soviet Union v the Netherlands in Munich for the Euro 88 final. And that Marco van Basten volley – still as ridiculous as ever. The powerfully nodded opener from Ruud Gullit always bears rewatching too. Precisely 10 years earlier, reverse fortunates for the Dutch as Mario Kempes helped himself to two goals to help Argentina to their first World Cup victory – on home soil too. More Dutch brilliance here from Patrick Kluivert, nonchalantly lobbing in from 40 yards with the outside of his boot for Barça Legends against Uganda All-Stars in 2015. The Ugandans still won 5-3 though. Nice to see that the touch is still there 😉 #ugandavsbarcalegends pic.twitter.com/OgKQa2xbSi 2) A slightly less savoury World Cup memory – today also marks six years since Luis Suárez was charged for helping himself to a chunk of Giorgio Chiellini’s shoulder in a bad-tempered group game in Brazil. Here he is in conversation with the Guardian’s Simon Hattenstone to discuss that incident and more. Pick your own grotty path from there: go back four years for more dastardliness from the Uruguayan to stop Ghana from reaching the World Cup semis … 3) … or travel back to 1997 for Mike Tyson’s yompers v Evander Holyfield’s ears. Here Tyson gets emotional in summoning an apology for Oprah, although it was a different story when the fighters sat down to reminisce; Tyson appears disturbingly disappointed that he hadn’t snacked on the same ear twice. See also hockey and Jarkko Ruutu v Andrew Peters’ thumb – at least there was ice handy. 4) Tuesday was the official Olympic Day, and saw a host of current and former Olympians sharing their big Games moments, including swimmer Katie Ledecky, long jumper Greg Rutherford and Aussie hurdler Sally Pearson. Many got involved to talk fans through specially devised workouts, but couch potatoes can stay put and enjoy badminton players Marcus Ellis and Lauren Smith aiming shuttlecocks into toilet-roll middles and through rolls of sticky tape. Ridiculous skills here too from gymnast Simone Biles. @ellis_marcus111 and @LaurenE_Smith’s #OlympicDay challenge is a jolly good one.Check it out. #StayActive pic.twitter.com/QRdbtq0Ecw 5) Jamie Redknapp turns 47 today, and would probably still fancy his chances from long range against Patrick Kielty. Spain’s Albert Costa is 45, and will always have Roland Garros 2002. Neil Lennon is now 49, and will fondly recall the 8-1 drubbing of Dunfermline in 2006, where he helped himself to a rare goal. Craig Johnston is in his 60s – here he is brilliantly in conversation about his storied career. 6) A pair of abysmal open-goal misses in Serie A this week but which was worse – Inter’s Roberto Gagliardini or Valerio Verre for Verona? 1) Nostalgia ahoy! Here’s LWT celebrating its 30th anniversary in August 1998 with this feature-length show about its sports coverage. Featuring Dickie Davies, Brian Moore, Reg Gutteridge, Brough Scott and Ian St John. 2) If you’re missing live cricket, then check out the European 10-10 cricket from Sweden. 3) Maradona’s impossible goal. 4) The late, great Willie Thorne taking care of business on Big Break. Spotters’ badges: kisbie, 102notout, whobroughtoranges, LeeWall. Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.