The Premier League is making its grand return this week and so is the Championship. While League One and League Two have ended their seasons prematurely, settling the final places via points per game and play-offs, the Championship has resolved to complete the campaign. There is still plenty to play for in the remaining 108 matches. Barring a late collapse in the nine remaining rounds of fixtures, Leeds and West Brom will take the two automatic promotion spots from the Championship. Leeds are top of the table, a point clear of West Brom, with third-place Fulham six points further back. Leeds went into lockdown in excellent form, winning five games in a row to move above the Baggies, who have won just two of their last five. That said, it is difficult to predict how the players will react after such a long lay-off. Leeds have a slightly easier run of fixtures. They play all of the bottom three at home in their nine remaining fixtures: Luton later this month, Barnsley in the middle of July and Charlton in their final game. Trips to Cardiff, Blackburn and Swansea will test their title credentials but Leeds boast the second best away record in the league and they will fancy their chances of ending the season at the top of the pile. The Baggies, meanwhile, have a tough derby against Birmingham City to navigate next week. They also have games to come against west London pair Fulham and Brentford. Their home run-in makes for forgivable reading, save the visit of Fulham, which is a boost given their record at the Hawthorns is fairly underwhelming. They have only picked up 31 points at their own ground this season (the eighth best in the division) yet they have won 39 points on the road – more than any other Championship side. This two-horse race will be an enthralling battle. Expect West Brom to push them all the way, but Leeds are definitely favourites. Fulham look set for a place in the play-offs. They are third in the table on 64 points, nine clear of seventh-place Bristol City, so have ample breathing space to secure a spot in the top six. They still have to play Leeds and West Brom, but Scott Parker’s side will see those games as opportunities to put pressure on the top two. Brentford, who meet Fulham next week, are fourth in the table (level on points with Nottingham Forest with 60 points) and will hope to catch their neighbours. The battle between the two London sides is also worth watching for the race for the golden boot. Fulham’s Aleksandar Mitrovic (23) leads Brentford’s Ollie Watkins (22) by a single goal. Things are less clear cut below fifth-place Nottingham Forest. Three points separate Preston in sixth to Swansea in 11th, making it all to play for in the race for that final play-offs spot. Any side in the top half of the table could make a push for promotion. Indeed, back-to-back wins before lockdown took Derby to within two points of Swansea. QPR, who have won three of their last five games, cannot be ruled out given the unpredictability of the Championship. Millwall, who are eighth in the league, will fancy their chances of making up the two-point gap between themselves and Preston. They have a promising run-in, including games against three of the current bottom four. Gary Rowett’s side should be confident of ending the campaign inside the top six. At the foot of the table, Barnsley are at real risk of being cut adrift. They are seven points off safety following back-to-back defeats before lockdown. They desperately need some points but their next three games are against sides in the top half. Luton, who sit a point above Barnsley in the relegation zone, are also returning to a tough set of fixtures. They have to play Preston, Swansea and Leeds before the end of June. In 22nd, Charlton have already faced the two sides below them home and away this season and return to action with a massive six-pointer at Hull, who should be looking anxiously over their shoulders. They have not won in 11 matches, picking up just two points from a possible 33 available in that time. Hull, though, are fortunate in that they have one of the easiest run-ins. Their future is in their own hands as they take on Charlton, Wigan and Luton before the end of the campaign, with the latter two clashes coming in the final weeks of the season. And, fortunately for Hull, the two teams below them – Barnsley and Charlton – have difficult run-ins. The Championship is a difficult league to predict at the best of times, especially now given there has been such a long gap between fixtures. But there is certainly a lot to play for between now and the end of the campaign. • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and analysis• Follow WhoScored and Ben McAleer on Twitter