The BBC News presenter Clive Myrie says the racist abuse he regularly receives has become increasingly virulent and prevalent in recent years and is at its worst since he started his career in 1988. A far-right extremist who threatened to kill him was jailed last year. Myrie said the UK must not be complacent over racism in society, and that the groundswell of anti-racism protests demonstrated the widespread desire for systemic change. “The most recent thing I got two weeks ago was quite succinct: ‘Fuck off you black cunt,’” he said. “It actually doesn’t really bother me at all. What bothers me is the general sense that we live in a country where some people think racism is either imagined, or in people’s minds, and I think that is a notion that has to be fought. “We’ve got problems in our own house that we need to sort out. There are a few too many people running around saying that we’re fine here, we’re not like America.” Myrie said the police were better trained in the UK than in the US and that lessons had been learned following the Brixton riots, the killing of Stephen Lawrence and the subsequent widely criticised investigation, but he urged against further inaction as incidents of racism increase in the UK. “I could count on the fingers of one hand the amount of racist abuse that I received from when I started in journalism in 1988 through to about 2008, though there was a guy in the early 90s who would send faeces in the post,” he said. “But it has picked up in the last decade and become incredibly more prevalent in the last few years. Why has that happened? I don’t know.” Myrie, who was born in Bolton, also received a card with a gorilla on the front last year which read: “We don’t want people like you on our TV screens.” The former foreign correspondent said black people were chronically underrepresented throughout British society and business and that white society knew this but had failed to act. “We’ve had God knows how many reports over the last 40 years detailing systemic racism and systemic lack of diversity across a range of institutions across British society, but nothing seems to get done,” he said. “Without dealing in opinion, we’ve had numerous reports and we’ve had little action done on the recommendations. One wonders what is the point of reports if the recommendations are not going to be acted on.” Myrie has reported on the disproportionate use of stop and search against black people in recent weeks and he said police should be restricted to using the power solely on the basis of intelligence received about a suspect. “You can’t just stop people on the street because they’re black, and that is what’s happening,” he said. “We cannot think we’re holier than thou and that the situation in the UK is fine when there are huge issues. I’ve interviewed enough people just in the last week getting across that point.”