It sounds scarcely believable in modern, multiracial Britain but nearly a century after the sprinter Jack London became the first black athlete to win an Olympic medal for Britain in 1928, and more than 40 years since Viv Anderson became the first black footballer to start for England, Team GB has never sent a black swimmer to an Olympic Games. Not one. But next summer Alice Dearing, a 23-year-old from Birmingham who is Britain’s best open-water swimmer, intends to flip 125 years of history on its head in Tokyo – the small matter of a global pandemic permitting. And, as becomes clear over a thought-provoking and nuanced conversation, that is only the start of her ambitions.“Being a poster girl for black swimming is exciting, because genuinely I love the sport and I want to see as many people doing it as possible,” Dearing says. “But it’s also terrifying because there’s a lot of pressure. I have rationalised it – if not me, then who? And I want this to happen as soon as possible, to break that barrier.” It is not the only one Dearing intends to shatter. Last year she became the lead ambassador for the Black Swimming Association, a charity that encourages black people to swim, and she illustrates the scale of the challenge by citing shocking figures from Sport England, which show that 95% of black adults and 80% of black children in England do not swim – while only 1% of registered competitive swimmers with Swim England identify as black or mixed race.“Things need to speed up absolutely everywhere,” she says. “You can’t just have elite swimmers come from absolutely nowhere. So our focus is on the learn-to-swim side. Because eventually, you’ll see that change as you get more county swimmers then regional, national, international and then eventually, hopefully, more black Olympians.” Part of the problem, she explains, is also cultural. “A lot of black people think they never learned how to swim and turned out fine so they don’t need to teach their children. Obviously there are a lot of flaws with that argument, but if that’s being repeated to a whole generation – that swimming is not for you – then obviously it’s going to trickle down.”Dearing has also recently partnered with the specialist swimming brand Soul Cap, which makes swimming hats designed especially for afro hair. As she explains, swimming can be more damaging to afro hair because of the sodium hypochlorite in pools, which can discourage those from black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds. Meanwhile Dearing’s skin colour meant that when she started swimming aged seven or eight she stood out – not that she always realised. “My mum’s the black parent. She’d be the one taking me training and to competitions, and she would literally be one of two black people at the pool along with me – people would see us together and just stare. My mum was like: ‘It must be because you are so small and then you swim so well.’ But maybe we were being naive.”While most in the sport have been encouraging, Dearing says there have been exceptions – including the time she found out from a friend that a coach used the N-word regarding her when she was 17. “If that’s the way someone sees me then it’s their issue and they need to learn to deal with it. I’m tired of educating people around these issues. That said, it is really exciting to see how many people in the last few weeks genuinely want to change things.“Typically I have been sceptical about these movements because they happen maybe once every two years and then fizzle out. But the more the days have gone on, and I’ve seen how determined everyone is to make change happen, the more I have become hopeful.” Dearing’s mum, who is from Accra in Ghana, is the keen swimmer of her parents. Her dad, who is white and from Hull, cannot swim at all. And it was her mum who encouraged her to stick at the sport until, because of a combination of a growth spurt and a switch to long distances, she suddenly moved into elite class.“When I was 16 I made my first GB team in the 400m freestyle – that made me realise I could achieve something because I was quite small and had always doubted myself. That same year I was invited for an open-water trial for the European juniors. I didn’t realise that it was over 10km. And to make matters worse it was only 14C, tipping down, and I didn’t have a wetsuit. But despite it being my first time in open water I somehow managed to finish in 2hr 20m. Off the back of that I went to European juniors and ended up winning. After that I just kind of rolled with it.” And then some. At 19 Dearing was crowned world junior open-water champion. Before the lockdown she was in the best phase of training in her career, having finished in the top 10 at a World Cup event in Doha in February, and was relishing a shot at the Olympic podium. Dearing could only train on her boyfriend’s parents’ exercise bike during the early stages of the pandemic but is now back in the swing of getting up at 4.30am to train in the pool. Somehow she combines this with studying for a Masters at Loughborough University and being on the Women’s Sport Trust’s Unlocked programme, which seeks to help women sports stars become voices for their generation.How does she fit it in? “I like to think about everything I do as influencing my younger self. Would it be enough to inspire somebody to be a woman of colour swimming for the national team – or could I take it a step further by reaching out to the community?”It’s working, too. “I am seeing way more black swimmers poolside than I used to. I watch them swim – and I am always their biggest fan in my head. To be honest I don’t want to always be referred to as the black swimmer from Britain. I want to be known for my achievements. But perhaps it is necessary if it helps inspire another child to get in the pool, aged eight, and to just give it a go.”