Although her mother once described her as “being born so late she was only able to enjoy the tragedies and not the triumphs” of being a Kennedy, as the last survivor of the nine children of Joseph P Kennedy and Rose Fitzgerald, Jean Kennedy Smith enjoyed more than her share of both. Considered the shyest of the Kennedy siblings, Jean kept a low public profile but despite maintaining her privacy became an admirable public servant, promoting the arts and care for disabled children, as well as serving as US ambassador to Ireland during the toughest days of the Northern Ireland peace process, and playing a controversial role in part of its success. Jean, who has died aged 92, was the eighth of the nine Kennedy children. Her oldest brother, Joseph Jr, was killed when a drone bomber he was piloting exploded prematurely during the second world war. Her sister Kathleen (“Kick”) died in a plane crash in 1948, while Rosemary (“Rose”), was kept out of the public’s and the family’s sight after being institutionalised and lobotomised, and died in 2005. Her brother John was elected president in 1960 and assassinated three years later; Jean and her husband were with Bobby on his 1968 presidential campaign when he too was gunned down. Patricia, who was briefly married to the actor Peter Lawford, died in 2006. When her sister Eunice died in August 2009, Jean elected to stay by her younger brother Edward’s bedside rather than attend the funeral; he died 18 days later. Jean was born in Brookline, Massachusetts. Although she was raised in an atmosphere of privilege, her parents were barely on speaking terms through much of her early childhood; her father, a wealthy businessman, film producer and politician, carried on a very public affair with the film star Gloria Swanson. Her closest bond was with Ted, four years younger. The family lived in London after her father was appointed ambassador to the court of St James in 1938; his controversial tenure included his making direct and unauthorised approaches to Hitler, and criticising US support for Britain during the Battle of Britain. After he moved the family to the country during the blitz he was seen by the British as defeatist, and, eventually, under severe pressure from President Franklin D Roosevelt’s state department and public opinion at home, he resigned. Like her sisters Eunice and Rose, Jean attended Manhattanville, a Roman Catholic women’s college in Purchase, New York, where she studied English, and her friends included two future sisters-in-law, Ethel Skakel, who married Bobby, and Ted’s first wife, Joan Bennett. In 1956 she married Stephen Smith, an executive with Cleary Bros, his family’s business of Hudson River tugs and barges. He soon took charge of the Park Agency, which controlled the Kennedy family investments; these included the real estate on which Lincoln Center in New York was built, and the world’s largest commercial building, the Chicago Merchandise Mart. In 1960 she and her husband campaigned for her brother John, who became the first Roman Catholic US president; her husband was appointed JFK’s campaign manager for his 1964 re-election, cut off by his assassination. In 1964, President Lyndon Johnson appointed her a trustee of Washington’s new Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, a post to which she was reappointed by each successive new president. In 1974, she founded Very Special Arts (now known as VSA), a programme to encourage participation in the arts by disabled children and develop art therapy. In 1968, Stephen Smith managed Bobby Kennedy’s presidential campaign; he and Jean were at the Ambassador hotel in Los Angeles when, having won the California Democratic primary, Bobby was shot. His death left the campaign millions of dollars of debt, and Smith took charge of satisfying the creditors, often driving hard bargains, but settling the matter from family funds. Eleven years later, Smith would once again be tapped as Ted’s campaign manager, but some Kennedy staffers found him out of touch as Teddy lost the Democratic party’s 1980 nomination to Jimmy Carter. After that, the Smiths maintained a low public profile, and in 1990 Stephen died from lung cancer. A few months later, their younger son, William, was accused of rape in Palm Beach; he was acquitted after a highly publicised trial which revealed that Ted Kennedy had often cruised Palm Beach nightclubs with his nephews. In 1993, President Bill Clinton appointed Jean Kennedy Smith ambassador to Ireland. She was following in her father’s footsteps as an ambassador and had accompanied President Kennedy to Ireland in June 1963, so her return held special memories for her. She was instrumental in the granting in 1994 of a US visa for the first time to the Sinn Féin leader Gerry Adams, a decision that was opposed strongly by some state department officials attached to the Dublin embassy. Her retaliation against them drew a rebuke from the US secretary of state Warren Christopher. She would later be accused of bullying embassy staff and spending public money on personal improvements to the ambassador’s official residence. Further charges of conflict of interest were resolved in 2000 when she paid $5,000 in compensation. But during her time as ambassador, she made notable public contributions to the peace process, including taking communion in the Church of Ireland, and taking a bit-part in the 1996 film Michael Collins. Most importantly, her intervention with the IRA leader Joe Cahill was seen as instrumental in getting Sinn Féin included in the peace talks, and helping to reinstate the ceasefire. It was also during her tenure that the US Senator George Mitchell issued the report that paved the way for the Good Friday agreement. When Kennedy Smith left the post in 1998, she was made an honorary citizen of Ireland. At the time she said: “I was a cog, really, in the machine that was moving. I was fortunate to be here to perhaps add momentum to what was happening.” In January 2008, along with Ted, Eunice and her niece, Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg, she publicly endorsed Barack Obama’s candidacy for the Democratic nomination for president over Hillary Clinton. In a moving piece for the Huffington Post, she quoted the Nobel peace prize winner John Hume’s call for America to be a “moral power”, and concluded: “As I think back on my brothers’ lives and John Hume’s words and example, I know that my experience, my conscience, and my heart all point to Barack Obama, the messenger of hope, who speaks to the same principle of unity and the common good that John Hume and my brothers believed in.” It was a fitting coda to the legacy of her generation of Kennedys. Kennedy Smith is survived by two sons, Stephen Jr and William, and two daughters, Amanda and Kym. • Jean Ann Kennedy Smith, public servant, born 20 February 1928; died 17 June 2020