Moscow has partially lifted its lockdown despite Russia reporting thousands of new daily cases and Spain’s government said face masks would remain mandatory in public as Europe continued to emerge from the first phase of its struggle against Covid-19. Concern mounted, however, over the spread of coronavirus in Africa and elsewhere, with Nigeria confirming 600 deaths from a previously undetected outbreak and South Africa warning its pandemic could last up to two years. Spain’s health minister, Salvador Illa, said the country would “have to learn to live alongside the virus” and masks would remain compulsory on the street, in open and enclosed public spaces and on public transport where people could not keep 1.5 metres apart. The government said on Tuesday there was “no room for complacency” as it outlined “the new normality” once the state of emergency ended on 22 June. “Until there is a vaccine or a treatment, the virus remains a threat,” the finance minister, María Jesús Montero, said. “The message is one of prudence and caution.” Life for Moscow’s 13 million residents resumed a semblance of normality after two months of lockdown as some restrictions in Russia’s capital were lifted even though it is is still reporting more than 1,000 new infections a day. Muscovites are now free to go outside when they want, use public transport and travel across the city in their own vehicles without any restrictions or digital passes after the mayor, Sergei Sobyanin, said the pandemic was receding in the city. He cited a recent steady fall in new cases, but critics accused him of rushing to ease the lockdown to allow a Red Square military parade later this month and a 1 July nationwide vote that could extend President Vladimir Putin’s rule until 2036. Russian authorities said on Tuesday they had recorded 8,595 new cases nationwide in the past 24 hours, pushing its total tally to 485,253 – the third highest in the world after the US and Brazil. Its official death toll remains relatively low at 6,142. In France, the Paris prosecutor launched an open investigation – targeting neither the president, Emmanuel Macron, nor government ministers – into the state’s handling of the crisis. Possible charges include involuntary homicide and endangering life. Beyond Europe, Nigeria’s health ministry said 50% to 60% of 979 “mysterious” deaths in Kano, the country’s second largest city, were linked to the virus, with most happening in a single week in April. Similar investigations are under way in eight other states that reported unexplained deaths. Officials in South Africa said there were now almost 51,000 confirmed cases in the continent’s most industrialised nation, with 1,080 deaths, most of them concentrated in and around Cape Town and more than 80% involving people aged over 50. South Africa, which lifted some restrictions earlier this month, was widely praised for its strict early lockdown and testing programme, but although nearly a million tests have been carried out there have been long delays before results are known. Afghanistan’s deputy health minister, meanwhile, said the country’s actual number of infections was higher than the official figure as 542 new cases were reported on Tuesday. Fifteen more patients died overnight, meaning the country’s Covid-19 death toll stands at 384. In India, authorities have warned there could soon be half a million Covid-19 cases in Delhi, with transmission forecast to increase almost 20-fold in the coming weeks. The world’s second most populous nation has recorded 270,000 infections, the fifth highest tally in the world, including almost 10,000 in the past 24 hours. The capital’s deputy chief minister, Manish Sisodia, said the city of 20 million people was expected to need 80,000 hospital beds, compared with the 9,000 it currently has available for coronavirus patients. Indonesia reported its biggest daily rise in infections on Tuesday: more than 1,043 new cases in the past 24 hours, bringing its total to 33,076. In Vietnam, however, which has reported just 332 cases and no deaths, flights are set to resume to and from countries that have had no new cases for 30 days. In Latin America a supreme court judge in Brazil ordered Jair Bolsonaro’s government to resume publishing full Covid-19 statistics following outrage at its decision to delete historical data and stop publishing the cumulative death toll. Brazil is set to overtake the UK this week as the country with the second highest number of deaths. The WHO’s Maria Van Kerkhove clarified on Tuesday that it was not clear to what extent the global population was infected by people with no symptoms. Modelling has estimated anything from 6% to 40%, but Kerkhove said the few actual studies following real asymptomatic people had found such transmission to be rare. In other developments worldwide: Coronavirus has infected more than 7,155,000 people worldwide and killed more than 407,000, according to the Johns Hopkins University tracker. Nearly one in five Iranians – 15 million – may have been infected with the virus since the country’s outbreak started in February, a health official said. Israel’s internal security service, Shin Bet, has halted its controversial mobile phone tracking of virus carriers, saying the method was no longer required. The virus may have been present and spreading in Wuhan, China, as early as last summer, according to US researchers who found a “steep increase” in cars parked outside the city’s hospitals between August and December 2019. Spain is not discussing any travel corridor with the UK, a foreign ministry source said, but it hopes the EU will agree on common criteria to allow tourists to travel. Slovakia is to reopen its borders to 16 more European countries from 10 June and will no longer require people to wear face masks outside. A UN expert said food insecurity in North Korea, which has yet to confirm a case, was deepening and some people were “starving” due to its Covid-19 measures.