More than 3.3 million EU and European Economic Area citizens have been granted the right to remain in the UK permanently after Brexit, the Home Office has said. In its latest update on the EU settled status scheme, it said 57% of those had been granted “settled status”, the term for those who have been able to demonstrate they have been in the country for five years or more. No accurate data on the number of EU citizens living in the country exists but previous estimates have suggested a range of between 3 million and 3.8 million. The figures released on Thursday show a high take-up rate, reflecting the desire of many to remain in the country despite Brexit and despite anxieties often expressed about their futures in the country. The figures also come just days after Michael Gove expressed concern in the House of Commons over reciprocal arrangements in Europe. It is believed that 13 of the 27 member states plan similar systems, including France, which is due to launch a similar system for Britons next month. Those of Polish heritage represented the largest nationality cohort remaining in the UK with 697,000, followed by Romanians, Italians, Portuguese and Spanish. Around 41% of applicants had been granted pre-settled status designed for those who have been in the country for fewer than five years. Of the remaining applications, 28,900 received a withdrawn or void outcome, 14,100 were invalid and 900 were refused. Of the total refusals, 99% were refused on eligibility grounds and 1% (9) were refused on suitability grounds, the Home Office said in a statement. Suitability grounds including those with serious or persistent criminality. EU citizens currently living in the UK have the automatic right to remain in the country after Brexit and have until July next year to apply for status. During the transition period EU citizens continue to have the right to settle in Britain in the same way that UK citizens still retain the right to move and settle to another EU member state. These freedom of movement rights flow from the UK’s continued membership of the single market. Future borders and immigration minister, Kevin Foster, said: “There is still plenty of time to apply before the 30 June 2021 deadline and I encourage all those who haven’t already applied to do so now. Support is available online and over the telephone for those with questions or who need help applying.” He said he was pleased that so many had already applied. Overall the total number of applications up to 31 May 2020 was 3,612,400, the government said.