Emanuel Gomes spent the last day of his life cleaning an office in the Ministry of Justice (M0J). It was late April, at the height of the Covid-19 outbreak and most of the civil servants had been sent home. Gomes and his colleagues were told that as essential workers they should keep coming into work in the central London offices. On 24 April, Gomes became so sick at work that a colleague, Amadou (not his real name), had to help him to get home. Amadou says: “In the last few days he was really ill. He lost his appetite, he had phlegm and he seemed to have a fever. I helped him home … by the time we got to Victoria station he was so sick he didn’t know where he was.” Just hours later Gomes died at home. His body was driven away by an ambulance and for several days his family had no idea where he had been taken. His brother, Leao Gomes, says Emanuel felt under pressure to work. “I spoke to him every week,” he told the Guardian. “I spoke to him just days before he died. “I asked him why he had to go to work. He said: ‘Here it’s strange, because I have to go to work, but our bosses aren’t coming in.’ He said he felt pressure to work. I told him to be careful, to wear a mask and gloves.” At Walthamstow Coroner’s Court Gomes’s death was officially recorded as hypertension of the heart. At the time, his colleagues were afraid of his Covid-like symptoms and sudden death. Several other cleaners in the team fell sick and Amadou was frightened. “I found out through colleagues that some others have been off sick with [suspected] coronavirus. I told my supervisor that people were really scared … This virus is scary, the streets are empty, it is very sad and everyone is scared.” Originally from Guinea, Gomes had been working for cleaning firm OCS since 2018 after he moved from Lisbon to look for work. Gomes’s union, United Voices of the World (UVW), had been campaigning since before the pandemic for a higher rate of sick pay for cleaners at the MoJ. At the end of April, as cleaners began falling sick, UVW wrote to OCS and the MoJ warning them that people were coming into work with suspected symptoms of Covid-19 because they couldn’t afford to stay at home on statutory sick pay of £95.85 a week. Our life as immigrants, our life as Africans, is this Leao Gomes says the lack of sick pay more closely related to normal pay levels put pressure on his brother to keep working, saying: “Emanuel went to work feeling sick but the life of an immigrant is like this. He knew that if he didn’t work he would get to the end of the month and he wouldn’t have enough money to survive.” Adding to the family’s pain, after his body was taken away by an ambulance it went missing. Leao found a distant relative in London, Acinario Gomes, who took over the search for Emanuel’s body. Unable to visit any hospitals or police stations during lockdown he called everyone he could think of. “I called many hours on Friday and Saturday,” he tells the Guardian. “I was mostly calling ambulance services, just looking them up on Google. I didn’t know what to do or who to contact.” Although he called OCS, Acinario says he did not receive any help from them locating the body. “Eventually with help from a charity I reached the police who found him on a database. He died on Thursday, it was Wednesday before I knew he was in London, in an emergency morgue for covid patients.” After they found Emanuel, the familyfaced the difficulty of trying to find a way to get his body home for a funeral. Leao says his brother’s story is that of many migrant workers: “He decided to immigrate to the UK, to try to find something better. His wife stayed here in Portugal. Our life as immigrants, our life as Africans, is this. He wished he could bring his wife with him … but he decided he would go first to organise his life.” Now he is trying to help to get his brother home. The costs, which run into thousands, are being raised by a crowdfunding campaign. “Everybody wants his body back home in Guinea,” Leao says. The MoJ has said there was no Covid-19 outbreak at its offices.