An appropriate reboot for lockdown: Alan Bennett’s timeless monologues return with a new cast. We begin with A Lady of Letters, which stars the brilliant Imelda Staunton as Irene Ruddock, a lonely woman who obsessively writes letters of complaint while spying on her neighbours. It’s a performance of real heart and nuance; busybody pomposity with unmistakable top-notes of sadness and vulnerability. Stay tuned for Sarah Lancashire’s take on An Ordinary Woman. Phil Harrison If the stakes of normal Bake Off aren’t high enough for you, why not dip into the pro edition, where, in episode five of this series, there are beetroot cakes, tomato-shaped-but-not-tomato-flavoured desserts, and choux constructions on the brink of collapse. Ingenious fun. Hannah J Davies No one is more enthusiastic about the joy of train travel than the historian Tim Dunn, and he spreads yet more railway magic in the latest episode. He ticks off part of his railway bucket list by visiting the Stockton and Darlington railway, and learns about Essex’s Chappel Viaduct. Hannah Verdier Gareth Malone hasn’t let a pandemic stop him from helping people to find themselves via the gift of song. This series of lockdown choirs begins with an episode focusing on frontline workers as they perform a specially composed song and reflect on their experiences during the Covid-19 outbreak. PH More heroics from the medical frontline and, as always, it is impossible not to be moved by the kindness and expertise on display. Tonight, 86-year-old Filippo suffers a suspected stroke and 80-year-old Susan has a fall. At the other end of the age spectrum, Tilly, 14, has hurt her ankle during gym practice. PH An intriguingly downbeat start to season four of Issa Rae’s Los Angeles-set comedy drama. This season is likely to focus on Issa and Molly’s increasingly fragile friendship. Happily, these feel like sufficiently nuanced characters to carry the action. Tonight, Issa is pitching a block party to sponsors. PH Carol (Todd Haynes, 2015) 11.15pm, Film4 Another intimate tale of forbidden love in straitlaced 50s America from Todd Haynes. Adapted from a Patricia Highsmith novel, it stars Cate Blanchett as Carol, a wealthy Manhattanite attracted to shop assistant Therese (Rooney Mara); the affair plays out elegantly against the jagged pain of Carol’s dying marriage. Paul Howlett Premier League football: Leicester City v Brighton & Hove Albion Sky Sports Main Event, 5.30pmLeicester will have their eyes on a Champions League spot while Brighton still have relegation concerns. Premier League football: Tottenham Hotspur v West Ham United Sky Sports Main Event, 8pmSpurs look to end a disappointing season with a good run.