How does it feel to be black in America right now? First, I wonder, do I capitalize the “B”? Is that grammatically correct? More to the point, as an element of style, a choice, does it prove something to you or to me if I don’t? I confess I don’t know any more. These are the petty games that play on my mind as a black American. I cannot speak for all black people, of course. We are not a monolith; you seem to understand this by now. I can only speak for myself – as a black writer. That experience, at least, I know. Instead of worrying about the white man who might murder me in my own home, or on my morning run, what preys on me in the night is how I constructed the sentence as I replay the day, if it was adequately punctuated in its disavowal of racist oppression. You see, I was raised in the house of “you can be whatever you want – with hard work,” the appendix like the slamming shut of a piano. I’m 33 years old. I was taught to be proud of being black, and I am. There are few things of which I am prouder. No dangling prepositions here, just the facts. I have earned the straight As. I have stayed past the bell. I have pushed myself to raise my hand, to venture an answer, even when I wasn’t sure I understood the question. I was taught that fear, like racial oppression or homophobia, was to be overcome. Walk with your head held high, my mother taught me. Let them admire and be transformed by your strength, by your unassailable conduct. Play it again, Sam – the one that says things will be different in the next life. They’ll look at me and think how far we’ve come. But will they, actually? Like being stymied at every turn by conflicting instructions, equipped with a playbook at odds with the moment I heard from my cousin the other day. She texted me a video of her son on the news. He was protesting in front of the White House. To the newscaster, he said: “They’re not hearing us.” His friend added: “When you talk, it’s just words to them.” Just words indeed. I thought to myself: I should be proud. Proud that my little cousin, who also survived a school shooting just a few years ago, is out on the street, marching, standing up for what is right. Proud of his mother too, for raising a young black man and sending him to college, as a single mother. But instead I felt sorry, like I’d failed him. Like we all had. I felt sorry that my 20-year-old cousin – the same age I was in college myself, doing what I thought you were supposed to do, “going high, when they go low” – has to resort to protesting in the streets to defend the value of his life. I wondered what my grandfather, who recently died, would think. An unapologetically black man from Mobile, Alabama, he migrated north and raised his own family, with one daughter entering an interracial marriage, and another going on to become the first college graduate in the family. Wasn’t this progress? What had the promise of his and my grandmother’s decades of hard work at a Chrysler plant in Delaware wrought? Did they consider marching in the streets then, or was being one of the first black homeowners on a predominantly white block, and throwing a big, black party to celebrate, political statement enough? Did “Pop Pop” question then, as I do now, how best to be black? Be the change you want to see, they say. You see, in this newly “woke” America – whose news media and movement allies suddenly exhibit uncanny proficiency in the vocabulary of oppression – I have this confused sense that one minute we were all playing from the same playbook, and now the rules have changed. For us, the rules used to be: you worked hard, were exemplary, indomitable in your pursuit of black excellence. They were at best indifferent, or else marveled at your endurance. But now? It’s as if black people are being bidden to look up from the groundwork of daily living by the very forces that made our single-minded focus necessary. Except you always knew what was on the periphery. You were trying, of course, to keep moving, like you were taught. Taking the time to translate was, more often than not, a waste of breath. Now, to stop, to be encouraged to acknowledge in the workplace how this current moment is affecting you, to have staff meetings about it, to be asked to shape an institutional response. That is the real mindfuck. I can still remember the times when I had to convince white people, even close friends, of the reality of racial prejudice and the insidious ways it showed up in my everyday life. I remember too, the exasperated sighs at my indignation, at my certainty that in any given room I was being overlooked or else targeted because I was black. My word, even then, wasn’t enough. Now, I can scarcely match their outrage. To be black right now, then, and perhaps always, is to be constantly questioning whether you have adequately demonstrated how pro-black you are, done your part, done it the “right” way, but never without also obsessing over the minutiae, what it has cost, if you’ve gambled high enough. It is to doubt your own ability to see the line of demarcation anymore, between you and the theater of protest, that insatiable pressure to post on Instagram. You’re expected to make a statement and externalize how you feel in some way beyond the living you’ve been doing, which you thought was supposed to be its own statement, its own strategy, which has ultimately led you to this same outcome, like a figure eight, or closed circuit. How does it feel to be black right now? Like being stymied at every turn by conflicting instructions, equipped with a playbook at odds with the moment. I am black, and this should offend me. This is how I should respond as a black person, as a voice. Be a voice. March in the street, but be home by curfew and don’t break anything, especially their things. Be quiet, keep your head down. Let your actions speak for themselves. Tell me again, what do they say? Capitalize the “B” or keep it lowercase for consistency. Chase Quinn is a writer and cultural critic based in Charleston, South Carolina