The Bolton Octagon’s artistic director, Lotte Wakeham, and its CEO, Roddy Gauld, have coined a new term for their approach to the Covid-19 crisis: “positive realism”. If magic realism is defined as “a realistic view of the modern world that adds magical elements”, then the Octagon’s spin means taking a hard look at the impact of lockdown, which has cost UK theatres an estimated £330m in lost income, and trying to stay positive. In April the UK government set out these five tests it said had to be met before they would consider easing coronavirus lockdown restrictions: “We’re very determined that we will be back,” says Gauld. “But we’ve also got to be realistic and recognise that it’s definitely an uphill challenge for our industry and for our organisation to recover from this.” The Octagon is in a unique position. As well as being the theatre for the UK’s largest town, it’s also the spearhead of a multimillion-pound regeneration project in Bolton, and was in the middle of a capital project when the lockdown happened, bringing work to a halt and tearing up carefully laid plans. That has meant a complete reassessment. “We will look at all our costs from production to organisational, and we’ve not ruled out redundancies,” says Gauld. Wakeham is thankful of the support from cultural figures such as Danny Boyle, who worked front of house at the Octagon, and the RSC’s Greg Doran who visited the theatre as a child. Wakeham says the support of famous former patrons helps to focus people’s attention on the Octagon, however briefly. “Any raising awareness of what we do here in Bolton, whether that’s to do with the shows that we put on and the people who’ve passed through that building – the Maxine Peakes and the Peter Kays – that’s really valuable to us,” she says. That local focus is crucial because the conversation about preserving theatre has been dominated by London-based institutions and figures, even though the first theatres to go into insolvency have all been outside of the capital. In mid-May, the Royal Lyceum theatre in Edinburgh said it was entering a “period of hibernation”, with potential redundancies, and that lockdown had cost it more than £700,000 in lost income. Leicester Haymarket, Nuffield Southampton and Southport theatres announced they were going out of business because of Covid-19’s impact, while in London – the Old Vic, Shakespeare’s Globe and the National Theatre have warned about their futures. Regional theatres are being squeezed on multiple fronts. There’s the immediate, impossible-to-predict problems caused by Covid-19, but a recent report revealed that public funding for the arts per head of population fell by 35% since 2008, with local government investment decreasing by 43%. Local authorities have signalled that without government support they face large-scale reductions in services, which could push support of the arts further down the list of priorities as they deal with a collective estimated shortfall of close to £9bn because of the pandemic. After lockdown, the Octagon launched a fundraising campaign that has brought in £38,000, according to Wakeham. But it needs more. As with most British culture institutions, since 2008, the amount of money the Octagon has got from public, local government and business investment has fallen steeply, leaving it more reliant on box office and other earned income. Gauld says that around 70% of the theatre’s income is earned (box office, bar sales and commercial activities), while 30% comes from public funding, such as investment via its local Conservative-led council. That has changed significantly from a decade ago when Gauld says the Octagon received around half its funding from public money. “Part of the reason for our new building is to generate an even higher portion of income ourselves,” says Gauld. “And, of course, all of those lines of income are now under threat and that’s why this recovery is such a challenge. It’s not just one part of our financial makeup that’s been affected. It’s literally every strand, ironically, except for public funding.” There’s frustration with the government’s response, which has left the theatre with questions. “We’re trying to plan with no facts, which is hard. It’s like a massive jigsaw, but we don’t really know where all the pieces are,” he says. Wakeham and Gauld want a clear timeline for when theatres can safely open, and more guidance around physical distancing. The main problem is vague guidance and a lack of clarity about what happens after October when government support, such as the furlough scheme that the Octagon is using, will stop. “All the existing support from the Arts Council is up to 30 September, all the existing government support is up to 31 October,” says Gauld. “Any plans we make from 1 November onwards are purely speculative. And that places us in a position of huge uncertainty.”