Collin Osborne still wonders why the call to coach representative rugby never came. Osborne worked for Harlequins for more than 20 years, arriving at the club shortly after rugby union turned professional and departing two years ago. In that time he ran the academy and was skills coach when Harlequins were crowned Premiership champions in 2012. It is not that he is bitter, nor does he wish to point fingers but having achieved his qualifications the year after the former England head coach Stuart Lancaster, Osborne – one of a handful of black coaches to work in the Premiership – feels the question is relevant. “As a senior coach, coaching at Harlequins I was never ever once offered or invited to coach any representative side. Surrey U11s to Surrey men – never. A lot of my contemporaries were. I was at one of the best clubs in Harlequins but I was never asked. I don’t know why it was.” With Osborne no longer at Harlequins the homegrown black and minority ethnic representation on coaching staffs in elite rugby in England is practically non-existent. Joe Shaw is skills and attacks coach at Saracens but the stark statistics show Paul Hull is the only black head coach or director of rugby in Premiership history, having been in charge of Bristol between 2009-11. The Black Lives Matter movement has led to introspection across the sporting landscape and this week the England footballer Raheem Sterling castigated his sport for the lack of opportunities available for black coaches. Given Osborne’s experience, it seems fair to ask whether the pathway exists in rugby, even if the difference in player participation numbers has to be taken into account. Osborne and Hull, who both reached their level five coaching qualification in 2008, feel the question will be more pertinent when the current generation of players are in early retirement. They are optimistic that some will land top coaching jobs should they wish. “If you look at the diversity in the England team, hopefully they will go on to coach and young black people will see that and want to follow them,” says Hull. Osborne echoes that sentiment. “I would be very saddened if players like Kyle Sinckler, Maro Itoje and Jonathan Joseph couldn’t get a coaching job if they wanted. I would be very surprised and disappointed if that were the case.” Perhaps the better question then, is what needs to be done to ensure that happens. Neither the Rugby Football Union nor Premiership Rugby intend to introduce the Rooney Rule but the RFU highlights how more than 30% of last year’s World Cup squad was from BAME backgrounds and believes its focus should be on increasing diversity at grassroots level, pointing to its Project Rugby and All Schools programmes. Contrast that, however, with the rest of upper echelons of the organisation where Maggie Alphonsi is the only black council member and there is no BAME representation on the board. “The stupid thing is that is the easier part of it to change,” says Osborne, now head coach of Wimbledon RFC. “Being a rugby coach is a very niche job, there aren’t that many people, white or black, who meet the criteria to do the job in the Premiership or at international level. But the last time I went to the RFU I was in a huge open-plan office and it was exceptionally white. There are loads of people who are qualified administrators, there are not a load of people qualified to be a rugby coach.” Hull is keen to stress coaching requires a specialised skill-set and it is not for everyone. There has to be the desire as well as the aptitude for it. Osborne agrees but he cannot fathom why there is such little representation on the backroom staff of clubs. And he has done his own research to prove it. “On the websites of the 14 clubs with academies, I looked at their staff,” he says. “Some were broader, including all their academy staff, 30-odd people, others have just their first-team coaches. It’s a snapshot and in the 14 teams there were 302 photographs and 12 were people of colour. You just think ‘wow’. It’s not that niche a market and there’s no reason why [backroom staffs] should not represent what England is, but it doesn’t. It never has.” Osborne recalls a time when the perception of black players was that “they’re all right in the sunshine but as soon as it gets cold they’re no good”. Those stereotypes are thankfully outdated but both men still see pigeon-holing black players as a barrier towards progress. “You find that a lot of coaches, this is not exclusively the norm, but a lot have played in positions where they have influenced the team,” says Hull, who now works at Prior Park College in Bath. “The hooker, the lineout leader in the second row, the No 9, the nine and 10. It tends to be those decision makers who become coaches. I don’t see that many black players in those key decision‑making roles that gives them the confidence to go into coaching. In those positions you are always in the tactical discussions. When you are in those discussions throughout your career then it’s natural to go into coaching.” Osborne recalls a promising black fly‑half in the Harlequins academy who, playing in a school match, was moved to the wing. “I had a chat with him afterwards and he said the teacher told him he was wasted at fly-half. The irony was that the only time they looked dangerous was when he came off his wing to fly-half, show and go, side-step, side-step, try. Unfortunately that is what you’re dealing with. I don’t think anyone goes out to think: ‘we’re going to keep you down’. It’s more a lack of thought and understanding and it comes down to stereotyping.” The media has a responsibility too. Not just to diversify but in terms of the language used. There can be a subconscious tendency to roll out cliches about “physical” Pacific Islanders, or the “natural athleticism” of black players, which in turn can shape perceptions. “Sometimes we’re not that conscious that what we say affects people’s thinking,” says Osborne. “The cliches come rolling off the tongue. In Maro’s case it’s not just his ability to jump higher than everyone else. He’s so strong at the lineout because he’s done his homework. Let’s give him credit for that.” Nonetheless, Osborne and Hull remain optimistic about the future but feel that consistent change has to come from the top. “Often a black person is asked about race but often it’s not us who should be asked the question,” says Hull. “I don’t mean to be aggressive in the slightest here but it’s not really our issue. We’re on the other end of it. The changes are not really going to be made by us, it’ll be elsewhere. “The incident with George Floyd has shone a light around the world and I think it will lead to massive, positive change.”