A controversial trial of New Zealand police carrying firearms has been scrapped and the force will not create an armed unit following criticism that it was ill-conceived, badly executed and poorly communicated. The decision comes in the wake of protests over the killing of black American George Floyd by police in the US that have spread around the world and to New Zealand, where thousands took to the streets despite Covid-19 restrictions. A review of the trial was underway and a decision on New Zealand using routinely armed police was due later this month. But in a surprise announcement on Tuesday, police commissioner Andrew Coster said the Armed Response Teams (ARTs) would not be rolled out. “[They] do not align with the style of policing that New Zealanders expect,” said Coster, who was appointed in March when the trial of the armed units was almost over. Coster said the decision was based on preliminary findings from the trial evaluation, public feedback and consultation with community groups. “We have listened carefully to that feedback and I have made the decision these teams will not be a part of our policing model in the future.” Following the shooting attacks on two mosques in Christchurch in which 51 people died in March last year, the police – without government input – began trials of the units in parts of Auckland and in Waikato and Canterbury. Coster said he was committed to New Zealand Police remaining generally unarmed, although a review of how police respond to critical incidents was ongoing. “How the public feels is important. We police with the consent of the public, and that is a privilege.” He said the trial was about having specialist police immediately ready to deploy to critical or high-risk incidents, to support frontline staff. In such situations, New Zealand normally relies on the Armed Offenders Squad, a group of specially trained officers on 24-hour call who otherwise conduct routine policing. ART officers were supposed to record details of all callouts during the trial, but data from five out of every six callouts was missing, according to documents by the Evidence Based Policing Centre, Radio New Zealand reported. The decision not to go ahead with ARTs comes as the opposition National party proposed creating an Australian-style “Strike Force Raptor” police unit to crack down on gangs. Former police officer Tim McKinnel told the Guardian he welcomed the decision not to follow the international trend to “militarise” police. “I don’t think you can ignore what we are seeing on television coming out of the United States, how the police are equipped and how they are behaving like soldiers rather than police officers,” said McKinnel, who has a master’s degree in criminology and heads a private investigation company. “Even at the most basic level, it changes the way an officer interacts with people. It creates distance between you and those you are dealing with, because you can’t afford to put yourself in a position where you are at risk of losing control of your firearm. So it changes everything.” At a societal and cultural level, said McKinnel, routinely carrying firearms sent a different message about what the police are and what they are there for. New Zealand’s response to armed offenders has not changed in decades, despite the number of guns in the community, and more dangerous types of guns, increasing. “Whether the answer is a roving full-time armed team that is proactively patrolling certain communities is something I am not convinced about,” said McKinnel. They were likely to be deployed in Māori and Pasifika communities, he said. Dogs, tasers and pepper spray have all been disproportionately used against Māori and Pasifika. In 2017, there were accusations of aggressive policing of the Tongan and Samoan communities during the Rugby League World Cup in Auckland, where officers were said to be “in riot mode”. There has been a parallel debate about systemic racism, including unconscious bias. While police minister Stuart Nash has said he does not believe it is a problem, regional development minister Shane Jones said this week there were “incidents and influences” police should not be proud of. “New Zealand is more ethnically diverse than ever, and the police have to learn to deal with that or lose goodwill,” said Jones, who is of Māori and Dalmation descent. “We have all seen instances where police in dealing with ethnicities, and even dealing with Māoridom, could have done a heck of a lot better – and I need go no further than the balls-up of the Tūhoe [tribe] raids.” In 2014, the police commissioner formally apologised to the central North Island iwi for police actions during the raids which occurred in 2007.