Rafe Spall and Anne-Marie Duff star in this three-part dramatisation of the real life 2018 poisoning of Russian former intelligence officer Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia in Salisbury. We open with the discovery of their unconscious bodies on a park bench and the immediate deployment of DS Nick Bailey (Spall) who begins to feel suspiciously ill after searching their home. Meanwhile, Director of Public Health Tracy (Duff) realises it is an attempted assassination and suddenly has the fate of thousands of people in her hands. Ammar Kalia Tonight, in the creative competition that takes crafting semi-seriously, host Keith Lemon asks the contestants to make pop-up models of British landmarks. Then they must create something suitably dangly for Nick Grimshaw to take to a charity gala. Last in a bewildering series. Jack Seale This season opener is all about hidden chambers as a team of archaeologists led by Dr Ramadan Hussein head to Saqqara in Egypt to take the risky move of knocking down a wall. “There’s stuff in there!” they exclaim excitedly, as they find a perfectly preserved burial chamber. Hannah Verdier An illuminating doc on the 1953 Iranian coup, planned by the MI6 and CIA to oust the country’s democratic leader for an all-powerful shah. Historians Rory Cormac and Richard Aldrich use newly declassified documents to show how the Queen was involved in convincing the shah. AK Who is she? Who is she?! She’s Davina McCall, that’s co-host Rylan Clark-Neal, and together they’re replaying the most notorious moments of a show the British public clasped to its delirious bosom from the get-go. Expect Nasty Nick, Vanessa’s meltdown, Galloway’s pussy and a dead David.  Ali Catterall Christopher Ecclestone and Niamh Cusack star in Polly Findlay’s 2018 Stratford production of the Scottish tragedy. Ecclestone delivers a powerfully rugged Macbeth, ground down by the trials of war, while Cusack is his frantic, tortured Lady in this light-footed modern take, running at only two hours. AK Two Days, One Night, 12.35am, BBC Two Another compelling slice of social-realist life from the Dardennes brothers. Marion Cotillard is Sandra, about to lose her job at a solar panel plant unless she can persuade her workmates to give up their bonuses: a daunting task for someone who has just had a nervous breakdown. Paul Howlett