The trial opens in Germany on Tuesday of two far-right extremists accused of killing a regional politician whose death shocked the country last year. Walter Lübcke, a member of Angela Merkel’s party who led the regional administration in the Kassel area of central Germany, was shot on his porch on 2 June 2019, and died later that night. Stephan Ernst, a 46-year-old man with previous convictions for violent anti-migrant crimes, is accused of murder, attempted murder, serious bodily harm and firearms offences. A second man, identified only as Markus H owing to privacy rules, is charged with being an accessory to murder and breaking firearms laws. Queues formed late on Monday outside the Frankfurt regional court where the trial is taking place amid heightened security precautions. Restrictions due to the coronavirus pandemic mean only a small number of reporters and members of the public will be able to witness the trial. Prosecutors say Ernst and Markus H both attended an October 2015 town hall event where Lübcke defended the German government’s decision to allow hundreds of thousands of refugees into the country. A video of Lübcke’s remarks was widely shared in far-right circles, drawing numerous threats. In January 2016, Ernst allegedly stabbed an Iraqi asylum-seeker in the back, injuring the victim’s spine and severing two nerves. Prosecutors said the attack was rooted in Ernst’s “rightwing extremist hatred of refugees”. Police only linked him to the stabbing after finding the knife used in his possession when he was arrested for Lübcke’s killing last June. Authorities discovered numerous illegal firearms that Ernst had stored in various locations, including three revolvers, two pistols, two rifles and a submachine gun, as well as 1,400 bullets. Ernst initially told investigators he had carried out the killing alone, but later retracted this claim. During the trial, Lübcke’s wife and two sons will be present as co-plaintiffs, as permitted by German law. The trial is scheduled to last until at least October.