When Vikram Solanki takes his first training session as the head coach of Surrey on Monday morning, he will be giving his players red balls to use. This was not an entirely straightforward decision since Solanki and all the other coaches around the country do not know how the county cricket schedule is going to look from August. “We’re hoping to know soon enough,” he says, “but at the start we decided we should go back to basics with a red ball.” There are no guarantees about this summer’s domestic cricket but most agree with Solanki when he says: “I would love there to be four-day cricket alongside an element of T20 cricket. I know there is a lot of work going on about that.” Richard Gould, the chief executive of Surrey, Tim Bostock of Durham, Rob Andrew of Sussex, and Lisa Pursehouse of Nottinghamshire have been charged with exploring every possibility. “That’s what the members would like and we will make every effort to play red-ball as well as white-ball cricket. Ideally, the games would have first-class status and they would be competitive.” Solanki is keen and “relatively optimistic” that the Willis Trophy, a much-touted proposal, should happen. “It has a great appeal,” he says. This would mean the counties being divided into three regional groups of six teams. Each would play five matches and the two counties with the most points at the top of their tables might then play off for the trophy in a five-day final, maybe at Lord’s at the end of September. It is a neat idea well-worth pursuing. Four rounds of matches could be played in August while the fifth could interrupt the T20 Blast, which is hoped to occupy most of September. Initially these games may have to be behind closed doors, although this restriction would enhance the commitment of the counties to streaming their matches. Surrey have invested in extra cameras to give their streamed coverage the feel of the normal television product. Other clubs, though nowhere near as well-endowed, might be eager to follow suit. Clearly there are obstacles ahead: the government and the medics will have to give approval and there may be logistical problems over accommodation, travel and creating secure bubbles. Playing the game may be the easiest part, although there has been the suggestion clubs should be wary of playing four matches in swift succession because of the burden placed on their fast bowlers. Such an argument should never be allowed to scupper the scheme. If the experts insist a bowler is at risk from too much cricket, just leave him out of the team rather than abort the plans for first-class cricket. It may be that the schedule will demand slow bowlers take up more of the burden, which could suit one of Solanki’s young players. One of the eight uncapped players in the England 30 is the 21-year-old off-spinner Amar Virdi. However, he is unlikely to make the Test squad so would welcome a rush of first-class cricket in August. Solanki is happy to share the promise of Virdi. “He has real skill that could set him apart and an ability to spin the ball and he’s a very attacking-minded type of bowler.” Doubts have been expressed about Virdi’s fitness levels but Solanki spies an improvement. “He’s getting to the point where he understands that in order to be a professional cricketer he needs to be an athlete. He’s responded extremely well to that and he’s probably one of the fitter lads in the squad now.” So if the pacemen are getting weary Virdi can bowl 25 overs per day throughout August. It would do him the world of good.