Khairi Saadallah, 25, has been charged with three counts of murder and three counts of attempted murder after three men died and several other people were injured in a knife attack in Reading on 20 June, police said on Saturday. Three people died at the scene in Forbury Gardens and three more were taken to hospital. They have all since been discharged. Saadallah, of Reading, is due to appear at Westminster magistrates court on Monday. The charges came ahead of a vigil held in memory of the victims one week on, at which the mayor of Reading said the town’s community will “not be divided” by the recent attack. David Stevens said the Berkshire town would always be “inclusive and diverse” at a private memorial event held on Saturday evening. David Wails, 49, Joseph Ritchie-Bennett, 39, and James Furlong, 36, lost their lives after being attacked shortly before 7pm on 20 June. Following short speeches by local officials, family members of the three men were the first to light candles in their memory. The home secretary, Priti Patel, joined a host of representatives from the Reading community in also lighting candles. Stevens told the vigil the attack had left Reading “feeling a mix of horror, disbelief and immense sadness”. He added: “Just one week ago, friends and families were sat in Forbury Gardens, just a few yards from here, making the most of the warm weather on a summer’s evening and enjoying one another’s company. “It was around now, the happiness and tranquillity of the evening was shattered in the cruellest and most horrific way. “Three men lost their lives and several people sustained injuries. Others were forced to witness the most horrendous scenes. “Last Saturday, Reading lost James Furlong, Joe Ritchie-Bennett and David Wails. To their families and close friends, we can only imagine your grief.” About 50 people invited to the vigil stood in front of their socially distanced chairs for much of the half-hour long event. Due to the coronavirus pandemic, Reading council was due to stream the event on its Facebook page to avoid a crowd gathering in Market Place. But a large screen was also erected on nearby Broad Street for residents to watch proceedings. Thames Valley police chief constable John Campbell gave his force’s condolences to the families of the victims. He told them that Wails, Ritchie-Bennett and Furlong had been “cared for and comforted by my officers and others who came to help them in in their final moments”. Campbell said Reading should take “pride” in how it had responded, which highlighted a “coming together of a diverse community, joined by the bond of humanity and a shared sense of injustice”. Before the lighting of candles, the Bishop of Reading, Olivia Graham, read a poem by Irish poet John O’Donohue. Among those also lighting candles were the co-headteachers of the Holt School where Furlong taught. The business secretary, Alok Sharma, who is MP for the Reading West constituency, and Matt Rodda, MP for Reading East, also lit candles.