At 1.12am, Bastian Trost invites anyone watching from Berlin to leave their beds and join him for a swig of kombucha. At 2.19am, Sharon Smith finds a horse in a field, its face glowing white in the light of her phone. At 5.23am, Laura Tonke lies down on the street, half asleep, and listens to the birds. In an extraordinary feat of endurance, Anglo-German theatre group Gob Squad mark the summer solstice with a 12-hour live-streamed performance. Blending the banal and the absurd, this largely improvised, time-stretching show runs from 6pm to 6am Berlin time. Audiences are invited to drop in whenever they like, but for those who join for the full 12 hours, it’s a feverish experience. A host (they rotate through the night) stands on the stage of the Hebbel Am Ufer theatre in Berlin, accompanied by a tech team, a tracking camera, and rows of empty seats. The other seven performers livestream from their homes or the streets of Berlin, London and Sheffield. A timer is ever-present below the stream, and they refer to the passing minutes obsessively. Separately, they chat, cook, and show us the sights of their cities. Every 15 minutes, the host brings them together for a moment of unity – generally through the medium of dance, laughter or snack. On the hour, every hour, one of the team finds a stranger roaming the streets of Berlin and persuades them to watch a few minutes of the performance. The best bits happen in the early hours, when exploring their streets feels like being let in on a secret This audacious midsummer marathon searches for connection in this moment of extreme isolation, but at times it misses the mark, feeling both insular and inaccessible. It is in rapid turn moving, soothing, baffling, illuminating, riveting, eye-scratchingly dull and full of joy; at 12 hours it’s hardly one-note. No question, the best bits happen in the early hours, when exploring their streets feels like being let in on a secret. Gob Squad have used lockdown to create a fever-dream time capsule. Both seriously and playfully, the show asks what theatre will look like post-pandemic. After 12 hours, we’re spat out wide-eyed, sweat-sheened, and none the wiser; but if it has half the sense of adventure and ambition as this, we’re in for a good time.