In the weeks since George Floyd’s death sparked worldwide protests, we have seen a lot of disappointing reactions on social media. Like when Fetty Wap tweeted that all lives matter before realizing what the hashtag meant, deleting his comment and apologizing for it. Heather Morris of Glee fame created a two-minute interpretive dance titled George Floyd, to express her “inner dialogue” – half of which consisted of her crying directly into the camera, the other half which looked like it was inspired by the video for ‘NSync’s Bye Bye Bye. On Friday, the celebs were out in force again, with yet another uncalled for video montage, in which they “took responsibility” for racism; but not for their inability to think of new ideas. If we are being generous, these posts show that it is easy to be tone deaf, ill-informed, and to spread misinformation on social media if you choose not to be quiet when simply Googling a hashtag would have done. But some celebrities are giving us reason to be faithful again. Take Selena Gomez, who this week has used her platform to shine a spotlight on scholars, activists and historical events important within the anti-racism movement. She joins celebrities like Cardi B (who perhaps is only less notable because she has been getting it right for some time) in showcasing the voices of people with smaller platforms and bigger expertise than herself during these times. On Sunday Ruby Bridges, the first black child to integrate in an all-white elementary school in Louisiana in the 1960s, took over Gomez’s Instagram for a day, educating Gomez’s 180 million followers about the history of integration and the huge backlash it received at the time. Trans writer and activist Raquel Willis also used Gomez’s Instagram this weekend to speak on the history of the Stonewall uprisings, and to explain the importance of black trans activism right now. Gomez has also elevated the voice of Ibram X Kendi, the award-winning author of How to be an Antiracist ; and actor Kendrick Sampson, who used Gomez’s Instagram to speak on the intersections of race and mental health. In short, Gomez has one of the largest Instagram followings in the world and has offered it up to experts who can speak to all of the myriad ways in which different injustices intersect, interact and compound. That seems almost a world away from the times when Gomez’s activism consisted of calling out other famous women for not being feminist enough when they criticized her; or appearing in a Taylor Swift music video alongside a cast of mostly white, wealthy, able-bodied women dressed in bondage to promote some warped vision of “girl power”. On that point – Swift too has come leaps and bounds with regards to her activism recently. In recent weeks, Swift spoke up against Donald Trump, accusing him of “stoking the fires of white supremacy and racism” when he threatened protesters with violence – while urging people to vote against him. On Saturday, Swift posted a four-part set of slides to her Instagram, explaining the histories behind individuals such as Edward Carmack and Nathan Bedford Forrest, whose monuments have been targeted as part of the protests. As people in Tennessee fight over whether their statues should remain, Swift has spoken out against continuing a “cycle of hurt” by keeping them in place – arguing “you can’t change history, but you can change this.” It marks a move away from the times that Swift feared speaking out against Trump, and stayed silent for fear of alienating her base. Constantly attacked for taking the incorrect stance, she spent a long time unsure over exactly how much she should say, and ultimately whether her words would be used for good or bad. But now both stars are using their massive platforms to ensure that authors, activists and histories which are currently absent from many school curriculums become mainstream. Bravo.