When Ryan Stewart, a 34-year-old supermarket manager, heard about the government U-turn over free school meals for the poorest families this summer, he felt a mixture of emotions – but mainly relief. Over the past two days, Boris Johnson found himself in a very public wrangle with the footballer Marcus Rashford over whether he would announce a new £120m voucher scheme keeping children from some of the most deprived families fed during the school holidays. As Johnson came under increasing pressure from his own backbenchers, and just hours before Labour was due to force a vote on the issue in the House of Commons, the prime minister announced a “Covid summer food fund” for pupils in England. The immediate reaction from those families who benefit from the meals was to feel an overwhelmingly sense of gratitude towards Rashford, who had in their opinion forced the government to do the right thing. “It was heartbreaking to think that so many families would be going into the summer holidays feeling anxiety about whether they would be able to feed their children,” said Stewart, whose seven-year-old son, Kian, relies on free school meals. “It’s difficult for people to understand that this is happening in our country, where children might go hungry. What Marcus has done is to shine a light on something very important. “This is going to be an absolute game changer for so many families. It is going to add those extra few meals in the cupboard that wouldn’t normally be there. The world turned upside down when the pandemic hit and this will be one less thing to feel anxious about.” In 2019, about 1.3 million children claimed free school meals in England. In Manchester, where Rashford grew up, 28.1% of children claimed free school meals. At 6am on Monday, Rashford released an emotional open letter to the government. He urged politicians to ensure that vulnerable pupils could continue to access a national voucher scheme, introduced in March to help poorer families to feed their children as the country went into lockdown and schools closed their gates. In the letter, he spoke of his experiences of relying on free school meals, and called on the government to reconsider the move not to extend the scheme backed by education leaders and teachers’ unions, which is worth £15 a week to recipients. “The letter shows a level of maturity you wouldn’t normally expect from such a young player,” Stewart said. “As a father, it makes me feel great that someone like Marcus is a role model for my children.” Families entitled to free school meals will now receive a one-off voucher at the end of the school term to spend in supermarkets, worth £15 a week for the six-week break. Erica Edwards, a single mother from Irlam in Greater Manchester, whose four-year-old daughter, Xena, has free schools meals, said Rashford’s intervention had helped put vulnerable children at the forefront of the government’s agenda. “It has really taken a weight off my shoulders. I would always try to find a way to make ends meet because I’m not going to let my child go hungry, but this money has been so helpful for us. It has allowed me to buy healthier food and just gives me that little bit of extra help I need,” she said. “For some families I know who are really struggling, these vouchers will mean that their child will get to have a hot meal every day.” Emma Roberts, the headteacher of Rashford’s former primary school, spoke of the community’s pride. She said the 22-year-old striker continued to be part of the community where he grew up and often visited the school. Roberts said he was already a “hero” to children at Button Lane primary in Wythenshawe, which has twice the national average number of pupils eligible for free school meals. “I think they all feel like he’s their friend,” she said. “Yes, he’s a good footballer and he’s playing for England, but he’s also an inspiration in how he lives his life,” she said. The headteacher added that money struggles for families had been exacerbated by the pandemic as many parents had seen hours reduced or faced unemployment. “We’ve got an email address open at the moment dedicated to the free school meals inquiries. “Parents knew summer was coming and we were starting to see those messages of concern come through. This scheme has been a lifeline for people.” Roberts, who started working at the school after Rashford left, said staff who taught him remembered him as a hard worker who did not let football distract him from the classroom. She said: “He is a good role model, both on and off the pitch. He has got good morals, he knows what’s right and wrong and he seems to stand up and fight for what he believes in. I think next time I want something I should ask for his help!”