The only black leader of a major British sporting body has urged the government and sport to learn the lessons from the Windrush scandal when it comes to the “long-standing and deep-rooted inequalities” for people from black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds in sport. Nigel Walker, the former Olympian and Welsh rugby union star who now leads the English Institute of Sport, said that while he did not believe British sport was institutionally racist it had “turned a blind eye” to problems within the system – and governing bodies now had to back up their recent promises of change with real action. In his first interview since the Black Lives Matter movement pushed the issue to the top of the sporting agenda, Walker told the Guardian: “I’m an apolitical person. But if you look at the Windrush scandal, two years ago Theresa May came out and she said: ‘This is scandalous, we need to do something about this.’ A drama was on TV last week. And we know that not enough is being done. “Once the spotlight goes off things, people turn away. And it’s not good enough that those people who suffered at the hands of the government were deported, and a scheme put in place to compensate them, and yet they have still not been paid.” Walker said it would be easy for the government to make several “quick wins”, including changing the sports governance code to set diversity targets for boardrooms as well as challenging sports to put plans in place that they would have to meet down the line. “It’s too easy to set up commissions until the fuss dies down in six months’ time and then it slips down the priority order. We have a chance now because of what was started in America with George Floyd and the Black Lives Matter campaign so let’s really do something. Paul Elliott, the chair of the Football Association’s inclusion advisory board, has called on organisations across the football pyramid to act in the fight against racial inequality. In an open letter published on Thursday, Elliott criticised his own organisation for a lack of diversity in its leadership and announced a new code that would voluntarily commit clubs and other footballing bodies to pursuing change. Unless there is greater BAME representation at the top of the sport, he writes, the shows this week of solidarity with the Black Lives Matter movement would be an “empty gesture”. “Nearly 30% of professional footballers are Black but Black people are still a rarity in the boardroom, executive offices and dugouts. This must change,” Elliot writes. “Showing solidarity with the Black Lives Matter campaign is a welcome start, but it will be an empty gesture from football if we don’t take this opportunity for concrete action. “We are therefore creating a voluntary code for Equality In Football Leadership, which every level of club will be able to sign up to – whether grassroots, semi-professional or elite. This will be a firm and tangible commitment to diversity and inclusion in boardrooms, senior administration and coaching. I’m asking that you join us.” The code will be launched, Elliott says, after a three-month consultation period with “senior black leaders in the game” in order to determine the key criteria. Elliott made specific requests of his employer, saying he had agreed with the FA’s chairman, Greg Clarke, to review the composition of the national governing body’s council, and to correct the FA’s “lack of BAME leadership”. Clarke wrote in a separate letter to the FA council: “Whilst nearly 30% of professional footballers in the PL and EFL are black, we have pitifully few head coaches, senior executives and board members who are black. Even at the FA, we have no black board member and no black SMT [senior management team] members.” On Thursday the Professional Footballers’ Association demanded BAME representation at board level at the FA, EFL, League Managers Association and Premier League by the 2020-21 season. The PFA also called for the closing of what it calls a loophole in the EFL’s application of the Rooney rule, whereby a BAME candidate must be interviewed for every managerial role. The PFA claims the process has been followed only when a shortlist is devised and not if a specific candidate is approached. The latter approach accounts for 70% of recruitment amongst current EFL managers. Paul MacInnes “Any commission worth its salt on this issue can’t just be appointed by the government with their cronies and the people that they think are important. And it can’t end up with recommendations that are just put in a six-inch thick file on the cupboard shelf and with nothing ultimately happening. Things have to start to change. “I don’t think sport in this country is institutionally racist. But have we turned as a system a blind eye to some things that are going on? Have we turned the other way when things needed addressing from time to time? Yes, we have.” Walker ran for Britain in the 110m hurdles at the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles and then switched to rugby union where he played 17 times for Wales. He later took an MBA and embarked on a career in the media and sport. Yet he said he was frustrated that of Britain’s top 12 sports governing bodies only one – UK Athletics – had a single black board member. It was also time, he said, for sports to do more to identify current players who could become top coaches or executives after their playing careers. “Forty per cent of the England rugby team that played in the recent World Cup are from a BAME background,” Walker said. “But if you look at BAME coaches, and you look at the council that runs the Rugby Football Union, there is hardly a BAME face to be seen. “How many of that England team do we think could be coaches? How many could be council members in the future? You can’t wait until those players in their mid-20s reach their mid-30s because it’ll be too late. You have to put them on the road now. “And if you look at athletics, how can only one person from 12 board members be from the BAME background when you think how diverse that sport is?” Walker praised the work that Sport England had done with Perrett Laver to identify people from BAME backgrounds who could sit on sports boards, as well its funding of the charity Sporting Equals, and said it was expanding the pipeline of people coming through. However he said that he was not in favour of the Rooney rule, where one BAME candidate is automatically put on the shortlist for board positions. “I think it is artificial, because if you get one person in who is not qualified you can dismiss them within 10 minutes. What difference is that going to make?” Walker said he took some encouragement from the fact that racism had decreased across British sport and society in the past 40 years, even if more still needed doing. “There were 1,400 pupils in my high school but just three black families so I experienced racism pretty much every day. Usually it was verbal abuse but occasionally it came to blows. “Athletics is an incredibly diverse sport and it’s judged on the stopwatch so I was selected more often than not for the major championships. And when I played rugby, there was the occasional comment – no more than five times at away grounds where I heard someone in the crowd say something which I found objectionable. “You could say what you liked virtually back then. The world is a much more difficult place to be a racist. Society won’t tolerate it. So people will do it in clever and sly ways.” Walker, who has led the EIS – which provides science, technology and medical support for British Olympic and Paralympic sports – for the past decade, insisted he did not regard himself as a trailblazer. But the 57-year-old said he hoped that by the time he retired he would like to see 5%-10% board members from a BAME background on all sports bodies and between one and three BAME chief executives. “When I walk into a boardroom, often it’s just me with a face of colour. I would just like to have a level playing field so that anybody who has the talent and the desire has an equal chance of making it – the same chance as their white counterparts sitting next to them. That’s all I want.”