The figures released on Tuesday morning by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) paint a bleak picture of the state of the labour market. After Friday’s news that we are on course for the largest recession in three centuries, today we have learned that the number of people unemployed and claiming benefits is rising faster than at any point in our history. Three key things stand out from the data. First, claimant unemployment – a measure of all of those who are unemployed and claiming social security benefits – has risen by 1.6 million in two months, to 2.8 million. This is the highest level since 1993, 1.2 million higher than the last recession and the largest increase since unemployment benefits were created nearly 100 years ago. Even in the first year of the Great Depression, unemployment only rose by one million. Furthermore, we estimate that based on applications for benefits in May, claimant unemployment likely stands at about 3.1 million as of 9 June – probably beating the previous highest ever level, set in 1986. There is a very real risk that a 'second wave' of unemployment could hit us as the job retention scheme starts to unwind Rising unemployment has also been accompanied by a collapse in job vacancies – from about 800,000 before the coronavirus crisis to just 320,000 in the single-month estimate for May. Putting this together with the unemployment data, this means that there are now 8.5 unemployed people competing for every job opening, compared with just 1.5 before this crisis began. This picture also varies hugely across the country – with our analysis of online job adverts for the Joseph Rowntree Foundation suggesting that in many ex-industrial, inner city and coastal areas the picture is far worse. Finally, these large rises in claimant unemployment are not (yet) appearing in the official survey-based measures of the labour market. This Labour Force Survey (LFS) data covers February to April, so it lags behind the claimant count, and is only showing relatively smaller falls in employment in the single-month estimate for April (down by 300,000), which appears to be almost entirely explained by falling self-employment. Instead, the LFS is reporting very large reductions in working hours (down by 8% on the quarterly average, which is equivalent to 25% in a single month). The ONS suggests that part of the difference between the survey measures and the claimant measure may be explained by people who are working a small number of hours but who have applied for universal credit and are being counted as unemployed. Undoubtedly this explains part of the difference. However, “real time” tax data also published on Tuesday suggests that the number of employees has fallen by 600,000 between March and May – which, added to the fall in self-employment, would mean at least a million more people out of work in May than in March. All told, with at least a million more people out of work and nine million workers furloughed through the job retention scheme, it is likely that right now less than half of the working-age population are actually working. So what will the next few months hold? In some respects, today’s data has added to the uncertainty around what is actually going on in the labour market. I think that we can say for sure that next month we will be reporting that claimant unemployment has passed three million and may well be at its highest ever level. I also think that the LFS data will start to catch up with this claimant data and will start rising towards three million in the coming months. Looking further ahead, new claims for universal credit appear to have fallen back to close to pre-crisis levels, while data that we will publish on Friday will show that the number of new vacancies has doubled in the last fortnight (albeit from a very low base). Both of these are positive signs. However, unless people are confident to start spending again, and businesses are able to reopen, then there is a very real risk that a “second wave” of unemployment could hit us as the job retention scheme starts to unwind. This could push unemployment up by at least a further two million, and see it rising inexorably towards four or even five million by the end of year. As with everything in this crisis, all roads lead back to successfully suppressing the virus. In the meantime though, we need to act now to deal with this jobs crisis. As we at the Institute for Employment Studies set out over the weekend with over more than business leaders, politicians and charities, we think that this response needs three parts. First, an urgent and temporary stimulus to kick-start hiring and support job retention over the summer, ideally by cutting employer national insurance. Second, a doubling of the size of our employment services, so that everyone gets the help that they need to find new work. And finally, investment now so that we are ready for record long-term unemployment next year – and in particular so that we can guarantee that all young unemployed people will have the opportunity of an education place, apprenticeship or job. • Tony Wilson is director of the Institute for Employment Studies