 People joining Black Lives Matter demonstrations in London on Saturday must be off the streets by 5pm, according to conditions laid down by the Metropolitan police. Protesters have also been told they must stick to the planned route, from Hyde Park to Whitehall. Police fear the anti-racism protests, which were sparked by the death of George Floyd in the US last month, could be met with counter-demonstrations by far-right groups. Floyd, a 46-year-old African American, died after a police officer held him down by pressing a knee into his neck in Minneapolis on 25 May, provoking riots in many US cities and demonstrations across the world. On Saturday, those affiliated to the Black Lives Matter (BLM) protests must remain north of a police barrier erected on Whitehall, while far-right protesters must remain south of the line. The conditions were set under section 12 of the Public Order Act. Organisers of one demonstration planned for Saturday cancelled it over due to fears of potential conflict with far-right protesters, but the Met thinks thousands will still attend. On Friday, statues in Parliament Square – those of including Winston Churchill, Nelson Mandela and Mahatma Gandhi – were boarded up to prevent them being targeted by either side. London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, defended the decision to board up the statues and other monuments and urged people to stay away from the capital. Khan said there were concerns that the statues could become a “flashpoint for violence” if rival protesters converged on them and accused the home secretary, Priti Patel, of seeking to score “political points” after she criticised his decision. “We had intelligence that extreme far-right groups are coming to central London, ostensibly, they say, to protect the statues,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “We think that these statues may be a flashpoint for violence and we are worried about extreme far-right groups getting involved in violence, vandalism, disorder with those protesting as part of the Black Lives Matter movement.” He added: “She [Patel] needs to see the intelligence that we have seen that the far right are intending to come to central London. “Rather than seeking to make political points out of this, what I hope is that central government would work with regional government and the police to make sure there isn’t violence, vandalism or disorder or, inadvertently, the spreading of the virus.” Denise Richards, a BLM organiser, said she and many other peaceful protesters would stay away from central London due to fears of violent clashes. “I won’t be coming to London. Initially that was the plan but hearing what the far right were planning to do, for our chapter it was a non-starter. If we don’t give in to threats, people will lose their lives … I just don’t think it’s worth us losing our lives.” Met commander Bas Javid, the brother of the former chancellor Sajid Javid, said he understood the protesters’ depth of feeling, but asked people not to come to London while lockdown rules were still in force. “If you were planning to come to London, I again would urge you to reconsider, but if you are still intent, please familiarise yourself with what the conditions are,” he said. “Please keep yourself safe by complying with government guidance on social distancing.” The anti-racism group Hope Not Hate has said gangs who describe themselves as supporters of the football clubs West Ham, Chelsea, Millwall, Sheffield Wednesday, Hull and Tottenham Hotspur were among the groups planning to travel to central London. The far-right group Britain First has also said its members would attend.