The government has announced an easing of lockdown rules in England from 4 July. Hospitality and leisure businesses will be allowed to reopen, and there will be more freedom to see other people. From 4 July you will able to go to a pub, cafe or restaurant, visit a museum, library or theme park, watch a film at a cinema, or stay in a hotel or on campsite – as long as the venue can open safely. You can also be part of a group meeting at a place of worship. If you need to sort out your lockdown hair, you will be able to go to a hairdresser or barber. You can’t go to the gym or do any type of exercise class – the risk is still too great to allow people to breathe heavily while in close proximity. The risk level also means that you can’t watch a play, except on a screen, or live music. Soft play areas will still be closed, as will activities that involve sharing or borrowing equipment – for example bowling or ice-skating. In more bad news for anyone trying to shake off any lockdown pounds, swimming pools will remain closed. Beauty salons, casinos and nightclubs won’t reopen yet, nor will cricket clubs. If you are a church goer, you will not be allowed to sing at services. Yes – and friends. But it is complicated. You will be able to spend time indoors or outside with another household, either at home or at a pub or restaurant. If you are outside at a pub, you can meet up to five people from more than two households, but if you are inside the two household rule applies. Social distancing of 1-metre-plus will apply in all cases. If you are already in a support bubble, that will count as one household so you can all visit another set of friends or family. You can stay overnight at someone’s home and there are no restrictions on how far you can travel to see people. But again the 1- metre-plus social distancing rule applies. Yes, over-70s can meet others under the easing, but they have been advised to remain especially cautious as their risk of complications if they do get Covid-19 is higher than for younger people. The government says the fall in the number of infections and the fact that the R rate – the number of people each virus-positive person infects – has remained below 1 means it can reduce the social distancing guidance for England. Instead of insisting that businesses cater for people to stay 2 metres apart, the guidance has been reduced to 1-metre-plus. This means that people can be closer as long as there are other safety measures in place – such as more handwashing facilities and screens at venues, or you could be asked to wear a face mask or sit so you are not facing other people. It’s a yes to staycations – you can stay overnight at holiday homes and second homes, book hotels, caravan parks and campsites, and tourist attractions can reopen. You can visit one other household, as long as you maintain social distancing. As for trips abroad, the government is in discussion to create “air bridges” with other countries, which would allow people to travel without quarantining, and an announcement is expected in the next few days. The countries being considered include holiday favourites such as France, Italy, Spain and Greece. At the weekend Tui said it would resume trips to Spain and Greece on 11 July, suggesting that the ban on travel could end by then. In Wales there is no date set for pubs and other leisure outlets to reopen but tourism businesses have been told they can open on 6 July and take bookings from 13 July. It’s a similar situation in Scotland, although tourism could reopen in the middle of the month. In Northern Ireland pubs, cafes and restaurants can reopen from 3 July.