British and EU negotiators have hit a new obstacle to securing a trade and security deal after clashing over €70bn of subsidies handed to European farmers by Brussels, the Guardian can reveal. The EU’s negotiating team led by Michel Barnier was accused in the latest round of talks of seeking to block the government from defending British farmers from cut-price European imports. The row centres on the EU’s demand for what it is claimed would be an unprecedented commitment not to retaliate through tariffs on European goods even where it could be potentially shown that British farmers are being unfairly undercut. The negotiators are set to return to the issue over the “intensified” summer talks starting next week, joining a long list of thorny areas where common ground is yet to be found. The 27 EU governments will issue a statement welcoming the new talks, scheduled to run into September, but call for businesses to be ready “for all outcomes”, according to a leaked paper. The UK’s farming industry is facing the biggest shake-up in over 40 years with the country’s exit from the single market and the customs union at the end of the year. For the duration of the current parliament, farmers will be paid subsidies at the same rate as the EU – around £3bn a year. The British government is concerned at the potential for heavily subsidised EU farmers to exploit the period of uncertainty, an anxiety brought to a head by clauses contained in the European commission’s draft legal text for a future trade deal. Under World Trade Organization rules there is no cap on payments to farmers that “do not distort trade, or at most cause minimal distortion”. Such unrestricted subsidies, known as “green box payments”, include direct income supports for farmers that are not related to production levels or prices. They also include environmental protection and regional development programmes. The EU has over time hugely increased the proportion of its subsidies that it regards as being green box payments, often in the face of opposition from rival producers. In 2018, the US Department of Commerce imposed a 17.13% anti-dumping duty on Spanish olives claiming that they were being sold at unfairly low prices as a consequence of green box payments. Two clauses in the EU’s proposed free trade deal with the UK would have both sides agree that such funds are not in effect price distorting and cannot be countered with “anti-subsidy proceedings nor be subjected to price or cost adjustments in anti-dumping investigations”. The UK negotiating team led by David Frost has in response argued that such a clause would limit the government’s ability to protect the British farming industry. The EU has previously sought to have similar provisions, known as a “peace clause” by trade experts, inserted into prospective trade deals with Australia and New Zealand but they do not exist in any current agreements. Maria Wiggerthale, a researcher on trade for Oxfam in Germany who has studied the potential price-distorting impact of the EU’s green box payments, said: “There is no reason why there should be such an external ‘peace clause’ for the EU. After 47 years and 30 days it was all over. As the clock struck 11pm on 31 January 2020, the UK was officially divorced from the EU and began trying to carve out a new global role as a sovereign nation. It was a union that got off to a tricky start and continued to be marked by the UK’s sometimes conflicted relationship with its neighbours. The French president, Charles de Gaulle, vetoes Britain’s entry to EEC, accusing the UK of a “deep-seated hostility” towards the European project. With Sir Edward Heath having signed the accession treaty the previous year, the UK enters the EEC in an official ceremony complete with a torch-lit rally, dickie-bowed officials and a procession of political leaders, including former prime ministers Harold Macmillan and Alec Douglas-Home. The UK decides to stay in the common market after 67% voted "yes". Margaret Thatcher, later to be leader of the Conservative party, campaigned to remain. Margaret Thatcher negotiated what became known as the UK rebate with other EU members after the "iron lady" marched into the former French royal palace at Fontainebleau to demand “our own money back” claiming for every £2 contributed we get only £1 back” despite being one of the “three poorer” members of the community. It was a move that sowed the seeds of Tory Euroscepticism that was to later cause the Brexit schism in the party. Thatcher served notice on the EU community in a defining moment in EU politics in which she questioned the expansionist plans of Jacques Delors, who had remarked that 80% of all decisions on economic and social policy would be made by the European Community within 10 years with a European government in “embryo”. That was a bridge too far for Thatcher. Collapse of Berlin wall and fall of communism in eastern Europe, which would later lead to expansion of EU. Divisions between the UK and the EU deepened with Thatcher telling the Commons in an infamous speech it was ‘no, no, no’ to what she saw as Delors’ continued power grab. Rupert Murdoch’s Sun newspaper ratchets up its opposition to Europe with a two-fingered “Up yours Delors” front page. A collapse in the pound forced prime minister John Major and the then chancellor Norman Lamont to pull the UK out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism. On 1 January, customs checks and duties were removed across the bloc. Thatcher hailed the vision of “a single market without barriers – visible or invisible – giving you direct and unhindered access to the purchasing power of over 300 million of the world’s wealthiest and most prosperous people". Tory rebels vote against the treaty that paved the way for the creation of the European Union. John Major won the vote the following day in a pyrrhic victory. Tony Blair patches up the relationship. Signs up to social charter and workers' rights. Nigel Farage elected an MEP and immediately goes on the offensive in Brussels. “Our interests are best served by not being a member of this club,” he said in his maiden speech. “The level playing field is about as level as the decks of the Titanic after it hit an iceberg.” Chancellor Gordon Brown decides the UK will not join the euro. EU enlarges to to include eight countries of the former eastern bloc including Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic. EU expands again, allowing Romania and Bulgaria into the club. Anti-immigration hysteria seems to take hold with references to “cockroches” by Katie Hopkins in the Sun and tabloid headlines such as “How many more can we take?” and “Calais crisis: send in the dogs”. David Cameron returns from Brussels with an EU reform package - but it isn't enough to appease the Eurosceptic wing of his own party The UK votes to leave the European Union, triggering David Cameron's resignation and paving the way for Theresa May to become prime minister After years of parliamentary impasse during Theresa May's attempt to get a deal agreed, the UK leaves the EU. “At the time of the WTO agricultural negotiations there were proposals to develop criteria for green box measures to make them really non-distorting and this has always been rejected by the EU. “Why should the EU be worried if there is no problem with these payments? EU exports to the UK are about 20% and they do fear a kind of dumping. I think it is reasonable for the UK on this. It is such a large amount of money.” The UK government and European commission declined to comment.