After “clap for carers” comes “glam-up for gee-gees”. There will be no aristocrats and only a tightly controlled handful of commoners present when Royal Ascot takes place next week but, rather than let the occasion be a bunting-free damp squib, the organisers hope to take their event into homes around the country by getting viewers to dress up as if the coronavirus did not exist and going racing with royalty were still an option. “Royal Ascot at home” is the name of the project and a charitable fund-raising element has been bolted on, to encourage people to take part who might otherwise settle for another day in their sweatpants. The hope is instead they can be persuaded to wear something stylish, share a selfie on social media and donate £5 to Ascot’s fund for frontline charities, including NHS Charities Together, and for those affected by Covid-19. There will be prizes for most elegant, most original and most uplifting. “We’re trying to make the most of it,” says Nick Smith, Ascot’s spokesman. “It’s going to be different but we are trying to make sure there’s as much compensation as possible for not being able to attend the race meeting. “We’ve adopted the same philosophy that we had for Royal Ascot when it was held at York in 2005; it has to be as much the same as possible and it has to be as good as possible. The idea is to take as many people as we can through the Royal Ascot experience, from their homes.” That will include the owners of the horses, who, regardless of status, are among those banned from the track under racing’s strict protocols designed to minimise the risk of Covid transmission. Sheikh Fahad, a member of Qatar’s royal family, had to watch from his stud two miles away when his horse won the 2,000 Guineas at Newmarket last weekend. The Queen will have runners, including the fancied First Receiver in Wednesday’s first race, but Windsor Castle is as close as she can hope to get to the action; it will be the first time in her 68-year reign that she has not been in the stands. Since they cannot be there, Ascot will send personalised racecards to each owner, along with faux entry badges stamped “Royal Ascot at Home”. A live 360-degree camera has been installed in the paddock so owners can see their horse’s final pre-race moments and size up the opposition. Prize money for this year’s event has been cut in half to reflect the track’s enormous loss of revenue but the hope is that winning there can still be as big a thrill as ever. Officials have dreamed up other ways of keeping the rest of us engaged in the gaps between this week’s 36 races, to be shown by ITV and Sky. Their plans, some of which remain secret, will run from the time the gates would normally open until after the last race, when there will be an attempt to recreate the communal singing that has become traditional around the track’s bandstand. Afternoon tea parcels and children’s activity packs are said to be selling briskly through Ascot’s website. All of this may provoke muttering among some of the sport’s hardcore fans, who surely hoped the spotlight would fall solely on the racing this year and will be dismayed, in particular, by the resilience of the fashion element. But Francesca Cumani, co-presenter of ITV Racing, points out that milliners are as much in need of cheering up as anyone in these times, and sorely in need of any work that can be sent their way. “A lot of them are small businesses,” she says. “They would be making hats and head-pieces for weddings and race-days in a normal year. It’s the summer season and that’s all been completely wiped out for them.” Leading hat-makers have contributed rainbow-themed creations, another nod to NHS workers, to be auctioned as part of this week’s fundraising effort. Cumani is still mulling the question of how showy her wardrobe should be, considering hers may be the only posh frock in sight. Whatever decisions she makes, she expects a divided response. “You’ll probably get half the viewers thinking: ‘That’s so incongruous with the rest of the world at the moment’ and half thinking: ‘I’ve missed fashion and glamour so much’.