The Rugby Football League will decide within the next few days whether a series of allegedly racist posts on social media linked to the Black Lives Matter movement are serious enough to be investigated. The governing body has decided to address the matter after at least one person came forward and provided evidence of what they considered to be racial remarks. Jermaine Coleman, the Jamaica and London Skolars coach, the only black coach in the professional game, told the Guardian this week he was keen to see how the RFL would react to comments he said could “incite racism and violence” apparently made by white players within the sport. He said: “Seven or eight white players have written things on Twitter that are disgusting. One said Black Lives Matters protestors should be tasered. That’s inciting racism and violence. And our players are supposed to go back and play on the same pitch as them? “It’s fortunate there are no games going on or they [the players] could find themselves being targeted. Another said the protestors are the dregs of society. Their true feelings are coming out. It’s coaches and owners, too. Given that people have been banned for homophobic comments online, I’m waiting to see what the RFL are going to do about them.” The RFL said on Tuesday that it had not yet received any formal complaints about the remarks. “We have noted Jermaine’s comments; we take that sort of thing very seriously and asked him to provide further details.” It is unclear whether Coleman and the RFL have yet spoken, but the Guardian has had confirmation that at least one individual has presented screenshots to the governing body and urged for a full-scale investigation into the alleged remarks. RFL officials insist there is a zero-tolerance approach to racism within the sport and it is increasingly likely that after determining the identity of the individuals involved, the governing body will launch a formal investigation. This week the RL said of its fight against racism: “We will continue to listen and learn from the lived experiences of black players, coaches, and supporters, to share ideas and to check and challenge ourselves to do more and be better.”