Christian Brückner, the man identified as a suspect in the disappearance of Madeleine McCann, had his first conviction as a teenager. In 1994, when just a teenager, he was convicted in his homeland of sexual abuse of a child, attempted sexual abuse of a child, and carrying out sexual acts in front of a child. The following year, as an 18-year-old who had just got his driving licence, he fled Germany for Portugal with a girlfriend to escape the youth custody sentence he had received, abandoning his apprenticeship as a car mechanic in the process. “We knew nothing about Portugal,” he would later tell a court. “We went to Lagos [in the Algarve] because we liked the name. We had a tent with us and camped in the wild.” The relationship soon ended, but he took on an array of odd jobs over the years, including swimming pool installation and car repairs, and settled in a house on the edge of the resort of Praia da Luz – described by neighbours as rundown and cut-off, and by a friend as a “typical bachelor pad” – which he would return to repeatedly. His relationships with women, including an English woman in 2004-5, were said to be frequent and shortlived. Convicted of sexual abuse of a child, attempted sexual abuse of a child, and carrying out sexual acts in front of a child. Flees to Portugal as an 18-year-old to escape a two-year youth custody sentence for the above offences. Returns to Germany to sit a youth custody sentence he had escaped. Dates an English woman in Praia da Luz, Portugal. Later in 2005 Brücknerrapes a 72-year-old American woman in the resort. Portuguese authorities drop the rape investigation due to lack of evidence. Madeleine McCann disappears from Praia da Luz. Brückner buys marihuana and hashish and sells it to a middle-man on the northern German island of Sylt, where it is sold on. Opens a kiosk in Braunschweig, in north-west Germany. McCanns appeal to the German public on TV for evidence over Madeleine’s disappearance. Brückner’s name crops up in connection with the case. Convicted of sexual abuse of a child in Germany and sentenced to 15 months in prison. Arrested in Milan and returned to Germany. Charged with the rape of a US citizen in August and is convicted in December. Sentenced to seven years for the rape. Prison term not yet started pending an appeal that the conviction was unlawful but he is being held in police custody. In more than 25 years, he flitted between the two countries, often escaping various criminal proceedings against him for the sexual abuse of children, but also drug-dealing, falsifying documents and driving without insurance. His most serious conviction was for a disturbing sexual attack on a woman at the other end of the age spectrum, however: the rape of a 72-year-old American woman whose flat was on the 1km route between his house and the beach which he walked every day. The attack took place on 2 September 2005, and according to court documents seen by the Guardian, it was planned in detail. According to the documents, Brückner entered the woman’s house at about 10.30pm through the open door of her living room. He dragged her through the house, tying her down, beating her with a 30cm scimitar, raping her, and then leading her to the kitchen where he forced her to hand over money before he left by foot, taking her computer. The crime was investigated by Portuguese authorities but was closed the following year. Brückner’s involvement only came to light much later, after a former accomplice, with whom he had previously stolen diesel fuel, discovered a video Brückner had apparently filmed of the rape, and eventually went to police. Late last year, 14 years after the crime, Brückner was sentenced to seven years in prison for raping the American woman, who was now 86. He remains in custody in the north-west German city of Braunschweig, and his conviction is under review after defence lawyers argued he had been extradited – this time from Italy, where he had travelled – on another charge and therefore, under the rules of the European court of justice, they argue, he cannot be tried for a different crime. Bettina Thoenes, a reporter for the Braunschweiger Zeitung, who followed the rape trial, described him as “a man of intelligent appearance, dressed in a simple grey shirt and slightly oversized jeans”. She said he was eloquent, and quoted frequently from legal text books. Witnesses who gave evidence at the trial described him as a “fortune hunter”, and someone who “tried to exude something special, but at the same time didn’t make out that he was the big cheese”. They remembered him driving a Jaguar, and paid attention to his appearance. “He went around in a very groomed manner, always wearing a shirt and jacket.” Some referred to him as the “maitre d’”. In 1999 the police caught up with Brückner for his early offences, and he was returned to Germany to sit out his youth custody sentence. He returned to Portugal as soon as he could, earning enough money to buy a secondhand Jaguar, an aubergine-coloured XJR 6, which has now been seized by German police and is one of the objects at the centre of the investigation into Madeleine’s disappearance. A witness who gave evidence at the rape trial said he had seen him “climb through open windows in one or another holiday flat”. The witness said Brückner told close friends how he went after “tourist shit” like cameras, video cameras, passports, wallets or loose change, sometimes entering apartments while the occupants were taking a siesta or during the night. During the year of Madeleine McCann’s disappearance – two years after the rape – he was living in Praia da Luz, and he had been having relationships with various women over the years, including from Portugal and Germany, the court documents say. He was dating an English woman between 2004 and 2005, according to the documents, where her name has been crossed out. Brückner was working as a waiter and barman in various pubs in and around the Lagos region at that time. But as the money wasn’t enough to live on, he looked for other jobs, including car repairs, selling golf balls he picked up on the course near his house, and selling oranges that he picked on various farms in the area. In 2006, while trying to steal diesel fuel with an acquaintance, they were arrested and later sent to prison. After his release, he returned to Germany and finally moved back to Portugal, to the same remote house in Praia da Luz, but he returned to Germany regularly. In 2012, he moved to Braunschweig and rented a kiosk with an accompanying flat, initially with a girlfriend. He abandoned the kiosk after about 18 months, citing burnout and later telling a court he had worked from 7am until midnight every day. He then moved into a summerhouse in a communal garden, and lived off welfare payments. He returned to Portugal while continuing to be registered in Braunschweig. In 2013, the McCanns – their tragic story already well known in Germany – appeared on the German equivalent of Crimewatch, called XY, to appeal for witnesses to Madeleine’s disappearance. It was then that Brückner’s name began to crop up in connection with the case, though it was only taken seriously after the 10th anniversary of Madeleine’s disappearance in 2017. In June 2017 he was arrested again and returned to Germany for a sentence of 15 months in prison for the sexual abuse of a child. After his release from prison, he found himself homeless and said he felt persecuted by the police who followed his every move, even as he slept on a park bench, he said. After travelling to Italy to take a holiday, he was arrested again at the end of September 2018 in Milan, and extradited to Germany. In August 2019 authorities in Braunschweig charged him with the 2005 rape of the US woman, with his conviction following in December. In its latest edition of XY, on Wednesday night, the man now identified as Brückner was described as a murder suspect. Investigators, the presenter said, “believe they know who her [Madeleine’s] murderer is. They suspect a previously convicted German sexual offender of abducting the three-year-old. There is a lot of circumstantial evidence against the man, but no proof. That’s why the police are putting their hope in the viewers of XY.”