Millie Chandarana has come a long way since that rather unfortunate day when she had a trial for the boys’ school team. “I was eight years old and I scored a goal from the halfway line … but into the wrong net,” she says, laughing. “Afterwards my teacher told me I was good enough to join the local girls’ team but not the boys’ team just yet.” Chandarana did not let that mishap deter her. Only a few months later she had convinced the coach for the boys’ team at school that she was good enough to play with them. The rest, as they say, is history and she now plays for UPC Tavagnacco in Italy. The midfielder is one of few British Asian women – or men – who has made it to the top in football but she believes things are about to change. The Manchester-born 23-year-old spent one year with Leoni FC in Dubai in 2018 where she observed that attitudes among Asian women towards football are changing. “I think it’s fair to say there are not that many Asian girls playing football. That said I spent a year in Dubai and saw many Asian girls playing and participating, showing interest, and I imagine this interest will increase every year. I think there has been a dramatic change in the last two to three years already, so with time I think the development will be huge.” British Asian men make up only 0.2% of players in England’s top four divisions, while the number of professional British Asian women footballers are even less prominent from the WSL down to the lower Northern and Southern National Leagues. Asmita Ale, 18 and a defender of Nepali descent, broke into Aston Villa’s women’s team last year and Kira Rai, also 18 and of Punjabi background, is a regular starter for Derby County Women. Kevin Coleman, the FA equality and diversity manager, is one of the people working on increasing these figures. “Asian inclusion is a crucial part of the FA’s wider diversity and inclusion strategy as we recognise the importance of making football at all levels as truly representative and diverse as our society is,” he says. Chandarana spent time at the Manchester United academy – despite being a diehard Manchester City fan – until she was 15 and played for the Blackburn Rovers LFC at the age of 16. Then came the move to Dubai before leading Loughborough University’s first XI to the National Championship finals for the first time in five years and, finally, the switch to Italy. Throughout her career she has felt fully backed by those closest to her. “I have had the full support of all my family to pursue football as a career. My studies were also a main priority, stemming from my family’s wish to push me to get a good education, but also my realisation of the need for it.” The move to Italy was tough but is also the thing, together with her education, of which Chandarana is most proud. “The move from England to Italy was a challenge. The language, the culture, the people, and the type of football was all new. I slowly became accustomed to communication on and off the pitch and now I’ve learned a new way of life, a new type of football. Serie A is played at a greater tempo than where I have played before but the high intensity of training five times a week prepares me well for matches.” Tavagnacco, a club in north-east Italy, are 11th in Serie A, which was abandoned this week. They avoided relegation and Chandarana, who scored against the league leaders, Juventus, with a deft volley in January, would like to continue playing in Italy and remains patient for news of the new season. Her contract runs out in June. In the meantime she is hoping more young people will take pleasure in playing football. “If you are interested in the slightest, then just play. Even if it’s on your own, juggling the ball. If you are Asian or English or a boy or a girl, it doesn’t matter, it’s the same thing, you just have to try it first. Participation and enjoyment are the first steps to finding your passion. “If you want to play, own it, and go out and play.”