What is Jeremy Vine on? That is surely what everyone wants to know. If you could bottle the elixir that appears to give him limitless energy, it would not only be Donald Trump rushing to take it. We talk just after he has finished the second of the two-hour programmes he does every day – the mid-morning show on Channel 5 and the lunchtime show on BBC Radio 2. Vine, 55, has been up and working since 5am, yet he is still fresh and boundlessly enthusiastic.Why on earth does he do two news-based programmes so close together and, at the moment at least, covering such similar ground? “Channel 5 is like playing squash and Radio 2 is like playing snooker,” he says. “With a TV show, you have to have a big bang of you leaping out of the screen, whereas the joy of radio is the intimacy. It’s a busy old morning and people say it must be stressful, but for a broadcaster the stressful thing is not broadcasting. As long as the red light’s on, we’re happy.”Vine says it has been extraordinary to be broadcasting during this crisis. “It’s given us a real sense of mission and purpose. I’ve never seen anything like it: 9/11 wasn’t like this; the crash of 2008 wasn’t like this. Every single story for weeks and weeks has been coronavirus, and when we’ve tried to break out of it – Harry and Meghan or something like that – it’s never felt quite right, because for most people this is bread and butter, this is every aspect of life. It’s amazing being at the crossroads of that conversation.” He believes it could be the salvation of the BBC. “It’s no secret that the BBC has been in a crisis. It’s an identity crisis caused by digital as much as a financial crisis caused by changes to the licence fee. We’ve been trying to become Netflix and we’ve done bloody well with Line of Duty, Fleabag etc, and then this thing comes along and we remember why we exist. It’s a bizarre thing that it should be an amazing communal moment, because all the buildings are empty, yet we suddenly know what the BBC is.” Vine says he has been at the BBC for 33 years, but has never before felt such a sense of animation.Doing two shows that rely on instant audience feedback makes him uniquely responsive to the public mood. He loves his viewers and listeners, though not necessarily the one who called him the C-word on live TV. “That was unfortunate,” he says. Generally, though, audiences have been engaging far more during the crisis. Vine says what has surprised him most about his audience is how responsible they have been during lockdown – unlike some of their political masters. “On Radio 2, I’ve done that show for 17 years, so I always like to think I’ve got a sense of the audience, but the thing that convinced me I’m wrong in thinking that is that people were so much more compliant about lockdown than I expected. I was really shocked. I thought: ‘You will not get Britain to lock down.’ This is a country that doesn’t like authority and the nanny state and being told what to do, but the level of compliance has been astonishing.” Throughout the crisis, he says, the key issues raised by viewers and listeners have been very personal. “It’s been about family, about not seeing your mum. Whenever the government announces anything, that’s the question: ‘When can I see my mum?’ It does come back to that.” Like some of his audience, he believes it is too early to condemn the government for its handling of the crisis, even though he admits it is clear mistakes have been made. “We still haven’t quite got the full picture of what’s gone wrong,” he says. “To take one example – care homes. We’ve had so many anecdotal stories of care homes being told ‘You’re taking this patient’ and the patient turns out to have Covid. Then the minister comes on and says the number of people transitioning from hospitals to care homes since the middle of March has been at a yearly low. We need to find out the truth about that. We’re still looking at an unfolding crisis with people trying not to get a lethal illness, and we can’t at the moment operate politics as normal, which is to say: ‘This is your fault. You should resign.’ We’re not quite there yet. I suspect Matt Hancock isn’t that long for this world, but we’ll see.” Vine takes a liberal view that all opinions should be heard on his programmes and dislikes the idea of no-platforming people. But isn’t there a danger that he becomes a pawn in the growing culture war in the UK, especially on his feisty Channel 5 show? The morning we spoke, the show had pitted the leftwing activist Ash Sarkar against the Daily Mail columnist Sarah Vine as the commentators on the day’s news stories. A rather obviously polarised confrontation, I suggest. “I’m going to resist the word ‘clickbait’, because obviously we want people to watch the show,” he says. “But the real answer to your question is that you engage people through argument. I LOVE argument. You can have somebody on who is very knowledgeable, but if they have no passion you don’t listen.” Vine (Jeremy, not Sarah) has said in the past that presenters must never ride their own hobbyhorses, but that “your values should come across”. How do you draw the line? “We’ve had a huge thing about impartiality at the BBC and it led me to think about how it affects me,” he says (we spoke before Emily Maitlis was castigated by the BBC for breaching guidelines on impartiality on Newsnight). “I was very much in news, I was a reporter, I presented Newsnight, and then when I moved to Radio 2 – that’s a hybrid show, somewhere between news and entertainment, you can never really pin it down. It’s all very well saying we’re impartial, but it’s a show that’s very passionate and the presenter can’t just read the bulletin. The conclusion I came to was that you can have values but you can’t have views, and that’s fundamentally how I operate.”Vine understudied Jeremy Paxman on Newsnight in the late 90s. “But I remember thinking I was in a very awkward position because, as the person who was then the other Jeremy, do I try to give you a motorhead version of Paxman, which is bloody difficult, or do I try and soften it, which was really off. Newsnight in those days was like a squash game. You were both going to play until one of you had a heart attack. I’ve been through all that and, having done a lot of interviews – I’ve spoken to 25,000 listeners on Radio 2, let alone actual interviewees – I do think asking a question and listening to the answer might be old-fashioned, but it is quite a good technique.” He now realises his attempt to succeed Paxman was always doomed. But rescue was at hand in the shape of an offer in 2003 to replace Jimmy Young, who at the age of 81 had just been defenestrated by BBC management, on Radio 2. Young was furious at being ousted and rebuffed Vine’s suggestion of a handover lunch – the two never did meet. Succeeding Young changed the direction of Vine’s career, pushing him towards light entertainment and making possible shows such as Points of View and Eggheads. The award-winning BBC Africa correspondent of the 90s was on his way to becoming a “personality”, and the transformation was completed in 2015 when he was contestant on Strictly Come Dancing – judge Craig Revel Horwood likened his jive to “a stork that had been struck by lightning”. On behalf of Eggheads fans, I ask him what is happening to the programme, which he has hosted since 2008 but has been missing from the schedules of late. A series shot more than a year ago has now resumed on BBC Two, but there is no sign of any new ones being made. “My understanding is that it’s sleeping,” he says. “I did more than 1,000 episodes and it’s one of the most successful TV shows in the history of British television, but I think what’s happened is it’s fallen victim to the BBC’s understandable desire to pull in 16- to 24-year-olds. Eggheads has the oldest audience in British television. I think the average age is 90.” At one point, he was presenting Eggheads alongside his radio show, Points of View and Panorama, as well as making manic appearances on election night. “It gave a beautiful range of activities,” he says. “The key word for a modern broadcaster is range. If you can do the very light and the very serious, and do them almost next to each other, that’s really useful. You need to be flexible and agile in this crazy world.” When he was doing five jobs at the BBC in 2008, he was handed a mega-salary of £700,000 a year. That generated controversy a decade later when he took centre stage in the BBC’s gender pay gap furore. Why, Samira Ahmed’s lawyers asked when she successfully took the BBC to an employment tribunal, was she paid one sixth as much for presenting the audience-feedback programme Newswatch as Vine got for Points of View? Did he resent his name – and his remuneration – being dragged through the courts? “Samira is a friend and the BBC is my employer, and it was between her and them,” he says. “In that sense, I wasn’t dragged into it. I was just watching from a distance.” I ask him if he supported what she did. He pauses and sighs, but eventually says: “Yes. It’s a matter of record that she asked me what my numbers [how precisely the £700,000 was broken down] were and I told her.” Is the BBC doing enough to address pay imbalances? “It’s doing a lot, but it’s probably still not acting quickly enough,” he says. “They almost can’t act fast enough.” When in 2018 he discovered the huge pay disparity with his female colleagues, Vine voluntarily took a pay cut that halved his BBC salary. He now gets just under £300,000 from the corporation. “I wasn’t comfortable about what the pay reveal showed,” he says. In the course of the tribunal, Ahmed made the unkind comment that Vine was “gifted” his primetime Radio 2 slot, but he clams up when I ask him to respond. “I won’t be drawn on that,” he says. “I’d rather leave that between her and the BBC. I wish her well.” When we talk, he portrays relationships between presenters as largely friendly, but they are also intensely competitive, and his 2012 memoir It’s All News to Me underlines the edgy relations between people who are vying for a small number of glittering prizes. He mentions John Sergeant’s subtle way with putdowns – “Vine is excellent; his sense of judgment will come” – and records that Paxman’s first words to him when he joined Newsnight were, “What are you doing here?” How big is his own ego? “Oh, minuscule,” he says with a laugh. “I’ve realised I can’t be bothered to bear grudges any more. I can’t still be tearing up the walls when something goes wrong.” I suggest to Vine that he is a workaholic. “I’m just a very lazy person disguised as a workaholic,” he counters. This is nonsense – he is very driven (or as driven as a keen cyclist can be). He has a novel called The Diver and the Lover coming out in September. He published two novels in the early 90s, but now dismisses them as juvenilia. This one, though, he really believes in. It’s based on Salvador Dalí’s Christ of Saint John of the Cross. “I enjoyed writing it more than I can ever say,” he tells me. He is a committed Christian, although he makes a point of not evangelising about it (unlike his beloved cycling – he periodically posts footage from his helmet camera of near misses with vehicles that cut him up). My suspicion is that his religion explains quite a lot: the work ethic, rigour, directness, absence of that old journalistic standby – cynicism. He lives in west London with his wife, the news presenter Rachel Schofield, and their two teenage daughters. It’s his second marriage. The first, to the American banker Janelle Muntz, ended in 2000. He admits that, since he is out of the house for the first half of the day, Schofield has been carrying the burden of home schooling during lockdown. His brother is the comedian Tim Vine and his sister, Sonya, is an actor and artist. Did his parents push their children to succeed? He says his late father, a lecturer in maths and engineering, was “the most encouraging man” and didn’t balk at his brother’s ambition to become a comedian. He taught them to believe all things were possible and to be bold. “My theory is that life was in a lovely way quite dull when we were kids,” he says. “We were in Cheam [in Greater London]; nothing much happened there.” They had to make their own entertainment, and the performative streak may be more significant than any desire to come top in life. I try to understand how the worryingly balanced and equable Vine has survived so long in the broadcasting piranha pool and been so successful across so many different formats. What is the secret? “I’m still looking,” he says. But then he lets slip what I think is the recipe: “In the end it’s about being real and being yourself,” he says. “In this weird digital age, so much is thrown at you that you find, as a listener or a viewer, that you want people who are real.” Jeremy Vine is on BBC Radio 2, Monday to Friday from 12-2pm, and presents new episodes of Eggheads, Monday to Friday at 6pm on BBC Two.