Art of PersiaFirst in a trio of programmes, filmed last year, in which Front Row’s Samira Ahmed goes to Iran to discover the origins of Persian culture, from calligraphy to architecture, in landscapes rarely seen by western visitors. Tomorrow, BBC Four, 9pm, then on BBC iPlayer. Laura Cumming Bob Dylan“I’m nothing like my ghostly appearance would suggest”: Dylan offers up a brand new double album, Rough and Rowdy Ways. Out on Friday. Kitty Empire BTSThe Korean boy band go live for a 90-minute, paid-for concert – Bang Bang Con: the Live – to celebrate their seventh birthday. Today, at the very kid-friendly time of 10am BST, via weverse.io KE Don GiovanniBritish conductor Daniel Harding leads a star cast, the Swedish Radio Symphony Orchestra and Swedish Radio Choir in a new staging of Mozart’s Don Giovanni, exploring the theme of separation, by British director/tenor Andrew Staples. Peter Mattei sings the title role, with Malin Byström as Donna Elvira. Streamed live last night from Stockholm’s Berwaldhallen and available until 12 July at berwaldhallen.se/en Fiona Maddocks Mr Potsunen’s Peculiar Slice of LifeFabulous Japanese comedian, actor and manga artist Kentaro Kobayashi presents his humorous portrait of life as depicted through a picture book world in his hit one-man-show: beautiful visions, wordless wit. Streaming from Wednesday at thecoronettheatre.com LC See, Hear and SpeakThe latest episode in The Lockdown Plays is released on Tuesday. Written by Robert Alan Evans, it stars Sinead Matthews, Harry Melling and Lesley Sharp. Earlier episodes of this new writing podcast – including plays by Caryl Churchill, Inua Ellams and Cordelia Lynn – can also be heard at acast.com Susannah Clapp Noah and the PeacockNottingham Playhouse launches live theatre at home for primary-aged children (and their adults) via Zoom. Created by Jeff James, this funny, moral tale of a too-proud peacock is delivered by four actors performing from home, encouraging audiences to dress up and join in by creating sound effects. Friday-Sunday, 10.30am and 2.30pm; tickets (including activity pack) £9 from nottinghamplayhouse.co.uk Clare Brennan Wasp NetworkUnpredictable French auteur Olivier Assayas fashions an old-school espionage thriller from a true story of Cuban spies on US turf in the 1990s, starring Penélope Cruz and Gael García Bernal. On Netflix from Friday. Guy Lodge La Fille mal gardéeThe most joyful of ballets is the Royal Ballet’s #OurHouseToYourHouse choice for streaming via the Royal Opera House YouTube and Facebook channels this week – and they’re fielding the sunniest of casts. Marianela Nuñez and Carlos Acosta play the determined young lovers Lise and Colas, while William Tuckett pitches in as Lise’s worried mother Widow Simone, in Frederick Ashton’s classic, complete with dancing chickens, a maypole and a Lancashire clog dance. Until 26 June at roh.org.uk. Also available for a further 13 days, is last night’s first socially-distanced gala from the ROH, featuring a new work by Wayne McGregor danced by Francesca Hayward and Cesar Corrales. Sarah Crompton The DesignSpark PodcastWeekly podcast discussing hot topics in technology, hosted by Professor Lucy Rogers and comedians Bec Hill and Harriet Braine, returns for a third series. Expect fun facts, standup and sketches. Tomorrow’s episode will explore the mysteries of smart homes. designspark.podbean.com Kadish Morris