Opening beer gardens before the end of the month would give struggling pubs a psychological boost but most would still lose money, JD Wetherspoon’s founder, Tim Martin, has said. The government is reportedly ready to let pub beer gardens in England reopen from 22 June as part of plans drawn up by a group of ministers, dubbed the “Save Summer Six”, who are looking at ways to restart the hospitality industry earlier than initially planned. The proposals, first reported in the Financial Times, would allow some of the 27,000 pubs that have outdoor space to serve customers for the first time in three months. Martin, the chairman of JD Wetherspoon, said: “Few pubs will be able to make a profit using outdoor space only but partial reopening will provide a psychological boost to a beleaguered industry. “It will signal the intent of the government to make progress towards normality, which will be welcome.” Almost 700 of Wetherspoons’ 867 pubs have a beer garden, roof terrace or patio and the company has previously set out plans for a coronavirus pandemic-era pub involving bar staff wearing goggles and protective screens between tables. Easing restrictions on pubs before the end of June would mean accelerating the timetable set last month for restarting the hospitality industry. The government initially set a date of 4 July to begin the third phase of easing lockdown, saying this would be the earliest possible moment for reopening some of the UK’s 47,000 pubs, along with other bars, cafes and restaurants with outside seating areas. The British Beer & Pubs Association, representing pub companies, has since issued a series of dire forecasts about the effect of lockdown on the industry, warning that thousands of pubs could shut for good. The trade body has lobbied hard for venues with outside space to be able to welcome drinkers by early July. The FT reported that Whitehall officials have now fixed on an even earlier date of 22 June as they search for ways to inject some life into the hospitality industry, which has been devastated by the lockdown restrictions.