The foundational house music producers Larry Heard (AKA Mr Fingers) and Robert Owens are suing Trax Records for allegedly unpaid royalties. In a federal copyright infringement lawsuit filed in Illinois on 23 June, Heard and Owens accuse the legendary house label of “building its catalogue by taking advantage of unsophisticated but creative house music artists and songwriters by having them sign away their copyrights to their musical works for paltry amounts of money up front and promises of continued royalties throughout the life of the copyright”. The complaint states: “Talented, but unrepresented, musicians hungry for their first break were lulled into a business relationship with an unscrupulous record company that made promises it never intended to keep and masqueraded as paternalistic benefactors for those artists – like a wolf in sheep’s clothing.” The suit included copyright documentation that Heard and Owens said shows their songs are registered to Trax as the copyright holder, and they they have not received payment from the label. They are suing for damages that they expect to exceed $1m (£800,240). A lawyer for Trax president Rachael Cain said she had been fighting to get royalties for artists for 15 years, and cited an ongoing legal dispute with a Canadian investor, Casablanca Trax. Lawyer Rick Darke said: “Rachael Cain has been fighting for a long time to get these artists paid. She just hasn’t received the monies from the parties responsible in order to pay them.” Said Cain, who took over the label from founder Larry Sherman in 2006: “Since the very beginning I have been championing house music, Trax Records and our artists. As an artist myself I can totally understand and feel their frustration. Since 2002 Trax Records has had no control over the Trax classic catalogue which we intend to rectify. I would like them to know I have not been in control of the classics and have been fighting to get them paid.” In a statement, Heard said: “After doing several releases independently, it was so disappointing that my earliest ventures into the music business was with a label in the community that turned out to be dishonest, like with many other artists that we hear about all too often. We are simply seeking justice and fairness. Maybe our efforts will shed light on the many predatory practices that have been in place for a long time in this industry.” The British management company and publisher Tap Music is co-funding the lawsuit. Tap’s Ben Mawson said the company was “delighted to be able to support their claim against Trax Records who have behaved abominably over the years to many artists signed to them. “We would ask any such affected artists to reach out to us and we will endeavour to support them however we can. Hopefully those in control at Trax now decide to do the right thing, after many years of shocking disregard for their artists.” Trax founder Larry Sherman died of heart failure on 10 April. He founded Trax in Chicago in 1984 to release music by the city’s house pioneers, including Frankie Knuckles, Jesse Saunders and Marshall Jefferson. • This article previously named Robert Owens as Richard Owens. This has been corrected.