As the furlough scheme tapers off, we are entering a frightening new era of mass unemployment, with 23% more dole claimants in just one month. Day after day, thousands more redundancies are announced, with more to come. Retail and hospitality warn many businesses won’t survive unaided. The shadow chancellor, Anneliese Dodds, has called on the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to slow the pace of withdrawing support or risk wasting the job-saving good done by furloughing so far. The Treasury view is that paying for 9.2 million workers can’t last forever, so there’s no point in propping up businesses that won’t survive – so shake out zombies that were staggering even before the pandemic hit. If these so-called zombies employ people otherwise thrown into long-term joblessness, letting them go will be a bad mistake. But the most calamitous error is to impose a one-size-fits-all retreat from job support, where the Treasury makes no distinction between failing companies and highly profitable thriving sectors closed only by virus diktat. The performing arts, music of every kind, theatre, film studios and dance venues are dark only because they are banned. Otherwise they would leap back as one of the few genuinely “world-beating” high-earners for Treasury coffers, a tourist magnet and the heart of the nation’s cultural identity. Musicians, performers, directors, crew, designers, employees of all kinds are being sacked right now. Many are freelancers with no government support to sustain them, the industry warns. This week the Theatre Royal Plymouth announced that 100 jobs could be lost, its director talking of their “very painful but unavoidable conclusion”, as Newcastle’s Theatre Royal cast off half its staff, cancelling five months of shows. When even Cameron Mackintosh – the West End impresario of Hamilton, Mary Poppins and other blockbusters – cancels all of his moneyspinners until next year, warning he’s about to take “drastic steps” with mass layoffs, the government should take fright. When a host of stars and directors warned in a letter to the chancellor last week that theatre was “on the brink of ruin”, it wasn’t melodrama. Oxford Economics’ report warns of a “cultural catastrophe”, with 400,000 job losses and £74bn of lost earnings across the arts sector. The creative industries, including studio production and video gaming, contributed £111.7bn to the economy in 2018 – and infinitely more through the influence of soft power around the world. Hold hard to those few things where Britain really does excel, as this is the second fastest growing sector in a stagnant decade. The industry calls on Sunak to invest heavily, right now: it’s too late for some, the 11th hour for most. Oliver Dowden, the culture secretary, has made soothing noises – “I will not see our world-leading arts and culture destroyed” – but “intricate” discussions with the Treasury drag on. The Financial Times reports today that while Treasury officials met creative industry representatives any relief is “not imminent”. The industry is asking for a £1bn support package: Whitehall says any help would be “on a smaller scale”. Taxpayer support for the Arts Council at £330m is pitiful compared with similar countries, cut by a third by George Osborne. The arts in the great national institutions only flourish with seed-corn grants for small organisations that are the training grounds and cradles of future talent. The splendour of our world-famous institutions is coasting on better-funded times, but their roots have been atrophying in the last decade. Cuts to budgets saw 90% of schools losing art, drama, music and dance teaching, as the Gradgrind Gove-Cummings curriculum downgraded their value: 20% fewer take GCSE music. Next-generation arts students are drawn increasingly only from middle-class families able to support them. The Theatre Royal Stratford East, made famous by Joan Littlewood, is shedding staff this week. This exceptional company specialises in diverse drama drawing young black and Asian audiences from the local community. Like all regional theatres it relies on its pantomime, but dare not commission one. To stay alive until reopening, it wants to take a tiny company round local schools and perform for free in the open air – but that needs money it doesn’t have. It is now forced to cancel local apprenticeships for lighting, costume and design. Everything everywhere is in danger of being permanently lost. The industry needs the government to invest in it, to take shares and to give tax relief upfront, as well as grants. Above all, the government needs to force or to finance insurance companies to underwrite productions: to reopen and risk hiring people for a definite date is too risky without affordable insurance, in case social distancing or a sudden order to close in a new virus spike means cancellation. Calls to bring back Labour’s 2009 emergency car scrappage scheme should be heeded to save the jobs cascading out in the West Midlands and other areas, even if car-making may not look like the future. Scores more job-creating programmes are needed now to save the young in a no-vacancy market. But failure to back the arts is madness when the UK’s future is in its booming film, TV, theatre, music, gaming and design industries, only dark due to the virus. None of that can leap back to life if venues have been allowed to go bankrupt and talent has fled to seek livelihoods elsewhere. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist