The momentous stage adaptation of Andrea Levy’s Windrush novel Small Island is among the last batch of productions to be streamed by the National Theatre in its popular online programme for audiences during lockdown. The epic 2019 show, adapted by Helen Edmundson and staged by the National’s artistic director Rufus Norris, will be available from 18 June for one week. The play opened in the National’s huge Olivier theatre just weeks after Levy’s death from cancer and a year on from the government’s apologies for the Home Office’s mistaken decision to classify thousands of long-term British residents as illegal immigrants. The scandal forced many out of their jobs and homes and led to detention and deportation. The Guardian’s Michael Billington called Small Island “a landmark in the National Theatre’s history: a tumultuous epic about first-generation Jamaican immigrants playing to a genuinely diverse audience.” The National Theatre at Home initiative has reached a huge global audience, with more than 12 million views, while the South Bank venue in London remains closed during the pandemic. Small Island will be followed on 25 June by A Midsummer Night’s Dream, staged at the Bridge theatre in London in 2019 by the National’s former artistic director Nicholas Hytner. Game of Thrones star Gwendoline Christie plays Shakespeare’s fairy queen, Titania, with the cast including Oliver Chris (from the National’s One Man, Two Guvnors) and Hammed Animashaun (Barber Shop Chronicles) as Bottom. There has been growing criticism of the lack of diversity in the streams offered by major theatres during the lockdown. But the National will also stream Les Blancs by the great African American playwright Lorraine Hansberry, best known for A Raisin in the Sun and as the inspiration for Nina Simone’s song To Be Young, Gifted and Black. Les Blancs, which was unfinished at the time of Hansberry’s death in 1965, is set in an African country on the edge of civil war. Yaël Farber’s production, online from 2 July, stars Sheila Atim and Gary Beadle. On 9 July, Helen McCrory stars in The Deep Blue Sea, Terence Rattigan’s portrait of emotional turmoil in postwar Britain, staged by Carrie Cracknell in the National’s Lyttelton theatre in 2016. The fifth production in the batch is the NT’s widely admired revival of Peter Shaffer’s Amadeus, directed by Michael Longhurst, with Lucian Msamati as Salieri and on-stage orchestral accompaniment by Southbank Sinfonia. It will be streamed on 16 July. In an announcement on Twitter, the National said: “Thank you for your support in lockdown. We remain positive, assured by the strength of our community, but realistic about the great peril our theatre faces. Please consider donating to us, becoming a member, or buying gift vouchers for future use.” This week, theatre industry leaders told a committee of MPs that 70% of theatres across the UK face permanent closure as a result of the coronavirus crisis. Rufus Norris recently told the Guardian that unless there is “a real and concerted drive to uphold the cultural industries in this country, it will be devastating”. The next stream from the National Theatre is Nottingham Playhouse’s revival of Alan Bennett’s The Madness of George III, starring Mark Gatiss. Directed by Adam Penford with a cast including Adrian Scarborough and Debra Gillett, it is the first production from outside London to be streamed as part of the initiative. It is available from Thursday night until 18 June.