What was the situation like when the league was suspended on 13 March? Strange as it now seems given their dominance of the season, but Liverpool were wobbling in the weeks before lockdown. Four out of six matches had ended in defeat, a sequence that cost Jürgen Klopp’s team their undefeated record in the Premier League, their hopes of reaching a third successive Champions League final and of adding the FA Cup to this season’s trophy haul. Liverpool did set an English top-flight record of 22 consecutive home wins in their last league outing with victory over Bournemouth. Controversy surrounded the decision to play the second leg of the Champions League tie against Atlético Madrid in front of more than 52,000 fans at Anfield with the coronavirus infection rate growing rapidly. An official investigation is under way. Alisson was sidelined by a hip injury at the time and his replacement, Adrián, was at fault as Atlético inflicted a first defeat on Klopp in his 11 European knockout ties as the Liverpool manager. What about now? Unsurprisingly upbeat now the unprecedented threat to a richly deserved title victory has eased. The return to contact training has also helped players who Klopp claimed were “like five- and six-year-old boys” while keeping fit at home during lockdown. On the day of football’s suspension the manager called his squad together for a quick meeting to stress the importance of remaining positive, and even enjoying the rare extended break, despite the reward for their outstanding season being placed on hold. A Zoom group including around 60 players and staff helped in that regard. Alisson is now fit, so too Jordan Henderson, who had a hamstring injury shortly before lockdown. Players who were starting to show the effects of an uninterrupted campaign for club and country – Roberto Firmino for one – should benefit from the shutdown. “We are so recharged, I can tell you,” the manager says. What needs to be done to have a successful end to the season? Win two of the remaining nine matches to be crowned champions of England for the first time in 30 years. On the surface it really is that simple, although that target would be at odds with the mentality and ambition Klopp has ingrained in his squad. Should results go their way Liverpool could win their coveted 19th league championship in the first game back against Everton but, even then, the manager would demand more. Manchester City’s record of 100 points will be his unspoken target. Liverpool, who have dropped points in only two of 29 league matches this season, have taken a staggering 109 points from the previous 38 games. They could win 109 points from the 114 available this season. While that is a big ask of any champion side there is no question Liverpool, their title celebrations stuck on pause for so long, will be supremely motivated to remind everyone of their authority. Have players and staff behaved during lockdown? Behaved and trained diligently throughout, which is little surprise given the standards demanded by dressing-room leaders including Jordan Henderson, James Milner, Virgil van Dijk and Georginio Wijnaldum. The same cannot be said of the owner, Fenway Sports Group, whose decision to furlough around 200 non-playing staff in April prompted fierce criticism and a swift U-turn following talks with the Spirit of Shankly supporters’ union and local politicians. Any unsung/community heroes? Henderson will not only be remembered this season for lifting the Premier League trophy. The Liverpool captain was the driving force behind the Players Together initiative that has raised millions for frontline NHS workers and made a mockery of government attempts to single out footballers for criticism over wage cuts at the start of the crisis. Liverpool players, and the chief executive, Peter Moore, have also donated thousands to Fans Supporting Foodbanks. Key player in the run-in? Mohamed Salah. The forward was hitting his best form of the season just before lockdown and is only three goals behind Jamie Vardy in the race for the Golden Boot. That could provide a little extra incentive to keep unlocking defences long after the title is won. End-of-season prediction Something tells me this really could be Liverpool’s year. Neck-on-the-line time – champions. Remaining fixtures (all times BST): Sun 21 June Everton (a) 7pm, Sky Sports and Pick Wed 24 June Crystal Palace (h) 8.15pm, Sky Sports Thur 2 July Manchester City (a) 8.15pm, Sky Sports TBC Aston Villa (h), Brighton (a), Burnley (h), Arsenal (a), Chelsea (h), Newcastle (a).