Michael Sheen and David Tennant reunite after the 2019 adaptation of Terry Pratchett’s and Neil Gaiman’s supernatural tale Good Omens for a more down to earth affair. Starring as the two leads of a West End production suddenly brought to a halt because of the coronavirus pandemic, Staged charts the cast’s continuance of rehearsals via Zoom calls. With each episode only running at 15 minutes, it is a meandering, gently-paced look at our state of affairs and the eternal fight against encroaching lockdown boredom. Ammar Kalia A glimpse into the country’s bingo halls in this charming documentary, focusing on one of the busiest nights of the year for the Westway hall in Belfast. With the prize money bumped up to four figures, we meet the seasoned regulars such as working mum Margaret and elder stateswoman of the hall Eileen. AK Semi-final spots are within reach as this Joe Lycett-helmed sewing challenge hots up. It’s world sewing week which is a chance to explore design classics from around the world. That means a Provençal tablecloth transformation, a Flamenco-inspired skirt and a traditional Filipino blouse. Phil Harrison A human slush puppy is uncovered in a frozen breakers’ yard, as it becomes apparent the murderer’s main targets are really their loved ones, in the latest development for the Canadian drama. While police attempt to establish a link between the murders, Cardinal and Delorme are drawn much closer together. Ali Catterall This new series shadows management and frontline staff of TransPennine Express, during a particularly hectic year for the northern train operator. The belated arrival of new rolling stock should help with delays and overcrowding but an early-morning derailment causes yet more chaos. Graeme Virtue Ashley Jensen returns as the London PR turned Cotswolds sleuth in the third season of the lighthearted mystery series. We open with Agatha setting up her own detective agency and struggling for clients in the sleepy town. A trip to a manor house said to be haunted since the English civil war might help. AK The Square (Ruben Östlund, 2018), 9pm, Film4Claes Bang’s art director Christian hits on a provocative, PR-friendly installation for his gallery, the Square – a space where people must behave responsibly and altruistically. And when, in that very space, his phone and wallet are stolen, things start getting bizarre indeed. Paul Howlett 