Pierrette Herzberger-Fofana, Germany’s first member of the European parliament of African origin, came to Brussels to make a difference in tackling all forms of discrimination. She did not expect to be telling her fellow MEPs she had been the victim of discrimination at the hands of the Belgian police. Arriving in Brussels on Tuesday lunchtime, the MEP had just left the Gare du Nord when she saw nine police officers “harassing” two black youths. Standing on the other side of the street, she got out her phone to record the scene, before finding herself being confronted by the police herself. The 71-year-old former teacher and university lecturer said she was brutally pushed against a wall by four officers, forced to stand with her hands up and legs spread, while her handbag was searched. Speaking the next day in the the European parliament, Herzberger-Fofana told MEPs she had been “a victim of police violence … a discriminatory act with underlying racist tendencies”. The MEP said she had been treated very rudely, and “not with the civility that you would expect from the police”, who addressed her with the familiar tu, rather than the polite vous. Despite showing officers several identity documents, she thinks it was only when the parliament’s official driver arrived that officers believed she was an MEP. The experience “was traumatising and humiliating”, she told the Guardian in an interview. The European parliament president, David Sassoli, has since written to Belgium’s prime minister, Sophie Wilmès, calling on her to take “the immediate and necessary measures”. A spokesperson for north Brussels police said an internal investigation had been launched, while rejecting accusations of violence or inappropriate conduct by officers. “Her identity wasn’t checked because she was filming but because she became involved in the control [of the two young people],” the spokesperson said, adding Herzberger-Fofana was treated in “the normal way [by] the normal procedure”. According to the police, the public prosecutor has launched a separate investigation into Herzberger-Fofana for “insulting the police” – a charge the MEP strongly denies. She contends officers were annoyed because she defended herself. “But imagine the regular citizen … who is afraid of the police. That is what pains me, that there are so many citizens who live in this situation and don’t have the chance to defend themselves because they don’t know their rights,” she said. Fofana-Herzberger was elected to the European parliament for the Greens in 2019, swept into office by a surge in support for the party. A councillor in her Bavarian hometown of Erlangen since 2005, she was a lowly 21st on the party list – a position that in previous years would have ruled out her gaining a seat. It is “always difficult” for people with foreign origins to make headway in politics, she said. A specialist in German linguistics, as well as African literature, during her five-year mandate she is focusing on EU development policy, EU relations with Africa and policies to counter all forms of discrimination. The incident at Brussels’ Gare du Nord came before the European parliament was due to vote on a non-binding resolution against racism on Friday, drawn up in response to the global protests following the death in Minnesota of George Floyd. Police checks on black Asian and minority ethnic citizens is raised in the draft resolution – a problem Herzberger-Fofana highlighted when she co-signed a letter to the European commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, criticising a senior EU official for “a public denial of racism”. Margaritis Schinas, one of von der Leyen’s vice-presidents and charged with “promoting our European way of life”, told the Financial Times this month Europe did not have issues that “blatantly pertain to police brutality”. Herzberger-Fofana said an EU commissioner should be better informed: “For some people it’s difficult to imagine this because they never encounter police violence.” The letter called on Schinas to apologise or issue an explanatory statement recognising “the severity of systemic and structural racism in the EU”. A spokesperson from the European commission did not respond directly to questions, including whether Schinas would apologise, but said “the letter has been received and it will be replied to”. The commission spokesperson referred to the “very clear position” of Von der Leyen, who this week told the European parliament the EU needed “to talk about racism with an open mind”. She promised to lead a debate on racism with her top team of commissioners next week, while acknowledging the 32,000-strong European commission does not reflect the diversity of European society. MEPs suggested Schinas is unfamiliar with the findings of the EU’s own Fundamental Rights Agency, which reported in 2018 that Europeans of African descent face a “dire picture” of discrimination in everyday life. One in 10 respondents to the FRA survey said they had been stopped by the police in the last year and almost half (44%) of those thought those incidents had been motivated by the colour of their skin, although this rose to 70% in Italy and 63% in Austria. The EU, however, has no powers over police forces, nor education, health, housing and social services, where MEPs also want to see action to tackle discrimination by national governments. Herzberger-Fofana wants to see better implementation of existing laws, including the 2000 race equality directive. She also thinks the EU needs to take a stand against racism, “to break the silence … and recognise the gravity of the systemic and structural racism that exists”.