Since late 2016, much of New South Wales has been in the grip of “the big dry” – the most intense drought in living memory. In recent months, the story of the water crisis has been dominated by the Black Summer fires and the global coronavirus pandemic. Yet, bucking of the trend of the world’s horror 2020, heavy rainfall between February and early May has brought a sense of quiet optimism and hope to rural communities. Many regions have recorded more than 300mm of rain so far this year, eclipsing the entire annual totals of both 2018 and 2019. While pockets of intense drought persist in the far west, northern tablelands and south-east, large parts of the state are now in the early stages of recovery. Dew gathers on the grass at Lisa and Ambrose Doolan’s property on a foggy morning. Life is returning to drained waterways. Farmers are restocking and planting for winter. For towns such as Coonabarabran, the water crisis has eased. In early March the emergency bores providing the town’s water were switched off, with residents now enjoying water from the local Timor Dam for the first time since early 2018. I recently returned to the area to catch up with farmers I first visited at the onset of the drought. For producers like Ambrose and Lisa Doolan, their property is almost unrecognisable compared with just a few months ago. From my first visit I can vividly recall the strain on Ambrose’s face as he and Lisa set about what was then a new feeding operation for their substantial herd of cattle. The ongoing cost of providing feed was effectively a gamble on the family’s future. Clockwise from top: Lisa and Ambrose Doolan on their newly green property, cattle in the growing produce. As recently as January the couple, who are fourth-generation farmers, watched as an intense dust storm tore through their property. “It was beginning to feel almost personal,” Ambrose says of the drought, which, according to his historical records, was the worst since his family first arrived on the same land in 1902. An aerial view of the Little Llangothlin Nature Reserve Just weeks after that dust storm, the region was hit by the same rains that caused flash floods across Sydney, and soon brought a transformation Ambrose and Lisa had thought they might never see. Adding to the joy has been the purchase of the neighbouring farm by their daughter Emily and her partner Joe. During the height of the drought, Emily had moved back home to help her parents and, despite moments of despair, the experience brought the family closer together, in a move that’s now permanent. “We are optimistic, without getting ahead of ourselves just yet.” Ambrose, Emily and Lisa walk on their property.. Further north, the small town of Warialda was last year at the epicentre of the drought. Shortly before the onset of the big dry, Elizabeth Hollow had bought her dream property, built a house and stocked the farm with cattle. That dream soon turned into a three-year battle to stay afloat, hand-feeding stock in the dark before heading to a full-time job. Elizabeth Hollow at work on her property in Warialda. Today, the farm is largely remade, and so too the prospects of continued life on the land for Elizabeth. “It’s been a beautiful change,” Hollow says. “Farmers up here have been quietly enjoying the reprieve, though it will take years to recover financially. “I sometimes like to just sit and listen to the sounds of the herd just munching away at the grass.” Near to the small town of Guyra, the Little Llangothlin nature reserve, a world heritage-listed wetland, was last year bone dry. Today, life is returning. Nesting water birds can be spotted, and the sounds of life echo across this important patch of wilderness. Nesting waterbirds spotted in the Little Llangothlin nature reserve. Back south to Coonabarabran and the sprawling property Marlborough, owned by farmers Coral, Greg and Tanya Jerry. It is here that has seen perhaps seen the most dramatic transformation of the properties I’ve visited. The Jerry family had for years been treading water financially in what became a very public struggle during the drought. After the 2018 pictures of their farm were published by the Guardian, the family experienced intense interest from local and international media. Network TV soon arrived to interview the family, and last year a GoFundMe campaign was set up, which raised a substantial amount of money for the family. Top to bottom: sheep on Coral and Greg Jerry’s property, and Greg Jerry. Greg tells me a decent chunk of this money went to helping others in the district. For the family, it helped them fend off bankruptcy just long enough for the rains to arrive, and not a moment too soon. Today, patches of red earth give way to sweeping green fields and crops planted after the rainfall. The property once again resembles the lush farm on which Greg grew up. The deluge in February was the first substantial relief at Marlborough since October 2016. For Coral, who continues to live alone in her small weatherboard house on the property, the change has been something of a miracle. Ambrose Doolan’s property in 2018 and in 2020. “I’ve never seen this type of rapid growth,” says Coral of the waist-high crops around us. “It’s been really remarkable. We thought it would take months after rain for the property to recover, but it’s happened fast, real fast.” I’ve never seen this type of rapid growth Coral’s daily trips on her quad bike around a property are now a joy. Gone are the emaciated sheep and cattle, replaced by well-nourished stock and a sense of calm after the daily struggle of years past. “I’ll never leave this place,” says Coral, as she wanders back to the small shack that has been home her entire adult life. Affected farmland near the town of Warialda in 2019 and in 2020. The process of recovery from the most intense drought on record is tenuous. Decent winter rainfall is needed to consolidate the earlier falls. Some areas are still as dry as before. On my way back to Sydney, Ambrose Doolan reminds me via text of the old proverb, “this too shall pass” – a nice reminder to stay positive during the current gloom. 