The West Indies squad have landed in Manchester and are now safely tucked away in their hotel, which overlooks the pitch at Old Trafford. For the next fortnight they will be in quarantine practising for the cricketing challenges ahead. It will not be a fun tour as of old because players will be locked away in a bio-secure bubble during and between matches over the next seven weeks. The tourists, coming from a region that has avoided the worst excesses of the pandemic, are making significant sacrifices by agreeing to play in a country that has endured the second highest number of deaths from the virus in the world. No wonder the England and Wales Cricket Board is so grateful they are here. Jason Holder, now a long-serving and highly respected captain, recognises the significance of a series that has acquired historic status. It has become a trailblazing event that can demonstrate cricket is possible in these bleak circumstances and, despite what the cynics may say, it will be the first Test series to be played without any spectators present. “This is a huge step forward in cricket and in sports in general,” Holder said on departure. “A lot has gone into the preparations for what will be a new phase in the game. I’m happy for the support and well-wishes we have been receiving from our loyal and dedicated fans once it was confirmed the tour would go ahead. This has been a source of great inspiration. “We have a fantastic group of cricketers, coaches, medical staff and support staff and I know everyone is eagerly looking forward to the start of the first match. There is expectation in the air that we will defend the Wisden Trophy and we will certainly put in the work and give it our all to keep hold of it.” Their presence enhances the prospect of live cricket this summer. Now something untoward would have to happen to prevent this series taking place. There are three Tests scheduled from 8 July, albeit in extraordinary circumstances, behind closed doors and under constant medical supervision. The first will be played at the Ageas Bowl near Southampton, after which West Indies will return to Old Trafford for the last two Tests. The teams will be allowed to substitute players displaying coronavirus symptoms following an International Cricket Council announcement on Tuesday of the change for Test matches . Other changes made to accommodate Covid-19 include players no longer being allowed to use saliva to shine a ball and the temporary removal of a need for neutral umpires. As a result of the latter change, tTeams will be given an additional DRS review per innings, upping allocations to three. These matches are designed to demonstrate the game is still alive, to entertain a sports-deprived public and to help minimise the financial losses of the ECB that are an inevitable consequence of the pandemic (a factor that has galvanised everyone in the ECB offices). And there is the Wisden Trophy to be contested; it resides with West Indies after their 2-1 victory in the Caribbean in 2018-19. Three West Indies players – Darren Bravo, Shimron Hetmyer and Keemo Paul – exercised their right not to tour, which means there are some relatively unknown names among the Test squad of 14 players, nine of whom hail from Barbados. In addition there are 11 other players here, who will train alongside that squad and provide opposition in two scheduled practice matches. It is not impossible that someone like Shannon Gabriel, the pace bowler who is returning from injury, may be promoted to the Test squad before the end of the series. It will be a major achievement if we end up speculating about the destination of the trophy in the last couple weeks of July rather than the safety and viability of playing Test cricket in such strange times. Whatever the outcome the West Indies players should be applauded – for being here.