In 2018, 20 months before Black Lives Matter forced us to reappraise the way we commemorate our history, a young architectural practice in London showed us the way. Studio Mash won a prize for A Long Shadow Over London. Taking the statue of Robert Clive, venerated outside the Foreign Office, they designed a bronze shadow for it, to be fixed in the pavement. This penumbra would chronicle how Clive had locked up the East India Company’s grain during the famine of 1770 and allowed millions of Bengalis to starve (as William Dalrymple has unearthed so devastatingly in The Anarchy: The Relentless Rise of the East India Company). All so Clive could pay a fat dividend to East India stockholders in London. At a time of social disruption, where we’re rightly forced to question our national identity, we look to creative designers and historians to help us both understand and accurately represent our past. Take tackling Covid-19, which we’re constantly told is a matter of science. But not just science, surely. The critical data, which tells us how humans are responding, is what shapes key policy decisions. And this comes from the discipline of social science. The trusted news that informs our citizenry and gives us resilience in a time of crisis is itself the product of sustained investment in trained journalists. The government furloughing and loan schemes, designed to save jobs and companies, are conceived by economists. The television entertainment, the JK Rowling children’s story released online and the digital theatre that all lift our spirits in lockdown – these are the product of our thriving creative arts. Science, we hope, keeps us alive. But the arts and humanities keep us sane. Yes, yes, but what’s my point? It is that the arts and the humanities are sometimes undervalued compared with the Stem subjects, and now a new coalition is going to do something about it. This is not a whinge, it’s a piece of self-help. If these disciplines are undervalued, it’s partly because their leaders have not clearly articulated the value of what they do sharply enough. So stand by for a bit of rebranding… The British Academy, the Arts Council and the London School of Economics have got together with others to remarket their endeavours as Social Sciences, Humanities & the Arts for People & the Economy – or Shape, in short. In future, they hope, you’ll be as likely to talk about the Shape subjects as you will the Stem equivalents. It’s not just an acronymic sleight of hand, because what will flow from this, they intend, is a reappraisal of the role and importance of the Shape disciplines with debates, essays and research projects. But always with the caveat that it’s not a competition. Shape will always sit alongside Stem in a complementary relationship. I have written before about the worth of the creative industries to Britain: not only around 6% of the economy – and growing much faster than other sectors – but of even greater cultural value in terms of our developing national conversation and sense of self. Shape nurtures this with courses that deliver the necessary talent , whether in journalism, graphic design or drama. But there is a growing trend in government to judge the success of a course by the salaries earned on graduation. On this measure, many of the courses our creative industries rely on would be discontinued. Many of these jobs at trainee level are undertaken for love, not money. But they’re important and I despair when I see such reductionism: must we be a nation that knows the price of everything but not its value? Shape is something we do well. Just as Britain pioneered the delineation of a creative sector, so too did we give the world English, economics and international relations as academic disciplines. Sixty years ago, CP Snow, a scientist and novelist, bemoaned what he saw as the two cultures and the gulf between science and the arts. But when Stem and Shape come together, as they increasingly do in well-organised governments and intelligently run companies, we find a healthy symbiosis that would astonish Snow. In his book Originals, Adam Grant cites a study of this century’s brilliant, Nobel prize-winning scientists. These breakthrough innovators are significantly more likely to be involved in the arts than their peers. Imagination, self-expression and sheer humanity inspire their discoveries. A cross-disciplinary marriage made in heaven. And it was an engineer, Lord Browne, who pointed this out to me. In the mid-20th century, when Shape subjects were still establishing themselves, John Maynard Keynes wrote: “The ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are right and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly understood. Indeed the world is ruled by little else.” When we remember that Keynes also founded the Arts Council, we can definitely put him down as a confirmed Shapist. He saw the Shape of things to come. Peter Bazalgette is chair of ITV and former chair of Arts Council England