It will not be long once ITV’s coverage of Royal Ascot is under way on Tuesday afternoon before someone who thinks that they are the “wit” in Twitter suggests that it’s much better without all the hats-and-frocks fluff that normally occupies the gaps between races. Five minutes, probably. Fifteen, tops. But a more sobering thought for the hardcore fans who care only about the horses and the racing is that if the need for a royal meeting behind closed doors is anything but a one-off, there may not be much of a racing industry at all this time next year. It will look much the same to the hardcore fans if they switch on only for the races and return to their form study in between. The British Horseracing Authority and Ascot racecourse, meanwhile, deserve immense credit for getting the meeting on at all this year, never mind in its scheduled slot in the middle of June, just over a fortnight after the resumption of racing. Scratch the surface, though, and this was only ever going to be a fire-sale Royal Ascot, designed to tide things over and keep the business afloat at a time of national crisis. Prize funds have been cut by 50%, or £3.65m – a fraction of the normal revenue from ticket sales alone, never mind the rest of the cash that the average racegoer leaves behind. In fact, since Royal Ascot had some protection against a pandemic in its insurance policy, it may be costing the track more to stage the meeting than it would to have abandoned it. But these five days are immensely important and valuable to the Flat season as a whole, a point which will not be lost on Ascot’s owner, and the royal meeting’s most dedicated and long-standing fan, who will be forced to follow it from home for the first time since her coronation 67 years ago. There may be no one else on a planet of 7.5bn people who has attended every single day of the same major sporting event since 1953, and even a committed republican would have to concede that the Queen’s dedication to the royal meeting – which is supposedly the first item inked into her diary each year – has been an essential part of its enduring success. For several generations the Queen’s close association with racing in general and Royal Ascot in particular has helped to sell tickets and hospitality packages to once-a-year racegoers whose in-depth knowledge of the form book is slim to non-existent. They dress up and arrive en masse to watch the royal procession, have a few drinks and a few bets, and indulge in a bit of celeb-spotting too. They are the Royal Ascot racegoers that at least some of racing’s diehards and purists would cross the street to avoid, and without them, the numbers for the royal meeting simply don’t add up. The Queen’s association with the meeting has a similar effect at the other end of the power pyramid too. Racing as a whole has two main sources of revenue: millions of people who invest small individual sums via ticket sales, betting or both, and a handful of multimillionaires who make immense personal investments to build racing and breeding empires. British racing’s prize money does not compare with that available in France, Australia or Hong Kong, but for a global billionaire with the racing bug, its heritage its priceless and the prospect of mingling with the Queen at the Royal meeting, or perhaps even getting invited into a carriage in the procession, is the most enticing carrot of all. On that basis, the unique circumstances of this year’s Royal Ascot will at least avoid the potential embarrassment of a close encounter between the Queen and Sheikh Mohammed, Flat racing’s biggest owner, at the meeting which his Godolphin operation values above all others. The Queen has reportedly decided to “distance” herself from the ruler of Dubai after a devastating high court ruling this year, in a case involving the Sheikh and his wife Princess Haya, that he had orchestrated the kidnapping and imprisonment of two of his daughters, one of whom was abducted from a street in Cambridge. Godolphin has two runners in Thursday’s Gold Cup, a race for which the Queen traditionally presents the prize (most famously to herself in 2013). Its runners across the week also include Terebellum, the second-favourite for Tuesday’s Queen Anne Stakes, whose ownership had mysteriously – and opaquely – switched from Princess Haya to Godolphin when she reappeared at Newmarket this month. No prizes will be presented to Sheikh Mohammed or anyone else at the racecourse this year, and it is anyone’s guess what the meeting – or the sport, or the country – will look like in June 2021. For now, it is a case of trying to carry on as best we can and hoping above all that everyone, from Queen to commoner, will be back in Berkshire in 12 months’ time.