It wouldn’t be summer without a sun-drenched coming-of-age story, so beautifully realised in Meg Rosoff’s seductive and elegant The Great Godden (Bloomsbury). In an almost implausibly golden British summer, two families congregate at an idyllic house by the sea until the arrival of American brothers Kit and Hugo is the catalyst for devastating change. The heady nostalgia and sweet ache of first love and lost innocence recall classics such as Bonjour Tristesse. More family drama in Clap When You Land by Elizabeth Acevedo (Hot Key), a verse novel narrated by two teenage girls, one in New York, the other in the Dominican Republic whose father has died in a plane crash. Only after his death do they discover they are sisters. Acevedo won the CILIP Carnegie medal for her debut, The Poet X, and this unforgettable portrait of grief, loss and forgiveness is equally accomplished. Eight Pieces of Silva by Patrice Lawrence (Hachette, August) sees Beck’s stepsister disappear when their parents are away on honeymoon. Venturing into the forbidden territory of Silva’s room, Becks discovers eight clues that slowly reveal the web of her sister’s secret life. An absorbing family mystery set in contemporary London, full of the complex, charismatic characters that Lawrence draws so well. For action and adrenaline look no further than Robert Muchamore’s Robin Hood: Hacking, Heists & Flaming Arrows (Hot Key). The author of the Cherub series reimagines the folk legend in the rundown, modern-day town of Locksley. When their father is framed for robbery, Robin and his brother, Little John, flee to Sherwood Forest, surviving among the free spirits and outlaws and hatching a plan against the corrupt authorities. Certain to be relished by thrill-seekers of 11 and up. In Harrow Lake by Kat Ellis (Penguin), Lola Nox is sent to live with her estranged grandmother when her film-director father is brutally attacked. There, she finds a small town seemingly frozen in time, a living homage to Nightjar, her father’s most famous work that was filmed there decades earlier. The eerie atmosphere and secretive residents lure Lola ever deeper into mystery and danger in a fiendishly suspenseful and super-stylish thriller, playfully employing horror motifs from the page and screen. Finally, the return of a YA blockbuster. Suzanne Collins is back in the world of The Hunger Games in The Ballad of Songbirds and Snakes (Scholastic), a surprise prequel and origin story of the villainous President Snow. Eighteen-year-old Coriolanus Snow is selected to mentor District 12 “tribute” Lucy Gray Baird in the 10th Hunger Games, a significantly more ramshackle affair than the slick media productions of the main trilogy. Collins chronicles the making of a monster fuelled by a toxic combination of privilege, ambition and a survival instinct more ruthless than anything seen in the arena. A 100 pages too long, perhaps, but crammed with so much Hunger Games mythology that fans won’t mind one bit. • To order any of these books for a special price click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15