Before lockdown the idea of a trip to the Etihad was like the idea of a trip to the dentist: just hoping to get through it without needing to be numbed. But maybe playing in an empty stadium after such a long shutdown will throw form out of the window? Maybe. Is it right to restart? I’m not sure it’s moral to ask players to risk infection for themselves and their families just to give us some entertainment. And the sanitised experience is going to be strange. It’s been bizarre to see subs distanced and masked in the Bundesliga while, on the pitch, the players are puffing and panting over each other. What I missed most … Having had to make do with press gossip about the futures of Aubameyang, Saka and co, I just can’t wait for some actual sport. What I missed least … I’ve missed all of it: the agony and the ecstasy. The only positive has been the chance to watch the replays of our former glories and be reminded what a privilege it’s been to watch Arsenal over the past half a century. I just hope the current squad were watching too. Has the club had a good lockdown? As a shielded resident of Highbury I’ve been waiting patiently these past three months for Mesut Özil to turn up on my doorstep with some groceries. It’s not happened yet, but the club’s support for the community has been admirable. Predictions … Top four: 1 Liverpool; 2 Man City; 3 Leicester; 4 Chelsea. Going down: 18 Brighton; 19 Villa; 20 Norwich. • Bernard Azulay GoonersDiary.co.uk @GoonerN5 We were absolutely dead and buried before the break: confidence shot, it looked grim. However, with McGinn back and Grealish’s 122 foul-induced bruises now healed, suddenly everything seems possible. With a bit of luck we could just scrape survival. It’s a shame Covid-19 chose this year to close grounds, though: after 20 years of Villa Park being mostly quiet or moany, in the last three it has been bouncing. The absence of fans is a disadvantage to us, with six of our 10 games at home. Is it right to restart? I suppose so, although I have always been in the “bin it off, no relegation, let Leeds and Albion come up” camp. Self-interested? Of course! Anyway, I’ve applied for a job as a ballboy for Wednesday’s game but I haven’t heard back. Ageism. What I missed most … It has 100% proved what I always knew deep down: while football is the beautiful game, the 90 minutes itself is only one of many elements of match day, and its reintroduction behind closed doors doesn’t fill the hole on its own. I’ve missed the week-long anticipation, the train journeys talking rubbish, pubs new and old and the spine-tingling feeling of being pitchside. Football Saturdays as a whole are greater than the sum of their parts, and give the week a focus. What I missed least … Feeling I have to watch Grealish’s body language every second, praying not to see signs he’s had enough of how rubbish we are. Has the club had a good lockdown? Positives: plenty of good community work. Negatives: Grealish is proof that it is possible to be both the messiah and a very naughty boy at the same time. Predictions … Top four: 1 Liverpool; 2 Man City; 3 Leicester; 4 Man United. Going down: 18 West Ham; 19 Bournemouth; 20 Norwich. • Jonathan Pritchard Our prospects have improved a lot since March, with the return of Cook and Brooks in particular – and Liverpool have let us keep Harry Wilson for the run-in. It’s going to be tough, with four of the top six to play, but we’ll battle. We may just scrape home. Is it right to restart? The low number of positive Covid-19 tests among players is reassuring but clearly the restart is just about money. Only a third of games are free on TV. Personally I’d have abandoned the season on safety grounds – even if it did mean automatic relegation. What I missed most … Apart from the football, it’s meeting other fans. You have a routine when you go to games, and we’ve missed that hugely. What I missed least … Talking about VAR. I just hope it has a quiet run-in, then something serious is done for the following season to change the system. It’s been a shambles. Has the club had a good lockdown? Mostly. Eddie Howe was first to volunteer a pay cut; players and staff contacted fans and made donations. Jordon Ibe let the side down, though: breaching lockdown to visit a celebrity hairdresser, then boasting about it on Instagram. He’s leaving next month. Predictions … Top four: 1. Liverpool; 2. Man City; 3. Leicester; 4. Chelsea. Going down: 18 Brighton; 19 Aston Villa; 20 Norwich. • Peter Bell AFCBchimes.blogspot.co.uk @cherrychimes Anxiety is running high. We’ve got Liverpool, Man City, Arsenal and Man United at home. With a crowd we’d have got a couple of points from those. Now I’m not so sure. But, then again, it doesn’t feel like the same season so hopefully instead of falling apart and conceding stupid goals, we’ll have forgotten we haven’t won a game this year and return refreshed, ready to bang in a couple of vital early wins. Is it right to restart? Yes and no. Yes because it’ll be a distraction from the misery of the pandemic and our unbelievably incompetent government. No because it’s all being driven by the TV money: sickening when so many people have lost so much and have years of hardship ahead. Having the Premier League awash with so much money has never felt right; if a couple of zeros can be knocked off players’ salaries and agents’ fees as a result of all this it’d feel a whole lot better. What I missed most … The whole shebang of match day - meeting friends in the pub, the anticipation, the noise, unbridled joy/misery, plus reading, talking and thinking about football every single day of the week. What I missed least … Listening to fans’ vitriol during games. And drinking so many pints of fizzy lager in plastic cups. Has the club had a good lockdown? They stepped up again: a huge donation to a local charities, and Albion In The Community continued its amazing work. Predictions … Top four: 1 Liverpool; 2 Leicester; 3 Man City; 4 Chelsea. Going down: 18 West Ham; 19 Villa; 20 Norwich. • Steph Fincham We’re in a pretty comfortable position: there’s no likelihood of being dragged into a relegation battle. Dyche has the squad in good shape. It’s probably the smallest squad in the league, though, so the new substitute rule won’t work in our favour – and the quick turnaround could hit us if we get a couple of injuries. Is it right to restart? It’ll be good to see some games, of course, albeit in a strange setting – but with the pandemic still taking so many lives in the UK it’s hard to argue with those who think it is the wrong thing to do. What I missed most … It’s been like a close season, but this time with little connection with football friends. That’s what I’ve missed more than anything: those long away trips and the company that goes with them are a big loss. There were still some really good weekends away to look forward to. What I missed least … Losing - but we hadn’t been doing that very often at the time of the lockdown. Has the club had a good lockdown? We’ve had no negatives in terms of squad behaviour. We don’t have a Jack Grealish/Kyle Walker/Dominic Cummings here. The club as a whole stepped up: they’ve done well to support the most vulnerable, particularly with food deliveries. Predictions … Top four: 1 Liverpool; 2 Man City; 3 Leicester; 4 Chelsea. Going down: 18 Brighton; 19 Bournemouth; 20 Norwich. • Tony Scholes UpTheClarets.com @UTCdotcom Feels a bit strange to restart – like a mini new season rather than completing the old one. We seem to be injury-free and we’ve got a good young squad, so I fully expect us to finish in the top four and win the FA Cup. I’m not sure I’d back us for the Champions League, though … Is it right to restart? I keep changing my mind. It was never about the integrity of the league: it was all about money. The Premier League should have come straight out and said that: I think most fans would have appreciated the honesty. Having tried to watch some of the German football I’m still not convinced it’s the real thing – it feels more like glorified friendlies. What I missed most … The social side: the pub, beer and the moaning – all as important as the game itself. Football without fans is nothing, and we’ll see that over the next few weeks. What I missed least … Football fan video bloggers. Oh, and the media fawning over Liverpool. The thought of Liverpool winning the league is bad enough without the 24/7 rolling coverage. Has the club had a good lockdown? Chelsea responded positively: they’ve supported the NHS and local charities from the start. By way of contrast, the likes of Liverpool and Spurs using the furlough scheme was embarrassing. Predictions … Top four: 1 Liverpool; 2 Man City; 3 Chelsea; 4 Man United. Going down: 18 West Ham; 19 Bournemouth; 20 Norwich. • Paul Baker In memory of Trizia Fiorellino We’d built up a bit of momentum before the lockdown, with three wins on the spin and surging up the table. The squad is fully fit now, but who knows what sharpness is going to be like … With a reasonably difficult run-in, a top-10 finish would be a great success. Is it right to restart? Absolutely. Once the safety of players and match‑day staff was established there was every reason to restart – both for the obvious financial reasons, but also for the morale-boosting effect it’ll have on football supporters everywhere. What I missed most … Not so much the matches themselves, but rather the friends you meet beforehand in the pub or sit with at the match, as well as the wider football chat in person and online. I didn’t realise how much structure football gave my life until it was gone. What I missed least … Queuing for a beer. Queuing for toilets. And those abject defeats that hang over you like a cloud until the next match. Has the club had a good lockdown? The chairman took a lead in pushing for the Premier League to come back – he’s come across well in the media. The club have been impressive all round: not furloughing staff, continuing charity outreach to vulnerable youngsters and providing free meals to NHS staff. Predictions … Top four: 1 Liverpool; 2 Man City; 3 Leicester; 4 Man United. Going down: 18 Brighton; 19 Aston Villa; 20 Norwich. • Chris Waters PalaceTrust.org.uk @Clapham_Grand We’re in a very precarious state. With Mina injured we have just two experienced centre-backs in Holgate and Keane. Given the high injury rate in Germany since their restart that’s an obvious worry. Gbamin’s injury also makes midfield extremely light. Players such as Walcott who are always susceptible to soft-tissue injuries make the situation even further stretched. Is it right to restart? No. It’s been driven by the financial consequences of not delivering a complete season to the broadcasters. Years of financial mismanagement by the clubs and poor relationships between the league and broadcasters are coming home to roost. What I missed most … The buildup to games, the anticipation and the predictions among friends, followed by the post-match debate and arguments. The games themselves, not so much. What I missed least … Pundits! If broadcasters could just let the football do the talking and leave the punditry out it’d do us all a favour … Has the club had a good lockdown? They continued to excel in community work, and they’ve also been fantastic employers, maintaining and paying all positions. Communications and engagement regarding the restart have been very poor, though. Predictions … Top four: 1 Liverpool; 2 Man City; 3 Leicester; 4 Chelsea. Going down: 18 West Ham; 19 Bournemouth; 20 Norwich. • The esk TheEsk.org @theesk It’s going to be a nervous run-in. It feels like the start of a new campaign, except there’s so much more to lose, especially for us. I have to hope the coaches have kept to the usual high standards and that everyone is fit and raring to go. More of the same will do nicely. Is it right to restart? I don’t think so. The aftershocks of the pandemic will be felt in football for years to come. Restarting after such a long break was just as unfair as all the other possibilities. I think we should have ended the season, honoured promotions, qualifications and championships based on current positions and played with 22 clubs in the Premier League until we can gradually return to normal. What I missed most … Just having something to look forward to – a distraction from the endless stream of bad news. What I missed least … Stressing about whether or not we can keep hold of our top-four spot. Has the club had a good lockdown? The club has been tremendous as always – taking much of the financial burden. Our players have made generous personal contributions to Covid-19 relief efforts, too. It’s one aspect we never have to worry about. Predictions … Top four: 1 Liverpool; 2 Man City; 3 Leicester; 4 Chelsea. Going down: 18 Bournemouth; 19 Aston Villa; 20 Norwich. • Chris Whiting clippings.me/chriswhiting @ChrisRWhiting Our first game is the derby, which I think we’ll win and be on our way. I’m confident we can take up where we left off, perhaps not with the same intensity at first, but I can’t see us not winning most of our games. Six points and we’re champions. It’s been a while. Is it right to restart? Yes. This season needs to finish before we can start to think what’ll happen for the next. Behind closed doors isn’t great but at this stage there’s no other way. Who knows when crowds will be able to gather again, and we’ve already had to play a game – against Atlético Madrid back in March – that we shouldn’t. It looks like it had dire consequences. What I missed most … Seeing Liverpool win the league. Celebrating Liverpool winning the league. Seeing mates. I’ve been asked a few times if I think this title will be tarnished because of the situation? Tarnished? Madness. What I missed least … Travelling at crazy times for crazy kick-offs to suit TV. Oh, and the rubbish you hear (see above). Has the club had a good lockdown? Klopp and the players have done a fair bit of community work and online connection with fans. The club took some stick when they announced they were going to furlough staff, and days later they backtracked. But they did backtrack. Anyone can make mistakes. The reversal came thanks in a large part to pressure from Spirit of Shankly and the club’s willingness to engage with the supporters’ union. The club also worked with SOS to lobby for games to be played at Anfield, not neutral venues. We’ve got an ace squad and the best manager. And pretty soon we’ll have number 19. Predictions … Top four: 1 Liverpool; 2 Man City; 3. Leicester; 4 Chelsea. Going down: 18 Watford; 19 Aston Villa; 20 Norwich. • Steph Jones • Part 2: Manchester City to Wolves