We are writing in response to the heartfelt letter on behalf of classical music and musicians from Sir Simon Rattle and Sir Mark Elder (UK orchestras may not survive coronavirus pandemic, conductors warn, 10 June), to give voice to the millions of people who sing in choirs in this country. Up until now we have had one of the most vibrant choral landscapes in the world. Our professional choral life, consisting of world-renowned chamber choirs, vocal ensembles, opera choruses, cathedral choirs and theatre ensembles, faces an uncertain future. The financial picture for such groups has always been challenging, even in the best of times, but the outlook now for such ensembles, mostly made up of freelance musicians, is not an optimistic one. We have a world-leading cathedral and church choir tradition, largely made up of young boys and girls and paid adult singers who face financial hardship and also serious challenges of continuity. The amateur choir life of this country is huge, from the world-class symphony choruses and university choirs to community and school choirs, and all these groups face a time of great uncertainty. We need church leaders to have the courage to speak out so that we can make singing together in churches work within certain guidelines. We need the government to show how we can restart singing together on an equal footing with opening theme parks, shopping and kicking a football around. It is imperative that we find a way for choirs in this country to resume as soon and as safely as we can. Singing in a choir is not only about communality, social cohesion and harmony; for many it is an essential source of emotional wellbeing and positive mental health. Moreover it is a powerful expression of our culture and humanity, and it cannot be allowed to fade away. Bob Chilcott Composer/conductor, John Rutter Composer/conductor, Sarah Connolly Opera singer, Simon Halsey Chorus director, LSO, CBSO, Harry Christophers Founder, The Sixteen, David Hill Musical director, The Bach Choir, Gavin Carr Chorus director, The Philharmonia Chorus, Bournemouth Symphony Chorus, Matthew Hamilton Choral director, The Hallé, Ben Parry Conductor, National Youth Choir, David Temple Conductor, Crouch End Festival Chorus, Andrew Carwood Director of music, St Paul’s Cathedral, Ashley Grote Master of music, Norwich Cathedral, Adrian Partington Director of music, Gloucester Cathedral, Robert Dean Guildhall School of Music, Jonathan Willcocks Musical director, Guildford Choral Society, Darius Battiwalla Musical director, Sheffield Philharmonic Chorus, Leslie East Chair, Association of British Choral Directors, Aidan Oliver Conductor