From tomorrow, millions of people will finally be able to spend time in another person’s home, as single adult households across England merge with a household of their choice to form a small, exclusive, support bubble. There will be hugs. There will be sex. There will be respite from the endless childcare burden faced by solo parents. There will be company for the bereaved. But there will also be anxiety. Can the bubbles stay exclusive? How do we decide who to bubble with? Will the bubbles live up to our pent-up expectations? As we figure all of this out, New Zealand can teach us some important lessons. Even at the height of lockdown, New Zealanders who lived alone were allowed to form such support bubbles. So were people with complex childcare needs. And as case numbers fell and restrictions were eased, every household in New Zealand could merge with another if doing so would keep people “safe and well”. For the past two months, I’ve been working with an international team of researchers to understand how this system worked out. We’ve surveyed and interviewed more than 2,500 New Zealanders. This is what we learned. First, support bubbles made a huge difference. Whether it was having grandchildren stay over, reconnecting with a partner, or simply being able to cook and clean for a loved one, bubbles allowed people to provide and receive much-needed forms of support. As they did so, they rediscovered their sense of value and purpose. Second, people took exclusivity seriously. Nobody wanted case numbers to rise, or to be responsible for infecting their loved ones. Even when the virus had been formally eliminated, only 7.5% of our respondents spent time with people outside their bubble. In almost all cases, this contact was outside and socially distanced. Third, bubbles are unknown territory. Reconnecting with loved ones sounds straightforward. But you’ve never been in a bubble with them before. Jane – in her sixties, and living alone – discovered this to her cost. She had agreed to be in a bubble with her neighbours and share a few meals together. Then her neighbours spotted her having a chat with someone else. From Jane’s point of view, the conversation was totally safe; there was nothing to worry about. But her neighbours felt she had been reckless and breached their trust. Having failed to discuss “bubble ground rules” in advance, Jane and her neighbours hadn’t understood what level of risk they were each comfortable with. This oversight soured a previously warm relationship. Some bubbles burst before they had even formed, after one group panicked about the possibility of being infected. Karla – in her thirties, and living alone – had lined up a support bubble with a household of friends. They had agreed on a strict set of rules and vowed exclusivity, but then one of the other bubble members “got freaked” and it never happened. Karla found this hard, saying “they were supposed to be ‘my people’.” Hardest of all was the fact that they never talked about it. Conversely, arrangements that worked well emerged out of empathic, respectful and compassionate dialogue. Indeed, the final lesson was that compassion and kindness go a long way. “Be kind” was the key message of New Zealand’s coronavirus response. It led New Zealanders to check in on their neighbours and look out for the vulnerable. It also helped them navigate difficult decisions over who to bubble-up with. Bubbling wasn’t about popularity – it was about who most needed support and who could best provide it. Lucy, a solo mother in her thirties, chose to bubble with a colleague who was “socially in need” even though others might have offered her more help with childcare. As Lucy’s case shows, bubbles don’t just allow lone adults to receive support and company – it also lets them provide it. Thinking about bubbles in terms of support can perhaps offer solace to anyone in a multi-person household who is currently feeling disappointed that they can’t yet see their partner or hug their grandchildren. There’s no shortage of people who would benefit from a bubble. Try reaching out to the solo parents you know, or to people living alone. They’re bound to appreciate the offer. Whether you become bubble-mates or not, you might just strengthen a friendship. Think also of the people for whom forming a bubble might prove particularly difficult. In New Zealand that included migrants – people who’d only just arrived in the country before lockdown began and didn’t yet know anyone well enough to form a bubble. It also included healthcare professionals and other people working on the frontline. “Too much risk!” our respondents shuddered. Aisyah, a nurse in her forties, noted that whenever bubbles came up, her friends quickly changed the subject. This kind of emergent stigma is worrying, but we can fight against it. Having clapped for our carers, maybe now’s the time to give closer support. If New Zealand teaches us anything, it’s not that bubbles work. It’s something more important: that an ethic of support, compassion and mutual understanding will be key to living well in the coming months. * All names have been changed • Dr Nick Long is associate professor in the Department of Anthropology, London School of Economics and Political Science. He is conducting a survey of UK coronavirus lockdown experiences at lockdownjune 