It’s easy to see why Boris Johnson is keen to reopen Britain’s classrooms. Closing schools has put vulnerable children at higher risk, widened inequality and deepened the economic slump caused by the Covid-19 pandemic. No question, the closure of schools is going to keep educationalists, sociologists and economists busy for years to come. There will be studies galore about the long-term impact of the lockdown on child development, social mobility, wellbeing and lifetime earnings. The findings are likely to make depressing reading, not least as there is evidence that depriving young people of education is bad news in a world where human capital matters more than ever before. No country wants to leave schools closed for longer than is necessary, but the incentives for the UK to reopen are perhaps higher than for most. For decades governments of both left and right have been using sticks and carrots to persuade new parents to join the workforce, which is one reason why Britain entered the current crisis with record levels of employment. But, as Samuel Tombs of the consultancy Pantheon economics points out, it also meant school closures had more of an impact in the UK than in other countries. By his estimate, about 8% of employees have been forced to stay at home to look after their children. Some of these 2.5 million people will now be able to go back to work. The evidence from the rest of the world looks encouraging. Schools have reopened in places such as France and Germany without any interruption in the rapid decline in Covid-19 cases and deaths. That seems consistent with the idea that children do not readily transmit the virus. Yet, while the infection rate in the UK has fallen markedly from its peak in April, it is still higher than it was in Germany and France when the schools were reopened. In Spain and Italy, where infection rates per head of population are similar to the UK’s, teaching has not resumed. That, coupled with the fact that primary school classes are on average higher than the European average, means the prime minister should remember the advice of the Roman emperor Augustus: make haste slowly. There are plenty of similarities between Ikea and Primark. Sure, one sells furniture and the other clothes, but both operate a pile ’em high, sell ’em cheap model. They make money with a simple proposition: you can get what you want at a price you can afford. The pull of Ikea was obvious when it re-opened 19 of its stores for the first time since March. Big physically-distanced queues snaked around car parks as customers waited for their chance to buy a double bed or a flat-packed bookcase. Associated British Foods will be hopeful of a similar response when they re-open all 153 Primark stores in England in a fortnight’s time. But there are differences between the two companies and these are likely to be highlighted in the post-Covid-19 world. One is that Ikea is all about staying in and Primark is all about going out – and there is going to be more of the former and a lot less of the latter, at least for a while. Ikea stores, with their existing one-way systems that channel shoppers around, are already configured for a physically-distanced consumer experience. The same cannot be said of Primark, which is going to have find a way of marrying its mass-market approach with the need to regulate the number of customers, operate sufficient changing-room capacity and find ways of getting clothes that have been tried on but remain unsold back on to the shop floor. It’s not going to be easy. The decision by the Financial Conduct Authority to bring a test case in the high court in July to see whether companies can claim for losses made as a result of government restrictions is welcome. At root, the issue is simple. Companies paid insurance premiums to cover disruption from a “notifiable disease” and assumed this would include the coronavirus. But many insurers refused to pay out, saying that the wording of policies excluded losses made as a result of a government-induced lockdown of the economy in response to a global crisis. This was the sort of dispute that could have dragged on for years, by which time many of the businesses would have gone under. The FCA action against a sample of eight insurers means it will be resolved next month. A good thing, too.