It feels like Groundhog Day each time I am asked whether racial discrimination still exists in Britain. We already know that 9% of black people are unemployed, compared with 4% across all ethnic groups. There is still a 13% attainment gap between black and white students at university. You are nine times more likely to be stopped and searched if you are black than if you are white. Out of every 100 professors, only two are ethnic minority women. It is still the case that 51% of children locked up in prison are from ethnic minorities, even though black, Asian and minority-ethnic people make up 14% of the UK’s total population. Yes, there has been huge progress on racial equality in the past century. Nothing gives me more hope than this. But, with these statistics, should we give up wanting more? On justice, on Home Office failures, on deaths in custody and on inequalities in the workplace, we already have the data We do not need another review, or report, or commission to tell us what to do. I personally made 35 recommendations in the Lammy report on inequality in the criminal justice system. There are 110 specific recommendations in the Angiolini review about disproportionality in deaths in custody. There are 30 recommendations in Wendy Williams’s review about the Home Office’s failure in the Windrush scandal. There are 26 specific recommendations in Ruby McGregor-Smith’s review about discrimination in the workplace. If Boris Johnson is serious about responding to the Black Lives Matter movement that has inspired people from all races and all backgrounds, he does not need to announce another commission on the back of a fag packet. Yet that’s what he did, as an aside in his Daily Telegraph column today about the Winston Churchill statue. We do not need a repeat of Theresa May’s 2017 race audit. It is time for action on the countless reviews, reports and commissions on race that have already been completed. There are real examples of leadership on race that the government can look to. The prime minister would do well to learn from Roy Jenkins, who in 1976 introduced the Race Relations Act. Or perhaps he could take inspiration from another Johnson, Lyndon B – who, after forming a relationship with Martin Luther King, signed the 1964 act that dismantled official segregation, the 1965 act that prohibited racist voting laws, and the 1968 act that outlawed discrimination in the housing market. This is what leadership looks like. Of course, there is a time and a place for new reviews, for gathering new data and for making recommendations. This is most important when challenges are not well understood. This why the government was right to announce a review into the disproportionate effect of Covid-19 on black and other ethnic minority people, but so wrong to bury the recommendations it made. Labour has had to step in to fill this void. As a matter of urgency, the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has tasked social justice campaigner Doreen Lawrence, working closely with the shadow equalities secretary, Marsha de Cordova, with leading a review that makes recommendations to prevent disproportionality and keep black and minority communities safe throughout the rest of this pandemic. But on justice, on Home Office failures, on deaths in custody, on disproportionality on corporate boards, and on inequalities in the workplace, we already have the data and the recommendations that we need. Johnson needs to stop the dither and delay. Black lives matter. The country is crying out for action. • David Lammy is the Labour MP for Tottenham and shadow lord chancellor and shadow justice secretary