Joe Root has reunited with Peter Moores, the former England head coach, as he tunes up for July’s proposed Test series against West Indies by holding his individual training sessions at Trent Bridge rather than Headingley. The England Test captain is one of six Yorkshire players in the 55-strong England training group, along with Jonny Bairstow, David Willey, Tom Kohler-Cadmore, Dawid Malan and Adil Rashid, but has opted to prepare away from the county’s headquarters. Root, who was down to appear for Trent Rockets this summer before the Hundred was postponed by 12 months, was among the England batsmen who began netting yesterday and his decision to switch training base is said to be in part due to an easier commute from his south Yorkshire home. It also makes sense in terms of resources. Trent Bridge had been operating solely for the benefit of Nottinghamshire’s Stuart Broad for the previous 10 days, with the 33-year-old having been observed by the club’s former England bowling coach, Kevin Shine, for a handful of his sessions. Root and Ben Duckett now make it three England players from the 55 on site for this initial period of socially-distanced skills work and have been assigned to Nottinghamshire’s head coach, Moores, for their batting drills. Root, who usually works with Graham Thorpe in the national team set-up, has maintained a strong relationship with the 57-year-old Moores since his brief second spell as England head coach from 2014 through to the end of the following year’s World Cup. Andrew Gale and Richard Pyrah are the coaches at Yorkshire who, like Moores and Shine, have been brought back from furlough to help England’s country-wide return to the nets. Among their five players on Monday were Bairstow and Malan, who both posted pictures from Headingley on social media. England are still due to publish fixtures and venues for the behind-closed-doors West Indies series, with the announcement of three Tests – expected to start on 8, 16 and 24 July – held up awaiting final confirmation from the government.