Passionfruit farmers are reporting a bumper haul of fruit this winter, following the warm summer and wild autumn temperatures. The fruit, which is native to Brazil, is a year-round crop in Australia, with seasonal peaks in both summer and winter. You might find Panama, yellow or golden passionfruit in suburban backyards, but growers generally have a strong preference for purple varieties, since they were first introduced to Queensland in the late 1800s. Both kinds are delicious, but the purple fruits tend to be slightly richer and less acidic than yellow varieties. For green thumbs at home, expect roughly 18 months between planting your vine and harvesting the first fruit. Passionfruit may not regularly pop up on the shopping list, but it’s easy to use and packs in high levels of vitamin C and dietary fibre. Forgot the old wives’ tale about looking for wrinkly fruit – the best ripeness signaller is fruit that feels heavy for its size when held in the palm. If you’re lucky enough to have a vine that’s going gangbusters, the picked fruit can be kept for up to a month in the fridge or the pulp can be decanted from its shell and frozen. Think of passion fruit as a tropical alternative to lemon: simply strain the seeds and use as you would lemon juice. Passionfruit curd is a lovely starting point. Eat it on toast, spooned over Greek yoghurt, or turn into a six-layered meringue, curd and cake tower, a la Annabel Crabb. Nigel Slater whisks his passionfruit curd with natural yoghurt for an easy frozen yoghurt, to serve with star-anise spiced roasted pineapple. For some, the quintessential Aussie passionfruit recipe is the melting moment – a perfect little bite of very short shortbread, tangy passionfruit, and cream centre. Dan Lepard’s recipe includes the genius little idea of swapping cornflour for custard powder. Cut through the richness of Meera Sodha’s (vegan) dark chocolate and olive cake with a ribbon of strained pulp, for a result reminiscent of Swedish kladdkaka with fruit. It also works beautifully with green cardamom, ginger and clotted cream in a decadent baked rice situation. Passionfruit undoubtably swings sweet, but you can experiment with savoury applications, too. Grower’s cooperative Australian Passionfruit recommend spiking a simple lemon and olive oil dressing with fresh pulp, wasabi and honey (recipe below), to spoon over blackened seafood and salads. It also plays well with fresh hot red chilli, or as an acid element in Vietnamese-style sauces. For cocktails, passionfruit works a treat with smoky mezcal (try this take on an old fashioned). We also love this take on a passionfruit martini, which subs out vodka for Korean soju and a few other fruity additions. If in doubt, you can’t go wrong simply au natural – eaten straight from the shell with a teaspoon. Passionfruit, wasabi & sesame dressing Makes ¾ cup ¼ cup passionfruit pulp (3–4 fresh passionfruit)2 tbsp lime juice¼ cup olive oil1 tsp honey½ tsp wasabi pastePinch sea salt2 tsp toasted sesame seeds Place passionfruit pulp, lime juice, oil, honey, 1 teaspoon wasabi paste, and a pinch of salt in a jar. Cover and shake well. Taste dressing, adjust seasoning and add additional wasabi if desired. Stir through sesame seeds. Serve dressing spooned over a fresh green salad, steamed veggies, barbecued prawns, or blackened salmon. Can also be used as a marinade for chicken. Recipe courtesy of Australia Passionfruit