I wrote my latest novel, Remain Silent, with a 9cm tumour pushing my brain over its midline. But I didn’t know about it. I was deep into researching Operation Pheasant, a team tackling modern day slavery in the Wisbech area. I was busy arranging a trip to Lithuania, where I travelled the neighbourhoods of Klaipeda to try and understand what makes a person leave. I was relishing the company of DI Manon Bradshaw, the detective protagonist of my crime novels. And I was plotting a cancer storyline, not yet knowing that I had cancer. I wish I could go back now and put in the specificity. So much of the experience of cancer is the waiting rooms, the hard chairs, the inequality between patients and medical staff – you feel so vulnerable in your elasticated slacks with your terrible hair, while they march about, passes swinging, blow-dried and in their normal world clothes. Waiting for them, terrified, in the Room of Bad News. It has been easier, weirdly, to cope with my illness during lockdown, because I’m not the only one whose life is on hold, not the only one terrified of dying. My treatment has been seamless: the monthly meeting with my consultant now happens on the phone and the chemo is couriered to me. The hospital, where I go for blood tests, is empty, making the whole process much quicker. Things are trickier coming out of lockdown: I face the prospect of other people returning to their lives while I remain locked in. The only thing I’ll return to is envy. Christopher Hitchens is brilliant on this in his book Mortality, a series of seven unapologetically angry essays about his struggle with oesophageal cancer. He describes how the ambulance comes to take the sick to a different world, after which they can only look on the normal world from a distance, desperate to get back. I feel this – as if I am behind a thick pane of glass watching others get on with their lives. Cancer means stasis; no travel, no big plans for the future, everything on hold. A bit like lockdown, you spend your time in treatment, saying to yourself “I just have to get through this, then I’ll get my life back”. Which is unwise, in the event of a bad scan. One thing you can do a lot of when you’re a patient is reading. It has been my lifeline, both in hospital and in the months during radiation therapy and chemotherapy when a lot of time was spent in bed. My reading needs have changed over the course of a year of cancer treatment. In the turmoil just after diagnosis, I was hungry for fellow feeling. And if you’re interested in what I’ve been through then do read Adam Blain’s Pear Shaped (his tumour was shaped like a pear). I devoured his funny book and I have since read it twice more because each time I’m further along in the same journey and so looking for different things. Now, however, we are parting ways, because although he has enjoyed five years of remission, I have not had the same luck. As I was being wheeled into theatre for brain surgery, I very much wished I had not read Do No Harm by neurosurgeon Henry Marsh. I knew far too much about the big gamble that is pulling a tumour away from brain – if it is sticky the patient is wrecked. But if you’re not having brain surgery any time soon then it is an extremely gripping read, not unlike The Examined Life by Stephen Grosz, with patients providing their separate stories. The Emperor of All Maladies is a book to make you glad you are being treated in 2020 and not 1880. Its author Siddhartha Mukherjee creates a thriller-ish experience out of his biography of cancer. Contrary to popular belief, cancer is not a new illness. It was merely outshone by the likes of tuberculosis, typhoid fever and smallpox. Once these were remedied, cancer came galloping up on the inside lane and will soon be affecting one in two of us. “By 1926, cancer had become the nation’s second most common killer just behind heart disease.” He describes the positively medieval surgeries performed without anaesthetic and how, in a world without scans, cancer could only be detected when tumours popped out of the body in a big lump, or when they killed. This may have been an advantage – nothing has made me sicker than treatment. The concerted efforts of the world’s scientists to find a vaccine against coronavirus has stuck in my throat: there is no such concerted effort to find a treatment for glioblastoma (the disease that killed Tessa Jowell and Beau Biden), though perhaps if 30,000 people died from it, there would be. What is also remarkable is that cancer treatment has barely advanced since the war. The cut-it-out, radiate-it, poison-it treatment model that I have just gone through was devised towards the end of the second world war. We are very much due a breakthrough. But this will only leave room for another killer (in you come, coronavirus). I very much hope the next biography of cancer will describe the great medical advance that will turn the tide: will it be immunotherapy? Or a DNA-specific vaccine? In the meantime it falls to writers to make sense of the terror of illness, because people who are suffering – people who are lonely, sick and bereaved – need the solace that stories provide, to see their suffering reflected in the suffering of characters. I’m not sure that I will want to read lockdown novels: it’s bad enough living it. There are an additional 35,000 bereaved people or families out there now. That seems a more pressing need: to talk about grief. It has been easier, weirdly, to cope with my illness during lockdown, because I’m not the only one whose life is on hold Six hours of brain surgery changed me: I didn’t like telly any more. All the fast-talking-and-walking down corridors in political or police dramas was going at too much of a clip for my poor, injured brain. The glossy physical perfection depicted on screen was so out of step with my glacial shuffle to the hospital toilet, wheeling my catheter, my gown open at the back. So instead, I read. Thank goodness I discovered the genteel fiction of the 1930s in the form of Dorothy Whipple. I devoured three on the trot. They were at my speed. With reading, I could dictate the pace; with television, I was left behind. The Spare Room by Helen Garner, about a terminally ill friend who comes to stay, is a forensic distillation of intense emotion. Garner is brilliant on the fierce and confusing projective identification that goes along with illness – who, in fact, is angry with whom? Are they angry with the illness or the person? Who is in denial, me or you? We live in an age when physical vulnerability is seen as personal weakness so it is books (in particular fiction) that tell us about a more subtle and emotionally painful state that goes along with illness. There is humiliation. There is neediness. There is shame. And there is total inequality with other people. Why has it happened to me and not you? The best fiction I have read on this is Olive Again by Elizabeth Strout. In the story “Light” Strout describes a woman with cancer who is in bed when Olive visits. Her weakness and gratitude are perfectly drawn. Olive goes on to experience health vicissitudes of her own in the novel and Strout renders this so delicately, it reduced me to tears. Her writing is plain and clear – like fresh, cool water – and she can capture sadness and frailty like no other modern writer. “We’re all just 20 minutes behind you,” Olive tells the cancer patient who is blindsided by her terminal diagnosis, in an act of typically blunt kindness. I didn’t know all this on a personal level when I wrote Remain Silent. I researched pancreatic cancer; I read journalist Simon Ricketts’ blog about his pancreatic cancer (Simon, I’m just 20 minutes behind you). I used my imaginative empathy to create a situation for my DI Manon Bradshaw – a situation in which she doesn’t behave all that well. She buries her head in her work, a murder investigation into the death of a young migrant, so that she doesn’t have to think about what’s happening to her partner Mark Talbot at home. Mark’s illness becomes a backdrop – but in reality, cancer is never a subplot: it is always the main storyline. I wish I’d given it more heft. I didn’t know then what I know now: how paralysing the fear is, how all-consuming it is to be a patient. And don’t get me started on side-effects. Living like this is gruelling: we need imaginative empathy in fiction to help us through it. So bring on the illness genre: stories of the sick. Fear doesn’t necessarily bring out the best in us but it is an everyday tragedy that blindsides each family uniquely. Writers and script writers need to encapsulate the experience that is at once so common but also utterly particular. • Susie Steiner is the author or four novels, including her Manon Bradshaw detective trilogy: Missing, Presumed, Persons Unknown and now, Remain Silent, published by Borough on 28 May. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.