Kenan Malik is right (“ ‘White privilege’ is a distraction, leaving racism and power untouched”, Comment). I agree with him that “race and class are not competitive causal categories to be set against each other”. Here is a story of poverty, class and slavery – and a statue: the blockade of the Confederacy in the US Civil War meant that cotton could not reach mills in Manchester. Naturally, mill owners were unhappy and many backed the Confederacy. However, the real sufferers were mill workers and their families, who experienced extreme poverty resulting in many deaths. They could have sided with their bosses in wanting to get back to work but the white, working-class mill workers called a meeting at Manchester’s Free Trade Hall on 31 December 1862 and agreed to write to Abraham Lincoln. In their letter, they expressed support for him and the Union, to ensure “the erasure of that foul blot on civilisation and Christianity – chattel slavery”. On 19 January 1863, Lincoln replied: “I know and deeply deplore the sufferings which the working people of Manchester and in all Europe are called to endure in this crisis… I cannot but regard your decisive utterances on the question as an instance of sublime Christian heroism which has not been surpassed in any age or in any country.” Which is why there is a statue to Lincoln in the centre of Manchester. I hope that my fellow Mancunians continue to venerate this monument to the need to tackle oppression caused by racism.Dr Ian CunninghamHove I agree with David Olusoga that heroic figurative statuary can be seen as a dated form of memorial (“The ‘statue wars’ must not distract us from a reckoning with racism”, Comment). He cites the Angel of the North as offering a much more meaningful image of our industrial past than a statue of a “super-rich” Victorian. Sutton Manor colliery in St Helens in Lancashire was closed in 1991. To commemorate the end of coalmining in the area, the council, in conjunction with a miners’ focus group, decided on a 20-metre high artwork by Jaume Plensa called Dream. The white structure was cast to resemble the head and neck of a young girl, eyes closed in a dream-like state. She represents hope for the future; a forward-looking piece to inspire future generations. And, unusually for statues, she’s female.Marje BeckettParbold, Wigan Catherine Bennett rightly drew attention to the Douglas-Pennant family’s exploitation of slaves that funded the Penrhyn estate in North Wales (“As statues of slave traders are torn down, their heirs sit untouched in the Lords”, Comment). Pity she did not also chronicle the exploitation of the Welsh miners and quarrymen whose efforts were the main provider for the funds to build their huge gothic castle and fill it with art treasures. Janet Corke Liverpool A myth is being perpetrated that the government prevented the NHS from “being overwhelmed”, but we need to be clear: the NHS coped with the first Covid-19 peak by closing its doors to thousands of its usual clients, sometimes with fatal effects (“Thousands may die of bowel cancer after Covid halts screening”, News) Hospitals offloaded thousands more patients on to ill-prepared care homes, with frequent fatal effects. The toll from running down the funding, and the resources, of the NHS over the last decade of Conservative rule is enormous.Jeremy CushingTaddyforde, Exeter We could do with a national youth corps to give more young people a way forward, basic training and an income (“Printing money, a new national youth corps… time to think the unthinkable”, Comment). It could deliver useful work experience, a companionship to bridge social barriers and the respect that public service deserves. It’s clear to me that young people, especially poorer ones, have suffered more than their share of austerity and lockdown. It’s bad for them to be locked out of college, work and social life while people like me live comfortably on our pensions. Now that essential jobs need doing and there’s little chance of a quick economic rebound in the right direction, it’s not only young people who need repurposing. But first things first. A national youth corps is a no-brainer and I wish I could join it.Greg WilkinsonSwansea You report that “Three years on, leaders pay tribute to Grenfell victims’’ (News). But if, as Boris Johnson says, “we all remember where we were three years ago when we saw this tragedy unfolding’’, can he and his colleagues remember where they were for the subsequent three years while Grenfell’s survivors were denied sufficient government help?Francis PrideauxLondon W9 Philip Inman alerts us to the sudden return of air pollution to our cities and towns (“Congestion to soar as shoppers and workers get back in the car”, News). He points out that this will be worse than before lockdown began because we are being advised not to use public transport. When we do return to it, it is clear that buses should be used more, be more frequent, and have reasonable fares. People in villages already complain that the aim of private bus companies is to provide transport at times and on routes only where money can be made. Bus companies, and railways, should run for the benefit of people who want to travel in their area. Another important point is how much travelling is held up by congestion. Can it be shown that a local authority will save money by having its roads and streets cleaner and clearer? If so, there is a good case for returning bus services to councils and tempting commuters from their cars to use free and frequent buses.Robin MinneyWitton Gilbert, Durham There has barely been mention of the effect of the lockdown on children’s play, so it was good to read Rowan Moore’s excellent suggestion to reclaim the streets (Notebook). But why has there been no discussion about how to reopen play and swing parks? In my area, these have been taped off since the start of lockdown. Can it be beyond the wit of grown-ups to devise a way of safely opening up?David LeslieEdinburgh In Simon Tisdall’s article, “Biden needs more than virtue to win…”, the last line reads: “With Trump at the wheel, madly careening about like Toad of Toad Hall, fearing jail if he’s caught...” (World news). Millions of people keep a special place for Toad in their hearts as one of the most charming and immortal characters in children’s literature and may take offence to see the hallowed name of Toad used in conjunction with that of the less disarming toad in the White House.Jill StaenbergMontreal, Canada