Tesco Finest Cinsault, Swartland, South Africa 2019, (£6, Tesco) I don’t remember many people picking out cinsault as potentially being one of the more fashionable red grape varieties of the 2010s and 2020s. It was known as a blending agent, largely in southern France, with a long history in everyday rosé and red wines. Much of the credit for its transformation is due to adventurous South African wine- makers who rediscovered old cinsault vines in the Cape, such as Adi Badenhorst, whose Ramnasgras Cinsault 2017 (£42, swig.co.uk) is a wine of burgundy-esque lightness and red-fruited complexity. It’s not just fine wine. Cinsault from the same Swartland district also does great-value summer reds, such as Tesco’s fresh, fragrant, cranberry-tangy example, which has £1.50 off its very reasonable £7.50 price tag until tomorrow. Domaine des Tourelles Vieilles Vignes Cinsault, Bekaa Valley Lebanon 2018 (£14.95, Kwoff ) That cinsault should have adapted well in parts of South Africa is not at all surprising given the climatic similarities between a region like Swartland and the variety’s home in the French Mediterranean. A similar story applies in Lebanon’s Bekaa Valley, where many winemakers are finding cinsault among the most expressive varieties they have to work with. It’s been around in the country since the 19th century, but was used for providing freshness and perfume in blends, while other, supposedly more noble varieties stole the show. Domaine des Tourelles, one of Lebanon’s oldest and best producers, is increasingly convinced by its own collection of 50-plus-year-old cinsault vines, and the aromatic, spicy, beautifully balanced wines it produces are a delight. Birichino Bechthold Vineyard Cinsault, Lodi, California USA 2018 (£24.50, Fine Wine Services) Another region doing great things with rediscovered old cinsault is California, and specifically the superb expression from Birichino. The grapes used to make it are taken from what the producers reckon is the oldest surviving plot of cinsault vines in the world – the vineyard, in the heat and dust of the Mokelumne River in Lodi, was planted in 1886. As so often with very old vines, the wine they produce is superbly balanced and energetic, and it has what the producers are right to call a ‘superficial lightness – it’s pale, red-fruited, relatively light in alcohol (at 12.5%) but there’s no shortage of intensity of flavour. And as well as its mix of fruit and herb, it has the mysterious non-fruity component that so many great wines have; something that makes me think of dusty, warm rocks at dusk. Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.