Five trainers have withdrawn their horses from Leicester’s race-meeting on Tuesday evening, owing to concerns related to the local lockdown, and some have criticised the decision to let the fixture go ahead. The British Horseracing Authority announced at 11.19am that, despite the measures being taken to combat a spike in coronavirus cases, racing would go ahead at the Oadby venue, just outside the city. Graeme McPherson, who works as a QC as well as a racehorse trainer and has presented cases for the BHA, said: “I thought it was a real kick in the teeth to the people of Leicester, to say you can’t open your businesses, you can’t go out of your houses because the government say you shouldn’t travel except for essential reasons, and for the BHA then to say that, well, the local authority says we can go ahead with racing so we will.” McPherson took out his only entrant at Leicester, Homing Star in the 8.15pm race. “It seems to me that racing ought to be setting an example. Regardless of whether or not racing could go ahead, racing ought to be saying we won’t go ahead if every other business in Leicester cannot reopen. I couldn’t agree more. To race at Leicester when local businesses are being told they can’t open, residents are being told to stay home and everyone is being told to avoid non-essential travel to the city looks insensitive at best, and reckless at worst. https://t.co/vyUAon6vdq “Without wishing to sound over-dramatic, I was going to go to Leicester myself with someone else tonight and I thought, I can’t actually in all conscience send a member of staff there. The guys that will be on the gate there, some will be BHA but some will be local. I thought, geez, I don’t understand why I’m going to the one city in Britain that the government has told to lock down.” His view was shared by Alan King, who has withdrawn Kismat from the 8.15pm and Party Potential from the 8.45pm race. “I honestly thought it would be called off,” said King. “They’ve obviously decided to go ahead but I did not feel comfortable about the situation at all. I spoke to my staff and they weren’t really overly keen to go and both my owners gave me full backing. “We’ve got to look at the big picture here. I genuinely hope it’s not a PR disaster. With what the city’s going through, we should not be driving through it with horse boxes. It’s only my opinion but I feel very strong about it and hence the reason why I haven’t sent them.” Mick Appleby, whose Oakham stable is 20 miles from Leicester racecourse, withdrew his three entrants. “Obviously, they’ve got a big outbreak in the area now, so why should racing be going ahead?” he asked. “It’s common sense that you’d call the meeting off. “We’re well away from the affected area but the racecourse is sort of in the centre of it. Oadby, where the racecourse is, that’s one of the worst affected areas. I just can’t see the point of taking the risk. “Hopefully nobody does contract anything but if somebody did test positive after attending the meeting, it’d mean that everybody who attended would have to go into lockdown. If I sent one of my staff to the races and they did come down with it after coming back to the yard, it risks everybody at the yard as well.” John Best also took out his only runner on the card after staff expressed concerns. “I think it’s got to be an individual decision,” said the Kent-based trainer, “but I felt that my staff were not comfortable going there, partly because my travelling head girl’s mother is a vulnerable person. We discussed it with the owners and the owners said, if they’re not happy to go, we wouldn’t want them to feel uncomfortable going. “The risk of course is absolutely minimal but if anyone does get something and it’s publicised, the public perception as well as everything else is not going to be good for racing.” Chelsea Banham tweeted that she had decided not to send two runners from her Newmarket base, for the sake of the safety of her staff. Earlier, the British Horseracing Authority tweeted: “Following confirmation from local health authorities that the race meeting should go ahead, the fixture at Leicester will take place today. The fixture will be held behind closed doors and with the existing strict health screening and social distancing measures in place.” Following confirmation from local health authorities that the race meeting should go ahead, the fixture at @LeicesterRaces will take place today. The fixture will be held behind closed doors and with the existing strict health screening and social distancing measures in place. The decision came as a surprise to some, given the governmental attention now being paid to the local area. The health secretary, Matt Hancock, has said the city had “10% of all positive cases in the country over the past week”, with the result that non-essential shops there will be closed on Tuesday and schools will close for most pupils from Thursday. Hancock announced the local lockdown measures in the House of Commons on Monday evening, and specifically mentioned Oadby, the area just outside Leicester where the racecourse is sited, as one of the areas that would be included. He told BBC Breakfast on Tuesday: “It’s so important that we get a grip on this spike that has happened in Leicester.” He advised that people should not travel “in, out or within Leicester” unless it was essential. The news means Tuesday’s fixture is a rare example in recent times of a Leicester raceday going ahead after being in doubt. The track’s finances have taken a battering over the past year, mostly because of weather-related abandonments. At one stage this winter, the track had lost six race-meetings out of nine. Horse racing has been taking place at tracks around Britain for the past four weeks, with attendance limited to essential personnel and measures in place to guard against transmission of Covid-19. Masks are worn by jockeys, stalls handlers and others who may at times have to work within two metres of others. It’s a tricky situation when you stick two young horses in the tracker after their debuts and then they turn up in the same race. I really fancied Roberto Escobarr for a novice contest at Doncaster today but, as he’s become a non-runner, Matthew Flinders (3.30) really ought to be winning. Both were third in separate divisions of a Haydock maiden three weeks back. Matthew Flinders took part in the marginally quicker of the two races and was travelling quite a bit better than the eventual winner at the three pole. Unfortunately for Oisin Murphy, racing room evaporated about a furlong later. The Siyouni colt ran on well once in the clear and was a really obvious eye-catcher. He should know more today and I imagine Murphy will be keen to avoid a repeat. They appeal, even at 11-8, and there might be a bit of 6-4 still hanging around. Doncaster 12.30 Digital 1.00 She Do 1.30 Mr Wagyu 2.00 Ice Lord 2.30 Giant Steps 3.00 Notforalongtime (nb) 3.30 Roberto Escobarr (nap) 4.00 State Crown 4.30 Verify 5.05 Revolver. Musselburgh 12.45 Chase The Dollar 1.15 Ghathanfar 1.45 Joshua R 2.15 Bal Mal 2.45 Gleniffer 3.15 Flood Defence 3.45 Little Ted 4.15 Robben Rainbow. Leicester 4.40 Hot Hot Hot 5.15 Zeebad 5.45 Krazy Paving 6.15 Deconso 6.45 Jeanette May 7.15 Alpine Mistral 7.45 Telekinetic 8.15 Lady Elysia 8.45 Party Potential. Chepstow 5.00 Myboymax 5.30 Urban Highway 6.00 Spanish Colt 6.30 Eye Smiling 7.00 Astapor 7.30 Sun Festival 8.00 Tomorrow’s Dream 8.30 Cafe Syndney 9.00 Gold Arch I thought Notforalongtime had strong claims earlier on the card and evidently at least one firm thought so too, as Clive Cox’s runner opened at 7-2. He is now 12-1, which is worrying enough that a watching brief seems the only responsible course. There’s some 4-1 about Ice Lord (2.00), who has slipped back to what looks a fair mark. His last win, at the end of 2018, was over this course and distance and he’s 5lb lower now. Chris Wall’s grey put up a really good effort on his reappearance, faring best of the hold-up horses in a Newmarket race in the first week of resumption, getting tired in the latter stages.