Tom Trbojevic’s troublesome hamstring let him down again, with the Dally M Medal leader limping from the field in Manly’s gutsy 14-6 NRL win over Canberra. Trbojevic and Dylan Walker were two of three Sea Eagles injured in the win, as the fullback limped from Campbelltown Stadium on Sunday in the 52nd minute. Trbojevic injured the same hamstring twice last year, once in the pre-season and in the early rounds which led to him missing half of the 2019 campaign. Early diagnosis from the Sea Eagles suggested their star fullback would spend around six weeks on the sidelines with the latest blow. His injury headlined a hard afternoon for Manly on the injury front, with Trbojevic having a hand in both Sea Eagles tries in the first half before going off. It came, though, in one of the gutsiest wins in Manly’s history, after they had just two on the bench from the fourth minute and one for most of the second half. Already without Martin Taupau, Moses Suli and Jorge Taufua before the match, they lost Walker to an ankle injury and Brad Parker to concussion in the opening stages. Walker’s injury appeared to be a high ankle sprain, which will also likely result in him spending some time on the sidelines. Lachlan Croker also played on and impressed after a head clash, making a tackle on his own line from the next play with blood spurting out of his eye socket. And after leading 12-0 at the break, they still had to fight off the Raiders in the second half with two second-rowers defending in the centres to finish the match. One of those – Curtis Sironen – pulled off arguably the most-important play of the game, putting Jordan Rapana into touch as he looked to score with 10 minutes to play. Moments later, he again shut down Jack Wighton on the last tackle, as Canberra again had numbers on the left. After Elliott Whitehead scored Canberra’s first try in the 50th minute from some smart hands from Wighton, the Raiders had their chances. Jarrod Croker was denied, ruled to have knocked on when he came down with a George Williams bomb just short of the line. Manly kicked a crucial penalty goal when Canberra were pinged for offside on their own line with 24 minutes to play to extend their lead to eight points. Earlier, Trbojevic had Manly’s first try in the 14th minute when he sliced through Canberra’s defence on the left edge and pushed his way over the line. Just before half-time, he put a ball on Tevita Funa’s chest for the winger to cut back in and go between two defenders to make it 12-0. Dean Pay’s chances of securing an extension at Canterbury have been dealt another blow, with the Bulldogs falling short 20-18 to Cronulla at Bankwest Stadium. Sharks winger Sione Katoa claimed his first career hat-trick, while Matt Moylan also came through unscathed to breathe life into the Sharks’ NRL campaign. Halves Shaun Johnson and Chad Townsend also had two try assists each on Sunday evening to consign the Bulldogs to their fifth defeat from their opening six games. Two weeks after his team bought Pay some time with their first win of the season, the off-contract coach will again be under pressure to earn a new deal. The Sharks looked home when Bryson Goodwin, in his first game back at the club, scored to give his team an eight-point lead with 12 minutes to go. However, a 95-metre intercept try to Bulldogs winger Christian Crichton set up a thrilling finish, only for Cronulla to hold on for a tense victory. John Morris’ side leap to within two points of the top eight in 11th spot. The Bulldogs showed plenty of grit from the opening exchanges, conceding just one try in the opening 20 minutes despite being pinned on their own line. Cronulla’s kick-and-chase game was on point, dominating territory with an early 25-2 advantage in plays inside the opposition half. An acrobatic Katoa try in the corner was their only reward, as Canterbury, led by Will Hopoate, ground their way back into the contest. Minutes after wearing a jolting hit from Jesse Ramien, Hopoate was on the end of a neatly worked set piece to draw level at half-time. Katoa reclaimed the lead for the Sharks when he made a mockery of the wet conditions to pick up a low cutout pass from Johnson in the 48th minute. The game cranked up a gear when Wakeham, a late insertion for Lachlan Lewis, was sin-binned soon after for a hit on Josh Dugan. A grounded Dugan was being dragged to the sideline when Wakeham speared into him, an act deemed unnecessary by the referee. Katoa completed his hat-trick when he pounced on a Johnson grubber. Four-pointers to Kieran Foran and Crichton gave the Bulldogs some hope, but it wasn’t enough to prevent another close defeat.