The UK’s death toll from Covid-19 is on the brink of exceeding 50,000, according to the latest official figures, confirming Britain’s status as one of the world’s worst-hit countries by the pandemic that has claimed about 375,000 lives globally. The Office for National Statistics said that in England and Wales alone, 43,870 people died from Covid-19 up to 22 May. The death rate is continuing to fall and reached its lowest level in the last seven weeks. But when taken with fatalities recorded in Scotland and Northern Ireland as well as more up-to-date, daily NHS figures counting deaths from coronavirus in hospitals in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland the total reaches 49,368. When deaths in care homes and other settings are taken into account for the last week, the coronavirus death toll in the UK is likely to have already broken the 50,000 mark. Between 23 May and 29 May, the period after the main ONS data was gathered, care homes in England and Wales notified their regulators of 578 deaths related to Covid-19. Scotland is set to publish more up-to-date death toll figures on Wednesday. The figures come as Boris Johnson continues to loosen lockdown restrictions with primary schools reopening for the children on non-key workers, professional sport being given the green light to restart, groups of up to six being allowed to meet outside and markets and care showrooms reopening in England. The UK death toll is currently the second highest in the world, behind only the US, and is higher than the worst affected countries in Europe: Italy, France and Spain, according to researchers at Johns Hopkins University. Overall, mortality in England and Wales so far this year has been running at 22% above the five-year average and the number of deaths involving Covid-19 remain higher among men. But April, when the virus peaked, was particularly bad and separate ONS figures, also published on Tuesday, showed the provisional number of deaths registered in England and Wales in April was 88,153 – double the number in 2019 and an increase of 38,430 deaths in comparison with the previous month. The north-east and east of England are the areas where the disease is still having the greatest impact, compared to normal, with death tolls 30% and 40% above the five year average, respectively up to 22 May, according to the ONS figures. Scotland has recorded 3,779 deaths where coronavirus was mentioned on the death certificate, according to statistics published last week by National Records of Scotland. The virus has hit 62% of care homes in Scotland and by 26 of May 18 health and social care workers had died from the virus, most of them working in care homes. There were also 716 Covid-related deaths in Northern Ireland in 2020 up to 22 May, according to the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency. More up-to-date daily figures about deaths in hospitals in England show there were 819 Covid-19 deaths between 23 May and 1 June and there were a further 93 in Scotland. Deaths involving Covid-19 as a percentage of all deaths in care homes decreased to 32.5%, but the figures showed the virus continues to have a hold in care settings in the way it no longer is causing such difficulties in hospitals. The number of deaths in care homes was 1,289 higher than the five-year average, while in hospitals the number of deaths was 24 fewer than the five-year average. By 22 May, UK care homes had reported 14,868 deaths from suspected or confirmed Covid-19. The UK’s biggest care home operator, HC-One, is nearing a toll of 1,000 deaths in its facilities. Up to Monday 1 June it said it had recorded 976 deaths of residents from the virus. “We are supporting the families of all of those residents who have been affected and those who have lost their lives, and our thoughts and condolences are with all those who have lost loved ones,” it said in a statement. The Care Quality Commission published separate data showing the impact of the virus on people with learning disabilities living in care or receiving care support. It showed a 134% increase in the number of deaths over the year with 386 deaths of people with a learning disability, some of whom may also be autistic, being notified. For the same period last year 165 people died who were receiving care from services which provide support for people with a learning disability and/or autism. Dr Rhidian Hughes, the chief executive of the Voluntary Organisations Disability Group, said: “These findings are a sad and stark reminder to us all of the impact that coronavirus is having on people with a learning disability and autism. The figures are a wake-up call for government to put right its testing programme that is currently neglecting disabled people of working age who use care services.”