Premier League games stopped for 100 days, but some staff were busier than ever. Player care managers – the staff at Premier League clubs who provide support to players and their families off the pitch – suddenly had some very different challenges. “We don’t just sign footballers, we sign footballers’ families,” says Charlotte Renshaw, the player care manager at Everton. “There is a stigma about the player care role, but I see myself more as a facilitator, particularly for the younger foreign players who may have never set foot in England before. My aim is to give them a sense of independence as quickly as possible.” Renshaw is often the first member of staff a foreign player meets when he arrives at the club and her role is not just about the player. “We want them to be part of the Everton family.” Renshaw would ordinarily see players at the club’s training ground, but that face-to-face contact was quickly taken to FaceTime. “Normally my office is the hub,” she says. “Players would pop in during their free time for a chat. Then we had to try and replicate that remotely. It was important to keep the lines of communication open. “We made sure that their days were full. It was difficult for the players who were used to arriving at Finch Farm, doing their training work, having set meals, doing their gym work and seeing their teammates. But that was taken away. So we filled up their days. Not only did they have their fitness regimes to follow, there were various Zoom meetings, including yoga sessions and English language lessons.” Renshaw also helped players with children in education. “Schools would send stuff to me and I would pass it on and we would give tips. This was made easier by the club’s strong links with many of the schools through the educational arm of our charitable foundation.” “It was all a bit strange,” says Simone Ricchio, the player care manager at Watford. “Because everything seemed so far away when it all started in China. Then it started getting closer and closer – first with Italy, where I’m from – then all of a sudden we were overwhelmed by the situation. Of course, the suspension of the matches made sense as it would have been dangerous to continue. We reached a certain point where the needs of the human being come before that of the footballer.” Like many player care managers, Ricchio has a dual role at Watford. “I also look after the football operations,” he says. “So on one hand there were none of the match logistics to organise, such as travel and accommodation, but as we had no idea of when we might return we still had to be prepared – which proved extremely challenging.” With no certainty about when training or games would return, the club set up various calls to keep everyone involved. “We did not want to lose the unity of the group. It was something that Nigel [Pearson] wanted, so we organised a video call at least once or twice a week between players and staff – so we could go through any doubts or particular problems our players might want to discuss. Ultimately, they also just wanted to have a chat with each other.” There were no major issues with physical fitness during the break as the players had all been given individual plans and both clubs provided gym equipment for those who did not have access at their homes. “Mental health was the most important aspect of the isolation,” Ricchio says. “We were in contact with the players on a daily basis or whenever they wanted or needed. All of a sudden they were just at home, alone or with their families, isolated and that can be really tough. So we provided all the players with experts in psychology, including one who could speak different languages to help the foreign players.” As a result, Ricchio’s role was even more demanding. “During lockdown everyone has a different routine,” Ricchio says. “The player care world is normally 24/7. In lockdown it was even more. It was non-stop because someone might be a morning guy and can text in the morning, whereas someone else gets in touch during the evening. There were no limitations anymore. They were all at home and might need anything at any moment. Another thing we did was to avoid players who might be at high risk of contracting the virus coming into contact with anyone, we would deliver them their food, organise the shopping for them and deliver straight to their homes.” Just as Ricchio was adapting to the new normal, Watford became the first Premier League club to announce that one of their players, 33-year-old Adrian Mariappa, had tested positive for coronavirus during lockdown. Ricchio worked closely with the club’s medical team to support Mariappa and his family. “We created a ‘bubble’, as the Premier League called it, which is a safe place so we have a training ground where everyone is negative and tested twice a week. We followed all the protocols and guidelines from the government.” Ricchio also spent time speaking with Watford captain Troy Deeney, who voiced his reservations about returning to action. Deeney took a stand as he was concerned for the safety of his five-month old baby, who had been born prematurely and suffered from breathing problems, and because of the way the virus has disproportionately affected the BAME community. “His position was completely understandable,” says Ricchio. “So we supported him and tried to back him as much as we could. So, anything he needed to understand about whether the environment was safe, we did it. We did our best to reassure him and support him, because it wasn’t easy for him to take that decision. He was really brave to do it, especially publicly.” Renshaw and Ricchio are both enthusiastic about the return of the Premier League. “Everyone at the club is looking forward to it,” Ricchio says. “It’s a great thing for us and for the fans as well. It was one of the government’s goals, to have the Premier League back to boost the morale of the country.” Ricchio is confident that Watford have made every effort to keep their players and staff safe. Now the focus shifts to their match against Leicester on Saturday as they try to preserve their Premier League status. Everton also have a big game this weekend, the Merseyside derby at Goodison Park. Renshaw says the players are “itching” to play. “We have all been on tenterhooks on when it’s going to happen. It will be a relief to get back to playing again.” Richard Foster’s new book Premier League Nuggets is out now and you can follow him on Twitter.