• This week we enter the salon. Please don’t leave. While not quite champing at the bit for CDs of music by Alfredo Piatti (1822-1901), a star of that 19th-century tradition, I was intrigued to receive two in quick succession. The Italian virtuoso cellist was a favourite of Queen Victoria, and also a composer. His 12 Caprices are central to the solo cello repertoire, but most of the short pieces in The Operatic Fantasies, Volume 2 (Meridian), performed by cellist Adrian Bradbury and pianist Oliver Davies, are world premieres. The duo have rescued manuscripts from the Donizetti Museum, Bergamo (also Piatti’s city of birth) and made performing editions of Piatti’s operatic paraphrases and fantasies from Lucia di Lamermoor, La favorita and more: virtuosic (and how) bonbons, brilliantly imitating the bel canto vocal technique, beloved of fashionable drawing rooms, and a route to getting to know opera in a pre-gramophone age. • If they set you off on a serious Piatti trail, try his Cello Concerto No 2, coupled with Schumann’s Cello Concerto (Concertstück) (a world premiere recording of its original version), performed by the Royal Northern Sinfonia, conducted by Martin Yates, with Josephine Knight as soloist (Dutton). Both discs, performed by musicians who understand this romantic, lyrical idiom, open an important door on 19th-century musical history. • The violin is more often associated with salon bonnes bouches. Think of James Tissot’s painting Hush! (The Concert), c1875: a female violinist stands by the piano waiting for the chatter to stop. It features in the liner notes for History of the Salon: Morceaux caractéristiques, 1823–1913 (FHR), a loving compilation, by the violinist Vaughan Jones and pianist Marcus Price, of nearly two dozen short works mostly by composers long forgotten such as Joachim Raff, Alfredo D’Ambrosio or the “other” Franz Schubert (1808-78). Some are world premiere recordings. Jones and Price cut an elegant musical dash, formidably nimble and adept at capturing the fizzing character of these miniatures. At 83 minutes long, this album will satisfy your salon needs, for lockdown and far beyond. • From the salon to the gusty wilds of England’s east coast: the unforgettable 2013 open-air performance of Britten’s Peter Grimes, from Aldeburgh beach, is on BBC iPlayer until 12 July.