Maya Jama speaks at twice the speed of most people, as if she is on fast-forward, as if her life moves at a faster pace than normal. It goes some way, perhaps, to explaining why, at the age of 25, she has crammed in so much already: a stint on MTV, DJing on Rinse FM, a job on Radio 1 and, now, presenting Saturday-night TV. Had this unsettling and difficult year not thrown an obstacle into her path, she would be acting in her first film around about now, too. Still, she has a brand of face masks to launch (the skincare kind), and another project she can’t talk about, which may be Strictly Come Dancing, according to newspaper rumours. Lockdown has been a bit of an enforced rest, though she has managed to buy her first house. “This is probably the most time I’ve had off since I started working when I was, like, 16,” she says. “And, yeah, it’s difficult to adjust – you find yourself running around the house. I’ve got so much energy.” We talk over Zoom, Jama at one point getting up to wander around her house, without breaking her conversational stride. But, she says, it has been “nice to chill out and work on myself a bit” – mainly learning how to cook. Until recently, many people largely knew Jama as the girlfriend of Stormzy, the grime superstar, but they broke up last year after four years together. It must have been infuriating when she had a career in her own right. “Yeah,” she says with a small laugh. “I understood at the time. He was – he is – massive in the public eye and a lot of people didn’t know who I was. But now I do feel people know my name separately, and it does feel like I’m coming into my own. It feels like I’m finally getting recognition for my hard work.” Jama has always been driven, she says – even more so when she was younger. “When I was a teenager, I was so tunnel-vision focused. My upbringing was not very … I think, statistically, the things that happened to me, or the situation I was born into, I shouldn’t have been where I am now. But I think it made me more determined to prove everybody else wrong.” Jama grew up in Bristol, and her father was in and out of prison for much of her childhood. As a young child, she says, she didn’t really notice it being a problem, “because it was normal for me. My dad’s side of my family was super-supportive and they did everything in their power to make me and my brother not feel like we were missing out on anything. And I did visit my dad in jail up until I was about 10.” Around that time, she says, “I realised that I don’t want to dedicate my time to visiting somebody who doesn’t want to dedicate their time to staying out of jail.” In 2017, she made a documentary exploring how growing up with a father in prison had affected her and other people. “I didn’t speak to him again after that.” At primary school, it wasn’t unusual for her friends to have little contact with their fathers either but at secondary school, she remembers going to friends’ houses and noticing a different family set-up. “As a child, I would make a joke out of it, like: ‘Oh well, my dad’s in jail.’ Speaking like that in front of some of my friend’s families, they would be like: ‘Maya, that’s not normal.’ Those kind of conversations started to make me think, no, that’s not how it should be, but sadly it’s reality for a lot of people.” Even now, she says, she catches herself making light of it. “That is a defence mechanism – you don’t want to make other people feel sorry for you, so you just kind of make a joke out of it.” It hasn’t been the only trauma Jama has had to deal with. In 2011, when she was 16, her boyfriend, Rico Gordon, was killed in a shooting. He lived in London and was visiting Maya in Bristol when he was caught in a gunfight between two gangs, which also injured several other bystanders. Jama, who had been on the phone to him at the time, appeared on Crimewatch, hoping to find his killers; in 2012, two men were convicted. “That changed my life completely,” she says. “Losing somebody close to you as a teenager, particularly your first love, rocks your whole world and you are forced to see life differently. And you feel like life is too short. I don’t want to look back and not have done everything I wanted to do. He was an innocent man who lost his life instantly at 21, and that shocks you and it also makes you snap up, like, no, I’m not wasting time any more.” She moved to London soon afterwards, working in shops and attending college while trying to break into TV and radio. Acting had been Jama’s first ambition, but she realised, quickly and correctly, that becoming a presenter might suit her better. Her role models included Davina McCall, “finding out that she’s been through her own struggles [with drug addiction] and made it out the other end”. And June Sarpong, the broadcaster and the BBC’s director of creative diversity: “Seeing a black woman as a presenter on TV, feeling like: ‘Yeah, I can do that too.’” It never occurred to Jama that she wouldn’t make it. Her mother has videos of Jama at the age of six or seven declaring she would be on TV one day. “I’ve felt like maybe some people didn’t take me seriously, or people downplay my success because of relationships or because of how I look - but I know how much I’ve worked.” She landed jobs as a runner and started making videos for YouTube, which led to a presenting slot on an online football channel. Jobs in music broadcasting followed, and she has since presented documentaries, daytime TV and gameshows. Jama joined BBC Radio 1 in 2018, but decided not to renew her contract last month, which seemed a brave move given that it was something of a dream job for her. “Radio 1 is the best platform ever, but because I did two days a week and was juggling other commitments, I know that I wasn’t always able to give 100% to the show,” she says. “With stuff I’m about to take on, I wouldn’t have been able to make the show the best that I’d want it. And, yeah, it is a risk, but I think everything that’s worth having is something that you’ve got to push for.” She’s now co-presenting the new Saturday-night BBC1 show Save Our Summer. It was originally meant to be a companion show to the BBC’s Euro 2020 coverage, mixing football with music and comedy. Once the tournament was postponed due to coronavirus, she says, “the BBC thought: ‘Why don’t we try and bring a bit of positivity to the nation and show the things that we’re missing out on during this time, like football and music performances?’ So the aim of the show is to try and bring some happiness, despite all of the horrible things that are going on in the world.” Negativity doesn’t seem to be something Jama allows much room for. But does she ever have moments of self-doubt? “When we filmed the first episode of Save Our Summer, because I hadn’t done telly in such a while, it felt like it was my first time. I remember feeling so nervous. I went into the toilet and I had to give myself a little debrief: ‘Maya, you’re meant to do this, you’re supposed to be here, feel confident.’ I do still get nervous, and you can still sometimes get impostor syndrome. It’s just about reminding yourself that you are meant to be there.” Jama is from the generation who grew up on social media, and there have been some serious missteps – a “joke” she posted in 2012 on Twitter about “dark skin bitches” resurfaced, for which she apologised. Social media, she says, is “a blessing and a curse. It’s amazing seeing what’s happening with people fighting against racism now, and how much you can use your platform for change. I think certain conversations wouldn’t be happening if it wasn’t for social media, but at the same time it is a scary place, full of bullying and abuse and insecurities that come from comparing yourself to other people.” How does she reconcile that with the bikini pictures and beautiful selfies she posts online? Does she worry about how her younger fans perceive that? “One hundred per cent. I am just trying to be myself and hopefully young people look at me and can connect to some of the things that I’ve been through, and where I come from. I am aware that I’ll post pictures of me in bikinis, but I also will post pictures of me when I’ve just woken up and I don’t have a hair and makeup team. I think it’s about honesty. I do eat shit and I do exercise – I’m not trying to portray something that’s fake.” She has had to contend with a growing tabloid interest. Some newspapers like to take stills from her Instagram videos and freeze-frame the bits where more flesh is showing. “My mum Googled my name and was like: ‘Maya, some of these things are ridiculous,’” she says. “It would be like: ‘Maya jiggles boobs in see-through top’ and I’m in a normal white T-shirt speaking about something, and I might have done a dance move, and the whole focus is I jiggled my tits.” The week we speak, Jama, who has Somali and Swedish heritage, has been using her significant Instagram platform to talk about the killing of George Floyd in the US and the issue of white privilege. “My black family members and friends are crying and shouting out: ‘This is not OK! We’ve been dealing with it for years.’” she says. “I just hope that with all this outcry, this is where the change starts for good.” There have been times, she says, “in jobs or when I’m doing certain things for work, I will be the only person of colour there, and that sometimes can feel like: ‘Oh, am I just ticking a box?’ It shouldn’t be just me being the only person, and brands and companies and people in positions of power need to make a conscious effort to start changing what their business looks like behind the scenes as well.” We speak before protesters took down the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston in Bristol, where Jama grew up, but she emails her thoughts a few days later. Growing up in the city, she wasn’t, she says, really aware of the statue, “but we are all on a learning curve and having a public statue felt like an extremely inappropriate celebration of one of the most painful and unjust acts in our country’s history. The question should be why there was a statue in the first place.” Its removal, she writes, “felt long overdue. It’s not about removing or rewriting history. It’s about making Britain and other countries confront their colonial past in a meaningful way.” Thanks to all of this, her new job at the BBC has been “bittersweet”, she says. “I’ve always wanted to do a Saturday-night show, and then, at the same time, we’re in the middle of a pandemic and then there’s everything’s that’s happening in America and here. I’m quite conflicted in my emotions, so I’m celebrating, but I don’t really feel there’s anything to celebrate. Still, this feels like a massive moment for me.” Save Our Summer is on BBC One on Saturday nights at 9.15pm