Senior government ministers have rejected China’s suggestion international students are unsafe in Australia, as the university sector complains it has been targeted by “unjustified” criticism. The Group of Eight universities chief executive, Vicki Thomson, labelled the warning about Australia “disappointing” and “demonstrably untrue” – while multicultural affairs minister, Alan Tudge, has suggested the ethnicity of participants on hit reality TV show Masterchef proves Australia is a harmonious society. On Tuesday, China’s ministry of education warned students to reconsider going to Australia because of a string of “incidents of discrimination” targeting people of Asian descent. The warning was interpreted as the latest instalment in a war of words between China and Australia, prompted by Australia’s call for an international investigation into the origins of Covid-19, in line with the call by China’s ambassador to Australia, Jingye Cheng, to boycott Australian goods. Nevertheless, there have been numerous reports of people of Asian appearance experiencing racism in Australia during the Covid-19 pandemic, including one survey by community group Asian Australian Alliance which recorded 178 incidents in two weeks. The education minister, Dan Tehan, responded in a statement that Australia “rejects China’s assertions that Australia is an unsafe destination for international students”. “Australia is a popular destination for international students because we are a successful, multicultural society that welcomes international students and provides a world-class education.” The trade minister, Simon Birmingham, denied that there was an increase in racist attacks against Chinese students, noting that official statistics are “widely reported” on such matters. “Australia is country that holds ourself to an incredibly high standard,” he told 2GB Radio. “[We have a] far higher standard than most other nations and where racism occurs, it’s condemned.” Tudge conceded there were “high profile” cases of incidents against people of Asian appearance, but dismissed them as the “actions of a tiny minority of cowardly idiots”. “The vast majority of Australians would be appalled and would call it out,” he told Sky News. “99.99% of Australians are as disgusted as I am, the prime minister or anyone else is – it’s not the Australian way and I don’t think it is by any stretch of the imagination the Australian norm.” Tudge argued Australia is a successful multicultural society, citing similar rates of unemployment and better education results by Australians born overseas relative to those born here. Tudge also noted one judge on Masterchef, Melissa Leong – whose family is from Singapore – is ethnically Chinese and several contestants on the 12th season Back to Win are Asian Australians. “Even when you look at pop culture, some of the most successful and popular people have got a more diverse background, such as on MasterChef at the moment, which is the most popular TV show, where one of the judges is Chinese, has an ethnic Chinese background, and many of the contestants, who are hugely popular,” Tudge said. The Universities Australia chief executive, Catriona Jackson, said “Australia is one of the safest places in the world – and Australian universities are committed to making it even safer”. “In 2018, a survey of more than 80,000 international tertiary students found that personal safety and security is one of the top five factors for deciding to study in Australia – surpassed only by the quality of teaching and the reputation of the qualification,” she said. Thomson, who leads the prestigious Group of Eight universities, said it was “absolutely committed to our international students and to maintaining a positive and collaborative relationship with China”. “But statements such as this do make things more difficult at an already difficult time,” she said in a statement. Thomson added on Sky News that China’s claims are “demonstrably untrue” because Australia is an “incredibly safe place for our students” and comments about the “impact of the Covid-19 pandemic” disregarded that Australia had performed “very well” in containing coronavirus. The university sector has recently released modelling claiming it will lose up to $16bn by 2023 due to the impact of Covid-19. Universities are struggling because of border closures impacting their international enrolments and the Morrison government’s decision to exclude all public universities from the jobkeeper wage subsidy. Overseas students make a significant contribution to the viability of many Australian universities. A recent analysis by two Melbourne University academics found that seven Australian universities are currently at “high financial risk” and could face a cash crisis as a result of the downturn in revenue from international students.