HS2 protesters have been accused of practising early morning yoga, swimming naked in a lake and “howling at the moon” as a council seeks a high court injunction to stop direct action against the project. HS2 Rebellion activists say the legal action by Hillingdon council in west London is the latest in a raft of injunctions aiming to quash the campaign against the £78bn high-speed railway. HS2 is seeking the extension of a separate injunction to enable the eviction of campaigners from the path of bulldozers in west London. Twenty-nine protesters are named in the HS2 court proceedings. All could be pursued for their assets, including their homes, if they are subsequently found to have breached injunctions at the HS2 site in the Colne Valley. Sailesh Mehta, a barrister representing one of the protesters, Sarah Green, said the case – due in the high court later in June – was a significant one for the legal right to protest in England and Wales. “This case is about the right to peacefully protest against what could be a huge environmental catastrophe as a result of large-scale piling operations on top of one of London’s most important drinking water reservoirs,” said Mehta. “At the time when many other peaceful protests are taking place worldwide, HS2’s actions become more significant – and from the defendant’s point of view, of far greater concern.” Green, an environmental campaigner and local businesswoman, said: “It’s not an offence to be against HS2 and it can’t be an offence to protest.” She said she and other protesters named in the court proceedings were concerned at the threat of losing their assets as a result of their protests. A nine-month injunction is in place to keep campaigners away from parts of ancient woodlands in the West Midlands, which anti-HS2 activists claim is to stop them witnessing what they allege is the illegal disturbance of nesting birds and badgers. This injunction has led to the eviction of protesters from land around the construction sites by bailiffs working for a private company employed by HS2. High Court Enforcement Group is allowed to use minimum force to remove trespassers from HS2 land under powers granted by the 2017 High Speed Rail Act. About 30 protesters are camped in woods and in treehouses beside fishing lakes and the Hillingdon Outdoor Activity Centre, a popular facility that will be forced to relocate because of HS2. In a witness statement, Michael Rees, the secretary and HS2 coordinator for Harrow Angling Society, claimed protesters had made the activity centre’s lake “unfishable” by churning up muddy footpaths. “The protesters were using the lake for swimming. This they did quite regularly naked whilst their dogs were running around unattended,” he said. Ian Kempster, the fisheries manager for the lake, complained about the protesters’ “morning yoga sessions”. He added: “On a number of occasions I have witnessed some of the protesters howling and chanting at the moon,” and he noted complaints about “bongo playing at all times of the day and night”. It is also alleged that protesters last year stole “fishery maintenance equipment” – scaffolding poles and boards – for their “ramshackle and unsafe tents and shelters”. Larch Maxey, an HS2 Rebellion campaigner in the camp, said the claims against the protesters were “spurious, tenuous and out of date”. He said: “One person swam naked in the lake once some time ago and he’s left the campaign. Some of us are local people; most local people are very supportive of us and we want to keep it that way. We’ve had multiple local people saying how tidy the site is.” Ron Ryall, a garage owner who lives in the Colne Valley and is facing the loss of his home and business to HS2 by compulsory purchase, welcomed the presence of the protesters camped behind his house. “The protesters have given me no problems whatsoever,” he said. “Of course they’re in HS2’s way. But we all have the right to free speech. The protesters are standing up for what they believe in.” An HS2 spokesperson said: “These protesters are not peaceful. They are often violent, their actions becoming increasingly criminal in nature. Injunctions are put in place to prevent these protesters from trespassing on land that is possessed legally by HS2, and to keep the public and our workers safe.” According to the spokesperson, HS2 workers have on one occasion had urine thrown on them by protesters, and workers and security staff have been verbally abused and physically assaulted during the coronavirus lockdown. The spokesperson added: “We have nothing but respect for how the [enforcement team] have conducted themselves during countless difficult situations while risking their health to protect these protesters.” Of allegations of wildlife crimes committed by HS2 workers, the spokesperson said: “HS2 takes its legal obligations seriously, and all our ecology work is carried out in accordance with the law. Licenses from Natural England ensure that we have the right safeguarding in place to protect wildlife species, and that all protections are met. No occupied birds’ nests have been destroyed and no trees supporting any bat maternity roosts have been felled in the maternity season.” Hillingdon council did not respond to a request for comment.