Lama Nadra reads at home in Tyre, Lebanon; and the view she has of the city “I will miss the family gathering; my brother will go back to Dubai and I will go back to Beirut. I will be separated from my father and mother too.” Adetona Omokanye, a documentary photographer, taking pictures from the window of his home in Lagos, Nigeria “I’ve had time to breathe, to re-evaluate how I’ve been living my life and trying to focus more on the things that truly matter to me, and that makes me happy.” Yael Ben Ezer, a dancer from the Batsheva Dance Company, practises in her apartment in Tel Aviv, Israel “I will miss the comfortable feeling of IT’S OK… It’s OK not to ‘do’ anything, it’s OK not to be ‘productive’ in the way we usually think. Things would come and go, the sun would rise and set, and I would just be living. And that’s totally enough.” Mohsin Rakha Al-meamar exercises at home in Karbala, Iraq, where all the gyms have closed “Time gained… because going to the gym takes more time than exercising at home.” Nada Maged, a student of art and design, works on a stop-motion video project from her home in Cairo, Egypt “I will miss spending quality time with my family, and the feeling that I have more free time, which is something I have dreamed of.” Brothers Hussein and Zeyad Ashish, Olympic boxers, train on the roof of their home at Al-Baqaa Palestinian refugee camp in Amman, Jordan “I will miss this place where I spent wonderful time training. I will miss beautiful memories spent here after the lockdown.” Mable Selina Etambo, seen through the window of her mud-walled house in the Kibera slums, Kenya “I will miss my space, because we are a very social society. Covid has made me realise that I need time to sit alone, reflect and plan my life without people bothering me.” Abu Ghazl sits inside his tent at a makeshift camp erected in a cemetery in Maarat Misrin, an opposition-held town in northern Idlib, Syria “I wont miss anything after the lockdown, because our situation will remain the same. Send us back home and we will self-quarantine there as much as you want.” Alphonia Zali, a domestic worker, looks out from her apartment to a view of shacks in the Langa township near Cape Town, South Africa “ I won’t miss anything about the lockdown. I know the lockdown is good for us, but to stay inside is difficult. You can’t shop, see friends, or go to work.”