Seph, a seven-year-old boy with sweeping blond hair, sat between his mom and me in the backseat of a Lyft for the ride to an indoor playground in the family’s New York neighborhood. “Are we going here so that you can see how I play with other kids?” he asked, turning to me. The question took me aback – it was so clear in that moment Seph understood he was being watched and examined because he is different, because he is transgender. Kids like Seph bring into sharp focus what it means to be male, female or something else. There is still widespread belief that minors with gender dysphoria – the clinical term for the distress caused by a mismatch between a person’s sense of their gender and their birth-assigned sex – should not be encouraged to transition. At least eight states have proposed bills that would criminalize doctors who prescribe puberty blockers or hormones to trans adolescents. On one side of the debate are people who think Seph’s gender dysphoria will fade by adulthood. On the other are the vast majority of mental health professionals who study gender dysphoria insisting that affirming a child in whatever way they express their gender is beneficial to their mental health. We all know that when we’re afraid we don’t make the best decisions At the center are the lives of trans and gender-variant kids who have immediate needs – a safe family home and a supportive school environment – regardless of what gendered adult outcome other people are hoping for. It was meeting those needs that prompted Jean Malpas, a therapist and mental health counselor, to start the Gender and Family Project (GFP) at Ackerman Institute in Manhattan in 2010 to serve trans and variant kids from age three to 19 and their families. “There were very few programs that were trying to figure out how to support caregivers who might, at the beginning, be kicking and screaming but wanted to understand how to be the best parent of a trans and nonbinary child,” Malpas, 44, told me in February as we walked the halls of the institute, which sits on a busy block near Madison Square Park. “They often don’t know how to do that and they often make terrible mistakes that will endanger their kid out of love and out of fear, and we all know that when we’re afraid we don’t make the best decisions.” Since the program’s inception, the GFP has served almost 600 families, probably making it the largest program for transgender youth and families in America not attached to a major hospital or medical group. Seph silently eyed me as his mother, Lindsay Jones, recalled his gender history in the living room of their apartment. When Seph was three, she told me, he walked into the living room with an armful of dresses and dumped them on the floor. “I won’t be needing these because I’m a boy,” Lindsay, a talkative woman in her mid-30s, said. When he was four, Seph began identifying with “Catboy”, the silly male protagonist of the Disney Junior show PJ Masks. By the end of preschool, he’d become more persistent in telling teachers and friends that he was a boy. Lindsay had an idea that Seph might be transgender but didn’t want to say the actual words. “I felt like if I put a name to it, it would make it real.” So she kept Seph’s hair long and didn’t raise the issue at school. It was a call from Seph’s dad that finally woke her up. “He told me that Seph had said, ‘I wish I was never born because no one gets me,’” recalled Lindsey. “No one should feel that way at age five.” Soon after her realization, a friend connected her to GFP. That day in their living room, Seph had only spoken when his mom asked him a question. But when his mom stepped away briefly and I told him that I was like him, that people had thought I was a boy but I was really a girl on the inside, his eyes grew wide. “You’re like the opposite of me!” he exclaimed, his body visibly relaxing. On Friday, the Trump administration rolled back health care standards for LGBTQ people, which had previously included discrimination against trans and gender non-conforming people. This only complicates the already highly medicalized and non-personal environment and treatment many trans kids receive. Most healthcare services for them are focused on the diagnosis of gender dysphoria and are meant to help predict whether the child will persist or desist with their dysphoria into adulthood, in order to make correct decisions over whether to prescribe puberty blockers. That focus on persistence and desistance started at some of the earliest gender clinics in the world, in Toronto and Amsterdam. But increasingly, researchers have begun to realize that how a child’s gender dysphoria evolves over time is less important than curtailing potential trauma caused by hostile family environments. For that reason, the GFP does not directly prescribe hormones or blockers to their clients – they are less interested in whether dysphoria will persist into adulthood, and more focused on creating healthy support systems for kids now, for them to explore their gender identities at their own pace. GFP’s model includes family therapy – which helps parents work through any discomfort they may have with their child’s gender identity and support them through the grieving process for the future they may have had in mind for their child – and group therapy, for both kids and parents. Malpas said the first word that comes to mind about the Friday night group sessions is “joy”. Often for the first time in their lives, the kids get to be with a dozen other kids their age who are like them, and it frees them up to just relax and be a kid. “They get to be a seven-year-old kid hanging out with their friends in that group space,” he said “I hated hearing my name,” 14-year-old Bryce said about the name given to him at birth, his deep voice resonating through our Zoom call. “I just hated how it sounded. It just didn’t feel like it fit what I felt inside. I felt like what I was on the outside didn’t fit what I felt on the inside.” Both Bryce and his mother, Emma Stovall, remember a day when he was about six and first vocalized that he was trans. They were watching a Dr Phil show about trans people and after the show, Bryce turned to his mom and told her he was actually a boy. “I didn’t notice [any signs] at all, to be honest with you,” she said from their home in Roosevelt Island, New York. Bryce’s transition started with cutting his then waist-long hair at about nine years old. “We first started by cutting off like the sides. We did it little by little and then eventually we just chopped it all off and now he had short hair,” said Emma. “I almost wanted to cry because the look on his face was like that of liberation. It was completely priceless.” A school guidance counselor suggested the GFP to support Emma, especially in dealing with Bryce’s father and older brother, neither of whom quite understood the need to transition. They went through the intake procedure, part of which is a two-and-a-half-hour interview going over the mental health history of the family and causes of familial stress as well as detailed information about the child’s gender development. “It is a very systemic view at the family,” said Derrick Jordan, counselor at the GFP. “So we’re looking at all of these different systems that intersect in any sort of way with the family to get a clear picture to help inform us on how we can support the family.” The GFP created a space where Bryce could learn more about his identity, and spend time with other trans kids like him, but it also became an invaluable resource for Emma. “It was very stressful in the beginning being the only one that seems to be onboard in the household,” she said. “I was able to find other parents that were also going through that.” Similarly, 12-year-old Zion’s father came around more slowly than her mother – it started with him not approving of the feminine way Zion expressed herself and blaming Zion’s mother, Natalie, for forcing “gender stuff” on their child. Like Emma, Natalie said she felt a lot of pressure from others in her extended family and community to squash Zion’s gender expression. Meanwhile, she watched her child get bullied. Bullying – which according to a 2017 GLSEN survey happens to 75% of trans students – over her gender expression quickly emerged at the child’s elementary school. Zion remembered an incident from when she was about seven years old, before she socially transitioned, when two bullies hid her lunchbox at her East Williamsburg public school because they thought the lunchbox was too effeminate. “At the time, Zion went by ‘he’, and so they would just emotionally, socially and physically abuse Zion,” said Natalie. Another time, bullies put her in a headlock and threw her off the top of the jungle gym. But when she tried to go to a teacher for help, she was unfortunately turned away. “She said, I’m just lying for attention. She didn’t believe it,” Zion said, sighing in frustration. After a hard search to find the right school for her trans student of color, Natalie considers herself lucky to have gotten Zion into a different school in Brooklyn and also connected with the GFP through a guidance counselor there. But she still worries about those who can’t access the support and services they need. “What about those kids in the inner cities, projects, who are poor?” She asked. “I felt like I was going crazy. How do you think their families feel?” No one is turned away from the Gender and Family Project for financial reasons, and payment is a sliding scale based on the family’s income level. Family therapy at the program is typically $100 per session, but the program takes Medicaid and private insurance, and is willing to offer its services free for those who are uninsured and cannot otherwise afford help. The only prerequisite for the program is approval from at least one parent or legal guardian. For Zion, once things were out in the open, she started to thrive both at home and at school. “Zion just started blooming,” said Natalie. Just as important as ensuring a safe home for trans kids is creating a supportive learning environment for kids to grow. When issues pop up for trans kids at New York City schools, the GFP has a training department that can advise and teach school personnel how to better deal with bullying and trans inclusivity. “How do we protect and support and empower that young person?” asked Malpas. GFP offers support in family advocacy at schools and medical institutions. “That means helping the school really understand what being supportive to that kid means.” Like Zion, Seph and Bryce also had bullying issues at school. After Bryce transferred to a new school, the GFP provided training and resources to school staff, ensuring that he would be able to use the boys’ bathroom without issue. Now that Bryce has been on testosterone therapy, the source of his now deep voice, for about 10 months, and he’s in a high school where he feels accepted, Emma said he doesn’t depend so much on the GFP for direct support, but he knows they’re there if the family needs them. “It makes a world of difference that I don’t have to worry about getting phone calls from the school every day, that I don’t have to have Bryce coming home agonizing over whatever happened at school today,” said Emma. “When things happen, he’s already at an age where he can handle most things on his own, but if he can’t, there is a support system in place.” Since the coronavirus pandemic began, that support system has become even more important for trans kids. There are potential negative side-effects to the pandemic for trans kids. Some kids may be forced into homes where each parent is at different stages of acceptance. One parent might be using one pronoun, and the other parent might be using another. It makes a world of difference that I don’t have to worry about getting phone calls from the school every day “You can’t leave that family unsupported,” said Malpas. “It’s literally a risk. It’s really dangerous.” In response to the pandemic, the GFP closed its doors on Friday 13 March but by Monday they had transitioned all of their clinical services to online. Malpas reports that 95% of the families who were using the Gender and Family Project are still receiving family and group therapy online, mostly through Zoom. Moving the program’s support groups has allowed the program to increase the number of group sessions it hosts, in both English and Spanish, increasing from two per month to six. “People want to be connected to each other,” said Malpas. “People want to see their friends, people want to have access to community.” Seph was all smiles at the indoor playground. He and I played a game of air hockey, which I accidentally won. After that he disappeared into the crowd of kids and I sat down again with his mom. Lindsay told me that she purposely builds a bubble around Seph. She worries how he’s going to react when he realizes that there are so many people in the world who either hate him or wish he doesn’t exist. She prays that her child can keep the effervescent personality that’s emerged from his social transition through it all. I leaned in and asked how she thought Seph would be now if she had decided not to ever accept his gender identity. She paused for what seemed like a few minutes. “I think I would see an unhappy, suicidal child,” she said. It’s a sentiment echoed by each of the parents I spoke with for this story. Back in a Lyft to head home, Seph was a chatterbox, bouncing from one subject to the next. “You can be trans and gay,” he said at one point. I asked him what he wanted to be when he grew up, and he said, “You first.” I told him I had wanted to be a writer when I grew up, which turned out to come true. He smiled at that and said it’s good when kids know what they want to be when they grow up. “If you don’t know what you want to be, you have to marry a rich husband,” he joked. Then we passed a double-parked car. “I hate double parkers!” he burst out, sounding like a 35-year-old New Yorker. I try to imagine what Seph’s life will look like going forward. When I was his age, I didn’t have words to put to my gender dysphoria. I thought I was alone in the world, that my parents would hate me if they found out how I really felt. I was, above all other things, a frightened child. My thoughts were interrupted by Seph again. “I want to be a zoologist,” he said. His mom looked at him. “Maybe you will solve global warming, Seph,” she suggested. “You could change the world.” “No, Mom! That’s not it at all!” he said, rolling his eyes.I smile at the retort. He shouldn’t have to aspire to change the world. He already has.