Berliner Nora (Rosabell Laurenti Sellers) wakes up with the hangover from hell in this bone-chilling German series. After taking the new party drug Bliss, Nora is unable to remember a thing and when investigators Nique Navar (Florence Kasumba) and David Leonhart (Falk Hentschel) realise she isn’t the only young person to have forgotten her life, or even to have disappeared while on Bliss, they begin to uncover an extraterrestrial plot, with Nora somehow holding the key to halting an invasion. Ammar Kalia For Gemini and James, transforming the back of their three-bed into an open plan kitchen-diner was draining – and their home-improvement hassle isn’t over yet. Luckily, architects Laura Jane Clark and Robert Jamison are here to re-energise their project, with help from Angela Scanlon’s VR tech. Ellen E Jones Wholesome rural fun in this new series following life on Cannon Hall Farm in South Yorkshire. As we arrive, it’s summer. That means an appearance at a country show for prized Highland cow Ted. But, from lambs with broken legs to sheep-shearing, other practicalities are less glamorous. Phil Harrison Historian David Olusoga concludes his fascinating history of No 10 Guinea Street in Bristol by tracing the lives of its occupants from the second world war to the present day. He finds how the house was almost destroyed before being inhabited by serial forger Cyril Tabrett in the 1950s and then rebuilt. AK We return to St George’s hospital in London for the 21st season of the gripping medical docuseries. Tonight, there are the cautionary tales of two motorbike crashes: one involving 35-year-old Przemek, which could leave him with permanent spinal damage, and the other with bike-loving 17-year-old Leon. AK The eponymous A&E medic takes to the streets of Croydon to consult those who can’t or won’t go to the GP; dishing out diagnoses and treatments in boxing gyms, nail salons and cafes, for everything from depression to excess sweating, fungal nails and a verruca. Ali Catterall Jack Reacher: Never Go Back 9pm, Film4 Tom Cruise returns as Reacher, the hero of Lee Child’s novels, an ex-military cop turned wandering righter of wrongs. Jack falls for Lt Susan Turner (Cobie Smulders), goes to visit her in Washington DC only to find her banged up on fake espionage charges: time to take out the bad guys in Edward Zwick’s slick thriller. Paul Howlett