I’ve been listening to some rather special Hugo Wolf this week. The young pianist Keval Shah has spent lockdown recording a virtual performance of the Italienisches Liederbuch, and has been uploading it in the last few days as a thread on his Twitter timeline. 1. Auch kleine Dinge - @AilishTynanEire #ItalianSongbook pic.twitter.com/cygnDF8HvF Instead of following the standard division of the songs between two singers – soprano and baritone or tenor – Shah shares them out between 11, Ailish Tynan, Kathryn Rudge and Roderick Williams among them, though the remaining eight are young artists at the start of their careers. It’s all marvellously fresh, humane, and immediate, with none of the archness that can creep into so many Wolf performances, and we’re very much aware throughout of the humour as well as the pain in Wolf’s disquisitions on the nature of love, sacred as well as secular. The recorded sound can on occasion be basic, but Shah’s enthusiasm for Wolf is apparent in every bar, and the singing is consistently strong. Tynan and Williams, as one might expect, are lovely, and there are particularly outstanding contributions from baritone Martin Hässler, sopranos Lorena Paz Nieto, wonderfully warm of tone, and Rose Stachniewska, with a voice like a flash of silver. Donations are suggested to Help Musicians UK and #BlackLivesMatterUK. It’s been a real treat to follow. More outstanding young singers, meanwhile, can be heard in the third of the livestreamed concerts from the Royal Opera House (available on demand for £4.99), in which the operatic extracts are provided by members of the Jette Parker Programme. Stephanie Wake-Edwards does powerhouse things with Deijanira’s mad scene from Handel’s Hercules, while Filipe Manu makes an engaging Nemorino in Una Furtiva Lagrima from Donizetti’s L’Elisir d’Amore. There’s fabulous Gershwin from Masabane Cecilia Rangwanasha and fun Rossini from Manu and Blaise Malaba. There’s also more ballet that we’ve had on previous occasions, with Matthew Ball and Mayara Magri ravishing in Christopher Wheeldon’s Within the Golden Hour, and Fumi Kaneko and Reece Clarke, poised and coolly sensual in the neo-classical central pas de deux from Kenneth MacMillan’s Concerto. OperaVision, meanwhile, streamed its Summer Gala (free on demand until 21 July) from eight European opera houses on 21 June. At Berlin’s Komische Oper, Barrie Kosky quips about it all being a bit like the Eurovision Song Contest (“Douze points for Germany”) before settling in to accompany soprano Alma Sadé in a selection of Yiddish operetta songs. Nina Stemme sings Stenhammar in Stockholm, before joining the socially distanced Royal Swedish Orchestra and Alan Gilbert for Isolde’s Liebestod. Danielle de Niese and Allan Clayton can be heard at Glyndebourne in a duet from Bernstein’s Candide. The high point for me, though, was Jodie Devos and Cyril Dubois, impeccably stylish and wonderfully elegant, singing Messager, Delibes and Offenbach in the foyer of the Opéra-Comique in Paris. My picks for the week ahead Louisa Muller’s Garsington Opera staging of Britten’s The Turn of the Screw is at long last available online, via BBC iPlayer or the Garsington site. Don’t miss a truly great operatic experience. And from 30 June, OperaVision are streaming Graham Vick’s Birmingham Opera Company production of The Ice Break, Michael Tippett’s 1977 examination of Cold War political division and racist violence. I haven’t heard it since I was a teenager, and am longing to see how well it has stood the test of time.