German ministers have criticised Donald Trump’s plans to withdraw about 9,500 US troops from German soil, saying the move is likely to weaken America’s own security architecture as well as European security. “We think that the US presence in Germany is important for the security not just of Germany but also for the security of the United States and especially for the security of Europe,” Heiko Maas, the foreign minister, said during a state visit to Poland on Tuesday. Earlier this week, the US president had confirmed reports of his intention to reduce the presence of American troops in Germany to 25,000, saying “we’re protecting Germany and they’re delinquent”, and claiming that the deployment of troops came at “a tremendous cost to the United States”. Trump claimed there were 52,000 US troops stationed in Germany, though the Pentagon puts the figure at 34,000 to 35,000. America’s military presence in Germany dates back to the end of the second world war. Contrary to Trump’s repeated claims, Germany does not owe payments to Nato or the US, but falls short of a Nato target in which members commit 2% of their annual GDP to military spending by 2024. According to Nato’s 2019 annual report, only seven out of 29 Nato allies meet the target. The government of Angel Merkel, the German chancellor, has vowed to raise German defence spending to the agreed threshold by 2031. Maas said he had yet to receive information on when the US administration was intending to remove troops and from which units. “Neither the state department nor the Pentagon has been able to provide any information about this,” he said, adding that any changes to Europe’s security architecture “definitely need to be talked about”. Several US military bases in Germany, such as the Ramstein air base, act as logistics staging posts for operations in the Middle East, eastern Europe or Africa. The German defence minister, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, also criticised the tone of America’s threats. “Nato is not a trade organisation, and security is not a commodity,” the departing chair of Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union said at an event at the Konrad Adenauer Stiftung thinktank. “Nato is founded on solidarity, on trust. And it is based on common values and common interests.” The centre-right newspaper Die Welt, one outlet that has consistently criticised German governments’ reluctance to increase defence spending, described Trump’s plans as shortsighted and counterproductive. “Trump’s partial withdrawal weakens Nato, it weakens America’s position in Europe and damages the relationship to its important if at times irritating ally Germany,” the foreign affairs commentator Clemens Wergin wrote on Wednesday. “Trump is displaying the same strategic shortsightedness that he is rightly accusing the Germans of.” On Tuesday, Nato’s secretary general said no timeline or firm plan had been agreed for Trump’s proposed withdrawal, suggesting it could be softened if Berlin agreed to increase its defence budget. Jens Stoltenberg said it was “not yet decided how and when this decision will be implemented”. The Nato chief said he expected an “ongoing dialogue” on the issue would be at the heart of discussions during a two-day summit of the alliance’s defence ministers due on Wednesday and Thursday.