The global advocacy group for gender equality Women Deliver has launched an investigation into allegations of racism and discrimination within the organisation. Its CEO, Katja Iversen, a G7 advisor on gender equality, has issued an apology and taken a leave of absence until the conclusion of the investigation. The move follows a series of allegations from previous and current staff that began circulating on Twitter last week. They complained of a toxic working environment and said the organisation suffered from a “white saviour” complex”. Since launching in 2007, Women Deliver, based in New York, has grown into one of the world’s most high profile organisations promoting gender equality and the health and rights of women and girls. Its triennial conferences have more than doubled in size and stature since Iversen took over in 2014, attracting Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau as a keynote speaker last year. Last week, former staff member Brittany Tatum tweeted that she was verbally abused while working at the organisation, and was asked by an employee in HR if her hair was real. She said: “I was the lowest-paid … full-time staff member for nearly two years, I watched time and time again qualified black candidates to be denied jobs.” Tatum said: “I have shared these thoughts with my colleagues who left Women Deliver but never shared them publicly because I was afraid of the consequences.” Another former employee, Chelsea Williams-Diggs, tweeted: “My time at Women Deliver was plagued by straight up racist, white faux feminism and toxic clickish behaviour – from the top down. And most former and current employees completely agree.” My time at Women Deliver was plagued by straight up racist, white faux feminism & toxic clickish behavior — from the top down. And most former & current employees completely agree.I have stories for days, but I’ll share a few specific ones that often play back in my head: On Monday, a group of Women Deliver young leaders said they were deeply concerned by the reports. In a statement they called for an independent investigation and for a clear plan on how the organisation would address “oppressive, unjust and racist” practices. They said: “As Women Deliver young leaders fighting for social justice everyday, and often experiencing such injustices ourselves (racial among others), we stand in solidarity with and applaud the bravery of every individual who has made the decision to speak up about their experiences, and those who have been tokenised and/or subjected to microaggressions, discrimination, racism, transphobia and white supremacist behaviour. “We hereby collectively condemn this transgression and will refuse to be associated with any future benefit derived from the platform that is revealed to be built on white supremacy, corporate power and racial oppression.” Women Deliver’s board of directors said they were “aware of and deeply concerned about the substance of the testimonies ​shared by former and current employees of the organisation. “The board takes this situation very seriously. It condemns all forms of racism and discrimination.” The board said the investigation would be conducted by a third party and was expected to conclude before the end of the summer. The group has set up an anonymous hotline and said there would be no retaliation for anyone speaking out. Iversen, a member of the G7 gender equality advisory council, said she was “shaken, heartbroken, and tremendously angry with myself”. She said: “I am in charge of this organisation, and I apologise and take full responsibility for these experiences and for my role in it. We have not lived up to our own values, and I am deeply sorry for the pain and the trauma experienced by current and former employees. I am grateful to our former staff for their bravery in coming forward, as well as our current staff and Young Leaders who’ve stood in solidarity.”