Hurrah for the Class of 2020! This is going out to all students who finished any significant educational landmark this year: those who were supposed to take their GCSEs or A-levels, university students now doing final exams in their parents’ kitchens, PhD students grinding it out on their own at home instead of in the library. Nothing – not childbirth, not a global pandemic – ever caused me more stress than end-of-year exams, and even at the time I thought: “Nothing will ever be harder than this.” And I was right! So bravo to all of you, it is (mostly) easy coasting from here on in. But this moment is probably looking pretty different from what you envisaged and what you were promised: less triumphant, more unsettling, even unfair, and probably pretty anticlimactic. It’s true, you have been robbed of something. But, honestly, this is not the wholesale loss it might seem to be right now, and I’ll explain why, using a subject I understand better than anything I ever took an exam in, and that subject is moi. There were no lockdowns or plagues when I was a teenager, and yet I still managed to lose all my big end-of-year moments. When I was in the early years of secondary school, every June I would watch the older girls walk into the exam hall – pale and strained, or flicking their hair with affected cool – and think how one day that would be me. I’d shuffle in to take my exams, come back to school in August to get my results off the board, and I’d go out afterwards with my friends to celebrate by the canal nearby. Well, 0% for that prediction, Freeman. Instead, by the time of my GCSEs, I was two years into my extended national tour of Britain’s finest psychiatric hospitals. I took them in a room in the Maudsley, invigilated by a somewhat bemused teacher sent from my school. When my results came through, instead of skipping excitedly to pick them up with friends, I stood alone in a phone booth in the Bethlem hospital and called up the school secretary. I was home by the time I got my A-level results, but had no friends due to the whole missing-multiple-years-of-school situation, so instead celebrated with a walk in the park with my mother. Rock on, youth’s wild dream! This was also how I celebrated my university finals, because even though I was no longer incarcerated, I was still quite mental: actual fun was just beyond me. None of this was how it was supposed to be, and for a long time I was pretty sad about never having experienced those classic markers of youth. I grew up on teen movies, many of which were – and still are – structured around the idea that the end of exams and graduation are the ultimate denouement, from the ridiculous (the Rodney Dangerfield classic Back To School) to the sublime (last year’s Booksmart). Had I even finished school if I didn’t get my big moment? It’s a natural narrative structure, but it’s also a false one – because it perpetuates the myth that the end of school, or college, is The End. But it’s really the beginning, and smarter movies recognise that, such as Cameron Crowe’s greatest film, 1989’s Say Anything…, which opens with the graduation ceremony (kind of a letdown for the students, as it happens). There is a reason that the late John Hughes – the finest writer ever of teen movies – entirely eschewed graduations and exams, and that’s because he knew they were bogus, an externally imposed idea of youthful triumphs. Instead, his characters grow through their own individual, emotional and often solitary experiences – from Emilio Estevez admitting he is a bully to impress his father in The Breakfast Club, to Molly Ringwald refusing to be humiliated by the cool boys in Pretty In Pink, to Alan Ruck having an emotional breakdown in front of a Georges Seurat painting in Ferris Bueller’s Day Off (the greatest movie scene of all time, do not @ me). It took a long time, but I finally came round to my end-of-year stories. No, they were not what I dreamed of, and they were not especially fun, but they were very specific to me and that time – and for that reason a lot more memorable than sitting with friends by the canal would have been. You are a special generation, Class of 2020: this experience is unique to you, and your memories of this month will have multiple layers of meaning, and will be a strong foundation on which to build your future. You have probably got to know yourselves pretty well, and how you have reacted to a major change of plans will have taught you even more about yourselves; there is nothing more important than that as you head out into the world. You didn’t ask to be exceptional, but you’re also the generation that grew up on Marvel movies, so you know that this is how superpowers work. Welcome to the start of not just your future, but The Future: I’m so excited to see how you shape it for all of us.