Northampton overcame a two-goal first-leg deficit to set up a League Two play-off final meeting with Exeter following a 3-0 win at Cheltenham. Goals from Vadaine Oliver and Callum Morton hauled them level on aggregate at 2-2 before Morton, on loan from West Brom, tucked away the winner 13 minutes from time. The visitors looked the livelier throughout and threatened as early as the fourth minute when Nicky Adams’s cross from the left found Morton but his header lacked the pace to trouble Robins goalkeeper Owen Evans. An early corner and a couple of long throws from skipper Charlie Goode put the home defence under further pressure before the Cobblers made their early pressure count with their ninth-minute opener. Adams again provided the cross, this time from the right, and Oliver rose on the edge of the six-yard box to guide his header past the Cheltenham keeper and into the bottom right-hand corner. There was almost a second a minute later when Morton created space for the shot but skied his effort over the bar. The visitors were almost caught out on the half-hour when a long clearance from Evans picked out Ryan Broom, who in turn played in Alfie May but the striker was offside. Jonté Smith put an effort a yard wide of the Cheltenham target as the hosts looked to level on the night and they were awarded their first corner eight minutes before the break only for Jake Doyle-Hayes’s kick to be headed clear. Cheltenham manager Michael Duff sent on striker Reuben Reid at the start of the second half in place of Smith and the home side had an early effort when Doyle-Hayes put in a low shot. But this was to be a false dawn for the Robins. Moments later Oliver stung the palms of Evans before Adams put an effort inches wide with the Cheltenham keeper beaten. The equaliser came after 57 minutes when Goode got his head on an Adams corner and Ben Tozer’s attempted headed clearance for the hosts rebounded off Morton into the net. Another corner soon after saw Scott Wharton head over as the visitors looked to wrap things up but it was a mistake that gifted them their winner with 14 minutes remaining. A mix-up between keeper Evans and defender Will Boyle allowed the ball to run for Michael Harriman. His shot hit the foot of the post but Morton followed up for his second of the game. The young striker almost wrapped up his hat-trick when, with seven minutes remaining, he broke upfield only for Evans to keep out his final shot. Cheltenham pushed for an equaliser in the seven added minutes at the end but the visitors held on for the win. Exeter had earlier come out on top against Colchester as Ryan Bowman’s goal deep into extra-time propelled them to a 3-2 aggregate win. After the hosts went 2-1 up in the tie, Colchester levelled things up in the 78th minute and with the sides looking dead on their feet, Archie Collins played a superb through ball to Bowman who made no mistake with his finish to secure a 3-1 victory on the night. Exeter, trailing 1-0 from the first leg, went in front after 10 minutes. Randell Williams’s cross found Alex Fisher, whose shot was well saved; Jake Taylor’s follow-up was blocked and as the ball fell to Aaron Martin, 15 yards out, he drilled his shot past Dean Gerken and a host of defenders and into the net. They went 2-0 up on aggregate after 58 minutes. Bowman headed against the upright from Nicky Law’s cross, Fisher collected the loose ball and teed up Jayden Richardson and his shot squeezed under Dean Gerken. Exeter were having opportunities to attack, but their poor final ball let them down and with 12 minutes remaining, Colchester levelled the tie. Bramall’s cross was palmed away by Maxted and straight to Courtney Senior, who made no mistake with a simple tap-in. In extra time, tiredness kicked in and chances were at a premium. Bowman did have an opportunity as Brennan Dickenson crossed from the left, but he could not adjust his body and get a shot away. Then, in the 112th minute, Bowman put Exeter in front on aggregate again after a superb driving run through midfield and pass by Collins to win the tie and send his side to a third Wembley final in four years.