When police officers stopped Neomi Bennett late at night, they did not know anything about her – including that she had been awarded a British Empire Medal for services to nursing, and invited to Downing Street in recognition of her work. In her opinion, they simply saw a black woman sitting in a car and asked her to get out to be searched. She said she was frightened and refused repeatedly to comply, demanding a female officer before she would leave the vehicle, video footage shows. After heated exchanges, male officers pulled Bennett out, arrested her and kept her in a cell for 18 hours, despite finding nothing incriminating. Bennett, 47, who has been working intensive care shifts as a locum nurse treating Covid-19 patients, has overturned a conviction for obstructing the police that night. Now she intends to bring a civil claim against the Metropolitan police for wrongful arrest, assault, battery, false imprisonment and malicious prosecution. Her case comes amid heightened concerns over the police treatment of black people, and UK protests sparked by the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. Bennett is now so frightened that she has installed cameras in her car. She said: “I feel I have to protect myself from the police more than anything else as a black person in London.” Just after midnight on 4 April 2019, Bennett was dropping off a friend in Wandsworth, south-west London, on her way home from a day’s nursing shift and watching her father perform in an open mic music night. A police car pulled to a stop in front of them. Bodycam footage released to Bennett shows officers on either side of the car. One knocks on her door to raise concerns that her front windows are illegally tinted. (Court documents later established they were within the legal limit.) When Bennett tells the officer she is scared, he says: “I don’t believe you because you’re talking to police officers.” He tells her he believes she is hiding stolen property. The officer explains she is being detained for the purpose of conducting a search and that in failing to step out of the car she is obstructing that search. He promises that a female colleague will search her person. When Bennett refuses to wind down the window or get out, and later says she is calling a lawyer to check the search is legal “because this is what you’re doing to black people”, he replies: “You’re really starting to annoy me.” She insists: “I don’t know what I’ve done wrong.” Within a minute, the footage shows, he threatens: “Open the door or the windows are going to go in.” Six minutes later he and a colleague pulled her from the car, according to the police report. An official police investigation found no wrongdoing on the part of officers. Officers searched Bennett’s car but found nothing. “They kept saying to each other: ‘This is not adding up,’” said Bennett. “It’s like I wasn’t fitting the narrative they had. Irrespective of my innocence they were going to continue the process.” A consultant psychiatrist’s note says Bennett had a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder from a serious house fire and is likely to have been unable to comply with police instructions because she was experiencing a severe panic attack. Bennett said: “All the way through I kept telling police officers that I was experiencing chest pain and palpitations.” The panic got worse when she was kept overnight in a police cell. She was released late afternoon the next day and remains traumatised. “I actually wet myself in the cell. I don’t like to tell people that but if it makes people understand,” she said. The Met confirmed no officers were disciplined for their role in Bennett’s arrest. Bennett invented a device called the Neo-slip, which is used by the NHS to apply deep vein thrombosis stockings and was featured on the TV show Dragons’ Den. She said: “You feel that no matter what I do, no matter what award I get, I pay taxes, I run a business ... but regardless of all that they see me as just another black person.” The Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, has said the force is no longer institutionally racist. Bennett is sceptical, saying: “You can only change something if you acknowledge it.” She believes her experience illustrates the challenges faced by black people once they are in the justice system. She was found guilty at Wimbledon magistrates court in September of resisting/obstructing a constable and says she worried about bringing up racism to an all-white bench. “Even in court I never once said: ‘This is because I’m a black person,’ for fear of them thinking: she’s got a chip on her shoulder.” After she appealed, the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) abandoned the case, wiping her criminal conviction. The experience damaged Bennett’s work and health. She was suspended from her job a month after her conviction before being reinstated, later suffering from depression and PTSD. Her barrister, Ann Tayo, said: “This is how we treat our NHS. She’s done so well, she’s come up with great ideas that are helping people to save lives but somebody who doesn’t know anything about her background has chosen to treat her in a negative manner simply because of the colour of her skin.” A Met spokesperson said: “We are aware of the decision by the CPS not to pursue the appeal hearing. The south west basic command unit professional standards team is currently assessing a complaint in relation to this incident. Due to the complaint, we cannot go into any more detail at this time.” A unit commander had connected Bennett with the local police independent advisory group chair to discuss her experiences with police, the force said.