Barcelona’s hopes of staying in front of Real Madrid took a hit after another stumble in La Liga. Barcelona were held 2-2 at Celta Vigo after conceding in the 88th minute, opening the way for Real to go top by two points if they win at bottom-placed Espanyol on Sunday. Iago Aspas scored from a clever low free-kick that went outside the wall to deny Barcelona victory. Luis Suárez twice gave the visitors the lead, with Vigo’s first equaliser coming from Fyodor Smolov.Sául Ñíguez and Diego Costa scored second-half goals as third-placed Atlético Madrid defeated Alavés 2-1 for a fourth straight victory. The home win moved Atlético four points clear of fourth-placed Sevilla. Diego Simeone’s team remain unbeaten since the league resumed, but it was the third consecutive loss for Alavés, who remain near the relegation zone. Their lone goal was scored by Joselu in stoppage time. Athletic Bilbao increased their chances of qualifying for the Europa League by defeating relegation-threatened Mallorca 3-1 at home, moving to ninth place. Werder Bremen extended their 39-year stay in the Bundesliga for at least another 10 days when they thumped Cologne 6-1 to avoid automatic relegation. The four-times Bundesliga champions climbed out of the drop zone above Fortuna Düsseldorf to finish 16th. They now face a play-off against the team who finish third in the second division. Fortuna lost 3-0 at Union Berlin and were relegated. Werder began the day as the favourites to go down. They were two points behind Fortuna with a worse goal difference but raced to a 3-0 lead when Yuya Osako, Milot Rashica and Niclas Füllkrug scored in a six-minute spell in the first half. Davy Klaassen added a fourth after half-time, Osako made it 5-0, Dominick Drexler pulled one back and Josh Sargent scored a sixth to leave Werder with 31 points, one more than Fortuna.Bayern Munich, already crowned champions last week, lifted the league trophy in an empty stadium after crushing hosts Wolfsburg 4-0. The Bavarians went ahead in the fourth minute with Kingsley Coman scoring from Thomas Müller’s 21st assist, a league record. Mickael Cuisance then rifled in from 25 metres for a sensational goal in the 37th and the 20-year-old Frenchman earned a penalty, which resulted in Joshua Guilavogui being sent off for a second booking. Robert Lewandowski converted the penalty for his 34th goal of the season to earn his fifth Bundesliga top-scorer award and his third in a row. Müller made it 4-0 in the 79th minute as Bayern took their goal tally to 100, one less than the league record set by them in the 1971-72 season. Borussia Mönchengladbach capped a successful season with a spot in next season’s Champions League group stage by beating Hertha Berlin 2-1 to finish fourth. Timo Werner marked his RB Leipzig swansong with two well-taken goals in a 2-1 victory at Augsburg. Meanwhile, Borussia Dortmund experienced a miserable end to the season, beaten 4-0 at home by Hoffenheim, with Andrej Kramaric scoring all the goals for the visitors. In Serie A, leading scorer Ciro Immobile converted a contentious second-half penalty to set second-placed Lazio on the way to a 2-1 comeback win over Fiorentina that kept them four points behind leaders Juventus. Franck Ribery stunned the hosts when the 37-year-old Frenchman put Fiorentina ahead. Lazio were struggling to find a way past Fiorentina’s defence until Felipe Caicedo went down under a challenge from goalkeeper Bartlomiej Dragowski and Immobile converted his 28th goal of the season. However, replays suggested that Caicedo fell before any contact was made. Luis Alberto grabbed the winner with seven minutes left. Cagliari won for the second time in four days when they beat Torino 4-2 in their first home game since Walter Zenga was appointed as coach. Genoa hit back with two penalties to force a 2-2 draw at Brescia as the two struggling sides defied sweltering temperatures