Having lasted just one week, GreenEdge Cycling’s partnership with the Manuela Fundaćion is over before it really began – and without even getting close to contesting a race in the recently proposed title sponsor’s blue and purple colours. On Friday GreenEdge’s founder and principal, Gerry Ryan, announced the Australian World Tour team would not pursue the agreement reached with the Spanish not-for-profit and would continue under the banner of Mitchelton-Scott for the rest of the year. Ryan also revealed riders would return on full wages once the World Tour season resumed in August, having been financially affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. “We felt a strong initial connection with Mr Francsico Huertas, the Manuela Fundaćion and their noble aims,” Ryan said. “However, as the negotiations have evolved after the initial announcement on Friday, we have concluded that the relationship will not proceed. “We wish Mr Francsico Huertas and the Manuela Fundaćion all the best for the future.” The U-turn comes after last week’s joint announcement of a “long-term agreement” that would see GreenEdge Cycling called Team Manuela Fundación for the remainder of the 2020 season and “fully incorporate a new look” when racing resumed. Ryan hinted all was not well in an interview with Ride Media on Wednesday when he said that press release “probably went a bit early” and also reiterated he remained the owner of the team. But the Manuela Fundación responded to those claims with surprise, telling Spanish news agency EFE a change of ownership agreement had been signed on 5 June and that GreenEdge were bound to abide by it. “It was agreed that we were already the owners, and that from 1 January 2021 we also took over the team’s licence once the season ended on 31 December and once the regulatory procedures and audits with the UCI had been completed,” Emilio Rodríguez, director of sports for the Manuela Fundación, said. Manuel Calvente, the Manuela Fundación under-23 team director, told Cyclingnews the Granada-based outfit believed a deal had been done and that it had taken practical steps towards its future as a partner of GreenEdge. “The team buses are in the workshop, stripped of their team colours and waiting for the new publicity and team stickers. We even received photos showing us how it was all going,” Calvente said. “But above all they’ve signed something. It’s been signed since 5 June and it went public on 12 June.” GreenEdge Cycling has been racing on the World Tour under the banner of Mitchelton-Scott since 2018 but the team has been searching for a new naming rights holder since the team’s original title sponsor, Orica, pulled out in 2017. Ryan, who owns Mitchelton Wines, sought to draw a line under the Manuela Fundaćion deal on Friday. “The Covid-19 global crisis has thrown up many new challenges, but our primary focus remains on our world-class athletes and support staff,” he said. “This will include a return to full wages for all riders and staff once World Tour racing commences in August and a commitment to the year 2021 as we search for a suitable sponsorship. “We believe in this team, and the people and culture that have made it so successful these past eight years. Our riders have been inspiring in their commitment and motivation in what has been an uncertain season, and our staff loyal and determined to provide the best service possible in what will be a busy and challenging end to the year. “We can’t wait to get back on the road and start winning more races.”