When Miriam Margolyes was “cleared by Ofcom” last week over remarks she made on Channel 4’s The Last Leg in early May, I was broadly pleased. But there was a lot about the situation that vexed me. Here’s what actually happened. On a live late-night comedy show, speaking from her kitchen because of the lockdown, Margolyes described the government’s handling of the coronavirus crisis as “a disgrace” and “a public scandal” and then went on: “I had difficulty not wanting Boris Johnson to die, I wanted him to die, and then I thought that reflects badly on me and I don’t want to be the sort of person who wants people to die. So, then I wanted him to get better, which he did do, he did get better, but he didn’t get better as a human being and I really would prefer that.” The remarks elicited 494 complaints (after being widely reported in the press) and led to “an initial investigation” by Ofcom, which concluded on Monday that Margolyes will not face “an official investigation”. For the avoidance of doubt, let me first say that I think what she said was absolutely fine. I don’t think it’s actively nice to hope Boris Johnson dies, but neither does Margolyes, as she herself made clear – it was intrinsic to the point she was making. She found herself hoping it and didn’t want to be someone who hoped it and so she stopped herself hoping it. What exactly is the problem? She was being interesting and truthful. In an age of relentless celebrity virtue-signalling, surely this is refreshing. Perhaps some people didn’t believe she stopped hoping it. But then they’ve only got her word for it that she hoped it in the first place. Are people cross because she might have lied about her hopes? Presumably not. Presumably they’re mainly cross because she told the truth about her hopes. They think she should have kept her horrible hopes to herself. Or do they actually take issue with her right to hope what she hoped? Do they think that someone who could hope a nasty thing like that shouldn’t be on television no matter what they say? Anyway, she’s been “cleared”. But I don’t love the sound of that. Someone on television honestly expressing the moral complexity of their feelings at an exceptionally difficult time has been condescendingly told, a month later, that actually that was OK after all. Of course it was OK! The very idea that it’s not OK is what’s not OK! Ofcom has investigated to the point where it has concluded that it doesn’t need to investigate. But what’s to investigate anyway? It’s not a crime scene, it’s a clip. Just watch the clip – investigation over. What would the full investigation have consisted of? Watching the clip a thousand times? Interrogating Margolyes to find out what other things she’s hoped that might elicit Tory disapproval? The exoneration is expressed in such tentative terms: “These provocative comments had clear potential to offend viewers,” Ofcom said, but excused them because Margolyes is “known for her forthright views”, she “immediately qualified her comments” and the audience was “warned in advance about the programme’s adult humour”. Except it wasn’t really humour. She wasn’t joking, laughingly saying she’d toyed with wanting the prime minister to die. Frankly, the complainants’ consternation would have been more justified if she had been. But she was just expressing how she felt. So what’s the offence? The concept of someone hoping someone else dies is widely discussed in our culture; it’s solidly pre-watershed and central to most murder mysteries. So that can’t be the problem. And Margolyes hasn’t alleged that anyone else hoped Johnson would die – that might have been problematic. Although implying that one person secretly hopes another person will die is quite a well-mined comic seam and the basis for half the jokes that are made about Prince Charles. The concept of someone hoping someone else dies is widely discussed in our culture Coincidentally, around the same time as the Margolyes non-offence, I wanted to put a joke on Twitter about someone hoping Boris Johnson died. After he’d recovered and was back in Downing Street, there was a headline on the BBC News website that read: “‘Contingency plans’ for Johnson’s death made, says PM.” And I was absolutely itching to quote it and add “Apparently Michael Gove was up all night”. Or “Never has Michael Gove worked so conscientiously”. Or “That was a real passion project for Michael Gove”. That struck me as funny. I’m not saying Gove genuinely wanted Johnson to die – I have no idea, but I doubt it. I suppose Priti Patel might, but not Gove. But then I suspect Priti Patel just generally hopes everyone dies. And they do, so that’s nice for her. But Gove’s history of unsuccessful political treachery makes it funny to imagine him hoping it. His clumsy attempts at metaphorical backstabbing in the past make the thought of his feverishly plotting the aftermath of Johnson’s viral demise an amusing image. To me, anyway. I didn’t tweet it though, because social media is an absolute Willy Wonka’s chocolate factory for confected outrage. Since I don’t like the government, my joke would have been wilfully misinterpreted as an aggressive partisan statement. The humour would have been ignored and a claque of government loyalists would have spent a few days denouncing me for vindictively imputing such savage instincts to a selfless public servant like Michael Gove. And I didn’t fancy that, so I kept quiet. Margolyes is made of sterner stuff. She was asked to say what she felt and she did. It didn’t reflect well on the government. But the government doesn’t have to address that. It’s been let off the hook because 494 people declared themselves disgusted by the mere notion that hoping someone dies could be within the bounds of psychological possibility. So we have a superfluous and objectionable debate about whether the remark should have been allowed and her heartfelt criticism of the government’s pandemic response is entirely neutralised.