Belgian detectives have appealed for information about the identity of a gun-wielding man in a fresh attempt to crack the case of the “Crazy Brabant Killers”, a gang that murdered 28 people, including children, in a series of raids and robberies in the 1980s. A photograph of an unknown male, sent anonymously in 1986 to officers investigating the notorious group, has been reissued to the media on the order of a judge in a renewed attempt to secure justice for the killers’ victims. Standing in a forest, the suspect is pictured holding a double-barrel SPAS-12 shotgun made by the Italian company Franchi. During a three-year spree, the Brabant Killers staged more than a dozen raids on supermarkets, hostels and a gunsmith’s, during which they shot customers, staff and even children. They suddenly ceased their activities and disappeared in 1985. Prosecutors are in a race against time to solve the long-running case, as a special extension to the statute of limitations runs out in 2025. On issuing the photograph, Eric Van Duyse, a spokesman for the federal prosecutor’s office, said: “The person who gave this photo said that the individual who is on this photo is a very important person in the Brabant Killers case. “Investigators’ efforts [to identify this person] since then have come to nothing. But since the file was started from scratch, the decision was made to call the public to try to finally find this individual because it is potentially interesting. This is another step in the investigation.” The gang’s proficient handling of weapons has prompted theories that they were linked to the gendarmerie, a former paramilitary police force of Belgium. It has also been suggested the group was part of an attempt by the far left or right to undermine the state, something that only last year the Belgian government confirmed remained “a possibility”. The francophone gang’s apparent indifference to suffering, and their sudden unexplained disappearance after a spree of killings, has ensured the case has long had hold on the public imagination in Belgium. The gang – usually comprising three disguised men wearing face paint, known as “the Giant”, “the Killer” and “the Old Man”, who was also the getaway driver – would at times take petty cash and low-value goods, yet appeared content to shoot anyone in their way. The police are also seeking information about a man with a 3-5cm wine-stain birthmark at the nape of his neck who took part in one of the gang’s raids on a Delhaize supermarket in Beersel, on the southern outskirts of Brussels, in October 1983. The suspect is said to have been tall, about 1.85 to 1.9 metres (just over 6ft). The supermarket chain is offering a reward of €250,000 (£223,000) in exchange for information.