Essendon will be missing two players for their AFL game with Carlton on Saturday night with just James Stewart deemed a “close contact” of Conor McKenna, who returned a positive test for Covid-19 last weekend. The Bombers’ clash against the Blues at the MCG will go ahead as scheduled with fringe key forward Stewart the only other Bombers player, along with McKenna, forced self isolate following a ruling from the Department of Health and Human Services. The entire Essendon playing list was tested at Marvel Stadium on Monday and all results came back negative, including Stewart’s. But as he is McKenna’s wrestling partner, he will be required to self-isolate for 14 days while the rest of the playing group will return to training on Wednesday. “The first priority is the welfare of Conor and James,” AFL general counsel Andrew Dillon said. “The club, with support from the AFL will ensure the players receive the proper support while in self-isolation. “The protocols in place have been established, and since updated, for the sole purpose to protect the players, their families, staff and the wider community. Although these circumstances are unfortunate, it proves the protocols work, ensuring the number of people deemed close contacts was minimised. “What has unfolded in the last few days is a reminder to the whole competition that we must continue to be vigilant.” Stewart, 26, missed almost all of the 2019 campaign with a groin injury and did not feature in the Bombers’ opening two wins this year against Fremantle and Sydney. Essendon’s round-three clash with Melbourne last Sunday was postponed after McKenna’s positive test and has yet to be rescheduled. There were fears that the Bombers could be without a host of players for the next fortnight as fellow defenders Adam Saad, Cale Hooker, Michael Hurley, Matt Guelfi, Jordan Ridley and Mason Redman had reportedly been in McKenna’s training group. Full-contact training has since been banned at all clubs by the AFL in response to McKenna’s test result and with Covid-19 cases continuing to increase at concerning levels in Victoria. Clubs will be permitted to continue contact training in groups of up to nine, and larger groups can still conduct ball movement drills without contact.