Taylor Swift has accused local and state governments in the US of harbouring institutional racism, and has called on her fans to elect candidates committed to fighting police brutality. The pop star told her 86 million Twitter followers: “Racial injustice has been ingrained deeply into local and state governments, and changes MUST be made there. In order for policies to change, we need to elect people who will fight against police brutality and racism of any kind. #BlackLivesMatter.” She followed it with a link to an essay written by Barack Obama, in which he argues: “Aspirations have to be translated into specific laws and institutional practices – and in a democracy, that only happens when we elect government officials who are responsive to our demands.” Racial injustice has been ingrained deeply into local and state governments, and changes MUST be made there. In order for policies to change, we need to elect people who will fight against police brutality and racism of any kind. #BlackLivesMatter Swift has been criticised in the past for not using her huge platform to be vocal about Black Lives Matter and other political issues, but has been more outspoken of late. In May she sent a tweet to Donald Trump after he seemed to threaten violence against protestors with his line “when the looting starts, the shooting starts”. “After stoking the fires of white supremacy and racism your entire presidency, you have the nerve to feign moral superiority before threatening violence?” she wrote. “‘When the looting starts the shooting starts’??? We will vote you out in November.” Condemnation of the killing of George Floyd and support for the protests has been widespread across the music scene, with stars including Jay-Z, Beyoncé, Travis Scott and Billie Eilish making statements. US record company executives Jamila Thomas and Brianna Agyemang created a “blackout” day of silence in the industry to help reflect on race, under the name #TheShowMustBePaused – Swift took part with a post to her 134 million Instagram followers. The R&B singer Ne-Yo performed the Boyz II Men song It’s So Hard to Say Goodbye to Yesterday at Floyd’s funeral on Tuesday, though was criticised for referring to Floyd’s death as a “sacrifice”.