Sign up for the Week in Patriarchy, a newsletter​ on feminism and sexism sent every Saturday. Remember when Melania Trump stayed in New York for several months after her husband moved into the White House? At the time everyone thought it was because she hated Donald Trump’s guts. That’s probably true, but it turns out there’s another reason she didn’t immediately decamp to Washington DC: she was renegotiating her prenuptial agreement. According to a new book, The Art of Her Deal: The Untold Story of Melania Trump, Melania’s original prenup with Trump hadn’t been particularly generous. So she stayed in New York after Trump’s inauguration – which caused a minor scandal and cost the taxpayer hundreds of thousands of dollars in security costs – as leverage while she negotiated better terms. It’s not clear what Melania secured in her prenup. Separate bedrooms, perhaps? Cash payments every time she smiles in public? A copy of the alleged “pee tape” to be used as collateral in future negotiations? One can only speculate. What is becoming increasingly clear, however, is that Melania is not the helpless victim so many people seem desperate to believe she is. Melania has generated a lot of pity over the past few years; one tiny grimace in a photo sends the world into a frenzy of speculation about how miserable the poor woman must be. #FreeMelania, for example, trended after she was pictured looking glum at Trump’s inauguration. At the 2017 Women’s March on Washington there were banners with messages like: MELANIA: BLINK TWICE IF YOU NEED HELP. In 2018, when Melania wore a jacket with “I really don’t care. Do U?” on it, people wondered if she might be sending a message to her husband about his inhumane border policies. If the first lady Be Best at anything, it’s at getting people to give her the benefit of the doubt. It’s time to retire the #FreeMelania hashtag, the new biography of the first lady, written by Washington Post reporter Mary Jordan, argues. “She is … much more like [Trump] than it appears … Both are avid creators of their own history.” Take, for example, all those claims that Melania speaks four or five language fluently. According to Jordan’s reporting, rumours of this linguistic proficiency have been greatly exaggerated. It’s a bit like me saying I can speak Italian fluently because I know how to say ciao. While it’s cathartic to believe that Melania loathes Trump as much as the rest of us do, how she feels about her husband doesn’t matter. What matters is her actions. She has repeatedly excused and enabled Trump’s most vile instincts, including his racist attacks against Barack Obama. And, like the rest of the Trump family, she seems to have viewed the White House as an opportunity for private enrichment rather than public service. Far from being an unwilling first lady, Jordan claims “there is ample evidence” she “not only accepted and embraced Trump’s political aspirations but was also an encouraging partner”. As well as retiring the #FreeMelania hashtag, I think it’s time to retire the idea that, just because she doesn’t say much, there’s anything remotely mysterious or interesting about Melania. A biography of the first lady published last year (title: Free, Melania) describes her as “an enigma” and that language has been echoed repeatedly elsewhere. But Melania is not a riddle, wrapped in a mystery, inside an enigma. She’s just an opportunist wrapped in Chanel. “No-knock” search warrants have been banned in Louisville following the death of Breonna Taylor, the 26-year-old emergency technician killed by police in March while asleep in her own home. It is great that Taylor is getting legislation named after her, but you know what would be make it even better? Actually seeing justice get done. The police officers who killed her still haven’t been arrested or fired. What makes this even more infuriating is the fact that there have been sexual assault allegations against Brett Hankison, one of the officers involved in Taylor’s shootings. In recent months Egyptian authorities have arrested a number of female social media influencers, accusing them of spreading “immorality”. One of the women in question was charged with “promoting debauchery” after posting a TikTok video in which, sobbing, she said she had been gang-raped. The Catholic island nation is the only EU country that has a total ban on abortion – there aren’t even any exceptions for rape, incest or the health of the mother. This is awful at the best of times, but border closures during the coronavirus crisis have made things even worse. A charity that helps people travel from Malta to countries with more liberal laws says it saw a huge increase in calls to its hotline when borders closed in March: “The contacts we are getting are a lot more frantic.” Gelman’s resignation comes after numerous controversies and accusations by employees that the trendy (and expensive) women’s club “doesn’t practice the intersectional feminism that it preaches to the rest of the world”. That’s according to André Leon Talley, the former Vogue editor-at-large. “She’s part of an environment of colonialism,” the 71-year-old said in an interview. “She is entitled and I do not think she will ever let anything get in the way of her white privilege.” It only took the publication 153 years to catch up with the times. It is safe to say that Kathy Sullivan is having a rather more productive lockdown than the rest of us. The New York City health department’s updated advice for “safer sex and Covid-19” has raised a number of eyebrows as it rather seems like they’re endorsing glory holes.