What were you hoping for?To meet someone new and to lose my Uber Eats virginity. First impressions?At first glance, he looked much more grownup than me. Luckily he wasn’t. What did you talk about?Our favourite lockdown pastimes; what we were missing the most (he misses Wagamama; I miss the tube and coffee shop dates); and the strange but brave feat of a virtual date. Any awkward moments?Plenty. Let’s just say my nerves got the better of me. Good table manners?He ate his pizza very gracefully. Unfortunately, my Greek takeaway never arrived. How long did you stay on the call?Hours, pretty good eh? Best thing about Jack?His interests seem rather like my own. We like similar music artists and gave each other some new music to try. Did you introduce him to your housemates?Considering I live with my parents, no. Describe Jack in three wordsConscientious, smart, “gym lad”. What do you think he made of you?Not his type, confirmed by the fact that he hasn’t followed me back on Instagram yet… Any connection issues?Nope. And… did you swap numbers?Yes. How did the call end?Conversation went full circle and it was getting late, so we called it a night. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Not to be reviewed afterwards. Marks out of 10?Oh I’m terrible at stuff like this… 6 perhaps? Would you meet again in-person?I doubt he would want to but if I’m mistaken, then sure. What were you hoping for?An escape from the quarantine routine. I thought the odds of meeting “the one” were slim, but went into the call with an open mind. First impressions?She was smiley and we got chatting quickly, despite us both being a touch apprehensive. What did you talk about? Favourite artists, podcasts, TV shows and films. When we were discussing her work as a barista, I was lucky enough to see some photos revealing how her latte art had progressed from phallic to heart-shaped. Any awkward moments?We moved from Ruthie’s bedroom to her living room and there was some to-ing and fro-ing between Ruthie and a family member. Good table manners? Ruthie’s order for herself and her family didn’t materialise. How long did you stay on the call?We started at 7pm and ended just after 9.30pm. Best thing about Ruthie?She held a great conversation. We got through a lot of topics and shared our interests, mainly due to her ability to ask questions. Did you introduce her to your housemates?I live alone at the moment. Describe Ruthie in three wordsFriendly, attentive, apologetic. What do you think she made of you?She was interested in the things that keep me busy. Any connection issues?None. We might’ve talked over each other or misheard once or twice, but that’s about it. And… did you swap numbers?We traded numbers near the end of the call and texted one another after to say thanks for the evening. How did the call end?Our goodbyes were accompanied by a classic webcam wave. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I might’ve brought up ordering sooner; I was getting a little hungry. Marks out of 10?6/10. Would you meet again in person?The topic of a second date came up during the call, but I think if we were to meet again it would just be as friends. • Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com.