Japan’s public broadcaster, NHK, has come under fire after its attempt to explain the Black Lives Matter movement in anime form was condemned as offensive and misleading. The animated clip features black men and women standing on a burned-out street with their fists raised, while an African-American man explains, to musical accompaniment, the cause of the protests that have rocked dozens of US cities over the past two weeks. Black people are angry, says the muscular male character, because of the wealth gap between black and white Americans and the disproportionate toll the coronavirus outbreak is taking on the African-American community in the US. The clip, made for an NHK programme that aims to explain world events to children, makes no mention of George Floyd, whose death while in police custody sparked the protests, or police brutality. Social media users condemned the video for perpetuating stereotypes of African-Americans. Others pointed out that all of the protesters in the clip were black, even though people of all races have been taking part the protests, which have spread to other countries, including Japan. Joseph M Young, the chargé d’affaires ad interim at the US embassy in Tokyo, tweeted: “While we understand @NHK’s intent to address complex racial issues in the United States, it’s unfortunate that more thought and care didn’t go into this video. The caricatures used are offensive and insensitive.” Another user wrote: “NHK, have you not followed George Floyd or Black Lives Matter at all? Or learned that racial caricature is harmful? Or seen videos showing diverse, multiracial participation at the protests? Are you not embarrassed?” Baye McNeil, an African-American writer based in Japan, condemned the video as “offensive”. He tweeted: “There is absolutely nothing redeeming about it! If you don’t understand the real issues in the US you should just ask, or do your homework! Not give your viewers nonsense and misinformation while clowning us like this! This is so bad!” One of many Japanese users who condemned the video wrote in response to McNeil: “As a Japanese citizen, I totally agree with you. I know that cartoon is nothing but shame. This cartoon simply reflects how many Japanese know or understand nothing about the #BlackLivesMatter.” Black Lives Matter protests were held in Tokyo and Osaka last weekend, with some demonstrators condemning the treatment of a Kurdish man by Japanese police officers after he was stopped for an alleged traffic violation earlier this month. The Japanese tennis star Naomi Osaka has voiced support for the Black Lives Matter movement and encouraged people to join protests in Japan. When other users claimed Japan did not have a problem with racism, Osaka reminded them that two Japanese comedians had been forced to apologise to her last October for saying during a live show that she looked “too sunburned” and suggested she “needed some bleach”. One of Osaka’s sponsors apologised after “whitewashing” her in an advertisement last year. In an ad for its Cup Noodle range of instant ramen, Nissin depicted the player, who has a Japanese mother and Haitian father, with pale skin, wavy brown hair and Caucasian facial features.