Leon Goretzka’s 86th-minute goal gave Bayern Munich a 2-1 victory over visitors Borussia Mönchengladbach on Saturday, meaning they need only one win in their last three matches to secure the Bundesliga title. Goretzka tapped in Benjamin Pavard’s cutback to send Bayern seven points clear at the top of the table from Borussia Dortmund.Bayern took the lead in the 26th minute when Gladbach keeper Yann Sommer, having made a sensational save only seconds earlier, passed the ball out into the path of Bayern’s Joshua Zirkzee, who fired home. The visitors, themselves in the hunt for a Champions League spot, went into the break level when the France international Pavard scored an own goal as he attempted to clear a Patrick Herrmann cutback. Sommer made amends with a fine save from a Serge Gnabry effort but was helpless a little later when Goretzka showed up with far too much space in the box to snatch the winner. Bayern, who could seal the title on Tuesday at Werder Bremen, are on 73 points, with Dortmund on 66. Gladbach remain fourth on 56. Earlier, the Borussia Dortmund substitute Erling Braut Haaland headed a stoppage-time winner to give them a 1-0 victory at Fortuna Düsseldorf. Haaland scoredon the last attack of a flat game in which Dortmund had struggled to create many chances. They survived several scares before Raphaël Guerreiro volleyed in just past the hour. His effort, however, was cancelled by a VAR review for handball. Fortuna, in the relegation play-off spot, twice hit the woodwork through Steven Skrzybski, first in the 82nd minute with a low shot and eight minutes later after breaking clear. But Haaland made sure of a last-gasp win when he rose high to connect with a Manuel Akanji cross. Second-bottom Werder Bremen boosted their survival hopes by thrashing bottom-of-the-table Paderborn 5-1, with the former Everton midfielder Davy Klaassen scoring twice in the first half after Paderborn missed an early penalty. The away win takes Werder level on 28 points with Düsseldorf and all but relegates Paderborn. Cometh the hour, cometh the man...Erling Haaland heads home a 95th-minute winner for Borussia Dortmund 🙌Off the bench as he came back from injury, he had one chance and he buried it 🔥 pic.twitter.com/U3LIQotSQs Union Berlin moved a step closer to securing survival in their first season in Bundesliga with a 2-1 win at Cologne. Marvin Friedrich’s first-half header edged Union in front and then Christian Gentner smashed home from close range in the second half to secure the points before Jhon Córdoba’s late consolation strike. Hertha Berlin were left to rue Dedryck Boyata’s sending off before the break as Eintracht Frankfurt came from behind to win 4-1, while Freiburg fought back from going two goals down in the first half to draw 2-2 at Wolfsburg.