The number of people in the UK who are living “an almost cashless life” has more than doubled in two years to reach 7.4 million, official data shows. UK Finance, a trade association for Britain’s banking and financial services sector, said the changes in payment habits had inadvertently left the nation better prepared to cope with life under lockdown than would have been the case a few years ago. The figures relate to 2019 – so predate the coronavirus outbreak, which has accelerated the adoption of contactless payment – and are likely to fuel concern about millions of people potentially being left behind as the shift to a cashless society speeds up. Fewer than one in four payments were made with cash, while more than half were made by card, for the first time. The balance is payments made by other means, such as direct debits and bank transfers. The data shows that almost one in seven of the population were choosing to live a largely cashless life in 2019, though for those aged 16 to 34 it was one in four. A cashless lifestyle is defined as either not using notes and coins at all, or only once a month. In 2018, the figure was one in 10 of the population, or 5.4 million people. In 2017 it was 3.4 million. Last year more than half of all payments were made with a card for the first time, with a fresh surge in contactless use. UK Finance said the increasing enthusiasm for these payment methods “may have helped prepare customers for the changes they now face due to the coronavirus lockdown”. It said the impact of Covid-19 “may accelerate these habits for many customers” but added that more than 2 million people still mainly used notes and coins, so it was “working flat out” to ensure the public continued to have access to cash and everyday banking services. The UK Finance report shows that cash payments continued their long-term decline in 2019, falling by 15% to 9.3bn payments, though it was still the second most popular payment method in the UK after debit cards. This means cash fell below a quarter of all payments for the first time – the 2019 figure of 23% compares with 58% just a decade earlier. Of those living a completely or largely cashless life, young people were leading the way, said the banking body. The report found 25% of those aged 16 to 24 fell into this category, as did 24% of those aged 25 to 34. However, there are people of all ages who rarely or never use cash: for example, for those aged 65-plus it is 7%. UK Finance previously predicted that by 2028, notes and coins would account for just 9% of all payments, though it said it was not publishing new 10-year forecasts because of the pandemic. With so many places where people use cash currently shut, such as pubs and cafes, some shops are refusing to take notes and coins at the moment. The cash machine network Link reported a 55% drop in ATM volumes during the lockdown, and many experts say it is not clear whether consumers will continue with their new spending habits once the restrictions are fully lifted. Debit cards were the most used method last year with 17bn payments, while the number of contactless payments across debit and credit cards increased by 16% to 8.6bn. “Trends in payment habits may have also increased lockdown preparedness, as supermarkets were the most popular place for contactless spending in 2019,” said the report. The findings came days after consumer group Which? warned that vulnerable people risked being unable to access the money they needed to pay for goods and services unless the government acted to support the “fragile” cash system.