Voting is under way in Poland’s presidential election, with the incumbent, Andrzej Duda, up against a field of challengers including the liberal mayor of Warsaw, Rafał Trzaskowski. Duda, who campaigned on a deeply conservative social agenda that was often laced with homophobia, is allied with Poland’s ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party, which since coming to power in 2015 has clashed with Brussels over eroding the country’s rule of law. Opponents hope that if Duda is defeated, the legislative agenda of PiS could be stymied by presidential veto, and a new era of Polish politics would begin. The election was initially scheduled for May, when Duda had a commanding lead in the polls and was expected to win easily. It was postponed at the last minute because of the coronavirus pandemic, and the race has since narrowed, partly the result of Trzaskowski’s late entrance. Recent polls suggest that although Duda is still likely to win, he will probably fail to get the 50% required to avoid a run-off. A run-off would take place in two weeks time, and polls suggest a race between Duda and Trzaskowski would be extremely close, with no clear favourite. People were mostly voting in person, although they were required to wear masks at polling stations. In one region where coronavirus numbers are still high, people were ordered to vote by post. Poland has had about 34,000 confirmed coronavirus cases, significantly fewer than in many western European countries, and life in the country has largely been back to normal for the past month. “I voted for Trzaskowski of course. Why? For democracy, the judiciary and respect for minorities,” 66-year-old Joanna Ugniewska told Agence France-Presse, after casting her ballot in Warsaw. Much of Duda’s support comes from smaller towns and villages, which are traditional PiS strongholds. Duda’s campaign drew controversy for using homophobic rhetoric in an attempt to rally this conservative PiS base. He made a pledge to “defend children from LGBT ideology”, and compared the LGBT rights agenda to communism. He also sought to gain a last-minute boost with a visit to Washington on Wednesday for what was in effect an endorsement from Donald Trump. He did not, however, return with the concrete US commitments on increased troop numbers stationed in Poland he had hoped for. Trzaskowski has been a supporter of LGBT rights during his time as Warsaw mayor, but has tried to sidestep the issue during the campaign.