One month after France ended its strict eight-week lockdown, there has been no rise in coronavirus cases as life returns towards normality. The number of new Covid-19 cases continued to drop even as most of France reopened for business – while maintaining physical distancing and protection measures – with the number of additional deaths down to its lowest figure since March. France’s health authorities say there are only 933 patients in intensive care with the virus across the country, down from a peak of 7,148 in April, and the number of new admissions to emergency units was 20 in the last 24 hours. This figure has not been above 50 in the last three weeks. An estimated total of 29,319 people have died of Covid-19 in France in hospitals and care homes since the pandemic began – an increase of 23 deaths in hospital in the last day. Of this total, more than a third of deaths occurred in care homes, but the government has stopped updating the figures because of the difficulty of accurately establishing a cause of death. Almost 72,000 people diagnosed with Covid-19 have recovered and been discharged from hospital. Announcing the second phase of the lifting of restrictions at the end of last month, three weeks after the end of lockdown, the prime minister, Édouard Philippe, said the health figures were better than hoped for. The newspaper Liberation, which has analysed the data since 11 May, agreed. “Since 11 May different tools allowing us to measure the extent of the Covid-19 epidemic in France have continued to confirm the trend at the end of the lockdown; that is a slow, progressive but constant return towards normality.” It added: “The coronavirus is still killing, it’s true, but less and less.” However, it added: “A return to zero [deaths] is nevertheless premature at this stage. The curve appears to have reached a plateau of around 40 deaths every day, and may remain at this level for the moment. Conversely, it seems improbable the curve will rise again in the coming weeks.” Emmanuel Macron will address the nation on Sunday evening, when the president is expected to begin closing the door on the coronavirus crisis and address the forthcoming economic emergency with a “post-virus” plan to put the country back on its feet. It will be the first time since the end of April, when he announced the lockdown was being lifted, that Macron has made a national address. After a nationwide shortage of face masks during the peak of the health crisis, France now has a surplus. Manufacturers are urging the public to shun paper “surgical” masks – most of them from China – in favour of reusable, washable masks made in France. Manufacturers, who say they have too many fabric masks and are in debt because they cannot sell them, argue that this makes sense on economical and ecological grounds and have demanded the government issues a clear message. France’s economy ministry said it had warned producers last month that “demand wouldn’t always be so high and they should take that into account”, but a junior economy minister, Agnès Pannier-Runacher, said she heard the appeal from companies and promised a plan of action to help them. “The French prefer the single-use surgical masks, most of which are imported from China,” said a ministry spokesperson. “In their minds it’s more safe than a fabric mask … but what annoys us is that the large companies have chosen to supply staff with throwaway masks, which isn’t very ecological or good for our economy.”