All games are behind closed doors for the foreseeable future but when Northampton welcome Cheltenham in the League Two play-off semi-final first leg on Thursday, the crowd will boast a familiar face in the shape of Shaquille O’Neal, the 7ft 1in NBA hall of famer. The American’s likeness will be among thousands of weird and wonderful cutouts to take their place in the stands after clubs invited supporters to make their presence felt. “If it was a life-size, Shaq would have to be at the back,” says the Northampton chairman, Kelvin Thomas, a business associate of the former Los Angeles Lakers centre. Keith Curle, the Northampton manager, jokes O’Neal will take up four seats and the 48-year-old is certainly one of the club’s biggest supporters. “He is always asking me how the club’s going,” says Thomas. “When I got involved with Northampton, he was supportive and he did a couple of videos during the [2015-16] League Two championship-winning season. “Hopefully people see it as a bit of fun, sitting in the crowd with Shaquille. He hasn’t been to a game, yet but we have talked about it. He does love England and if he was in England at the time of a game he would definitely come along, but he’s very heavily involved with basketball, different businesses and his charity work. The timing has never really worked, but this is the next best thing.” At the return leg on Monday, eagle-eyed television viewers can expect to spot EastEnders’ Phil Mitchell, Donald Trump and Dominic Cummings in Gloucestershire. Beyond the big names and Cold War Steve baddies, there are Z-listers, animals and cartoon characters. Then there is the photoshopped image of Dale Vince, the owner of rival Forest Green Rovers, wearing a Cheltenham shirt. Clubs are charging about £20-25 for a cutout. Murry Toms, an associate director at Cheltenham, started the ball rolling after being struck by Borussia Mönchengladbach’s 12,000-strong army of artificial supporters; Cheltenham will call on the backing of more than 1,000 “fans” from six continents, including former players Steve Elliott and Steven Gillespie, while a dozen Northampton “supporters” will be in the away end. “We wanted to bring a bit of the Bundesliga to Whaddon Road,” Toms says. “We’ve got the cast of Only Fools and Horses and somebody has sent a picture of them in a horse mask.” The cutouts are primarily good fun – a simple initiative to help fans support their club during the crisis – but in some cases they are extremely poignant, with many taking the opportunity to pay tribute to loved ones. Among those images in the stands at Northampton will be the former season-ticket holder Harry Dunn, who was killed in a crash outside RAF Croughton in August. His motorcycle collided with a car driven by Anne Sacoolas, who fled to the US claiming diplomatic immunity. Harry’s face will be alongside his father, Tim, and brother Miles. “His memory and his spirit will always live on and he will always be known to this club,” says the Northampton midfielder Alan McCormack. “That’s what this initiative has brought; it’s brought communities together, kept memories alive and we, as players, want to hopefully bring joy to the people that are not here with us now.” At Cheltenham, whose durable Foamex cutouts (PVC foam sheets) have been created by a local commercial printer, Typecraft, 10% of profits will go to the club’s charity partner, the Hollie Gazzard Trust, set up to reduce domestic violence following the murder of the 20-year-old hairdresser in 2014. “It is an incredibly challenging time for our community but we wanted to try and finish the season together and have a bit of fun while we’re at it,” says Toms. “The Trust has struggled because of cancellations to fundraising events so it was important for us to show some solidarity with them through this campaign.” Exeter are making the 500-mile round trip to Colchester on Thursday on two or three coaches, leaving at about 7.30am, but when they return to Devon they will be made to feel at home. At St James Park for the return leg on Monday dogs, goats, cats, and camels will be on show in the crowd. There will also be a cut-out bearing the face of Adam Stansfield, the club’s former striker who died of bowel cancer 10 years ago, paid for by The Terrace, an alternative merchandise retailer and club partner. “Play-offs are probably the most nerve-racking point of any season because it’s all or nothing,” says the company’s co-director Carl Sewell. “You need a little bit of luck, someone looking over you and we thought it would be a nice little touch to put Stanno there looking over the team. It felt like it was a way for us to give something back to the fans. “We have been on this little journey with the club – we’ve done retro shirts together and made a donation towards the defibrillator in the Adam Stansfield stand. We thought we would pay homage to one of Exeter’s legends on behalf of the city and the fans.”