The Yorkshire Dales are known for picturesque countryside, wild heather moorland, dry stone walls, hay meadows and pretty villages. Rural homelessness is not what springs to mind. House prices in the national park average just over £317,000, more than double than in the wider region. Last year rural communities saw a rise in homelessness from 9,312 to 17,212. These areas are often considered to be affluent. I asked Adam what he misses the most. He looks at me and then at the ground … 'My one-year-old son' I asked the men to put meaningful possessions outside their cabins. The answer was almost always the same. I don’t have anything. A phone. Sunglasses. A key. A rucksack. A watch Adam* is a builder. Now out of work, he was living out of the back of his van when lockdown began. I first met him on Good Friday. With the two public health crises of homelessness and coronavirus colliding head-on, he was referred to the Jonas Centre. He arrived on Thursday and was just settling in. I asked Adam what he misses the most. He looks at me and then at the ground. “My one-year-old son,” he says. In rural areas the homeless are rarely visible, sleeping in barns, under bridges, in graveyards, in tents far from public view, going from couch to couch, and sleeping in cars. The effects are still the same. The moors. The road leads out to the town of Richmond and the army base at Catterick. Sunset over the cabins. In total, there are nine. When this crisis began, I knew we were going to have to shut down. Rather than leave the cabins empty, I reached out to the district council to offer accommodation. We currently have five people on the site who were homeless The Jonas Centre sits in the heart of Wensleydale, a tranquil site with log cabins that seems far removed from the pandemic. People often assume there is no poverty in a place like this. The holiday centre offers subsidised cabins for underprivileged families, carers who need a break, adults with special needs and those with disabilities, alongside regular rate holidays. It is offering its log cabins for individuals and families who are homeless in the Richmondshire district. When the crisis began, Simon Eastwood, the centre director, acted early: “I knew we were going to have to shut down. We had log cabins here that were sitting empty. I said to the council, ‘we’ve worked with you before providing for the homeless, we want to do it again’.” The prayer barn built by Simon, which he used as a space for recovery after his son died. Simon runs the centre. He has had to furlough most of his staff and wanted to do something to help the homeless during the pandemic. It is no surprise that unhoused people are the most vulnerable to the Covid-19 virus. There are so many reasons someone can become homeless: a bereavement, a relationship breakdown, the loss of a job, struggles with addiction. In many areas the rising price of homes and lack of affordable housing contributes. It is not just bad luck. In Yorkshire the rise of homelessness has gone hand in hand with well-paid professionals flocking to the area and driving up house prices. There is an need for affordable housing across the whole Richmondshire district. Prices have inched higher and higher, and more properties are second homes. From 2010 to 2016, rural local authorities recorded a 32% rise in cases of homelessness. Hopefully at the end of the pandemic homeless people won’t have to go back to the streets Matthew* became homeless after his relationship broke down. He was struggling with alcoholism, PTSD, and combat trauma. “I couldn’t pay my rent or pay my rates or anything like that. So that’s how I ended up on the streets.” Three of the men here are ex-forces. The virus has meant that those who were already struggling have become homeless. Jonny* explains: “I was evicted from my property last month and was in the process of looking for a private rent until we went on lockdown.” Matthew keeps his cabin in spotless order. He has PTSD and combat trauma. He was struggling with alcoholism last year. The cabins offer a safe space to physically distance and the residents have their own cabins. They were built in the 1970s but recently renovated. The internet comes from a red public phone box. The men have laundry facilities, a fridge, a TV and heating. There are still problems; for many of the men it is hard to adjust to this very different lifestyle and the worry of what will happen next hangs over them. There is a very real possibility of large numbers of people becoming homeless as a result of a loss of income during the coronavirus crisis. Eric is a volunteer at the centre where he is looking after the animals and the grounds. He is ex-army and has connected well with the men who were also in the forces “Hopefully at the end of the pandemic homeless people won’t have to go back to the streets,” says Matthew. Lord Bird, the founder of the Big Issue, says: “We cannot allow the streets to return to where they were pre-Covid-19 … I want the government to say, ‘Okay, we will not allow this situation to happen again’. It is crucial that they survive to come out the other side too.” *Some names and identifying details have been changed to protect the privacy of individuals. My personal story It happened so quickly for me. I had turbulent teenage years filled with loss and trauma. I had no choice but to try and escape. To do that at 17 years old meant becoming homeless. I am one of the lucky ones. I was young and registered at a college which meant these months didn’t last long. I remember being embarrassed, and fearful. I didn’t want anyone to know. After those months I went on to sofa surf with a boyfriend before finding help to rent in Longsight, Manchester. Without being able to have that room I wouldn’t be able to work and live as I do now. There were lasting effects from those months that I still have to work through 10 years later. From this experience I know how easily it can happen, and how quickly circumstances can slide. It becomes a vicious cycle, and the consequences affect you for years to come. Joanne Coates The Jonas trust charity is a Wensleydale business located at Redmire near Leyburn in the Yorkshire Dales. The centre still has room for people or families who find themselves homeless during the pandemic. If you are affected by the issues in this article and live in the Richmondshire district you can contact Richmondshire council’s housing options team on 01748 901150, or email housing.options@richmondshire.gov.uk