Back in the day, Method Man used to be a cleaner at the Statue of Liberty. The symbolism feels apt because the story of the Staten Island hip-hop collective is the American dream as it should be written. Featuring in-depth interviews with all the main players and plenty of magnificent archive footage, this series tells their tale. There is friction after a long, stormy relationship, but enduring love and respect, too. “I still write my rhymes to impress these dudes,” says Method Man. Phil Harrison The repackaged father-and-son travelogue continues, providing more envy-fodder for anyone desperately in need of a holiday. Bradley and his son Barney arrive in Florida, which was home to Bradley’s favourite writer, the notorious hell-raiser Ernest Hemingway. PH After 10 weeks of savvy stitches and unexpected hitches, GBSB’s 12 hopefuls have been trimmed down to just three. The theme of the grand final is suitably celebratory, with the added challenge of trying to outshine Joe Lycett’s natty pearlescent jacket. Graeme Virtue Seeking the George Clarke seal of approval this week is Marianne in Buckinghamshire. She wants to turn a dilapidated shed into a three-room haven for her family. Meanwhile, in Chile, George has an architectural epiphany. How will the Santiago Baha’i temple inspire his home observatory? Ellen E Jones This documentary about the National Enquirer manages to be great fun and a serious exploration of the dawning of “fake news”. How did the paper transition from its early trademark of hilarious idiocy to become a purveyor of dangerous conspiracy theories and disinformation? PH A double bill of lockdown larks with David Tennant, Simon Evans and Michael Sheen. Tonight, a new cast member, Adrian Lester, is dragged in by Simon to make him look good. Meanwhile, David finishes a draft of his screenplay and Michael worries about his neighbour when an ambulance turns up. Ali Catterall On Chesil Beach (Dominic Cooke, 2017), 9pm, BBC TwoIn a gloomy Dorset hotel in 1962, newlywed virgins Florence (Saoirse Ronan) and Edward (Billy Howle) prepare to consummate their marriage – with disastrous results. Adapted by Ian McEwan from his own novella, it is a handsome-looking, tender, and very English drama. Paul Howlett Premier League football: Manchester United v Sheffield United 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Face-off at Old Trafford. Premier League football: Newcastle United v Aston Villa 5.45pm, BT Sport 1. The clash from St James’ Park. Premier League football: Liverpool v Crystal Palace 8pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Live action from Anfield.