Integrate That! | Refugee Journalism Project On the Record: Refugee Stories | nationalarchives.gov.uk The Worldwide Tribe Podcast | theworldwidetribe.com Last week was Refugee Week, an annual event that celebrates the contribution of refugees to Britain, and there was a small flurry of interesting podcasts that came out to celebrate: some from refugees themselves, some from those who archive or report their experiences. Abdulwahab “Abdul” Tahhan is a twentysomething refugee from Syria who decided to make a podcast – Integrate That! – because, he says, “we want to represent ourselves by ourselves”. Tahhan’s hosting is one of the strengths of this five-part series: his warmth, honesty and humour mean that his first guest, Baraa, who is also a Syrian refugee, responded in kind. Tahhan arrived at his new home, Southampton, aged 25, a few years ago – “I thought it was a big park, not a city” – and Integrate That!’s first episode, Mental Health, moves from this big park to Tahhan’s description of his regular flashbacks and nightmares and how that can affect him. We don’t need the details. Both he and Baraa are from Aleppo and it’s not just the Syrian war that has left scars. Children in Syria do not have the same rights as those in the UK. “You might be traumatised, but you don’t know it,” says Baraa, who describes how children are “abused, patronised, mistreated… It really breaks personalities, puts down aspirations, limits abilities and imaginations.” Tahhan tells a story of how his mum, when called in by a teacher to talk about his behaviour at school, said to the teacher: “You can beat him, you can skin him alive and send the bones to me.” Baraa remembered a time when he forgot his trainers for a sports class. The teacher slapped him six times across the face. Such tales make Tahhan and Baraa chuckle together, not because the events weren’t traumatising, but because they were. Such memories have to be held inside and lived with. This is alongside the difficulties of fitting into a new society while trying to maintain ties with home. So, when well-meaning westerners tell Tahhan and Baraa to “enjoy the moment”, they find it funny. “What moment do you mean, exactly?” they wonder. The National Archives has a podcast, On the Record, which I’ve reviewed before, and last week it gave us a special episode, Refugee Stories. This used Britain’s history, especially that of the 20th century, to look at some of the stories of those who took refuge here. This podcast is calm and clear, carefully defining the difference between a migrant and a refugee, consulting historical records to illustrate. We heard about 4,000 children from the Basque region in northern Spain who were sent to England in 1937 (initially, they were all put in a camp in Hampshire). Also about partition – the terrible colonial decision to divide the subcontinent into India and Pakistan – and how that affected people. Iqbal Singh, who works at the National Archives, has experience of this story, with both his mum and dad being refugees because of partition. He interviewed his mum for the podcast. Ela Kaczmarska, another National Archives employee, recently found some of her dead father’s details in the archive and read them out. Her father grew up in Poland and joined the army in 1937. During the second world war he was imprisoned in several concentration camps before coming to Britain as a refugee. Iqbal and Ela’s individual reactions to their own family history made this episode come alive. The Worldwide Tribe Podcast is an excellent interview podcast hosted by Jaz O’Hara, who works with refugees. The first episode of the third series came out yesterday: an interview with Rob Lawrie, who tried to smuggle a four-year-old girl from the Calais camps to the UK, on impulse. I have reservations about Lawrie (there’s an in-depth series about him, Girl Taken, on BBC Sounds), but O’Hara is great and this new series promises interviews with the amazing Waad Al-Kateab, Syrian journalist and director of For Sama, and Hassan Akkad, also Syrian, who has worked for the NHS during the Covid crisis. In the meantime, I’d recommend you check out the first two series, especially the stories of Mez and Nhat-Anh, as well as that of O’Hara’s mum, who fosters refugee children. BuddyLine (Sonder Radio/Reform Radio)Reform Radio is a Manchester-based online radio station that helps young people into employment. Sonder Radio is also a Manchester-based online radio station, but it caters for older people. For BuddyLine, the two stations linked up, pairing elders with youngers for one-on-one phone chats, about lockdown and anything else. The results are lovely and often surprising, with the young people taken aback at just how much the older people have done in their lives. Each pair become increasingly easy with each other as the calls progress. Try Katie and the extremely adventurous Rosetta to start. In Your Place (Boom Shakalaka) Short, beautifully produced episodes from great young audio-makers. Introduced by Gemma Cairney, these original pieces are designed to take us to somewhere else – a specific place – and to be heard on headphones. First up is Natural Born Isolator, from Rhiannon Walsh, who has a chronic illness and reflects on her flat as a place of safety. Subsequent episodes, from Raymond Tannor, Malizah, Leyla Pillai and Chantal Herbert, talk us through memories of Ghana, take a poet’s walk through Bristol and watch pigeons from a flat window. Herbert’s features testimony from women who have suffered domestic violence during lockdown. The Sound Off Ladies An unusual podcast this, in that it’s silent. Made for deaf people, this is a visual podcast made by four bright and impressive American women: Marlee Matlin, Alexis Kashar, Liz Tannenbaum and Wendy Adams. Matlin, you may well recognise as the Oscar-winning actress from Children of a Lesser God; Kashar is a civil rights attorney and tech entrepreneur; Tannenbaum, a cooking show host; Adams, a communications manager. The show, in Zoom format, features them chatting to each other and interviewing various guests. Signing throughout, of course.