Every person is different. The early coronavirus mantra that “we are all in this together” was true to a point, with the global pandemic exposing our collective human frailty. But through speaking to dozens of people for our Postcards from the pandemic series, it became obvious that vulnerability was relative. Having a white-collar job that you can perform at home eased the pain and provided some benefits. Losing a job or trying to keep a business afloat was far more stressful. Our first postcard was about a small businesswoman, Kristy Busuttil, a former Commonwealth Games gold medallist in taekwondo who teaches the martial art in a studio in Melbourne. There were the financial strains – no income, and bills to pay – and the crucial emotional ones, a thread through many of our stories. There was the uncertainty about what might happen, the fear of someone you love contracting Covid-19. And there were intangible impacts. “[Teaching] gives me some sort of outlet, some sort of purpose to my life,” Busuttil said. “When you go from working and being focused on a goal and a dream, then all of a sudden it’s taken away from you, it’s very scary.” This week, her studio opened for face-to-face classes for the first time since March. For a few months at least, norms were tossed into the air, and challenges that seemed too hard were suddenly possible. It took a public health crisis for Aubrey Roe and his two youngest daughters to find relief from a two-year search for somewhere to live. Those sleeping on the streets could unwittingly spread the virus, so almost overnight state governments housed thousands in hotels and motels. In Roe’s case, it was Indigenous advocacy groups in Perth who did a deal with a boutique hotel in Fremantle to house people who had nowhere else to go. “Life can be hard at times, but it can also be nice,” Roe told the Guardian Australia journalist Luke Henriques-Gomes. Homeless groups say the pandemic has given us an opportunity if we grasp it to end rough sleeping for good. So far, fears that coronavirus would devastate Indigenous communities have not eventuated, due to strong efforts by governments to lock remote communities down, and through communities themselves taking action. Like many others, the east Kimberley artist Shirley Purdie, 73, left town to return to her remote homeland, in her case Mabel Downs. It was the safest place to be. For those on the health frontline, there was a sense of purpose and contribution. The Sydney doctor Brandon Verdonk volunteered to run the Covid-19 testing clinic at Westmead hospital: “You feel like you can make a small difference in this pandemic time and that’s empowering.” A Melbourne public transport cleaner, Fawad, felt the same. “If we are not disinfecting the trains, maybe someone get the coronavirus.” Businesses large and small lost huge amounts of income, although the wage subsidy scheme, jobkeeper, helped enormously. The North Queensland tourism operator Steve Edmondson grew impatient at the interstate border closures. Restaurant owners including John Mitchell of the Mornington Peninsula’s Montalto were happy, for now, with a slow, steady and safe reopening. What also came through was a discussion about how this remarkable crisis might shift thinking, act as wake-up call. A year 12 student, Zoe Latimore, missed school and worried about her results, but she liked hanging out with her family in a way they had not done for years. Restaurants and cafes offering takeaway is here to stay. Working from home has its downsides and its upsides. There was a new appreciation for those who do essential work for modest remuneration. “I could not do what they do,” said a software engineer, Robert Merkel, of early childhood educators. The pandemic has upended lives but, for some, it has been shattering. Maureen Preedy, 69, died in hospital from Covid-19 after most likely contracting it on a cruise ship. Her husband, Barry, was unable to see his wife of almost 50 years as she died. He also contracted the virus and was kept isolated in a hotel room for two more weeks. Jonathon Cartwright was far luckier. He, too, contracted Covid-19, and isolated at home in Melbourne for a fortnight until he recovered. He was brave enough to reveal his own foolishness, his own ignorance. Cartwright had flown to London with a friend in early March to see a band – and both of them contracted the virus. His wife, Christine, hadn’t wanted him to go, and he felt stupid for his cavalier approach: “I took the risk and I fucked up.” Cartwright, too, is in a process of rethinking things. Those who held us together and are still doing so are healthcare workers, teachers, cleaners, supermarket attendants and public health officials. “[This] has the potential for a recalibration of what’s right, both for individuals and their health, but also for the community,” he says.