Kanye West is set to become a beauty mogul. It’s been revealed that he’s planning expand his Yeezy line to include a range of wellness and lifestyle products. The rapper and fashion designer has filed a trademark for Yeezy Beauty and its products will include makeup, fake eyelashes, face masks, nail polishes, moisturisers, body oils, bath gels, shaving creams, haircare products, perfume, toothpaste, deodorant, scented pinecones and aromatherapy pillows, reports TMZ. In 2017 West filed a trademark for Donda beauty, named after his mother, which never reached fruition. The beauty market, which is expected to be worth $805bn (£721bn) by 2023, has been lucrative for members of his family. KKW, the beauty line belonging to West’s wife, Kim Kardashian, reportedly made $100m (£65m) last year, according to Forbes. While in November West’s sister-in-law Kylie Jenner sold a share of her cosmetics brand Kylie Cosmetics to Cover Girl-owner Coty for $1.2bn (£948bn). The influence of West’s Yeezy fashion label has been broad. In March he told the Wall Street Journal magazine that he believed Yeezy was “the McDonalds and the Apple of apparel”, and the popularity of the Boost 350 sneakers has led it to be, as of early 2019, the most searched for streetwear brands on the luxury resale site The Real Real. The look of Yeezy’s earth-toned body con, has also influenced the look of Kardashian’s SKIMS range. West’s last collection, Yeezy Season 8, showed at Paris Fashion Week in March this year and featured Hazmat suit-inspired looks that were influenced by his Sunday Service Choir musical venture. In the past West has collaborated with Nike, Louis Vuitton and APC, as well as his high-profile Yeezy collaboration with Adidas. In April Forbes announced that West was officially a billionaire with earnings of $1.3bn (£1.04bn). His assets include a stake in the Yeezy trainer line, which Forbes described as “one of the great retail stories of the century”, plus $81m (£64.7m) in property and $21m (£16.8m) in land. His back catalogue and his record label GOOD Music are estimated to be worth around $90m (£71.8m). However, the magazine also said his debts were around £100m (£80m). West has become a controversial figure in recent years, with his outspoken support for President Trump. Earlier this month it was announced he had set up a college fund to support George Floyd’s daughter.