It is not – alas – the case that any documentary anatomising the influence of prejudice and the state of race relations in the UK would ever be untimely, but the makers of the three-part series The School That Tried to End Racism (Channel 4) can hardly have envisaged just how relevant and necessary their programme would feel by the time it was broadcast. The school in question is a nonselective state secondary, Glenthorne high school in south London, whose intake is just over 50% white students and just under 50% BAME students. It is rated outstanding by Ofsted, and you can see why. It is taking part in the first trial in the UK of a three-week programme developed in the US to educate children about the existence and effects of unconscious racial bias towards and against different communities. It is part of a wider movement away from “colour-blindness” as the default anti-racism policy (ignoring racial differences and therefore their effects in an inequitable world) and instead aims to work towards a society that can cope with the idea that difference can be recognised and – with conscious effort and strategies – not penalised. It’s an immediate testament to the trust parents must have in the school (which plans to incorporate the scheme into its curriculum if it proves worthwhile) that it was able to recruit for and implement so difficult an endeavour. The 24 year 7 pupils who take part are confident, thoughtful and articulate, and possess in full measure the charming and unmistakable guilelessness of pre-adolescents: they are a testament to the safety and security the place affords them. And the deftness and grace of the teachers involved – notwithstanding the special training they underwent first – and their perfectly pitched delivery of increasingly challenging content is quietly awe-inspiring. The programme follows a familiar format. We watch as the children are given different tasks to perform. The classroom sections are interspersed with scenes of their lives at home, letting us see how one informs the other. There are passages in which the children talk separately to camera, expanding on an issue just raised, detailing their experiences and making use of the opportunity to explain thoughts they struggled to make clear during tasks and challenges in class. Over in the white group, they understandably find themselves having to come up with self-definitions for the first time As ever, the format’s success depends on the subject and “casting”, and in that sense the school’s scheme is as much of a gift as the students are. Overseen by Dr Nicola Rollock of Goldsmiths, University of London and Prof Rhiannon Turner of Queen’s University Belfast, the children’s tasks include attaching negative and positive words to pictures of faces from different ethnic groups and dividing into “affinity groups” (white students in one, black and brown students in another) to discuss what racial identity means. “I love being described as black!” says Bright, a notably exuberant figure with comic timing so immaculate that I hope for a long and storied career on our screens for him, “because it’s what I am!” Others are less sure. And over in the white group they understandably find themselves having to come up with self-definitions for the first time. “Ginger European boy,” says Bright’s friend Henry, and you have to love him for it. In the most visually arresting of their endeavours they take up starting positions in a sprint race according to how they answer certain questions. “Take a step forward if you’ve never been asked where you come from.” “Step back if you have ever worried about stop and search”. “Step forward if you’ve never been the only person your colour in a room”. It’s a brutally effective filter. Half-white, half-Sri Lankan Farrah doesn’t immediately get the point. “Farrah,” explains Mahkai quietly, gesturing towards the back half of the field, “None of us are white.” There is no celebration after the race is run. Why, the teacher wonders. “Feels like,” Bright explains, “a very racist sports day.” It’s a sobering and instructive way of introducing the notion that white privilege, as Rollock puts it, fundamentally amounts to not having to live with the consequences of racism, and will surely jolt (white) viewers out of some complacency, too. Despite the organisers’ stating that intervention and explanation at this age make for better, more lastingly ingrained change, there will be some who object to what they see as the loss of childlike innocence involved. Others will see it as the dispersal of a kind of ignorance that has flown under the radar and should be tackled as fearlessly and matter-of-factly as we do children’s lack of knowledge about Boyle’s law or simultaneous equations. Your attitude may depend on where in the race you stand.