Four of London’s most successful stage musicals will not reopen until 2021, the producer Cameron Mackintosh has announced. Mackintosh said he had taken the “heartbreaking” decision to delay the return of his shows Les Misérables, Mary Poppins, Hamilton and The Phantom of the Opera because of uncertainty over both safety for audiences and a date for the withdrawal of social distancing measures. Mackintosh, his producing partners and Delfont Mackintosh Theatres are starting a process of consultation over potential redundancies for all employees on the four productions. Mackintosh said that despite the government engaging with “desperate pleas from everyone in the theatre industry”, there had been no “tangible, practical support beyond offers to go into debt”. For the time being, it remains “impossible for us to properly plan for whatever the new future is” he said, which means that the four shows will not return until “as early as practical” next year. “This has forced me to take drastic steps to ensure that I have the resources for my business to survive and enable my shows and theatres to reopen next year when we are permitted to.” Once social distancing restrictions have been lifted, it is anticipated that it will take several months for the productions to be restaged for audiences. In his statement, Mackintosh said he has no investors or venture capital backing and that “everything is funded by me personally”. He recognised that he is “one of the biggest employers in the theatre” and said his companies’ reserves have been severely depleted since lockdown began in mid-March. This week, research from the Creative Industries Federation and the global forecaster Oxford Economics suggested that Britain is facing an irreversible “cultural catastrophe” with a projected £74bn drop in revenue for creative industries and the loss of 400,000 jobs as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. Mackintosh has called for recognition that commercial theatre provides “billions of pounds of revenue to the economy” and for government action so “this priceless resource at which the British people excel is helped to survive”. On Thursday, a letter calling for further government investment, signed by almost 100 creatives including Tom Stoppard and Phoebe Waller-Bridge was sent to Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, and Oliver Dowden, the culture secretary. “The pandemic has brought theatre to its knees,” it stated. “Theatres do not have the money to operate viably with physical distancing. It is difficult to see venues opening before the end of the year.” The Society of London Theatres has been cancelling performances across the West End on a rolling basis, in line with the latest advice from the government. The cancellations have currently been extended until 2 August. In May, Mackintosh said that West End theatres are unlikely to be able to reopen until next year. “For major producers [on] both sides of the Atlantic, the truth is until social distancing doesn’t exist any more, we can’t even plan to reopen.”