Even as a beauty editor, I am in awe of anyone who can look at a rainbow-hued eyeshadow palette without feeling anxious. It’s intimidating. Apply it badly and it’ll date you no end. That said, there is a simpler, modern approach to wearing brights around your eyes. It’s all about lining the eyes – as per the Oscar de la Renta SS20 show – as opposed to shading them. Simply draw a slightly exaggerated winged eye at the top and line the bottom with an opposing colour. Keep everything else simple and you won’t resemble an 80s pop video extra. Westman Atelier Super Loaded Highlight in Peau de Rosé £69, goop.com Stila Double Dip Liquid Eyeshadows in Mint Julep and Pink Martini £24, stila.co.ukLaura Mercier Caviar Eye Stick in Intense Violet £25, cultbeauty.co.uk Suqqu Moisture Rich Lipstick in Blissful Coral £30, selfridges.com Rimmel Wonder Swipe 2 in 1 Liner to Shadow £6.99, lookfantastic.co.uk I talk about SPF a lot (sorry if that offends you). However, recently, I realised that I focus predominantly on the face, rather than the body. Which I guess doesn’t make sense – all skin needs protection, otherwise eventually your face will look like it’s been fitted on someone else’s body. So, ideally, SPF for your body should not be limited to the beach (most of us probably won’t be seeing that for a while anyway). The problem with most SPF products created for the body is that they are not as progressive as their facial counterparts. Many remain thick and claggy, and leave a dreadful white cast. It’s easy to convince ourselves that SPF for the body is an unnecessary evil. Imagine my joy when I discovered this gel to oil option from Clarins. Now, Clarins is known for excellent sun care, but I think in this case it has surpassed itself. Formulated with olive leaf extract, it smells divine (a floral peachy scent that isn’t overpowering). The creamy, yellow texture (it’s actually not particularly gel-like) is opaque, but quickly disappears as you rub it in – impressive considering its high factor. But my favourite thing about this product is that it’s suncare that acts like an excellent moisturiser. It hydrates, illuminates and protects with a glowy, non-greasy finish. So now I use it every day. Finally, an SPF for the body that isn’t a nuisance to wear. Clarins Suncare Gel to Oil SPF 50 for Body, £22, clarins.com Feeling fruity Banana, coconut, tiger orchid and mango seed butter are just some of the ingredients in this rich, plant-powered hair mask that targets dry, stressed out tresses. Fable & Mane Holi Roots Hair Mask, £24, fableand mane.com Flower power Thicker than a toner, lighter than a serum, this deeply hydrating essence is formulated with Japanese orchid to wake up and illuminate fatigued skin. Elizabeth Arden Ceramide Skin Replenishing Essence, £45, elizabeth arden.co.uk Vitamin vitalise A Vitamin C and Glycolic Acid combo that targets hyperpigmentation, refines skin texture and promises brighter skin in a week. Murad Vita-C Glycolic Brightening Serum, £72, murad.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.