Anyone wandering along a quiet street in central Seville at 8.30pm on Saturday would have witnessed the odd sight of a 17th-century Dutch governor wearing a Covid-19 mask as he once again handed over his city to Spanish forces. The Surrender of Breda, a significant moment in the Dutch war of independence immortalised in Diego Velázquez’s eponymous painting, was brought to life by a historical reenactment group to mark the 395th anniversary of the event, and the Spanish painter’s 421st birthday – both on 5 June, albeit 26 years apart. It was staged a day after the anniversaries, outside the mid-16th-century house where Velázquez was born, and which is being turned into a learning centre and museum dedicated to the artist and his life. The recreation, which the house’s owners hope will become an annual event, was slightly complicated by Spain’s coronavirus restrictions. Enrique Bocanegra, the man behind the museum project, said: “We did it for the first time last year but we wanted to make it a bit bigger this year, with two horses and a little cannon. We couldn’t get a lot of people along otherwise it would have been cancelled, so we just did a small recreation.” Masks were worn and numbers kept to a minimum. “It was basically for us,” said Bocanegra. “It was a bit like playing a football match with no spectators, but it looked lovely in the end and it’s a little tradition that we’re keen to maintain.” Bocanegra, a journalist and author who was inspired to rescue the dilapidated house after a visit to William Shakespeare’s home in Stratford-upon-Avon, hopes the property could open to visitors next year. He and others have already begun creating hi-tech copies of some of Velázquez’s best-known works – including An Old Woman Cooking Eggs, which sits in the Scottish National Gallery in Edinburgh. But before the copies can be exhibited in the house where their creator was born, the property needs a thorough renovation. “We’re just waiting for permission to start the restoration works and we’re hoping to begin later this month,” said Bocanegra. “We’re going to start with the roof but the problem with renovating a 16th-century house is that it’s like opening up a melon – you just never know what you’re going to find inside.”