Burnley will demonstrate further opposition to the “White Lives Matter Burnley” banner flown over the Etihad Stadium when they resume their campaign at home against Watford on Thursday. Players and club officials were appalled by the stunt over Manchester City’s stadium before kick-off on Monday when the captain, Ben Mee, said he felt ashamed and embarrassed. Discussions were held on Tuesday at the club over reiterating condemnation of the banner, and support for the Black Lives Matter movement, at the Watford game. Although details have yet to be confirmed it is understood Burnley will project their “One Club For All” message inside the stadium with support from Sean Dyche’s squad. “One Club For All” is an initiative that includes an inclusion advisory group and Burnley FC in the Community, whose activities involve 33,000 people, 19% from a BAME background. “Clarets Welcome”, another Burnley FC in the Community project, provides weekly coaching sessions for men from 20 Syrian refugee families settled in the town. Burnley issued a statement during the match on Monday that condemned the banner and vowed to ban for life those supporters responsible. That stance was repeated in a statement by the chairman, Mike Garlick, and chief executive, Neil Hart, on Tuesday . Lancashire police have said no criminal offence took place. Garlick said in an interview with ESPN: “We need to gather our thoughts, but clearly we need to make a clear stand against this sort of behaviour. I am sure will be doing that over the next few days to make our actions speak as loudly as our words. It’s a tiny minority, as any form of hooliganism or racism always has been, because the vast majority come to football in peace. But I want to stress that Burnley football club welcomes all people, from all creeds, races and religions.” Garlick echoed Mee’s embarrassment at Monday’s events – the chairman was at the Etihad Stadium – and said it was a shameful episode. “We will root out these racists and I am sure they will be dealt with in due course,” he said. “We will do whatever we can to make sure justice is done against these people. Let’s be clear. The plane didn’t fly in our name. It has absolutely nothing to do with Burnley football club and we absolutely deplore it. But we have to talk about it. We cannot and will not sweep it under the carpet. “I was at the game and I have been chairman/co-chairman for eight years. I have always been proud to be in that position, but I can tell you that I wasn’t proud to be Burnley chairman last night. It was for all the events that happened off the pitch, not what happened on the pitch. The game became irrelevant after the plane flew over. But I thought Ben Mee, our captain, spoke exceptionally well in really difficult circumstances. I am proud that he is captain of our football club and I have told him that.” Burnley’s condemnation of the banner on Monday prompted numerous complaints on social media and to the club questioning their stance. Garlick and Hart felt compelled to explain their objection in Tuesday’s statement. It read: “While we naturally consider that all lives matter, let us be clear that the Black Lives Matter movement aims to overcome years of racial inequality against the BAME community and promote a greater fairness for all. We at Burnley therefore stand firmly behind it and oppose anything that may appear to undermine or challenge such a positive message.”