Ian Gould: I never had myself down as an umpire. Never! I used to scream and shout at umpires when I played, I was a pain. I was coaching at Middlesex and, once or twice during a second-team game, the umpire was late or ill so I went out and did it and quite enjoyed it. It had never entered my mind before that. David Lloyd: I’d always been interested in being an official. I became a reserve umpire as there wasn’t any room on the list. The matches I did were university matches and I’m umpiring with the very best – Dickie Bird, Alan Whitehead, Lloyd Budd and Ray Julian are showing me the ropes. David Millns: I got myself qualiﬁed while I was still playing in the Nineties but I was running a marketing company after I retired. After the Ashes series of 2005, all the euphoria and buzz in general, I just thought, “I want to get back involved with cricket.” Michael Gough: When I ﬁrst went into it every single person thought I was crazy. They thought I was weird for giving up playing [in 2003, at the age of 23] but I’d fallen out of love with it. I was always a daydreamer, I must have been a nightmare to captain. I’d ﬁnd myself at square-leg chatting to the umpires and that was probably where the seed was sown. Lloyd: Dickie [Bird] used to say to me: “These young lads, students, it’s everything they’ve wanted to do to play against county cricketers, so we won’t be giving them out lbw.” My ﬁrst match was bitterly cold, late April. We umpired in bobble hats and had a cup of tea at the drinks interval. Gould: I loved it, it just felt natural. The day went very quickly, even though, as Peter Willey would say: “Every day is a ﬁelding day.” Millns: I did my ﬁrst pro game in 2006. I was umpiring with Tim Robinson, who was my skipper at Notts in the 1980s and I remember coming off at lunchtime and thinking: “This is what I want to do.” Gough: I was so young, just a kid really. I’ll always remember my ﬁrst meeting with the ECB and [the former umpire] Barry Leadbeater turned to me and he couldn’t believe it, he thought I was there on behalf of the players to give a speech to the umpires! I had turn up to grounds and ask where the umpire room was and everyone would look at me weirdly and direct me to the players’ changing rooms. Gould: When I ﬁrst started out as an umpire I wanted to umpire the way I would have liked to be umpired as a player. I never liked that headmaster thing. The modern umpire, he puts his ego in his cricket bag in the morning. Lloyd: Nobody crossed you as an umpire when I was doing it in the mid-1980s. Absolutely not. Peter Willey: I tried to umpire knowing as many rules and regulations as would get me through the game and then use common sense and speak to people. Having played Test cricket gave me some respect. Most of my games were quite calm, as people knew that I was a cantankerous old bugger. Millns: I remember after I’d had my ﬁrst decision overturned on DRS, I walked over to my colleague at square-leg – Bangladeshi umpire Masadur Rahman – and he said: “I think we all missed that day at school – the day when they teach you to be perfect.” I thought that was a brilliant thing to keep in your head as an umpire. You can’t guess; you give what you see. Gould: I remember I was mic’d up for a T20 game on Sky and Dominic Cork, he wasn’t happy about a decision or something, comes stomping towards me, and I know I’m getting an earful. Next thing in my ear is Bumble: “He’s on his way, Gunner. You better be careful ….” So I thought bugger it, and me and Bumble just stopped the game for ﬁve minutes as we were chatting away and I’m saying on live TV, “I’d rather be looking after my granddaughter at this moment than looking after Dominic Cork!” Willey: I umpired a World Cup game between New Zealand and India at Centurion in South Africa in 2003 and Craig McMillan was yapping on to the opposition. Someone had put a roll of tape in my pocket and when he walked past I pulled a bit off and stuck it over his mouth. Can you imagine doing that now? You’d be done for assault! Lloyd: I was doing a game at Taunton between Somerset and Middlesex. Ian Botham was batting, three balls left and 12 to win. Wayne Daniel is running in to bowl and Botham backs away to prod the pitch and ask me, “Who are you backing in this one?” I told him, politely, to get on with it and he smacks the ﬁrst one for six and blocks the next one, just to ramp up the theatre! He then dispatched the ﬁnal ball for six. As he ran off he patted me on the backside with his bat and said, “You stick with me pal, I’ll make you famous.” Millns: Myself and Russell Evans, we grew up together. He was best man at my wedding. Tragically he passed away a couple of years ago. I remember we had four days umpiring in Scarborough for a Yorkshire game. Always a great trip. Ryan Sidebottom is bowling at my end, he was quite a theatrical appealer. He goes up for a big lbw, I gave it not out. Next ball he’s up for another and again I give it not out, there was a little inside edge. Third ball in a row, he has a massive appeal, I think the batting side are about 100 for 0, it was way too high, and I said, “Not out and that’s lunch gentlemen.” Ryan snatches his jumper off me and shouts at the top of his voice, “Fucking hell!” and storms off like a petulant child. So we’ve got to book him. Three points. The next morning as we’re taking the ﬁeld, Ryan comes running up between me and Russell and puts his arms around us, and he says: “Lads, those three points you gave me last night … I’ve had a word with the missus and she’s gonna take them.” Gough: I remember a match between India and Australia, and Virat Kohli and Rohit Sharma were putting on a huge partnership. I was stood next to Aaron Finch at square-leg and he said to me, during the game, how it was unbelievable to watch these two great players. Then he asked me how I would bowl at them! I looked at him and said, “I’ve got enough on my plate, you’re on your own there!” Gould: I was lucky last year to do an IPL, which was a bucket-list job for me. There’s Kohli and Sharma… that was as exciting a thing as I’ve ever seen. You’re 22 yards away, the best seat in the house. But it can be dangerous. Chris Gayle hit one back at me and if it had hit me, I wouldn’t be here. Gould: There is a great camaraderie between all the umpires, and some great characters. You see your name pinned up next to someone like [South African umpire] Marais Erasmus, or Jeff Crowe as match referee, and you know it’s going to be great fun. Lloyd: Ray Julian was one of my favourites. There used to be a great band of umpires, as there is now. You are a team. There’s a batting team, a ﬁelding team and an officials team. Millns: We’re all in it together. You do not want to see any official, in any corner of the world, having a bad day. It’s a tough job. Willey: Shep [David Shepherd] was brilliant. Everybody respected him. He was very calm and collected. He didn’t allow any trouble. Gough: I remember speaking to Merv Kitchen when I was starting out; he was always good to talk to, and Peter Willey as well – he would always give you his honest opinion. He never holds back, but I found it really useful. Peter Hartley and Richard Kettleborough, I’d pick their brains all the time. I’ve been lucky enough to spend a lot of time with Gunner [Gould] and that has been great for me. Gould: I just love to umpire with Neil Bainton. He’s underrated. He’s one of our best. He probably doesn’t get the credit he deserves as he never played the ﬁrst-class game. He’s a postman in the winter. He knows the laws. We all go to him when we need a law. His humour is ... astonishing. Marais [Erasmus] is a good bloke, a proper gentleman. He’s someone I know I can go to the trenches with. But we are chalk and cheese. I’ve done three Boxing Day Tests with him and on Christmas Day he goes off to church and I go to the pub, but we do leave the hotel at the same time! Gould: I’ve been the luckiest bugger. I’ve roamed the world. Cricket is full of fantastic people and I think the game is going the right way. In the last five or six years, with the introduction of DRS, people are understanding umpiring a bit more and how hard it is, and people start respecting you for it. Willey: It’s fair to say you need to have a thick skin. Gough: I feel like I got a second chance with the game and I want to make the most of it. Cricket has been my life and I feel I owe it to the game and the players to be as good as I can be every single day. Lloyd: The very best umpires, they get 95% of decisions correct but you know what, the umpire, even when he’s wrong … he’s right. Millns: Sometimes you’re under the pump. Yes, you’re going to cop a bit of abuse sometimes from the crowd, but you’ve got to take that on the chin. Out in the middle − it’s a great place to be. The new issue of Wisden Cricket Monthly is a county cricket special. Get three issues for just £2.99 when you take out a digital subscription