In the three months since lockdown began, I’ve spent more on books than I care to admit. But with charity shops and secondhand bookshops shut, donating finished books seemed impossible – until I discovered the South London Book Swap. It is run by Millie Ginnett since she was furloughed from her advertising job in April, and she is bringing joy to the lives of those stuck at home. “Everyone was asking how I was going to make my time on furlough ‘productive’. They were asking, what online courses I was planning to take, was I going to learn a language, none of which I wanted to do,” says Ginnett. “I was burning through books and after swapping a few with a friend, I resorted to buying some – which I knew would get expensive and was unsustainable.” Ginnett, who lives in Tooting with her boyfriend, posted a list of around 20 books on various community support groups, and offered to deliver them as part of her daily exercise. All of them were snapped up that day. So Ginnett set up the South London Book Swap on Facebook. Within two days, she had amassed almost 300 books by collecting them from doorsteps all around south London. “The group has gone from strength to strength, gaining more members every week I feel so privileged to have met and interacted with many amazing people who I maybe never would have had the chance to otherwise,” she says. “One lady gave me some fresh blondies in exchange for her book, and we laughed about how wholesome it was to swap baked goods for books.” Another person gave her wine vouchers, which Ginnett used to celebrate when she hit the 500-book milestone. And there was also a high-speed book drop: “It was a rainy evening and I was meeting a lady on her bus route home. She ran to the front of the bus and grabbed them from me without getting off. The driver was very amused!” Ginnett collects the books from people’s doorsteps, adds them to a spreadsheet, and then photographs them by genre. Books are allocated on a first-come, first-served basis. She wipes down all the books before rehoming them, either by delivering them on her walks, or collection from a box outside her house made by her boyfriend. As libraries remain shut, demand is high, with books such as Queenie by Candice Carty-Williams and The Tattooist of Auschwitz by Heather Morris proving most popular. One week, I managed to bag a copy of Girl, Woman, Other by Bernadine Evaristo. Navigating several school drop-offs meant collection was tricky, so it was a delight to have Ginnett leave it on my doorstep, and to have a socially distanced chat. There are currently 378 people signed up to receive and donate books. The swap has even spawned a sister group in Fiji. Ginnett hopes to continue the group after lockdown ends, but says she may have to find an alternative way to keep it running. “I’m keen to carry the swap on for as long as I can, but once I’m back at work I will struggle to keep up, with the collections, deliveries and admin. We will also have to turn our library back into a spare bedroom as and when we are allowed to have people stay again, which means I would have nowhere to store the books in our small flat.” But with such strong community support, Ginnett is brainstorming all options, including starting a weekend stall or handing the project on to a member. “I’ve had so many touching messages from people who have found it a help during this uncertain and scary time,” she says. “I will keep thinking and working towards ways of keeping it alive.”