The Manchester United teammates Marcus Rashford and Paul Pogba have both posted powerful anti-racism messages on social media, as outcry continues to build over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. “I know you guys haven’t heard from me in a few days,” said the England forward Rashford in a message posted on Twitter and Instagram. “I’ve been trying to process what is going on in the world.” The 22-year-old added: “At a time [when] I’ve been asking people to come together, work together and be united, we appear more divided than ever. People are hurting and people need answers. “Black lives matter. Black culture matters. Black communities matter. We matter.” Rashford also called for justice for Floyd, who died last Monday after a white police officer knelt on his neck. Onlookers pleaded for the officer to stop as the stricken man said that he was unable to breathe. I know you guys haven’t heard from me in a few days. I’ve been trying to process what is going on in the world. At a time I’ve been asking people to come together, work together and be united, we appear to me more divided than ever. People are hurting and people need answers. Black lives matter. Black culture matters. Black communities matter. We matter. #justiceforgeorgefloyd #justiceforahmaudarbery #justiceforbreonnataylor A post shared by  Marcus Rashford (@marcusrashford) on Jun 1, 2020 at 2:02am PDT Pogba also joined the calls for change on his Instagram account. “During the past few days I have thought a lot about how to express my feelings about what happened in Minneapolis,” the France midfielder wrote. “I felt anger, pity, hatred, indignation, pain, sadness.” He added: “Sadness for George and for all black people who suffer from racism EVERY DAY! Whether in football, at work, at school, ANYWHERE! This has to stop, once and for all! Not tomorrow or the next day, it has to end TODAY! Violent acts of racism can no longer be tolerated. I can’t tolerate. I won’t tolerate. WE WON’T TOLERATE. Racism is ignorance. LOVE is intelligence.” Earlier on Monday Liverpool players, including the captain, Jordan Henderson, and Virgil Van Dijk, tweeted messages with an image of the players taking a knee during training at Anfield. Rashford has followed his England colleague Jadon Sancho in addressing the issue after the Borussia Dortmund winger said: “We shouldn’t fear speaking out for what’s right.” Sancho displayed a message reading “Justice for George Floyd” on his undershirt after scoring the first of his three goals against Paderborn on Sunday. Chelsea have declared that they stand with Floyd and “all victims in the fight against discrimination, brutality and injustice” in a statement. “As a club we are committed to being a part of the solution, and we are joining our voice to all those calling for fairness, equality and meaningful change. Enough is enough. Together we are stronger.” The former England captain David Beckham posted on Instagram: “My heart goes out to George’s family and I stand in solidarity with the black community and millions of others across the world who are outraged by these events. Its heartbreaking to see that in 2020 this is still happening.”