Spanish football is making plans for supporters to return to stadiums but they should not celebrate just yet. In fact, fans will be discouraged from celebrating at all. A 16-page draft protocol put together by La Liga, and seen by the Guardian, will enforce physical distancing in the stands, staggered arrival times and registration for those who want tickets. It also recommends supporters “avoid embracing and slapping hands”, which may prove difficult if there is a 90th-minute winner. The document is incomplete and not expected to be applied before the beginning of next season on 12 September. It is being prepared on the understanding a fans’ return could be brought forward – not least because some clubs are beginning to prepare their own protocols to present to local health authorities and to push for a return in the short term. According to the draft, fans will have to sign up in advance, provide ID and details of any health conditions. A club will then decide who gets tickets based on the numbers and the size of the stadium. There will be no away supporters. Season-ticket holders – expected to be the only supporters in the ground, depending on demand – will not get their normal seats; they will, though, be given seats of a comparable value. No specific limits to the number or percentage of fans allowed in has been set but stadium capacities will be reduced significantly to maintain a distance of 1.5m between people. Three rows of seats behind the goals will be reserved for photographers and the seats behind the dugout will be occupied only by substitutes, coaches and medical staff. Fans will be given one of up to five 15-minute slots during which they must arrive at the ground. Those slots start an hour and a half before the game, with the most vulnerable supporters among the last to arrive. Every club will have to construct an outer rim around the stadium allowing for two check-points and supporters will be asked to remain in their seats. They will all have to wear masks and will be given two small bottles of water upon entry as there will be no food or drink on sale. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/06/23-51060-gnl.200623.ic.Football.europe.mp3 At the end of the game, fans will leave the ground by row, with those closest to the exits departing first. They will be discouraged from using public transport. Should there be any outbreaks of Covid-19 among spectators, clubs will provide the health authorities will a list of the people who sat near those infected. This week Espanyol announced their intention to request the return of supporters before the end of the season, following the formal end of Spain’s state of alarm on Sunday. Las Palmas had said they intended to do so on the first weekend of football’s return, as the Canary Islands were already in phase three of the government’s plans for the de-escalation of the lockdown and the decision would thus theoretically lie with the local authority. Las Palmas’s move was blocked by the central health ministry and the country’s sports ministry, whose president, Irene Lozano, says that fans should be allowed back only when they can do so at every club. Many clubs though are preparing to play in front of their fans for the final three or four rounds of games. Some clubs, such as Real Madrid, Osasuna and Levante, are unable to bring fans back because of building work which they accelerated when lockdown began on the assumption there would be no supporters for the rest of the season and probably not even until after Christmas. They are unhappy at the suggestions that some clubs may welcome back their faithful faster, arguing that offers an unfair advantage.