The thwack of a racket on a tennis ball, the gentle buzzing of bees, the bustle of a summer party … coronation chicken conjures up all this and more, and makes me feel all the more nostalgic given the current restrictions of life. This deliciously spiced sticky roast chicken salad will banish any memories of plastic motorway coronation sandwiches, and should be just the ticket for outdoor feasting – with any luck, soon with friends. This salad is beautiful served with slices of celery, radish and finely chopped chives and their flowers, if available. Prep 20 minCook 45 minServes 4-6 6-8 chicken thighs, or a jointed chicken2 medium red onions, peeled and cut into wedges1 head garlic, broken up, but not peeled200g sourdough bread, torn into pieces60g raisins1 tbsp mild curry powder1 tsp turmeric4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil1 heaped tbsp mango chutney, plus 2 tbsp extra for the dressingJuice and zest of 2 lemons For the salad4 tbsp natural yoghurt2 heads of little gem lettuce, washed2 celery sticks, very finely sliced (optional)4 radishes, very finely sliced (optional)1 handful chives, finely chopped (optional)Salt and black pepperHeat the oven to 190C (170C fan)/375F/gas 5. Put the chicken, onions, garlic, bread, raisins, spices and chutney in a large, wide baking tray and toss together with four tablespoons of olive oiland the zest and juice of one of the lemons. Once everything is thoroughly mixed up, check the croutons and, if they are looking dry, add a little more lemon juice. Season generously, and roast for 45 minutes, or until the chicken is cooked through and golden. Meanwhile, in a small bowl, mix together the yoghurt, the further two tablespoons of olive oil and remaining chutney and the juice of half a lemon. Prepare the salad and lay it out in a large salad bowl or serving plate. Once the chicken is ready, pour any juices from the chicken tray into the yoghurt. Break up the chicken pieces into large chunks and scatter it over the salad leaves. Top with the celery and radish, if using, and drizzle with the yoghurt dressing. Season and serve. If you are avoiding gluten, leave out the croutons and toss the chicken in a salad of rice and slivered almonds instead, including the salad leaves.