For Norwich the restart is over before it truly began. Turned over by a Southampton side that did not have to play well to win convincingly, the Canaries remain bottom of the table and while the six-point gap to safety may not yet have grown, any belief among Daniel Farke’s side that they might yet escape relegation must surely have taken a fateful blow. Southampton won the game with second-half goals from Danny Ings, Stuart Armstrong and Nathan Redmond. They are now 10 points clear of the drop zone. Surely all but safe, Ralph Hasenhüttl’s men gave a performance – especially in the second period – that did the players and the manager real credit. Not only stronger and technically better, they were cool and decisive too. This last quality comes with a proviso: due to the empty surroundings it was impossible for anyone not to hear Hasenhüttl’s numerous instructions to his players, specific down to the very direction of each pass and its timing. “In the end the result was absolutely deserved‚” Hasenhüttl said. “We didn’t have a good start but it was getting better and better the longer the game went on. We had a few good chances in the first half but that last pass was not perfect. In the second half Ingsy made the opener and after that we deserved it, we never lost our aggression or our passion to get the ball.” “I trust my players and I was fully convinced we could win this game,” said Farke. “Just because of the points we have to win five games, when you lose the first game it’s getting even a bit more difficult. But we wouldn’t dance on the table after a win and we won’t give up after a loss.” Norwich began the match with an unfamiliar 4-4-2 formation, with Teemu Pukki in the unusual position of playing with a partner, Josip Drmic. They were on the front foot and in the opening two minutes forced a succession of free-kicks and corners, each taken by Emi Buendía with half-chances squandered by ponderous finishing, Drmic particularly culpable. That initial spell lasted for 15 minutes before Southampton began to exert themselves in midfield, the new club captain, James Ward-Prowse, forming an effective partnership with Pierre-Emile Højbjerg, the man he replaced. They closed down the supply to Norwich’s forward four. “We were physically stronger in the centre than the opponent and that was the key element of the day,” said Hasenhüttl. Norwich stalled, perhaps sensing that their opportunity had passed. Not for the first time this season, the mistakes then began to creep into their game. The first big chance came from a turnover; Todd Cantwell eased off the ball by Jack Stephens on halfway before the seas parted. The centre-half ran with the ball all the way into the penalty area before cueing up Ings, whose shot was well-judged but crashed back off the crossbar. Hasenhüttl claimed he did not have much to say at half-time. Surely the message was clear to his players that this game was there for the taking, however, and it was not long before his team pressed decisively on their hosts’ vulnerability. A ball into the Norwich box was not dealt with decisively, Armstrong poked possession to Ings on the edge of the box and the striker sized up his opportunity and finished with characteristic decisiveness, curling a shot beyond Tim Krul. Afterwards Ings, who looked as if he had never been in lockdown, said the game had been “good fun”. Norwich heads slumped and Southampton’s grew in composure. “It’s not so nice when you win and you have only 10 or 15 people to celebrate with‚” Hasenhüttl said of playing behind closed doors. “For coaching it’s a little bit easier though because you have more chances to coach them and they hear you.” Southampton doubled their advantage in the 54th minute. Again it came from a turnover in the middle of the park, and again the visitors were able to advance straight down the pitch without interruption. This time it was Ings who was the enabler and he passed the ball to Armstrong on the edge of the box. After dancing past an ineffectual challenge he slotted a left-foot effort past Krul. Pukki then had his team’s two best chances but dithered and wasted both. With 11 minutes to go Southampton put the matter beyond doubt and again it was too easy, Ings releasing Michael Obafemi wide on the right. The Irish teenager teed up Nathan Redmond in the centre and he sent Max Aarons the wrong way with a feint before shooting calmly past Krul.