Ryan Fraser has declined to sign a short-term contract extension at Bournemouth and the expectation is that the Scotland winger has played his last game for the club, despite being eligible to feature until 30 June. In a blow to Bournemouth’s survival hopes, Fraser will depart on a free transfer at the end of the month after rejecting the opportunity to play out the remainder of the Premier League season. It is an awkward parting of the ways and, though the club are not entirely surprised by Fraser’s decision, it is naturally a disappointment given the winger’s influence in recent seasons. In January the 26-year-old admitted he “didn’t play for the team” for the first four months of the season after being distracted by transfer speculation and the former Aberdeen winger, who joined the club for £400,000 in 2013, will now move on. It is understood Fraser trained as normal on Monday before communicating his decision. Arsenal and Tottenham were previously credited with an interest in Fraser but neither side are thought to be pursuing the winger and while his next destination is unclear, it is more likely to be a mid-table team, with Crystal Palace, Newcastle and Watford thought to be among the interested parties. But, as of yet, it is understood the winger is yet to receive any concrete offers this summer. Fraser is the highest-profile player thus far to reject a contract extension for fear of jeopardising a potential move, with Lyle Taylor at Charlton and Hull’s Eric Lichaj examples in the Championship. The West Ham teenager Jeremy Ngakia also rejected a short-term extension, with the defender considering an offer to join Watford on a free transfer. Meanwhile Bournemouth have agreed short-term contract extensions with the club captain, Simon Francis, Andrew Surman, Artur Boruc and Charlie Daniels, who this week returned to training following knee surgery. Eddie Howe’s side resume the season at home to Crystal Palace on Saturday. The game will be the first-ever Premier League match broadcast live on the BBC.