Formula One will abandon the traditional champagne-spraying podium ceremony for the pandemic-hit 2020 season. With grand prix racing resuming in Austria on 5 July under the strictest possible safety procedures, F1’s sporting director, Ross Brawn, has vetoed both the podium and the usual presentation of trophies to the top three drivers, referring to the departure as “the new norm” for F1. The sport has gone to considerable lengths to ensure it poses as little risk as possible of coronavirus infection. The opening eight races will be held behind closed doors and the paddock will operate as an enclosed biosphere. Team personnel will be tested for the virus every few days and practise social distancing. Drivers celebrating on the podium would not be feasible with these restrictions. “Because of the implementation of the procedures, we need to be safe and sure of the Covid-19 situation,” said Brawn. “The practices we have had in the past just can’t be done. The podium procedure can’t happen, but we’re looking at doing something on the grid after the race. One option would be to line the cars up on the track and the drivers will stand in front of cars.” On Thursday the FIA unveiled how motor racing can safely resume and Brawn confirmed F1 was adapting to the new reality. “We can’t present the trophies, as you can’t have someone in close proximity presenting a trophy,” he said. ‘But we have worked it out, we have plans and procedures, we’re looking at how we can present it on TV.” The grid procedure will still occur rather than having the cars begin the formation lap from their garages but the number of personnel will be limited and the drivers will not gather for the national anthem. Brawn said all the measures would remain in place for the rest of the season. “This is the new norm,” he said. “How long will this carry on? We don’t know, but this will be the new norm for the rest of the year.” F1 looks increasingly likely to add further races in Europe to the eight confirmed for this season. The sport wants to hold 15-18 races. On Friday the Azerbaijan, Singapore and Japanese GPs were all cancelled. With the coronavirus outbreak particularly severe in Brazil the race in São Paulo looks highly unlikely to take place. F1 is believed to be considering various venues for adding meetings, at Mugello in Italy, Hockenheim in Germany, Portimão in Portugal and Imola in Italy. Portimão has a grade one FIA licence required for F1 and the Autodromo do Algarve was this weekend hosting a 24 Hour GT race. Imola renewed its grade one licence last week.