Early on in Our Mutual Friend, Charles Dickens treats us to a description of a Thames-side pub: The Six Jolly Fellowship Porters, already mentioned as a tavern of a dropsical appearance, had long settled down into a state of hale infirmity. In its whole constitution it had not a straight floor, and hardly a straight line; but it had outlasted, and clearly would yet outlast, many a better-trimmed building, many a sprucer public-house. Externally, it was a narrow lopsided wooden jumble of corpulent windows heaped one upon another as you might heap as many toppling oranges, with a crazy wooden verandah impending over the water; indeed the whole house, inclusive of the complaining flag-staff on the roof, impended over the water, but seemed to have got into the condition of a faint-hearted diver who has paused so long on the brink that he will never go in at all. It’s gloriously fanciful, especially with that crowning metaphor of the nervous diver teetering over the water. And that’s just the start: there an astonishing image of the gnarled wood inside twisting into the “likeness of boughs”, where “upon an old corner cupboard of walnut-wood in the bar, you might trace little forests there, and tiny trees like the parent tree, in full umbrageous leaf.” As I read his descriptions of the bar – the cosy snugs, the red curtains “matching the noses of regular customers”, the landlady reading a newspaper by the fire – it all felt more real than the pub at the end of my road. Yet I couldn’t help also suspecting that he was tricking me. Surely his descriptions were preposterous? So I thought, until I saw The Bunch of Grapes in Limehouse, the pub that inspired the Six Jolly Fellowship Porters (now known as The Grapes and owned by the actor Ian McKellen). It is amost exactly as described, from the jumble of windows to the tiny street frontage. Dickens was entirely right in his prediction of its longevity, and wasn’t altering reality so much as heightening it. The same can be said of plenty more in Our Mutual Friend. One story strand features a noveau riche family called – with characteristic audacity – the Veneerings, and the grasping socialites who come to sup at their table. Their conversation is consistently awful and hilarious, but their rapaciousness is so inhuman as to make them feel almost too much. Take this description of a gentleman of property: Where does he come from? Shares. Where is he going to? Shares. What are his tastes? Shares. Has he any principles? Shares. What squeezes him into Parliament? Shares. Perhaps he never of himself achieved success in anything, never originated anything, never produced anything? Sufficient answer to all; Shares. O mighty Shares! To set those blaring images so high, and to cause us smaller vermin, as under the influence of henbane or opium, to cry out, night and day, ‘Relieve us of our money, scatter it for us, buy us and sell us, ruin us, only we beseech ye take rank among the powers of the earth, and fatten on us’! Cannibalism! It feels like a lot. But it also feels all too familiar. If you interchange “shares” with “price systems” this could be one of the more excitedly voracious passages from Milton Friedman’s Free to Choose. And doesn’t it also describe the free-market acolytes who have dominated politics since the 1980s? The overblown can be all too real. Dickens himself often stressed that where many readers saw exaggeration, he was merely reporting the truth. In his afterword to Our Mutual Friend, he strenuously defended his portrayal of a character called Betty Higden, who lives in poverty rather than succumb to the Poor Law and the workhouse. He complained that critics had been “contending that there are no deserving Poor who prefer death by slow starvation and bitter weather, to the mercies of some Relieving Officers and some Union Houses; the other, admitting that there are such Poor, but denying that they have any cause or reason for what they do.” Dickens may have prepared a fate for Betty that allows him to trowel on the pathos – but something similar happened to people all over 1860s England. Yet, there’s plenty more in this magnificent book that feels plain old sentimental and daft. A character called Boffin encompasses both of those terms, going from too good to be true, to too bad, and back again, with all the subtlety of napalm. Not that any of that should be taken as criticism. Because it’s Dickens, the incredible can be just as fascinating as the credible. Nor can I entirely rule out one day encountering someone who turns out to be just like Boffin, to prove me wrong. Dickens may sometimes seem unrealistic, but reality also has a habit of seeming just like Dickens.