As the world faces a reckoning over racism and police violence, social media influencers are being blasted for making the movement about themselves. Some influencers are being exposed for staging photoshoots within protests while others are being called out for participating in makeup trends that promote blackface. Kris Schatzel, an influencer and YouTuber who lives in Los Angeles, took a photo among the protesters to post on her account. But footage of her posing in a gown at the gathering was also uploaded to Influencers in the Wild – an Instagram and Twitter account that tracks influencers posing at protests. Soon after, she received hundreds of death threats, she said. “I can’t wrap my head around this kind of backlash,” the 23-year-old said, adding that she went to film a video for her South American followers. “I went to the protest because I wanted to take an informative and symbolic picture to support the cause.” Schatzel’s experience represents the complicated optics of capitalizing on a movement that has been spread widely using social media, said Rahul Titus, the head of influence marketing at advertising firm Ogilvy. “When the person becomes more important than the cause, you have an issue,” he said. “People want to see influencers back up their support with real action.” Influencers have traditionally been apolitical, said Emily Hund, a research affiliate at University of Pennsylvania’s Center on Digital Culture and Society. Now they must walk a fine line: those who share self-serving or half-hearted posts are being publicly canceled while others who don’t speak up are being criticized for their inaction. “Even as recently as the 2016 election there was backlash to influencers getting too political,” Hund said. “Now the tides have completely turned and there is a strong expectation that they speak up and reflect on their own privilege and encourage their followers to do the same.” The struggle is particularly pronounced for women, Hund said. She explored the phenomenon in a 2019 paper she co-authored titled Gendered Visibility on Social Media: Navigating Instagram’s Authenticity Bind. “There is a pressure to voice an opinion, especially for those who have a significant following on Instagram,” she said. “Meanwhile, they are still operating within the constraints of a monetized personal brand.” Influencers in the Wild has been tracking influencers posing among protesters, featuring many different examples. “Stop treating the protests like Coachella,” a typical response to a video of a woman posing in a gown amid a march said. The account is run by George Resch, who also runs popular meme account Tanks Good News. He said the difference between authentically participating in the movement and using it as a photo op is obvious to most followers. “Some people have co-opted the BLM movement in order to get content, and the problem with that and why it enraged people so much is that it is the single most egregious act of cultural appropriation you can imagine,” he said. “Repurposing your presence there for content strikes me as one of the most shallow things you can do.” Remember George FloydRemember Ahmaud AbreyRemember Breonna TaylorRemember Trayvon MartinForget about these two pic.twitter.com/HX9zWwtPk3 In perhaps the highest-profile recent example of influencing gone wrong, YouTuber Jake Paul is now facing criminal charges for entering a mall in Arizona to record social media content after it was looted. Following his arrest, Paul claimed he was there only to film what was happening to put on his YouTube channel. He subsequently posted a black square on his account in solidarity with Black Lives Matter, which was flooded with comments criticizing him for using the movement as a photo op: “Yet you took advantage of a riot?” one comment read. “My guy goes out looting and pretends to care, Jake you’re a clown.” Resch said he posts images of influencers using protests as a backdrop to condemn the action, not the person. “I’m not endorsing anyone tracking these people down,” he said. According to Resch, focusing on tracking down the influencers he shares on the account to shame them or get them fired misses the point of his sharing them. “People get fixated on calling out the individual because it relieves them of the responsibility of having to look at themselves,” he said. “We all need to change and evolve constantly and what this movement is about is looking at yourself and what you can do.”