Last week I came to the end of 10 days of work focused on the north-eastern town of Middlesbrough. Drawn by the fact that it had one of the highest Covid-19 infection rates in the country, the team behind the Guardian’s Anywhere but Westminster video series had decided to talk to as many local people as possible – about the illness and what remained of the lockdown, but also how they felt about the future. Via video-conferencing platforms and phone calls, one of the neighbourhoods we focused on was South Bank, three miles east of the town centre. We had been there five years ago, when we heard about the closed down shops and businesses, long-term unemployment and the cruelties of the benefits system. This time around, along with a strong community spirit, all these things were even more evident, but it was clear that even the opportunities to make ends meet by ducking and diving through precarious work and the informal economy were now shrinking fast. We spoke at length to Tonia Nixon, the co-founder of a local community charity called Tees (Together, Engage, Encourage, Support), who was stepping up work on a clothing bank, and also busy supplying people with such basics as cookers, fridges and furniture. “The people who are struggling now – it’s the people who’ve been self-employed,” she said. “People who’ve always worked. And it’s humiliating for them. The lads round here have always found a way to make money. But they’ve had their legs chopped off.” Beyond places such as South Bank, it feels as if the rest of the country is ignorant of the emerging social catastrophe. On paper, we surely all know what millions of people are now staring into: a recession without modern precedent, 10% unemployment by Christmas, and the prospect of the most fragile parts of local economies – including the fabled high street – being fatally hollowed out. But there is still a sense of these things being variously ignored, thought about as eventualities that will hit us in the near-future, or mainly understood as abstract statistics. The reality, of course, is that whatever the help that has so far been provided – Rishi Sunak’s furloughing scheme, or the current ban on evictions – people’s lives are being upturned right now, in the most awful ways. While covering Middlesbrough, I also spoke to Pip Donegan, an inspirational disability activist who set up an operation at the start of the crisis that has rapidly grown into a community food bank, partly targeted at households containing shielded people. Referrals to her service from Citizens Advice and charities, she said, are increasing by the day, and the reason is plain. “It’s the amount of people who’ve lost their jobs, and the amount of businesses that have closed,” she said. She emphasised the number of people she deals with who are self-employed: electricians, childminders, painters and decorators. “A lot of people are struggling for the first time and they don’t know where to turn. They’ve always worked. So where do they start?” There is something very strange about having conversations like these, and then logging on to social media – online spaces divided between politics, the media and a surplus of opinions about everything and nothing, in which the crisis you have been talking about sometimes seems to be barely registering. One world seems light years from the other; you begin to wonder if even the most vivid human experiences count for much any more. As if to highlight such gaps, while we were covering Middlesbrough, my feeds were aflame with righteous anger about the alleged treatment of the Newsnight presenter Emily Maitlis by the BBC: an issue of some importance, perhaps, but surely not worth two days of massed rage. Of late, I think I have read more about MPs’ voting arrangements than fast-rising poverty and unemployment. In that context, the entry into the news of an international uprising over racism represents a much-needed dose of hard reality, but the antidote is never far away: comparatively trivial matterspumped up by the more misplaced furies of the so-called culture wars. To some extent, the fact that so many of us are seemingly unaware of other people’s daily lives shines light on what Britain – or certainly England – has become. If the 2016 EU referendum felt like the result of one group of people knowing precious little about the other and the suffering of whole swathes of the country going unanswered, I wonder whether the social disasters unleashed by Covid-19 will play out in a similar way. Inequality, after all, manifests itself culturally as well as economically: it is partly about people ignoring or neglecting the predicament of other human beings, thereby making social gaps even worse. The past 10 weeks have brought some glaring examples of this: people whose experience of lockdown has been pleasant and whimsical seemingly averting their eyes from those who are enduring real nightmares; a certain kind of shrill indignation about the complex web of issues surrounding schools that ignores deep social problems that the effective suspension of state education is making much worse. These attitudes transcend ideological divides; indeed, they arguably run deepest of all among well-heeled people who think of themselves as being thoroughly liberal, and positioned somewhere on the left. As our social and economic prospects slide, it does not seem misplaced to wonder if our national estrangements will get in the way of a proper understanding of what is actually going on, who it is affecting and what needs to be done about it. Two kinds of places are experiencing the worst of Covid-19’s social and economic effects: our inner cities, where people’s suffering is made even worse by the structural and everyday prejudices that are now being so loudly contested; and the post-industrial areas now crudely associated with the Brexit vote and Tory success along the so-called red wall. In different ways, both still seem too far from too many people’s thoughts. The fact that that distance has been formalised by the restrictions of lockdown – on reporting, as much as anything else – has clearly deepened that problem. To even begin to relieve such places’ predicament will obviously demand unprecedented action from the government. What the state can do to help ought to be the defining political question of the coming years; the weekend’s rumblings about rescuing the economy via a bonfire of regulation suggest that grave problems may be met with stock Tory answers that will offer no convincing remedies. But what I heard from Middlesbrough also pointed to something else: the fact that in an era of community activism and self-help, those things will now require the support and involvement of as many people as possible. From that, there follow a couple of imperatives. Put down your phone, and consider where we have arrived. A social and economic disaster looms. What are we going to do about it? • John Harris is a Guardian columnist