Steve Bruce has admitted Newcastle United’s stalled takeover is causing “uncertainty” at the club and said he remained “in the dark” about the proposed Saudi Arabian-led buyout. The Premier League has been considering the £300m deal for 11 weeks, leaving Newcastle in limbo and their manager anxious about his players’ response. “Any distraction at boardroom level creates a little bit of uncertainty,” said Bruce as he prepared for Sheffield United’s visit on Sunday. “There’s something rumbling along but let’s not make it a distraction or an excuse. I can’t influence anything happening above me. I’ve had no conversations with anybody.” With Mike Ashley keen to sell and the consortium comprising Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund (PIF), Reuben Brothers and Amanda Staveley waiting for the Premier League’s decision, the hiatus has prompted a flood of speculation about the manager’s future. “Some of it has been disrespectful,” said Bruce, who has seen countless reports predicting he is soon to be replaced by Rafael Benítez or Mauricio Pochettino but hopes to respond by securing a top-10 finish. First, though, his team, on 35 points, must secure Premier League survival. “Let’s stabilise the place,” said Bruce. “Whatever’s best for the club is, for me, the most important thing but, the one thing you need here [as Newcastle manager] more than anything is a thick skin. “You just have to let it go, unfortunately, and try to ride the storm. It’s never easy, and it becomes unsettling, not for myself, but for other people that are close to me like the staff. “The takeover seems to drag and the one thing I can’t do is let it be an excuse. We need to take away that uncertainty. People have written the team off, and myself, all season. Let’s answer it in the best possible way by finishing strongly. Let’s see if we can catch Burnley, who are four points ahead of us. We’ll see if that takes us to a top-10 finish but first let’s get to the magical 40 points as quickly as possible.” Newcastle are close to agreeing contract extensions with Javier Manquillo and Andy Carroll, but Matty Longstaff’s future appears more problematic. The 20-year-old midfielder is out of contract this month and has been offered £30,000 a week by Udinese. “We’ve made the kid a fabulous offer,” said Bruce. “I really hope we’ve done enough to persuade him to stay but he’s the one we can’t seem to get over the line. Unfortunately Matty’s picked up a niggle so he won’t be involved on Sunday.”