Our first day back since mid-March started at 5am with those same niggling doubts you get before going on holiday: what vital thing have I forgotten? By 6.30am I’m in the bookshop and waiting for a BBC crew to arrive – today we will be juggling a whole new set of rules and a film crew … We’ve done all the things required: distance markers, piles of disposable gloves, directions printed in the largest font possible, and enough sanitising gel to cleanse all the souls in purgatory. But customers have to take responsibility too. No shopkeeper wants to be constantly barking commands: “Use the hand gel!”, “Please do try not to cuddle all the books.” Customers apologising to each other unnecessarily in a small bookshop is the most English scene there has ever been By 8am I am being filmed putting books away and trying to “look natural”. When we are properly open there is a small flurry of customers. By 11am there are extremely polite but awkwardly elaborate dances going on as people try to maintain social distancing, even though no one is really in anyone else’s way. Customers apologising to each other unnecessarily in a small bookshop is probably the most English scene there has ever been. Independent Bookshop Week starts on 20 June, featuring online events with authors and exclusive editions of books, and I do think smaller traders are in a better position than larger retailers. We’ve proved that we can be fast and commercially intelligent – rapidly adapting our website, forging new collaborations. As the day went on it was truly lovely to see familiar faces again. The “How are yous?” are now more than the social niceties they were a few months ago. And it was a good day’s trading with sales much the same as a pre-lockdown day. But for me the most poignant moment came when the first child came in – we’d forgotten (or perhaps never fully appreciated) just how important children are to the spirit of our bookshop. At the first giggly squeal of joy, I could feel the place brighten and broaden – and the magic just streamed back in. • Tamsin Rosewell is a bookseller at Kenilworth Books, Warwickshire