Eddie Pepitone’s closest brush with UK fame came in 2012, when the incongruous story broke of Hugh Grant being turned away from the New Yorker’s Edinburgh gig. Whatever attracted the urbane English movie star to the splenetic blue-collar Yank? Well, Pepitone has a cult following, at least since documentary The Bitter Buddha put on a pedestal his brand of barking self-disgust and rage at the debauchery of modern America. His new special unites those elements more satisfyingly than I’ve seen before, and finds the 61-year-old on sparkling – read: appalling – form. Filmed at the Dynasty Typewriter in LA, For the Masses makes no bones about what we’re in for. “You’re not going to hear a lot of shit about dating and cargo pants and how fun everything is,” growls Pepitone. “It’s not fun! We’re in the end times!” He proposes a daily recrimination instead of a daily affirmation. He contrasts the life of his docker dad (a cartoon of brutal masculinity) to the pampered existence we lead today. We find Pepitone driving his car while listening alternately to porn and the speeches of Mussolini – a metaphor, he suggests, for contemporary America. Squat, gruff and broad of Brooklyn accent, Pepitone turns these routines into mini-masterpieces of hopelessness, hate and moral absence. But they’re also exaggerations ad absurdum: the intemperateness is part of the joke, which Pepitone chuckles away at throughout the show. And you can see why. The skit about how bullish he’s going to be as an Alzheimer’s sufferer (“Excuse me – where THE FUCK am I?!”); his lame excuse for not attending his own revolution – these are terrifically effective reversals. Only occasionally does the cynicism pale, usually when it’s directed at less deserving targets. A routine about brutally honest wedding toasts overstays its welcome. The (minimal) Trump material is probably surplus to requirements, if only because it aligns Pepitone with conventional bien-pensant thinking, which isn’t where he belongs. But usually, as with his signature “How do you get these shirts so fresh?” advertising routine that closes the show, Pepitone’s horror at what America has become – and what we have become – is superbly bracing. Available on Amazon Prime and iTunes.