I’ve been loving quarantine. Everything has been super-chilled; I’ve spent a lot of time by myself which has made me a more creative person. I’ve been recording and fixing-up songs, perfecting them for [album release] Pretty Bitch Music. For Memorial Day weekend I was able to chill with my family. What I miss most is eating at restaurants. I also love to skateboard. I used to be in a skate group in high school called the Mighties, and my name was Mighty Saweetie. I haven’t been skateboarding for a long time, so me and my homegirls are going to a skatepark once we’re out. Since the protests began, I’ve been doing my research and I’m starting up my own foundation. It’s time for me to make my own difference in the world, especially in the black community. It’s hard seeing the racist protests in response to Black Lives Matter. The fact that people are peacefully protesting, and there is this much anger in response – that, for me, is a problem. All we are protesting for is equality, justice, our lives. The songs I picked all have a chilled, relaxing vibe. They just make me feel good. And when you’re trapped in your house, you just wanna feel good. I play this song every morning when I’m cooking breakfast because it makes me feel like I’m in paradise. I could play Soco 15 times in a day and I’d be fine. It releases endorphins – I’ll be holding my glass of wine doing my little twerk! I’m not even sure what they’re saying sometimes, but that just shows you the power of music. I understand the emotion behind it. That’s what’s so great about the song. This makes me feel like a gangsta, girl. I don’t know why – it’s just smooth and classic. And I love the video – the black room with the white lights and how the camera faces up. It’s one of the best videos I’ve seen. I’ve been listening to it in my living room a lot since I ain’t got nowhere else to go! But even in my living room, the song has so much energy behind it. This song makes me feel like I’m back home and cruising through the streets. When she goes, “Fuck them girls, you’re mine now / It’s my time, let me shine now”, it makes me want to ride around the town, super-late at night, basking in life, being in a city with bright lights, just feeling good with my homegirl in the passenger seat, and we just vibing. When Nipsey died, this song was really hard to listen to. But in quarantine my emotions have been going up and down, and I love it when he says: “Never let a hard time humble us.” Because these are hard times, we have the virus taking over, and we’ve seen injustice. It’s an uplifting song that keeps my mind positive and the hustling spirit up. I can always look to Nipsey for that. I love the production, the beat is so soft, and his voice is raw. When you listen to his music, you feel like he’s still here. His music keeps him alive. Girl, I got an alligator in the video! When people say “tap in”, they mean checking in with your homegirls, your boys, whoever you care about. It’s a great twerking kind of song, but the message is still there about tapping into the culture and things that matter to you. I can see this being the song of the summer!