What are your memories of going to Glastonbury as a punter or performer?The first time I went I was 16 years old – in 1998, I believe. It was horrendously muddy but I had an incredible time. Growing up in Devon I was really into music and for the first time went to a place that had all this stuff going on that I’d read about in magazines. It suddenly felt like I was able to connect with it all. What makes Glastonbury stand out from other festivals?It’s not that it’s different from other festivals, it’s that it’s the original one in some respects. Without Glastonbury you wouldn’t have Latitude or Green Man. We’ve played there so many times, and still every time I’m excited: I’ll be looking at the site and taking it in, and it’s like a man-made marvel – a bit like the Great Wall of China. What are you most looking forward to at the festival next year?I’ve got kids now who could probably venture there, and my girlfriend’s never been. So next year I’ll try and take my family – that’s what I’m most excited about. What are your memories of going to Glastonbury as a punter or performer?I performed at Glastonbury’s emerging talent competition in 2015, borrowing some friends’ equipment, and ended up winning. I didn’t really know what Michael Eavis looked like at the time but he shook hands with me after my performance. That’s the power Glastonbury has – it brings people together with music. What makes Glastonbury stand out from other festivals?I’ve had so many cool experiences at Glastonbury. I crowdsurfed for the first time. Last year I saw the Cure, which was amazing. One year I sang Wannabe by the Spice Girls with Maggie Rogers. Once we went to Shangri-La and there was a secret club where you had to have a moustache to get in, so we were passing round a fake moustache. What are you most looking forward to at the festival next year?Next year I’m most excited about going to the Rabbit Hole at 2am and dancing around, going to the Cosmic Disco. Right now it sounds so appealing to just not be contained inside – I’d love to sit in a field and hang out for two weeks. What are your memories of going to Glastonbury as a punter or performer?I played on the BBC Introducing stage on the Sunday last year, which didn’t allow much room for partying beforehand. It was worth it, though – as soon as I finished I ran off stage to find my friends who were all dancing topless at Roy Ayers as he sang Searching. What makes Glastonbury stand out from other festivals?It seems like I only just scratched the surface of what Glastonbury has to offer, but I guess what I walked away with was memories that would last a lifetime. What are your memories of going to Glastonbury as a punter or performer?My main memories of Glastonbury are being so excited to see all my favourite artists in the backstage canteen whilst trying to act cool about it. There’s a specific positive energy to the audiences at Glastonbury that I haven’t quite experienced at any other festival. There’s a camaraderie between artists and audiences that’s really special. What are your memories of going to Glastonbury as a punter or performer?The atmosphere. It’s an obvious answer but it’s true. Festivals all have one but Glastonbury has something other festivals will never have. When we played the Other Stage in 2010 it was amazing, I will never forget how that felt and what it looked like. What makes Glastonbury stand out from other festivals?It’s something you look forward to and make special plans for live, so there are always more nerves surrounding it, which I actually really like. It goes in more of a flash than other shows so for me it’s about trying to savour every moment and do the best I possibly can. What are you most looking forward to at the festival next year?I think everyone’s performances next year will feel quite overwhelming and emotional as hopefully we will have come through a very hard year and learned some valuable lessons. It has the potential to be incredible if we are out the other side of this. What are your memories of going to Glastonbury as a punter or performer?I just remember feeling genuine happiness every time I have been there or performed. What makes Glastonbury stand out from other festivals?It’s so special because anywhere you walk you’re guaranteed to find something intriguing to watch or listen to. Or a new person with a new perspective and it might just change your life. What are you most looking forward to at the festival next year?I’m most looking forward to performing and then wandering around with no aim afterwards and letting the festival do its damn thing! What are you most looking forward to at the festival next year?It’s a dream of mine to play Glastonbury. I always heard stories from people I knew who attended the festival and it made me want to go even more. I can’t wait to play some new songs on stage next year and watch some of my favourite artists play too! I’ll also end up staying a few nights at the festival with my friends. I’m excited for it.