The British are obsessed with class, it’s said – unlike in egalitarian America. You’d never guess that from US comic Gina Brillon’s new Amazon Prime Video special, which resembles one of those UK sets in which working-class comics (Rob Beckett, say, or Micky Flanagan) look askance at their new middle-class lives. So well trodden is this terrain, it’s acquired the density of plutonium. Mention quinoa – as Brillon does here, of course – and great waves of compressed comic energy are instantly released. The Floor is Lava traces Brillon’s journey from South Bronx urchin to a woman living her standup dream; from “hood me” to “evolved me”. Puerto Rican but with “a 1978 Caucasian” midwestern husband, Brillon – a former winner of NBC’s Standup for Diversity contest – is perfectly positioned for cross-cultural comedy. She duly delivers with routines about visiting her in-laws’ lakeside second home (“The radish was a garnish!”) and telling her Latino family she’s gone vegan. There’s no point pretending this blazes trails – save for the trail Brillon claims to be blazing, in her pious epilogue, for all those overlooked youngsters told their dreams are unattainable. The jokes seldom surprise. As with the one about angry attendants in “ghetto” supermarkets, it’s often just a premise, an act-out that reiterates the premise, then move on. The phrase-making is unremarkable, save for when it goes wrong. Her assertion that “when you marry someone, you marry the entire bibliography of their issues” is a bit of an idiomatic stretch. But if it’s not adventurous, Brillon has a warmth and (her word) sass to keep most audiences onside as she ranges across her experiences as a singleton then a wife; as a twin sister, an insomniac and a therapy patient. The world beyond her own experiences doesn’t interpose, but no matter – it’s enough to savour the good gags about “broke people culture”, the precious facial expressions (when bedding a guy with sleep apnoea, for instance) and the depiction of her raging possessiveness. “As soon as I knew his name,” she says of meeting her husband, “I launched a cyber-investigation.” Nothing here to inspire such devotion – but it’s a likable hour. The Floor is Lava is available on Amazon Prime Video.