This year was going to be my last Glastonbury. I’ve been three times; first in 1977, then in 2015 and last year. We thought we’d bow out on the 50th anniversary. I can remember turning up in 1977 and driving in at night, and the only indication of where it was happening was a hand-painted sign on a tree that said “fun” pointing to the left. I saw the festival when it was a do-it-yourself indulgence for 2,000 to 3,000 people, and now there are 200,000 attendees – I’ve seen both extremes, and enjoyed them both. One of the things I like about Glastonbury is that it’s not ageist at all. I’m quite used to going to gigs and being quite a lot older than the parents of the bands playing, but I don’t get that feeling at Glastonbury – it’s very inclusive. I was going to go with my wife, Kathy, and meet our youngest son there – it’s a bit of a generational thing. Somewhere where two people who have almost 40 years between them can appreciate the same thing – that’s unique. We’re pleased they’re honouring tickets for next year. We’ve already booked our motorhome. We’ll definitely go one more time and see how the stamina is after that. Mike Gunning, 65, retired, Aylesbury I’m really gutted it’s been cancelled. I’ve been going since I was a child, and this would have been my 20th time at the festival, so everything seemed to come together. The weather is looking nice and there’s even the obligatory shower planned for the weekend, so it seems perfect. This month is always spent lining everything up for going, getting packed, and rooting out the camping gear. It’s left a big hole. I’ve gone with lots of different people over the years, but recently we’ve developed a really good crew, and everyone’s really sad. We’ve all been on a group chat moaning about it. I’m sure we’ll all do some Zoom chats over the weekend, but we can’t really go anywhere to make up for it. There’s stuff on the TV, but it’s not the same. There’s no atmosphere, and none of the eccentric people you meet. Last year I saw Hot Chip next to a guy dressed as a dinosaur. You don’t get any of that on TV. Chris Allen, 39, London Last year was the first time I’d been. I volunteered with Greenpeace. I had to get the coach down by myself, it was scary and I didn’t know what to expect, but it was brilliant and I made amazing friends. I even turned 19 while I was there, which was so incredible. When I came home, I raved about it to everyone, and I’ve not stopped thinking about it since. I’ve been to a few festivals, but I’ve never experienced anything like Glastonbury. It goes without saying that cancelling this year was the right decision, but I’m super disappointed, we’ve been thinking about it all year. I bigged it up so much that my parents wanted to go, and it would have been their first time. I booked a full week off work for Glastonbury and my birthday, and I’ve still got to take the hours off. Me and my parents are talking about doing our own mini Glasto and camping in the garden. We’ll watch the TV coverage, get the guitar out, and maybe have a little sing-song. Maddi Fearn, 19, student, Leeds I knew there was always a strong likelihood of cancellation, but when the announcement came through on Twitter, it still stung. This year would have been my 10th Glastonbury, and my fourth as part of the festival production crew in the theatre and circus fields. Preparation was well under way for this year’s festival so while I’m sad that it has been cancelled, I can’t imagine how the people who work tirelessly on it all year round might feel. The majority of the theatre crew members have been working there for decades – there are even several generations of families within the team – and I was looking forward to seeing them all again. It becomes a great big “love in”.I know that Glastonbury will be OK, but I can’t be sure that other UK festivals will fare so well, same as all of the music venues, theatres and other cultural institutions. This government hasn’t committed to the future of these things and I really want them to step up and ensure that culture can continue after the crisis ends. Paul Taylor, 33, charity worker, London I’ve never been to Glastonbury, it was the first time for me and my boyfriend. We were really excited to go, I’d been checking the Twitter and website weekly for all the lineup announcements, and it was only a week after the full lineup was announced that they cancelled it, so obviously that was disappointing; I’m surprised they even released the lineup. I believe it was the right decision. We might be in a better position now than when it was cancelled, but it would have put all the workers involved at risk, and you can’t social-distance at a festival. Eve Reynolds, 23, barista, London I am gutted it won’t be on. I cannot watch replays of Glastonburys gone by without the pangs of fantastic memories and nostalgia eating me alive. Nothing compares to those five days in glorious Somerset fields. Obviously, it’s the correct decision to cancel. But I’ve come into this week feeling subdued at what could have been; no last-minute booze runs, no packing, no hiking with luggage and warm beers, no relief at setting up camp in South Park. I will miss the walking around on a Wednesday or Thursday checking out the installations or what has changed from previous years. I will miss the clash debates and amazingly raw emotional sets. I will miss the “naughty corner” in all its night-time wonderment. There’s always next year – where I will never take good times for granted again, relishing moments with friends, family and strangers alike. See you then, always equidistant between the bar and the toilets. Nick Southey, 31, Cambridge I worked at Glastonbury a few years before as security. It was a cool experience, but it was exhausting, and I was looking forward to going back and being able to enjoy it properly, and not have to rush back after every gig. There were around 25 or 30 of us, going together. We’d tried really hard to get tickets – there was even an Excel spreadsheet involved. We’re all friends from uni, who are now spread out all around the UK. We even had one friend coming over from Berlin to go to Glastonbury with us, and another from Sydney. We’re all gutted, but we’re thinking about trying to watch the web or TV coverage together, like on Netflix Party. I’ve realised it’s the best outcome to an otherwise terrible situation, because our tickets roll over to next year. We’re sad to not all be together, but it would have felt irresponsible for it to go ahead this year. It’s better just to call it off and focus the efforts on next year when it’s safer. It’ll be more of a celebration, too. Prerana, 23, student, London