Back in late March, my wife, mother-in-law and two children were due to visit Disneyland Paris and we bought park tickets for two days. Obviously, events overtook this trip, the park was shut and our holiday cancelled. I have since tried to get refunded for the Disney tickets but to no avail. I have just received an email stating that the tickets that we bought are “non-refundable”. The website suggests that we can switch our tickets to another date. However, a revisit will not be convenient and we probably won’t be able to afford it.  Is this legal? EC, by email At the start of the Covid-19 crisis Disneylands around the world were quick to tell customers that no refunds would be offered on park tickets in spite of the fact that all the parks were closed. Disneyland Paris, according to its very confusing website on the subject, appears only to be offering those whose trips were cancelled the chance to visit on another day before 31 March 2021. Unsurprisingly, and along with many other travel firms, it has not put a lot on the site explaining how to ask for refunds. We asked the company to clarify its policy given that the law is firmly on the consumer’s side, and it has agreed to refund you. It says that while most of its customers will want to rebook their trips at a later date, it accepts this will not always be possible and that “requested refunds are being handled on a case-by-case basis”. Meanwhile, the park remains closed until at least 14 July, though it looks set to reopen soon after as the French government has lifted the closure order. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions: http://gu.com/letters-terms This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.