Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The number of confirmed deaths now stands at 391,439, according to the Johns Hopkins University tracker. A total of 6,651,047 cases of infection have been confirmed. Brazil’s Covid-19 death toll went past that of Italy on Thursday as the health ministry reported 1,437 deaths in the last 24 hours and 30,925 additional coronavirus cases. The Latin American nation has now reported 34,021 deaths from the coronavirus, trailing only the US and UK. The head of the French government’s scientific advisory council, Jean-François Delfraissy, told France Inter radio: “We can reasonably say the virus is currently under control. The virus is still circulating, in certain regions in particular … but it is circulating slowly.” The 38-year-old man in Rakhine state had returned to Myanmar from Bangladesh, officials told Radio Free Asia. Rights groups are concerned about the squalid conditions in camps in Rakhine, where around 130,000 internally displaced Rohingya remain trapped. South Africa has recorded 3,267 coronavirus cases in 24 hours, the biggest increase since the pandemic hit the country. Africa’s biggest industrial power has now recorded a total of 40,792 infections, the health ministry said. The death toll rose by 56 to 848. More than half of the cases are in the Western Cape region, where health services are under pressure. The number of new cases of coronavirus in Iran has dropped slightly from its new peak on Thursday, with 2,886 more people in the country testing positive for the virus in the past 24 hours, according to the health ministry. Thursday’s new daily cases record suggested that the country could be experiencing a second wave of epidemic. The previous daily record in Iran, which was one of the first countries in the Middle East to be gripped by the disease, was on 30 March. President Tayyip Erdoğan has cancelled a lockdown announced late on Thursday after a public backlash, but warned of a rise in the daily number of new coronavirus cases. AstraZeneca will begin rolling out the vaccine in September if ongoing trials prove successful, its chief executive said. The company is partnering with Oxford University, which has pioneered the vaccine, and is already manufacturing doses before seeking final regulatory approval once testing concludes in the coming months. Mexicans have responded with outrage after a man was found beaten to death hours after he was arrested by police officers for not wearing a face mask in public. Video of the incident emerged on Wednesday, showing the police officers with assault rifles forcing Giovanni López, a 30-year-old bricklayer, into a police pickup truck as bystanders pleaded for his release.