The Premier League is to launch a system for players to report online abuse in a new measure aimed at combatting discrimination. As football continues to confront the issue of racism, following the ignominy of the “White Lives Matter Burnley” banner trailed over the Etihad Stadium this week, the league has taken a proactive step to engage with the abuse rampant on social media. Incidents of racist insults directed at Paul Pogba and Marcus Rashford, among other prominent black players, made headlines this season and prompted a debate about the lack of intervention from social media platforms. Last week the former Arsenal player Ian Wright revealed he receives racist abuse on a daily basis online, and called on social media companies to act. The Premier League has taken steps in recent weeks to support its players against discriminatory behaviour. It endorsed calls from players to support the Black Lives Matter movement, with the words replacing players’ names on the back of their shirts, and has now constructed its own system to fast-track complaints against offensive online content, either on public pages or in private messages. Every complaint reported by a player will be “reviewed, reported to the relevant social media company, investigated and legal action taken where appropriate”, according to the league. Its chief executive, Richard Masters, said: “Online discriminatory abuse is unacceptable in any walk of life and tackling this issue must be a priority. There are too many instances of footballers and their families receiving appalling discriminatory messages; nobody should have to deal with this. “We have recently been made aware of the wholly unacceptable online racist abuse received by Ian Wright. The Premier League strongly condemns this deeply offensive behaviour. We immediately implemented our reporting system and will support Ian in any endeavour to bring the offenders to justice. “The Premier League will not tolerate discriminatory behaviour in any form and we, alongside the FA, EFL, PFA and LMA will continue to challenge major social media companies that fail to do enough to block offensive discriminatory material and identify and ban offenders from their platforms.” Following the incidents involving Pogba and Rashford in 2019, the league, alongside the FA and Kick it Out, met Twitter to discuss implementing new processes to combat discriminatory behaviour on the platform. Twitter subsequently said that it had acted to deal with 700 examples of “abuse and hateful conduct related to UK football”, but Kick it Out subsequently called for Twitter to “deliver concrete change” on abuse.