Driving into Nottingham a few years ago, I remember seeing posters for new “local” radio shows hosted by Myleene Klass and the tall one from JLS. It was a strange scene that has likely been replicated across the country, where once genuinely local output is replaced by a celebrity presenter sitting in a central London studio. In recent years, the idiosyncrasies and charm of regional shows have quietly been replaced by a cheaper, identikit radio. In 2019, Global Radio replaced the 40-plus local breakfast shows across its Capital, Smooth and Heart networks with just three nationwide programmes hosted from London. The formula was simple enough: replace local hosts with big names based in the capital and beam one blanket service out to the regions. Now the commercial group Bauer has announced plans to fold almost 50 regional radio outlets into a national network. It means dozens more towns and cities across England will lose their own distinctive local radio stations later this year, with stations such as York’s Minster FM and the West Midlands’ Signal 107 being replaced with largely syndicated programmes made in London, hundreds of miles from the communities they serve. It has also recently emerged that the BBC is considering axing its regional current affairs television shows. The award-winning Inside Out series of investigative programmes has already had its autumn series cancelled – and budget cuts mean bosses have launched a review of all regional programming in England. MPs, including Jacob Rees-Mogg, have criticised the move but offered no promise of a reprieve. If this is the end of regional output, it is going out with a whimper. The death of local radio in the UK has been a quiet type of decline. While the closure of local newspapers in recent years has rightly gained at least some attention, the morphing of regional radio into a centralised London hub has happened with little fuss. The world can seem like it’s moved on from local broadcasting. Local radio or regional reporting can bring up less than favourable references to Alan Partridge, and the cost-cutting of commercial vehicles can easily be written off as a sad but inevitable sign of the times. Britons increasingly listen to the radio via DAB radio and smart speakers; we are more used to Amazon Echo now than FM radio. Like so much of the media, there is dwindling revenue in radio and ever growing competition as podcasts and playlists become the norm. Meanwhile, the 24/7 global news cycle is available on our phones at the press of a button. But there is still demand for regional programming, and considerable value to it. Radio generally has come into its own during the coronavirus pandemic, providing structure and togetherness for listeners, and even company for those who are alone. Local stations have been particularly well suited for this, bringing a sense of community through the airwaves. In recent weeks, my local BBC station’s Saturday night show has had its presenter broadcasting from his kitchen table. Listeners are familiar enough to text in with niche local jokes, like signing off as “Lincolnshire Mountain Rescue” (in a notoriously flat county); the host can refer to nearby bands and music venues in a way no national hub can. Local broadcasting is also a rare and vital vehicle for the media outside the south. The BBC regional current affairs television shows now under threat have been a training ground over the years for many journalists based outside London. My first television job, on Sunday Politics East Midlands, was on my local BBC service. With no contacts at the bigger stations and being unfamiliar with the capital, local news was an invaluable way to get a foot in the door. Taking away one of the few platforms available outside the capital will only enshrine the hold of a southern, non-disabled, white, middle-class media. In an ever busier and more disconnected culture, there is something unique and personal about local media output. Hearing a regional accent on the airwaves, you are transported to your own corner of the world, rooted in the people and places that are meaningful to you. It is a sense of identity, a voice that would otherwise be drowned out. As we look afresh at what it means to be home, local broadcasting suddenly feels all the more needed. We will surely miss it when it’s gone. • Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnist 