Neil Warnock does not take long to identify a rare benefit of football’s surreal new existence. “The plus of playing behind closed doors is that players will be able to hear me shouting from the touchline,” says Middlesbrough’s new manager. “We’ve probably not got many leaders in the dressing room, so it has advantages.” Given that Warnock is noted for an ability to project invariably forthright, often expletive‑punctuated, technical area instructions above the noisiest of crowds, his latest squad could be in for a culture shock at Stoke on Saturday. In sacking Jonathan Woodgate on Tuesday Steve Gibson, the Middlesbrough, deemed a change of voice essential if his club are to avoid the financial calamity involved in dropping into League One. Last Saturday’s 3-0 home defeat by Swansea left Boro hovering above the Championship relegation zone, ahead of 22nd-placed Hull only on goal difference. By Tuesday evening Warnock was experiencing the 18th managerial unveiling of a long and largely successful career, the only difference being that the coronavirus pandemic dictated his introductory media address was delivered via Zoom. By then the 71-year-old had not only completed the long drive north from the home in Cornwall where he had “pretty much retired” after leaving Cardiff last November but presided over training. Three more sessions have followed, enabling Warnock to begin diagnosing Boro’s problems as they approach vital trips to Stoke and, on Thursday, Hull. The good news is that he does not rank lack of ability among such ills. Instead his principal challenge is unlocking the talent in a squad studded with high-level experience: the Sheffield United loanee Ravel Morrison, George Friend, Adam Clayton, Ryan Shotton and Paddy McNair have played in the Premier League. “I’ve already seen one or two really good things and we’re working on a pattern to give ourselves an advantage,” says the former chiropodist who learned a lot about human psychology during that former life treating feet. “You have to hope the players respond to what I want. You might have all the degrees and diplomas in the world but man-management’s the main ingredient for success. “Players need ability but ability alone won’t bring success. If you get players with ability working hard for you that’s utopia.” Right now Boro are some way from nirvana. “It’s no good kidding anybody,” says Warnock. “We’re in a serious position; you’re not down there without something being wrong. It’s not all bad luck; we know we’re scrapping for our lives. “The players seem a genuine bunch and are trying to impress me but they’ve got to work their socks off. I want total commitment from everyone.” This manifesto for change does not preclude fun. “I ask them to try and enjoy training. I know quite a few of the players, I tried to sign some of them in the past. I’ve had a bit of banter with one or two about what a lucky escape I’ve had! I’ve missed that banter in the last few months.” There is a sense Woodgate was let down by certain individuals but an inquest has been postponed. “It’s disappointing when a manager leaves; I’ve told the players they have to take some responsibility,” says Warnock. “But we haven’t got time to dwell on it now. I’ve just said everyone’s going to have to contribute something over the next eight games. We’ve got to be ready to die for the cause.” Woodgate showed flashes of real promise but the former England defender was thrown in at the deep end. If things were complicated by the 40-year-old’s longstanding friendships with particular first‑teamers and the inexperience of his backroom staff, he also inherited a poisoned chalice following last season’s failed promotion attempt under Tony Pulis. It will be intriguing to see whether Morrison – the troubled talent has made only two appearances and exerted minimal impact since arriving in January – finally emerges from hibernation. Warnock may be painted, sometimes a touch inaccurately, as an uber-pragmatist but at Queens Park Rangers he built a second-tier title-winning side around the mercurial talent of Adel Taarabt after ignoring warnings that placing trust in the maverick Moroccan would be tantamount to organising his own sacking. He has signed up for eight games on Teesside but has long cast covetous eyes at Boro’s impressive infrastructure and may yet be persuaded to stick around by his old friend Gibson. “I think of Middlesbrough, like Stoke, as a big club who should be in the Premier League,” says Warnock. “It’s sad to see them scrapping in the Championship.” A struggle to escape League One next season would be infinitely worse.