That old racing piety, “Let’s hope they all come back safely”, is generally saved for the moments before a Grand National or a novice chase at Cheltenham, but Flat racing has its dangers too, as anyone who saw Well Of Wisdom’s race on Saturday will know. Under a strong left-hand drive from William Buick, the colt lurched to his right and squeezed Surf Dancer against the rail with such force that the other horse had to scrabble to stay upright. Well Of Wisdom won and was allowed to keep the Sandown race. Surf Dancer came fourth, which is at least one place further back than he would have finished with a clear run. Buick received no punishment because the interference was ruled accidental, the jockey having had insufficient time to react. 🗣 "From a stewards' point of view, William has done everything right, but he has obviously caused a massive amount of interference"@GeorgeENB1982 gives his take on Well Of Wisdom's victory at @Sandownpark for @godolphin Stewards' enquiry ongoing pic.twitter.com/C4l7OVmHLC That outcome makes sense if you’re a grizzled veteran who has been in the racing bubble for decades and likes nothing better than a determined winning ride of the kind Buick delivered. An outsider, however, would see a shocking incident in which a horse and rider were put out of contention and nearly knocked over, and somehow resulted in no action being taken. Risk cannot be eliminated from horse racing but it does need to be managed. The interference rules and the way they are enforced allows for too much danger, giving too much leeway to the cut and thrust of competitive race-riding. It is a timely discussion for Royal Ascot week. Since resumption a fortnight ago, almost all races have been limited to 12 runners but that restriction will now be eased to 14, or more in certain cases. Tuesday’s card will feature one race of 24 runners and another of 20; the stakes will be higher than normal and there will be a greater risk of people getting in each other’s way. One thing to look for in the closing stages is the leading horse that hangs across the path of his most likely challenger, deterring that rival and improving his own chances. The jockey will say they were doing everything possible to keep the beast straight and there is really no proving otherwise. Stewards are in a difficult position when faced with a senior jockey such as Buick – a highly accomplished sportsman whose skills in the saddle outstrip their own. On Saturday they could have found him at fault because Well Of Wisdom had hung away from the whip earlier in the straight. After that, Buick was taking a risk in continuing to use the whip while his horse was right alongside another. Had he been an apprentice, the stewards may have told him as much. But bickering over fault will get us nowhere. What is needed is an automatic penalty in cases of serious interference, forcing jockeys to take extra care to avoid such incidents. That penalty should not just apply to the rider but also to the trainer and the owner. Jockeys ride to please their employers, not themselves, and there will be no changing the hard-nosed way they do the job until owners and trainers earnestly desire change. If their man gets a suspension for interference, they react – at most – with a tired sigh and start thinking about who to use in the meantime. Goodwood12.00 Dark Company 12.35 Rusper's Lad 1.10 Treacherous 1.40 Basilicata 2.10 Sir Roderic 2.45 Variyann 3.15 Master Spy (nap) 3.45 StagiairePontefract12.20 Lost My Sock 12.50 Bowman 1.20 Corvair 1.50 War Defender 2.20 Makthecat 2.50 Antonia De Vega 3.25 Revolver 3.55 Kaylen's Mischief 4.25 Bahkit 5.00 Embrace The MomentKempton4.30 Wolflet 5.05 Takeonefortheteam 5.35 Yuri Gagarin 6.05 Float 6.35 Jellystone 7.05 Monsieur Fox (nb)Chepstow4.55 Coul Queen 5.25 Red Bravo 5.55 One Night Stand 6.25 Oeil De Tigre 6.55 Bartat 7.25 Ametist 7.55 Captain Kissinger I would not favour increased use of disqualification for interference. Stewards should alter the result on the track as rarely as possible. The sport loses income when bookmakers pay out on one winner and then find themselves paying out on a different one 20 minutes later. But if prize money were forfeited in cases of serious interference, regardless of fault, it would get everyone’s attention. Jockeys would be free to give each other that little bit of extra room that improves everyone’s safety, knowing they will not be scolded for it upon dismounting. Racing needs to make it clear that no one can really win when someone has ended up in danger.