Eschewing recently fashionable titles such as curator and art educator, Alister Warman, who has died of cancer aged 73, described what he did as “working with artists”. The first official director of the Serpentine Gallery, from 1983 to 1991, then principal of the Byam Shaw School of Art, both in London, Alister had an approach that was always intuitive and collaborative, rather than strategic. The Serpentine Gallery had opened in a former tea pavilion in Hyde Park in 1970, under the authority of the Arts Council, with Sue Grayson as gallery “organiser”; in 1987, four years into Alister’s tenure, it became a trust, independent of the council. Alister’s diverse programme reflected his belief that the quality of the strongest artists stemmed from waywardness and conviction. British painters working in different idioms were given one-person exhibitions: Kenneth Martin and Ivon Hitchens; Tess Jaray and Maggi Hambling; Frank Bowling and Ken Kiff. In 2018 he reflected that “some of the artists might seem parochial in the context of the global firmament that has become the norm”. However this programming, as well as his openness to different media, such as ceramics, textiles and printed ephemera as well as painting and sculpture, now seems prescient. Unusually, photographers were shown in depth, in exhibitions such as Another Country (1985), Chris Killip’s and Graham Smith’s photographs taken in the north-east of England; a pioneer look at Japanese photography in Black Sun: The Eyes of Four (1986); and Eugène Atget: Photographs of Old France (1984). Female artists were given solo exhibitions at a time when that was uncommon, notably a first British show for Louise Bourgeois in 1985, and, later, younger sculptors such as Alison Wilding, Rebecca Horn and Alice Aycock. Paulo Rego’s show in 1988 coincided with what Alister described in the catalogue preface as “a sea-change” in her work – the more realistic figures from her intimate life were enacting dramas. He cited the menace of the just-completed painting The Family, in which two young women try to revive an ailing man, one rubbing against him, and speculated correctly that Rego “had discovered a key to unlock the furniture containing her childhood fears. And in having the courage to use this key she has at the same time become an artist of the first rank.” Instead of always curating group exhibitions at the Serpentine himself, Alister gave a free hand to critics such as Adrian Searle and Andrew Brighton. His light touch was also demonstrated by Structure for Two Catalpas, a 1987 piece by Daniel Buren named after the grand trees on the gallery lawn, where the French artist used a transversal wall articulated by his signature vertical stripes to join the inside and outdoor spaces. A cool LA aesthetic prevailed in the 1990 exhibition of Ed Ruscha’s new paintings. Alister viewed his 1991 move to the Byam Shaw School of Art as an opportunity to remake the independent art college. His first step was to abolish departments for different media and insist on a single “fine art” course. Regular visiting artists would be invited to the school on the same day, giving them the chance to meet each other and hang out with the students in Esmeralda’s Brazilian cafe. Although students and staff regretted the loss of independence when the Byam Shaw became part of the much larger Central Saint Martins in 2003, the change brought access to state-of-the-art facilities and survival. Alister hoped that the school’s “resourcefulness … would allow it to adapt more quickly to changing circumstances”. Born in Harrow, north-west London, Alister was the second of five children of Zillah (nee Whittle), and Mark Warman, a classicist who taught at Harrow school after the second world war. After Harrow, Alister studied at the Courtauld Institute of Art (1966-69) and in 1971 joined Newcastle Polytechnic to teach art history. After a year travelling in South America, in 1976 he went to the Arts Council of Great Britain, based in Piccadilly, London, first working on grants and projects. When he became the Arts Council’s officer responsible for art in public spaces, in the early 1980s he commissioned Bridget Riley (then temporarily out of the limelight) to make a large wall painting for the Royal Liverpool University hospital. It did not survive rebuilding but was remade in 2017 for the Chinati Foundation in Marfa, Texas. Working with Eduardo Paolozzi as the artist produced mosaics for Tottenham Court Road station on the London Underground from 1979, Alister convinced him to use black and white for the Northern line and colour for the Central. In 1983, after an open competition, Alister became the first person designated “director” of the Serpentine Gallery. At the farewell for his successor, in 2016, one speaker described the place Julia Peyton-Jones encountered on her arrival as a “potting shed”. There were gasps from the audience until those who were familiar with Alister’s tenure and character thought of how he preferred to nurture rather than showcase careers. After leaving Byam Shaw, Alister continued to work with artists, on the board of the independent spaces Gasworks and Peer, and on the Kenneth Armitage Foundation and the City & Guilds of London Art School. Riley and, later, the estate of Anthony and Sheila Caro employed him to advise on options for their foundations. Over a lifetime, intertwined pleasures came from close and attentive looking at paintings and birds in the landscape. In a conversation with the artist Ruth Maclennan for her project Hide (2010), he explained that Archway Tower (now Vantage Point), viewed from his desk at Byam Shaw, served as a guidepost for cormorants commuting from Hampstead Ponds to roost at Walthamstow reservoirs. Alister is survived by his partner of 31 years, the artist Alison Turnbull, by Jake and Rebecca, his children from his first marriage, to Anne Guthrie, which ended in divorce in 1990, and by four grandchildren, Dylan, James, Oliver and Suki. • Alister Seager Warman, curator and art school principal, born 9 December 1946; died 29 May 2020