You can no longer legally be fired for being gay or transgender in the United States. In a surprise 6-3 decision on Monday, the supreme court ruled that title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, which among other things bans employment discrimination on the basis of sex, also applies to sexual orientation and gender identity. Writing for the majority, Trump appointee Neil Gorsuch wrote that discrimination against gay and trans people is based on objections to the way these people’s behavior relates to their sex, and is therefore already illegal. The decision extends protection to gay and trans workers in many states who previously could legally be fired if their bosses objected to their gender identities or sex lives. It is the first decision on LGBT rights since the 2018 retirement of Justice Anthony Kennedy, the Republican appointee who became an unlikely advocate of gay rights on the court and wrote majority opinions in all four of its major gay rights decisions. The ruling folds together two different cases brought by three different plaintiffs, two gay men and one transgender woman. Gerald Bostok of Georgia was fired from his job as a child welfare services coordinator in 2013 after joining a gay softball league. Donald Zarda was fired from his job as a skydiving instructor in New York in 2010 after making a joke about his sexual orientation to a client. And Aimee Stephens, a funeral director in suburban Detroit, was fired after telling her boss that she would come to work presenting as a woman. Of the three plaintiffs, only Bostok is still alive to see the decision. The decision is a rare bit of good news from the court for progressives, who have all but given up on the institution. The refusal of Mitch McConnell to fill the seat vacated by the passing of Antonin Scalia under the Obama administration, followed by the swift confirmation of Brett Kavanaugh to the court in 2018, despite multiple credible allegations of sexual assault, gave conservatives a robust majority on the court that was anticipated to hand victories to social conservatives. Rollbacks of civil rights protections, voting rights, women’s rights and racial justice provisions are expected under this new judicial regime. It was thought that LGBT rights would be on the chopping block, too. The ominousness of a conservative majority and the acute dangers this poses for civil rights and gender justice has provoked some on the left, including me, to call for court packing under the next Democratic administration as a means of staving off the worst of the conservative justices’ impulses. There is still time this term for the conservative court to prove itself an enemy of gender justice: major cases on contraceptive access and abortion rights are scheduled to be decided soon. Even a few years ago, this reasoning was considered a bit of a stretch in legal circles But the ruling signals a caution and unwillingness on the part of the court to move too quickly on a rollback of LGBT rights. It is particularly interesting that the majority opinion was issued by the arch-conservative Justice Gorsuch, who defended his reasoning on textualist grounds, claiming that the word “sex” implied a ban on discrimination against other sexual and gender identities. “We agree that homosexuality and transgender status are distinct concepts from sex,” Gorsuch wrote. “But as we’ve seen, discrimination based on homosexuality or transgender status necessarily entails discrimination based on sex; the first cannot happen without the second.” Because sexual orientation discrimination punishes employees of one sex for behavior that would not be punished in employees of another sex –say, firing a lesbian worker for dating women when male workers are not fired for dating women –Gorsuch reasoned that it was a discrimination based on the employee’s sex, and hence already prohibited by the law. Even a few years ago, this reasoning was considered a bit of a stretch in legal circles –certainly, it was thought, the court would consider sex and sexual orientation to be distinct issues. The fact that they didn’t is the result of a mass social movement that has rapidly shifted attitudes towards gay people in the culture, demanded reform to discriminatory laws, and ensured that LGBT people have a greater chance to live lives of dignity and prosperity. It also means a significant expansion of formal protections for LGBT workers at the federal level and provides progressives with a bit of much needed good news from the court. On a court that routinely splits into 5-4 decisions, the 6-3 majority wasn’t even close: only three Justices, Samuel Alito, accused sexual harasser Clarence Thomas, and accused sexual assault perpetrator Brett Kavanaugh, dissented from the ruling, in a petulant opinion written by Alito that accused their conservative colleague Gorsuch of betraying the legacy of Antonin Scalia. It’s unclear what the ruling will mean in practice. About half of states already had anti-discrimination protections for gay workers on the books; most of these state statues included safeguards for transgender employees, too. Federal employment discrimination lawsuits brought under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act are notoriously difficult to prove, since a burden falls on employees to prove that their employer discriminated against them explicitly because of their protected status – race, gender, or now, sexual orientation. Under a regime of at-will employment, it is easy for employers to invent some pretense to cover up their discrimination, making up excuses and concealing their real intent. This burden of proof on employees who want to sue when they have been discriminated against doesn’t get any easier now that the kinds of discrimination they can sue over have been expanded. To really make employment more secure for gay and trans workers, as for other workers, we will need an end to the regime of at-will employment and the strengthening of affirmatively feminist, anti-racist and pro-gay unions that will fight against employer discrimination. The decision will meaningfully improve the lives of gay workers in rural areas and red states The decision too, is merely statutory, not constitutional – meaning that it can be more easily undone by a future conservative Congress or mendaciously opportunistic court. But the decision will meaningfully improve the lives of gay workers in rural areas and red states, where discrimination has previously been legal and where employers will now be motivated to avoid Civil Rights Act lawsuits that are costly even when they are winnable. For these workers, the ruling means a new era of greater freedom, greater security and lesser fear. These workers’ new protections are a legitimate cause for celebration. And for LGBT Americans nationwide, too – even those large urban centers and deep blue states where discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity was already illegal – the ruling marks a meaningful symbolic victory on the path to a full and rigorously protected legal equality for LGBT Americans. Homophobia and transphobia remain robust forces in American culture and institutions; this is not the end of the struggle against the forces that oppress LGBT Americans. But now the court has granted gay and trans Americans another tool with which to fight.