Boris Johnson’s surprise announcement this week to parliament that he will fold the Department for International Development (DfID) into the Foreign Office is the wrong decision taken at the wrong time for the wrong reasons. Such a move will hurt the world’s poorest just when the Covid-19 pandemic is predicted to cause soaring levels of poverty, malnutrition and child mortality. Mr Johnson’s ill-conceived merger plan is less about responding to global challenges and more about diverting attention from this week’s humiliating U-turns with a damaging culture war. On Tuesday Mr Johnson unexpectedly declared his intention to end Britain’s policy of divorcing the pursuit of the national interest from the promotion of development abroad. At stake is DfID’s aid budget of £15bn a year, the third largest in the world. Mr Johnson prizes realpolitik rather than a zeal for reducing poverty abroad. The ruling Vote Leave clique thinks the money could be better spent in a series of gestures that only serve to highlight the narrowness of its nationalistic agenda. This is a two-front battle, with Mr Johnson advancing against opponents within his party – those one-nation Conservatives for whom DfID’s independence is a litmus test of liberal Toryism – and his enemies without who oppose his reckless chauvinism. It was under David Cameron, building on Labour’s inheritance, that the UK became the only G7 state to meet the target of spending 0.7% of GDP on overseas assistance. This ought to be a source of pride and strength. But the aid budget’s biggest critics were, like Mr Johnson, also leavers. That’s no coincidence: a form of nationalism, particularly the corrosive idea of a munificent Britain being taken for a ride by foreigners, fuelled both campaigns. Brexit’s enemies were cast as an out-of-touch elite who cared more about people outside the country than those inside it. Mr Johnson’s leave campaign also juxtaposed austerity at home with generosity abroad, playing on the absurd suggestion that we were seeing cuts in the UK but not in the developing world. In parliament Mr Johnson shamelessly played to leave sentiment with evidence-free claims that DfID was a profligate “cashpoint in the sky” that spends money abroad without reference to Britain’s “diplomatic, political and commercial” priorities. This is palpably false. Aid works by reducing poverty and bolstering growth in poor nations. Money does go to some of the world’s poorest, most corrupt and most violent places. But since these are often in the most need of basic amenities, cash will inevitably flow to the worst places. The prime minister says the UK gives more aid to Tanzania and Zambia than it does to Ukraine and the western Balkans where Russia poses security threats. That’s because countries like Zambia and Tanzania have high levels of poverty, which is what DfID was created to tackle, and because on a per-capita basis the western Balkans get far more aid than Africa. Without a focus on development, aid will end up being used as a sweetener for arms deals. Mr Johnson dog-whistled to his base that we can return to the ways of the white Commonwealth by bringing the UK into line with Australia and Canada. These are minnows in the world of development. Some Conservatives try to leaven the argument by saying that foreign ministries in Norway and Denmark are in charge of aid. The Scandinavian comparisons only work if Mr Johnson’s government adopts Nordic levels of competency. The prime minister knows it is the law to spend 0.7% of GDP on development each year. But the modus operandi of Vote Leave is to break the rules and to make political capital out of being taken to court. Foreign Office mandarins would be naive if they believe that DfID’s pain will be their gain. There are votes for Mr Johnson if he diverts aid cash to build warships and NHS hospitals, and none in revamping embassies. If the prime minister gets his way then “Global Britain” will become a textbook case of how to lose friends – and influence. By pandering to the belief that aid sells the country short, Mr Johnson is doing enduring harm to British leadership and the idea that the country can help those in need.