Tiz the Law has won an unprecedented Belmont Stakes, claiming victory Saturday at the first race of a rejiggered Triple Crown schedule and crossing the finish line in front of eerily empty grandstands. The three-year-old colt from upstate New York charged to the lead turning to the frontstretch and now can set his sights on the Kentucky Derby (on 5 September) and Preakness (3 October). All three legs of this year’s Triple Crown schedule were postponed due to the coronavirus pandemic. Belmont, usually the series capper, was initially scheduled for 6 June. Tiz the Law gave New York a hometown champion in its first major sporting event since the coronavirus pandemic seized the area. He’s the first New York-bred horse to win the Belmont since Forester in 1882. This Belmont States was unlike any of the 151 that preceded it. The Long Island track can pack in nearly 100,000, but this race had about 100 on hand, including jockeys, media and park staff. Masks were mandated for all but the horses. Even the jockeys wore face coverings. Closed to the public since March, Belmont Park hardly resembled the summer soiree New Yorkers are used to. Betting windows and gift shops were closed, no boozy Belmont Jewels shaken to order. Foot traffic was so slow that a few weeds over a foot tall sprouted up between bricks paving the track-side pavilion. Silence at the 115-year-old venue was broken when New York governor Andrew Cuomo issued the traditional riders, up! call remotely via video. Bugler Sam Grossman pulled down his facemask to tap out Call to the Post, and racers strolled onto the track to a recording of Frank Sinatra’s New York, New York. A PA announcer introduced them to empty grandstands. A heartfelt and memorable 'Riders Up' from @NYGovCuomo! 🗽@BelmontStakes | @TheNYRA pic.twitter.com/N93Iz9HKNY Signs outside the locked-down venue instructed gamblers that if they wanted to wager on this Belmont Stakes, their best bet was to download an app and do it on their phones. Perhaps welcome harbinger for Tap It to Win, who led out of the gates and seemed poised to give trainer Mark Casse a third straight Triple Crown race victory. Instead, Tiz the Law powered past him on the outside and cruised to a four-length victory. Tiz the Law owner Jack Knowlton of New York’s Sackatoga Stable was set to watch from a restaurant patio in upstate Saratoga Springs. A little different than 17 years ago, when the Sackatoga crew took a school bus to watch their colt Funny Cide try to wrap a Triple Crown sweep at Belmont Park. Funny Cide finished third. It was also a breakthrough win for 82-year-old trainer Barclay Tagg, who completed a career Triple Crown after also training Funny Cide. “I’m just glad I lived long enough that I got another horse like this,” Tagg said. Manny Franco, a 25-year-old jockey from Puerto Rico, entered the winners circle in his first career Belmont Stakes. He called Tiz the Law a versatile horse in the run-up to the race, and what he showed Saturday was typical stalk the pacemakers early, then pounce on the home stretch. Dr Post, owned by famed trainer Todd Pletcher, finished second. Max Player finished third, among the highest finishes by a woman-trained horse. Linda Rice was trying to become the first woman to ever send a horse to victory at a Triple Crown race. The track Saturday was shortened to 1 1/8 miles instead of the grueling 1 ½-mile standard to account for competitors unusual training schedules. Racers kicked off from a starting gate placed atop the backstretch, rather than in front of the grandstands. Plenty remained on the line. Tiz the Law earned Knowlton the top share of a $1m purse, and the top four horses earned Kentucky Derby qualifying points. Tiz the Law took advantage of a 10-horse field weakened by injuries. Among the casualties were two potential entrants from famed trainer Bob Baffert, who ended up without a horse in this race – one of then, Charlatan, is expected to run the Kentucky Derby. Earlier Saturday, Gamine led all the way in winning the $300,000 Acorn Stakes for three-year-old fillies by 18 3/4 lengths. Trained by Baffert, Gamine ran one mile in 1:32.55, fastest in the 90-year history of the race. Her time was just off the track record of 1:32.24 set by Najran in 2003. Gamine earned 50 qualifying points for the Kentucky Oaks on 4 September at Churchill Downs. Gamine is one of two horses trained by Baffert that tested positive for a banned substance at Oaklawn Park in Arkansas. She won a race there on 2 May. Published reports said Gamine, along with Charlatan, tested positive for lidocaine, a regulated anesthetic widely used in equine medicine.