The footage and photographs are disturbing. These lawless rioters are out of control. They have driven an SUV into a crowd, tossed journalists to the ground and pepper sprayed them, beaten people with batons, and even blinded a woman in one eye. They have been launching unprovoked attacks on peaceful, law-abiding citizens exercising their constitutional rights. The violent behavior of these mobs should be condemned by all. We need to restore order: someone must stop the police. Around the country over the last few days, following the murder of George Floyd, there have been widespread protests against police brutality. But in city after city, law enforcement agencies seem determined to prove the protesters right, by responding with a hefty dose of police brutality. There is no shortage of examples of police using excessive force against protesters. In New York, officers who had intentionally covered their badge numbers “pulled down the mask of a peaceful protester, who had his hands up, and pepper-sprayed him in the face.” In Salt Lake City, an older man with a cane was shoved to the ground. In Austin, police shot a pregnant woman in the stomach with a “non-lethal” round. There were scenes reminiscent of the infamously brutal suppression of demonstrators at the 1968 Chicago Democratic Convention. As Reason concluded, officers around the country acted with “total disregard for protesters’ safety or rights.” There was no real need for those New York officers to disguise their badge numbers. After all, even when police officers’ names are fully known, there is rarely any accountability. The whole reason protesters are angry is that it seems American cops can get away with almost anything. In 2016, an Arizona police officer executed a man who was pleading for his life. It was on video. The officer was acquitted. This was not an exceptional case; it happens over and over. If outright murder goes unpunished, no officer need every worry about getting in trouble for blinding and maiming a few protesters. Of course, it’s the protesters who are called violent, even when the overwhelming majority do nothing but march and chant – though they do refuse to back down, and challenging authority can be a capital crime in a police state. There have certainly been plenty of instances of vandalism and theft accompanying demonstrations, but it’s important to make a clear distinction between acts of property destruction and actual violence. Setting a police car on fire is very costly to taxpayers, but harm to human bodies should be far more disturbing. American police have been brutal for a long time, and both Democratic and Republican presidents have failed to successfully reform them. Barack Obama’s Justice Department was admirable for at least investigating a number of egregiously out-of-control departments, though outright criminals like Joe Arpaio managed to remain in power throughout Obama’s term. Donald Trump made it clear from the outset that if it was up to him, police could brutalize people with total impunity – he even explicitly encouraged cops to rough people up during arrests. According to the Trump-supporting head of the Minneapolis police union, Trump has reversed Obama’s policies by “letting the cops do their job, put the handcuffs on the criminals instead of us.” But when cops kill, as in the case of George Floyd, they need to be the ones with the handcuffs on. Otherwise they have a license to freely murder citizens. There have been commendable exceptions to the pattern of police misconduct. In Michigan, a local sheriff marched with protesters and in New York, several officers shocked protesters by joining them in taking a knee. But it seems to be that there are just a few “good apples” in a generally rotten bunch. The frequency of aggressive, militarized responses to civil demonstrations suggests there is something very deeply wrong with police culture and with policing as an institution. At the very least, we need to seriously demilitarize the police, so that they do not appear to be an occupying army complete with tanks. But there are serious criminal punishment scholars who have suggested we need to talk about “ending the police” altogether. By this, they do not mean allowing anyone to victimize anyone else without fear of consequences, or ceasing to protect the population from threats. Rather, they mean totally rethinking how laws are enforced and how social problems are addressed. Having a militarized force respond to situations that require social workers trained to deal with mental health issues has often made things tragically worse rather than better. Frankly, fire departments seem like they would do a much better job addressing many of the situations that police are now dispatched to deal with. Firefighters actually protect and serve, while police too often act like squads of armed thugs rather than compassionate and helpful community servants. In theory, the police are supposed to protect the community. When they are whacking the community with sticks, and firing tear gas into it, they are more like an armed gang than keepers of the peace. When police show no interest in obeying the constitution or treating protesters with dignity and care, then they should cease to command respect. A police force that runs amok does not deserve to be called “law enforcement.” They are rioters, plain and simple. Nathan Robinson is a Guardian US columnist and the editor of Current Affairs