Long queues of shoppers formed outside stores around England on the first day that non-essential shops were allowed to reopen for business since the coronavirus lockdown was imposed. Branches of Primark and Sports Direct were among those attracting large numbers of customers before they opened. In Liverpool, the queue for Primark stretched around the shop and along a street behind, before the retailer opened its doors at 7.20am. Mia Melia, 20, told PA Media that she had arrived just after 8am. “I needed pyjamas and all sorts really,” she said. “I have done some shopping online during lockdown but when things arrive they don’t always fit. It did feel a bit weird in there because it has been months since anyone has been in.” Shoppers heading for the high street will have to get used to new rules before and after they enter stores. The queues were partly explained by retailers placing restrictions on the number of people who can be inside at any one time. Stock has been spread out to allow physical distancing and some items can no longer be handled by browsers. John Lewis, which on Monday opened only two stores, is using disposable covers for customers who want to test furniture and asking people to wear disposable socks before they try on shoes. Apple, which opened stores in London and Northern Ireland, is taking customers’ temperatures and supplying them with face masks before they enter. In Sunderland, the Northern Echo reported a mile-long queue outside Sports Direct and there were similar scenes at some of the retailer’s other branches. Sports Direct, run by Mike Ashley, was encouraging shoppers to visit with the offer of a 50% discount for NHS workers. A queue of people also waited outside Nike Town on Oxford Street in London, two hours before the store’s opening at 11am. Ricky Young, who was there to buy trainers, said it felt like a return to some kind of normality. He said he had not expected it to be busy when he arrived. “I actually thought people might have been sleeping or didn’t want to go out,” he said. “But the doors are open again, it’s back to almost normal, back to business – but we just have to line up.” The government has urged people to get out and spend money to prop up an economy damaged by three months of lockdown.