Childhood friends Elena and Lila return for the second season adaptation of Elena Ferrante’s bestselling Neapolitan novels. We pick up just after Lila’s wedding to Stefano with the couple on a tumultuous honeymoon on the Amalfi coast. When Lila returns home with bruises, Elena reconciles their friendship to help her to take revenge against her violent new husband. Meanwhile, Elena is facing troubles in her relationship with Antonio as he nears the prospect of leaving for military service. Ammar Kalia It’s tech galore with the return of the experts’ guide to gadgets. Craig Charles is tonight’s handyman – he tries to create a smart home using a DIY kit, but can he mesh his wifi? Meanwhile, Jon Bentley test drives Google’s new Pixelbook Go and Ortis Deley is on the hunt for a swimmer’s training aid. Hannah Verdier With his career increasingly constituting antics with his dad, comic Jack Whitehall is the perfect guide to this year’s lockdown version of Father’s Day. In this special, Whitehall enjoys some doorstep bonding with his dad. AK The 5 Live review duo continue their lockdown series, in which they only slightly awkwardly mimic a studio dialogue about TV and film, by sitting sideways on in their own studies. Self-filmed viewers’ contributions keep it fresh. Jack Seale Estimates suggest up to 90% of discarded plastic isn’t recycled, so this documentary scratches the surface of where the tonnes of plastic waste actually go. Insider testimony shows how recycling was promoted in the 90s without knowing whether it would be fully viable. AK Holly Walsh’s warm and gently tongue-in-cheek comedy continues, with Cathy leaning on her formerly secret, identically named sister Cat for support during compassionate leave. Naturally, mum Tess (Rebecca Front) is far from happy, but at least she has Cathy’s wedding plans to stick her oar into. Hannah J Davies Night of the Living Dead (George A Romero, 1968), 11pm, TCM MoviesGeorge A Romero’s dirt-cheap, monochrome cult shocker changed the ghastly face of horror movies into something altogether creepier. A bunch of clean-cut folk are besieged in a farmhouse by zombies, and in the new moral order, the good and the bad meet similarly gruesome fates. Paul Howlett