The new PlayStation 5 has been announced, and I am furious. It feels like just a few months ago that I bought the kids a PS4. I walked into the house in slow motion, and the kids fell at my feet, declaring me the best father in the world as I triumphantly brought it into the living room. Admittedly, there were some raised voices expressing frustration at how long it took me to set it up, but on the whole I came out of it looking pretty legendary. We always make the point in our house of saying that gifts are from both of us, but this time the kids knew I was the main architect, and the person to lavish with praise. I said humble things such as, “It was nothing, guys,” and, “I just want you all to have fun, that’s all I ask.” My wife looked on as my ego took a long drink of my children’s adoration. Pretty pathetic, in hindsight. A few weeks ago, the PS4 suddenly stopped working. I don’t know if the console had got fed up with the swagger I had adopted when walking around the house, but it decided it was just going to stop switching on. The kids were incredibly upset, and it felt very much like the family were holding me responsible for its shoddy manufacture. I found somewhere to send it for repair, but then lockdown happened, putting the plan on ice. More resentment headed my way – this time, I assume, for being responsible for the onset of a global pandemic. My wife was loving all of this. I have to say the kids were being pretty reasonable, but an elephant had very much moved into the room, and that elephant clearly thought the man who was happy to claim all of the accolades needed to get this sorted. About three weeks after it broke, my son asked me if we could try switching it on in the morning, instead of later in the day. I explained that it was broken, and that he was wasting his (my) time, but he was insistent. And so, as with so many parenting conversations, I acquiesced simply to bring it to an end. The next morning, while monologuing about how I needed to get on with some work, and how stupid this was, I switched on the machine, and because my name is Romesh Ranganathan and this is my life, it booted up and started working perfectly. I watched as my son the magician became the target of the family’s adoration. He had shown faith, and believed that something would happen, and sure enough it had. “You were saying it was a waste of time, Dad,” they told me. “Shame you don’t have any faith in your son or Sony.” For the next few weeks we settled into harmony, with a working games console and lessons learned about how to behave. Then, all of a sudden, the new PlayStation was launched. I knew it would be only a matter of time before their friends got them, and our boys would start to feel that having a PS4 was a hardship. I know what’s going to happen: I am going to resist for about a week, before I arrive with it on a satin cushion, waiting for them to lift me up like C-3PO at the end of Return Of The Jedi. I have learned nothing.