On Friday night in San Francisco, protesters tore down and defaced statues of white men who enslaved black and indigenous people – among them Ulysses S Grant, the 18th president who in the civil war led the Union armies in the defeat of the slave-owning Confederacy. Video posted on social media and by local news outlets showed a small crowd in Golden Gate Park cheering as people toppled the statues with rope, covered them with red paint and, in at least one instance, dragged them through the grass. Statues of Father Junípero Serra and Francis Scott Key, the author of the Star-Spangled Banner, were also brought down. Grant was the last US president to have personally owned another human being. Though his father was an abolitionist, Grant married a woman from a slave-owning family and personally direct the labor of enslaved workers at their plantation in Missouri. In 1859, two years before the civil war, he emancipated William Jones, a slave aged around 35 whom he had personally owned. During the war, his wife, Julia, traveled with a woman named Jules who was still enslaved, a decision that prompted public condemnation. The Grant family did not free Jules after President Abraham Lincoln issued the emancipation proclamation. Instead, according to the White House Historical Association, Jules ran away. On Friday Americans celebrated Juneteenth, a holiday marking the end of slavery. Juneteenth also marks the long period between when the US government officially ended slavery and when formerly enslaved people learned they were free.In light of events in San Francisco, some commentators argued that Grant’s legacy deserved respect. “As a general he smashed the Confederacy, and as president he crushed the Klan,” the journalist Adam Serwer, who writes frequently about America’s racist history, wrote on Twitter. As president from 1869 to 1877, Grant pushed through Congress legislation cracking down on the Ku Klux Klan. He also called on the army to help federal officials “arrest and break up bands of disguised night marauders”, Allyson Hobbs wrote in the Guardian in 2017, arguing that Grant was a positive model for how the US government should crack down on white supremacist vigilantes after deadly violence in Charlottesville, Virginia. But as the Smithsonian magazine reported, as president Grant also “launched an illegal war against the Plains Indians, and then lied about it”. Junípero Serra was a Spanish priest who played a central role in the violent colonization of California. His path towards being canonized as a saint in the Catholic church has long been met with protest by Native Americans. Contemporaries, including the French explorer Jean François de Galaup de la Pérouse, compared the Catholic missions the priest founded to slave plantations, where indigenous people were forced to work and harshly disciplined. “By law, all baptized Indians subjected themselves completely to the authority of the Franciscans; they could be whipped, shackled or imprisoned for disobedience, and hunted down if they fled the mission grounds,” PBS News wrote in its biography of Serra. “Indian recruits, who were often forced to convert nearly at gunpoint, could be expected to survive mission life for only about 10 years.” In 2015 Ron Andrade, executive director of the Los Angeles City/County Native American Indian Commission, told the Guardian: “Everywhere they put a mission the majority of Indians are gone. Serra knew what they were doing: they were taking the land, taking the crops, he knew the soldiers were raping women, and he turned his head.” Francis Scott Key, the author of America’s national anthem, not only personally enslaved people but also tried to silence the free speech of abolitionists, using his position as district attorney for Washington DC in the 1830s to launch high-profile cases attacking the abolitionist movement. In San Francisco, protesters dragged the Key statue through the grass and were going to dump it in a nearby fountain, until they were told the fountain was a memorial to the Aids epidemic and stopped, a witness tweeted.