Iowa’s college football team cut ties with its strength coach Chris Doyle on Monday, announcing a separation agreement that will pay him more than $1.1m after former Hawkeyes accused him of mistreating and belittling African American players. The school announced the move before a news conference by athletic director Gary Barta, who released a statement wishing Doyle well. The university also said a law firm will conduct an independent review of allegations relating to racial disparities within the football program. “I have worked diligently to make a positive impact on the lives of student-athletes, support them as they speak out, and look forward to continued growth,” Doyle said in a statement. “I am confident that my record and character will be confirmed in the course of the independent review. The university and I have reached an agreement and it is time to move on from Iowa football. My family and I are looking forward to the next chapter.” Doyle, who earned $800,000 per year and was the highest paid strength and conditioning coach in college football, has denied any “unethical behavior or bias” based on race. Under the separation agreement, Doyle will be paid 15 months’ salary. He will receive two payments of $556,249.50, the first in August, and the second in January. Doyle agreed not to take any legal action against the university, the board of regents or state of Iowa. There are too many racial disparities in the Iowa football program. Black players have been treated unfairly for far too long. Former Iowa offensive lineman James Daniels, now with the Chicago Bears, was the first to raise the issue of the Iowa staff’s treatment of players. “There are too many racial disparities in the Iowa football program. Black players have been treated unfairly for far too long,” Daniels tweeted on 5 June. Dozens of former players followed with social media posts about their experiences, with many accusing Doyle of making racist remarks and belittling players. Doyle was placed on paid administrative leave the day after Daniels’s tweet. Offensive coordinator Brian Ferentz, son of head coach Kirk Ferentz, and assistant defensive coordinator Seth Wallace also have been alleged to have made inappropriate comments to players. Kirk Ferentz said on Friday the coaching style by some of his assistants “at times was demeaning and created unnecessary frustration and anxiety. One byproduct of that is that some of our black athletes feeling they couldn’t be themselves in our culture, and to that end we must be more inclusive and more aware.”