With its muted trumpets and noirish atmosphere, this reimagining of the classic 70s detective drama feels admirably faithful to the spirit of the original. Matthew Rhys is expressive and sympathetic as the mournful, dishevelled defence attorney of the title, and the period trappings of Depression-era US are beautifully rendered. The plot is a bleak one: after the kidnapping of a child goes tragically wrong, it falls to Mason to pursue a case of which the implications spread further and wider than he could possibly have imagined. Phil Harrison This new series issued cameras to 1,000 marine workers around the globe and reaped an alarming whirlwind of footage. It kicks off with Hurricane Dorian, the Atlantic storm of 2019, here seen up close in battered hotspots including Barbados, North Carolina and the deck of a cargo ship. Graeme Virtue The 1987 murder of Daniel Morgan is one of those crimes that deserves national attention. It remains unsolved, having begun in the world of organised crime and spread into the higher echelons of the British establishment. As this series continues, Morgan’s brother tells his side of the story. PH Zoroastrianism is one of the great lost religions; a shame, says Prof Lloyd Llewellyn-Jones, as it focuses on “good works, good thoughts and good deeds”, which we could definitely have a bit more of these days. Samira Ahmed explores the ancient Persian faith and its Fire Temples. Ali Catterall The comedians of Britain continue to make the best of a bad job. Tonight’s selection of homemade sketches and songs includes quarantine etiquette from Tom Allen, plus Meera Syal and Sanjeev Bhaskar recreating the Kumars. But, most excitingly, look out for an animated version of Bob Mortimer’s Train Guy. PH Michaela Coel’s drama, already nailed on for 2020’s best-of lists, continues. Arabella (Coel) is in a phase of processing her trauma that involves reassessing other events, which means resuming the show’s examination of transgressions both obvious and insidious. It is a masterly piece. Jack Seale Call Me By Your Name, 9pm, Film4This most sensual of summer romances is set in northern Italy, where young musician Elio (Timothée Chalamet) is entranced by a suave American graduate Oliver (Armie Hammer) at his family home. Directed by Luca Guadagnino, it’s an exquisitely crafted account of a languorous love affair. Paul Howlett ANZ Premiership netball 8am Sky Sports Main Event. From Auckland Netball Centre. EFL football: Exeter City v Colchester United 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The League Two play-off semi-final second leg at St James Park. Premier League football: Manchester City v Burnley 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Top-flight togger from the Etihad Stadium.