I used to be a habitual vaper. I started buying e-cigs with the intention of weaning myself off nicotine altogether, but then I made the mistake of looking at the range of products on offer. Before I knew it I had several different batteries and tanks, and was mixing my own liquids. My wife and I would sit down to watch TV and she would tell me it was like sitting next to Thomas The Tank Engine, as plumes of raspberry-flavoured steam filled the living room. One evening, as I was rearranging a coil in one of my tanks, she pointed out that it was an incredibly male trait to get into a weird hobby that requires tinkering and obsessiveness. Up to that point I had assumed that I was being an individual who was trying not to smoke by having 36 different flavours of vape fluid, but as soon as she held that mirror up to me, I knew I had to quit. I reckon my vaping habit had by then cost me the best part of a grand. I no longer vape, but I am now obsessed with the Rubik’s Cube. It started when I found a knockoff one that my son had left lying around. I was messing about with it during a Zoom meeting when somebody asked what my quickest solve time was. I said that I had never solved it and was just messing about, and they looked at me as if to say, “What the hell are you doing?” What the hell was I doing? I immediately ordered an official Rubik’s Cube. I resent how easy this was: in days gone by, I would have had to go to a shop, look around and possibly even ask for a Rubik’s Cube. That whole process would involve moments for me to reflect on the fact that me “getting into Rubik’s Cube” was pointless. I don’t have anything against people who are Rubik’s experts, but I am someone who is unable to properly concentrate on acquiring useful skills, let alone ones that are by design a waste of time. The next day I found myself sitting in front of a YouTube video learning the proper way of holding and manipulating the cube, and how to complete the steps to find the solution. I have since spent hours trying to get my time down, Googling numerous tips and tricks on how to get slicker. Only as I write this have I begun to wonder what my endgame is here. I looked up “benefits of the Rubik’s Cube” and it suggested it was an awesome conversation starter. Come on, mate. At the same time, it’s hard to know: what will I think if, after lockdown, I am at somebody’s house and they decide to show me how quickly they can solve a Rubik’s Cube, or even worse discover that they actually have one with them at all times. A few weeks ago, I would have cut off all contact. Now, I would try to become their friend so I could learn all their secrets. I cannot even begin to convey the look of utter despair on my wife’s face when I opened the package to reveal what I had bought. I think she believes I am wilfully searching out hobbies and interests that push her to leave me. The vapour that used to hang about me like a fog has been replaced by the incessant click-clacking of a man trying to find some sort of purpose in his life. And that purpose, it turns out, is a Rubik’s Cube solve time better than five hours.