‘Yeah, I’m a ratbag,” says Bradley Murdoch over the phone from the prison where he has been jailed for 16 years. “I’ve belted a lot of fuckin’ people. I’ve run a bit of pot. But I’m not a fuckin’ murderer.” Two courts disagree. In 2005, a jury convicted 47-year-old Murdoch of shooting Peter Falconio in the head before before assaulting and attempting to abduct his girlfriend, Joanne Lees, on a remote stretch of highway north of Alice Springs in Australia’s Northern Territory on 14 July 2001. In 2007, appeal judges upheld his conviction. Lees’ account, told in court and in her book No Turning Back, is that she and Falconio were driving that night from Alice Springs to Darwin, planning to get married at Bora Bora before flying home. But they were flashed down by a driver. Falconio, 28, got out of their camper van and was shot dead by Murdoch. Lees, 27, was then threatened with a gun, punched in the head, bound with cable ties and bundled into the back of Murdoch’s truck. She managed to escape and ran off into the moonless night. For five hours, she hid in bushes while Murdoch and his dog searched for her. Eventually, he gave up and drove off. Lees flagged down a passing truck, whose drivers cut her restraints and called the cops. Murdoch was convicted on the strength of Lees’ identification and because his DNA was found on the shirt she was wearing after the attack. Murder in the Outback: the Falconio and Lees Mystery (Channel 4) reopens the case after nearly 20 years. What was Murdoch’s motive? Where is Falconio’s body? Why, asks a professor who describes himself as a specialist in “human secretions”, was there no blood spatter at the scene, just pools of blood, if Falconio had been shot? Why would a hitherto careful drug runner, asks the author of a book on the case, bundle an abducted woman into the back of his truck containing $200,000 of hydroponically grown cannabis? Most of all, what was the deal with the mysterious red car and the so-called jelly man spotted up the road from the crime scene? The appeals judges ruled the case was overwhelming. Andrew Fraser demurs. “I believe he’s had about the roughest end of the pineapple you can get,” said Fraser, a colourful, if disgraced, former defence lawyer who has been investigating the case. The questions he raises are worrying. Why, for instance, were only Lees’ footprints found in the bush near the crime scene, not those of Murdoch or his dog? Why did Murdoch’s Australian working dog not sniff out Lees, given that she was hiding only 35 metres from the road? The most disturbing issue, though, arises when Fraser interviews the lorry driver who picked up Lees. Vince Millar recalls something he has never mentioned before. Just before he found Lees on the highway, he says, he noticed a parked red car and, beside it, two men holding up a third. “I saw this bloke who looked like jelly,” he recalls. “He was in the middle of two blokes.” He pulled over and asked if they were all right, but they got into the car and sped off. “I’m pretty sure that the bloke in the middle was Peter Falconio.” If so, then, just possibly, Falconio survived his own murder. One of the reasons Murdoch’s conviction has long been supposed by some to be doubtful is because of how Lees behaved before the media. Just as there was supposed to be something wrong with Meursault for not crying at his mother’s funeral in Albert Camus’s L’Étranger, so Lees’s refusal to perform her grief on telly made some think she was hiding something. Lees, doubtless, will hate this four-hour series, not least because it serves up the night she says her life was destroyed as entertainment. It is a masterclass in true-crime telly, right down to the fact I worried more about the motives of the people who made it than about Murdoch’s motive for killing Falconio, if he did. There are all the hackneyed moves from the Making a Murderer playbook: moody piano arpeggios, slow-mo footage, dodgy audio from prison phone calls and cliffhanger reveals just before the closing credits to keep you coming back for more. One reporter suggested the case is real-life Agatha Christie, but maybe the truth is that there is no mystery: maybe it all went down just as Lees said and Murdoch is much worse than a ratbag.