What was the situation like when the league was suspended on 13 March? Tense at best, volatile at worst. Supporters were protesting against an increasingly unpopular board and another season at the London Stadium had descended into a relegation battle. Yet there were flashes of positivity in the weeks before lockdown. Jarrod Bowen and Tomas Soucek had impressed after joining in January and there were signs that David Moyes, who replaced Manuel Pellegrini in December after a torrid run of form, was making his presence felt. Admittedly the improvement came out of the blue. The mood was low after a calamitous 3-3 home draw with Brighton on 1 February but Moyes found a better balance as the weeks progressed and his side crept out of the bottom three thanks to a 3-1 win over Southampton at the end of the month. Bowen scored his first goal for the club, Sébastien Haller and Michail Antonio dazzled up front and West Ham looked dangerous in their last league outing, even though it ended in an unfortunate 1-0 defeat at Arsenal. What about now? Nervy given that 16th-placed West Ham are only above Watford and Bournemouth on goal difference and were concerned about the financial consequences of relegation even in pre-pandemic times. Staying in the top flight is vital after the move to the London Stadium and Moyes could have done without Jeremy Ngakia, who did well at right-back after being handed his debut in January, deciding to leave on a free at the end of the month. The 19-year-old is out of contract on 30 June and is not even considering a short-term extension, infuriating Moyes. “We are really surprised and disappointed that Jeremy is not going to stay at West Ham,” the manager said last week. Still, at least Jack Wilshere is fit after recovering from a hernia operation. Wilshere has struggled with injuries since joining West Ham in 2018 and the former Arsenal and England midfielder, who has a year left on his deal, has been handed a chance to remind Moyes of his worth thanks to the unexpected break. What needs to be done for a successful end to the season? Moyes is focused on improving his side’s defensive shape. He wants clean sheets and needs a settled back four. Ryan Fredericks needs to knuckle down at right-back, while Angelo Ogbonna and Issa Diop must ensure there are no costly lapses of concentration in central defence. West Ham have been too open this season and there will be pressure on Declan Rice to shield the back four – a job made easier by the arrival of Soucek. There is talent in this squad and there are attacking options. Bowen is dangerous cutting in from the left, Pablo Fornals is improving and defenders will not enjoy playing against the physicality of Haller and Antonio. Have the players and staff behaved during lockdown? Moyes could have done without Rice having a kickabout with Chelsea’s Mason Mount on 15 March. Any unsung/community heroes? Moyes spent part of lockdown delivering fruit and vegetables for his local food shop. “There was a thing up in the window that said drivers needed,” the Scot said in April. “I volunteered to do it as my wife was away at the time and I was on my own. So I became a fruit and veg driver.” Key player in the run-in? Antonio only has two goals this season but West Ham are never quite as threatening without his pace and strength. The attack lacked oomph when the forward was out for three months after a hamstring operation in August. The problem is that his hamstrings are very unreliable. End-of-season-prediction The margins remain fine but West Ham should have enough talent to stay up. While they still have to face Manchester United, Chelsea, Tottenham and Wolves, their rivals have tougher run-ins. Home games against Burnley, Watford and Aston Villa are likely to be pivotal. Remaining fixtures (all times BST): Sat 20 June Wolves (h) – 5.30pm, Sky Sports Tues 23 June Tottenham (a) – 8.15pm, Sky Sports Weds 1 July Chelsea (h) – 8.15pm, Sky Sports TBC Newcastle (a), Burnley (h), Norwich (a), Watford (h), Manchester United (a), Aston Villa (h)