Rugby Australia has started its long climb out of a financial black hole after reaching a crucial deal with Fox Sports to broadcast the new-look Super Rugby competition. The revamped domestic league will get kick off with a 3 July clash between traditional rivals Queensland and NSW in Brisbane, with Canberra hosting the Brumbies and Melbourne a day later while the Western Force have a first-round bye. With the draw to be announced Thursday, the Force are set to initially base themselves in Cessnock, west of Newcastle. The tournament is three weeks behind the New Zealand competition, which opens this weekend in what are expected to be packed stadiums. Fox also announced it had reached an agreement to air that competition, much to the delight of rugby-starved fans. Rebels chief executive Baden Stephenson said he hoped that local crowds were the next step, in a further boost to their ailing bottom line. The NRL and AFL, which starts Thursday, are slowly getting fans back in stadiums. Stephenson and Melbourne Storm boss Dave Donaghy are working together with the Victorian government on having crowds at AAMI Park. “I’ve been keeping in close contact with Dave Donaghy and watching how quickly it’s been moving and what it might look like in three to four weeks,” Stephenson told AAP. “The reality means there might a staged approach where we have a restriction on numbers but if we’re going through to September you’d like to think it would open up. We will all be watching across the Tasman, so let’s hope Australia isn’t too far behind.” Under massive financial pressure with the Covid-19 pandemic shutting down Super Rugby in March after seven rounds, RA had been sweating on the deal to bring some much-needed funds back into the code. There were fears that Foxtel may have played hard-ball and elected not to broadcast the new competition after negotiations broke down earlier this year for a new deal beyond 2020. Stephenson said he did not want to think about the consequences for rugby if the competition didn’t get underway or the broadcast deal was not done. “It’s certainly a bit of a relief and now we can get on with it,” Stephenson said. “I probably didn’t want to think too much about the ramifications were but they would have been huge if there was no competition or no games; I just know that the pressures and uncertainty to drag on would have been a disaster.” Teams are set to fly-in, fly-out to games, although arrangements for Perth matches later in the competition are still to be finalised. Will all teams starting on zero points, the competition will involve 10 weeks of round-robin matches before a two-week finals series featuring a qualifying final on 12 September and a final on 19 September.