Neil Warnock has described his decision to take charge at relegation-threatened Middlesbrough as a “no-brainer” after replacing Jonathan Woodgate on Tuesday. The much-travelled 71-year-old met his new squad before presiding over training. Warnock’s first Championship game will be at Stoke on Saturday before a trip to Hull next Thursday. Steve Gibson, Boro’s owner, is a longstanding friend and admirer of Warnock’s and made the change following last Saturday’s alarming 3-0 home defeat by Swansea, which left Woodgate’s team just above therelegation zone, ahead of 22nd-placed Hull only on goal difference. Woodgate arrived at the training ground on Tuesday morning to be told of Gibson’s decision. He swiftly said some farewells before heading home but there are some suggestions the former England defender – who recorded only nine wins following his appointment as Tony Pulis’s successor last summer – could be offered a new role at the club. In a classy social media post he thanked Gibson for the opportunity and wished Warnock well. Woodgate’s successor, who will be assisted by Kevin Blackwell and Ronnie Jepson, has agreed an eight-game deal but will keep an open mind about possible future involvement. “At my age you don’t look too far ahead,” he said. “I don’t think I would have driven this far north for anybody but Steve. I’ve always had a lot of respect for Steve. “It was a no-brainer when he asked me to help out. It’s just about giving the lads a bit of confidence and a change of voice. I always expect my players to give everything. It’s about good habits. “I’d more or less retired but I thought: ‘What an opportunity: eight games without anyone booing me.’” Middlesbrough are the 16th club Warnock has managed, with past employers including Sheffield United, Crystal Palace, Queens Park Rangers and Leeds, but he has been out of football since leaving Cardiff in November. Since starting at Gainsborough Trinity in 1980 – the year Woodgate was born – the former chiropodist has won promotion to the top flight four times. A year ago Woodgate, whose assistant Robbie Keane has left Boro, declared himself “the proudest man on Teesside” after taking charge but, given that he had not yet completed his coaching qualifications and lacked experience, the appointment was always a gamble. Although his commitment and determination to play attractive football impressed, he inherited a debilitatingly tight budget.