A couple of times a day, a huge flatbed lorry backs down the lane that runs alongside our garden, like an ocean liner floating down a canal, to unload bags of cement and gravel for some project happening across the way. The ground rumbles with each new approach. Like many people who sit at a computer all day for a job, I am reliably entranced by the physical transportation of heavy things. When the enormous sacks are lifted into the air by a driver operating a push-button crane, I swivel round in my chair to watch. It is, I think, my dream job. I’ll bet the waiting list is decades long. I’ve been doing some work for my wife – a bit of editing, an hour or two a day for a few weeks. I find it easy when the words aren’t mine: moving commas, rationalising tenses, weeding out adverbs that sprout in the cracks of sentences. It’s one of the few jobs I can approach with any kind of authority or confidence – I know things will be better when I’m done. It’s like rearranging a spice rack: everything you need is still there, but it somehow takes up less room. Editing probably isn’t as satisfying as craning gravel, but it’s rewarding in its own way, until my wife says she’s going to pay me in shirts. “What are you talking about?” I say. “You need some new clothes,” she says. “So I thought I’d order you some. My treat.” “I’m a businessman,” I say. “We can buy you some business clothes, then,” she says. “I’m gonna invoice you,” I say. “I’m gonna charge you VAT.” “I found a website,” she says. “You’ll like it.” After a week of threatening to take my wife before some kind of tribunal, I give up and accept the clothes. I sit down with her as she navigates a fashion website she seems to know well. “What about brown?” she says, clicking on some trousers to make the image spin. “Would you wear brown?” “Not every brown,” I say. “What do these sizes even mean?” It occurs to me that these are all clothes for wearing in front of other people, at gatherings. When will that day come? “What I really need is pants,” I say. “You can buy your own pants,” my wife says. “You’re refusing to pay me in pants?” I say. “Pay me in money then.” On an afternoon a few days later, I email my wife a final page of copy and go inside. She is reading the email when I get there. “It’s better,” she says. “Even I can see that it’s better.” “Professional editing services,” I say. “Look what came!” she says, reaching for a large bag. I open the box, which contains a pair of brown trousers and four shirts. “Four?” I say, holding one up. It looks small. “Two are for me,” my wife says, taking it away. “This and the blue.” “Did you partially pay me in shirts for you?” I say. “They were on sale,” she says. “Try the trousers on.” The next morning I go out to my office shed in a brand new shirt to spend an hour staring at a paragraph I wrote the previous day. There are so many things wrong with it I don’t know where to begin. Fortunately I am the only person who knows of its existence; if it were to disappear no one would miss it. I hear a low rumble, the heavy clank of chains and a reversing alarm. I swivel my chair round to see a different kind of lorry backing down the lane – the kind that leaves an empty skip and reclaims one full of bricks and broken concrete. The driver climbs out of his cab. A steel arm rises into the air. “This,” I say to myself, “is a completely new system, requiring additional training.” Glancing up at a high window opposite, I see a black and white cat looking down at the lorry, as transfixed as I am.