The AFL has had a big win before the season restart with the South Australian government announcing more than 2,000 spectators will be allowed to attend Saturday night’s Showdown at Adelaide Oval. Fans in other states appear likely to have to wait at least another week – and Victoria even longer – to be afforded the same opportunity. In a move confirmed on Tuesday, the SA government gave clearance for Port Adelaide and Adelaide to do battle in front of up to 2,000 fans in the stands, with an additional 240 spectators in private rooms. Details around which club members or fans will be allowed into the venue are still being finalised but the decision makes SA the first state to allow spectators at AFL matches since the coronavirus shutdown. It comes as the Queensland government rejected a claim that it had already approved the Gabba and Metricon Stadium to be at 25% capacity for games as soon as this weekend. AFL chief executive Gillon McLachlan is hopeful of further announcements this week while Gold Coast chairman Tony Cochrane confirmed the club was pushing for a “test crowd” of up to 1,000 people at Saturday’s clash with West Coast. On Tuesday Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the state’s chief health officer was yet to approve any proposals and that spectators would not be allowed at AFL games in the state this week. “It won’t be this weekend, but we have plans in currently with our chief health officer,” Palaszczuk said. “We want to see crowds supporting their local football matches but also future netball games [and] sport across the board. “We have to be measured and responsible and that’s why the plans are currently with the chief health officer and once she ticks off those plans she’ll get back to those organisations and we’ll be able to make some public announcements.” The NRL has been granted permission for small groups of no more than 50 in corporate boxes to attend games in Sydney this weekend, at a ratio of one person every four square metres to abide by social distancing restrictions. GWS have raised the prospect of hosting corporate supporters at their round two match against North Melbourne at Giants Stadium on Sunday. McLachlan is growing increasingly confident that AFL games in Victoria won’t be played behind closed doors for the entire season despite Covid-19 infection rates there remaining higher than in other states. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews on Tuesday said there would be no crowds at AFL matches in his state “for the foreseeable future” as it attempts to control the coronavirus spread. “As soon as we can have crowds back at the footy, as soon as we can have crowds back for a multitude of purposes, we will,” the premier said. “But we’ve got to be cautious about this. “People will be focused on the fact footy’s back, that’s absolutely fantastic news, we’re not going to be able to go to games for a period of time. Let’s be guided by the experts.” Meanwhile, the NRL’s push to repopulate stadiums as soon as possible continues, but the league’s proposal to welcome back 15,000 fans by 5 July is still under discussion, according to the Daily Telegraph. The NRL has led the charge on the return of fans, and the federal government is considering “decreased capacity” for games, according to deputy chief medical officer Dr Nick Coatsworth. Dr Coatsworth said it would be easier to maintain social distancing in stadiums than protests, which were given the green light over the weekend. “The important thing of course about the footy is you have a large number of people, like we saw on the weekend with the protests of course, coming together in different parts of the city and then dispersing into the city,” Dr Coatsworth said on the Today Show on the Nine Network. “You can be a little more controlled in a stadium than you can in a protest. That’s an important thing to note, and we could consider going back to situations of decreased capacity in stadiums. “Ultimately that’s going to be a matter for states and territories, but it is something we are considering now. Hopefully within before the footy season finishes, that’ll be good.” At this stage, only NSW venues have been given the green light to open up their corporate boxes with Queensland considering doing likewise.