Details of two more instances of deaths at the hands of police in the US have come to light as a result of videos surfacing, placing further scrutiny on US law enforcement conduct as protests continue around the world sparked by the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis last month after a police officer knelt on his neck. Police video and documents have been released more than a year after the death of a black man being detained by police in Texas, showing that officers repeatedly used a stun gun on him despite him pleading that he could not breathe and explaining he had serious heart problems. Javier Ambler, 40, was driving home on 28 March last year when police attempted to pull him over after noticing he had his bright headlights on while facing oncoming traffic. Ambler refused to stop, according to the police report, resulting in a chase before he crashed his vehicle near downtown Austin. The details were first published by the Austin American-Statesman newspaper and KVUE-TV. Ambler got out of the car and showed his hands, according to the report, but then moved towards the car and was tasered by JJ Johnson, a black Williamson county deputy who was being filmed at the time by a camera crew from Live PD, a real-time police TV show, although the footage was not aired. Another, white, police officer arrived and Ambler was hit with a taser a further two times. An Austin police officer arrived at the scene as the officers struggled to handcuff Ambler. Body-camera video from that officer recorded the final minutes of Ambler’s life. Between gasps, Ambler says he is trying to adhere to their commands. He tells the deputies four more times that he can’t breathe and pleads: “Save me.” “I have congestive heart failure,” Ambler said. “I am not resisting.” One of the deputies fired his taser a fourth and final time, the body-camera video shows. The deputies subsequently placed handcuffs around Ambler’s wrists after his hands went limp. The officers then realized he was unconscious and his pulse had stopped. Deputies performed CPR for several minutes until medics arrived. Ambler was later pronounced dead. Investigators with the Williamson county sheriff’s department of internal affairs determined in a report that the deputies did not violate the agency’s pursuit or use-of-force policies, according to the Statesman. The report did not indicate whether the deputies faced any disciplinary action or were forced to take time off because of the incident. Ambler’s death was ruled a homicide, according to the report made to the state attorney general’s office, which noted that the homicide could have been “justifiable”. An autopsy revealed he died of congestive heart failure and hypertensive cardiovascular disease associated with morbid obesity “in combination with forcible restraint”. Margaret Moore, district attorney for Travis county, which includes the part of Austin where Ambler died, said the death is still being investigated with the intention of bringing the case to a grand jury. Details of the death of Ambler, which echoes the dying pleas of Floyd that he could not breathe, have emerged as a police officer was charged with involuntary manslaughter for a separate incident in New Mexico, earlier this year. Christopher Smelser, an officer at the Las Cruces police department, is facing the charges after he placed Antonio Valenzuela, 40, in a neck restraint during an arrest on 29 February. Valenzuela, who was also tasered twice by police, became unresponsive and paramedics were unable to save him at the scene. An autopsy returned on Thursday showed that Valenzuela died from asphyxial injuries from the chokehold. According to a Las Cruces police statement, Smelser used a “vascular neck restraint technique to gain control” of Valenzuela, who was wanted for a parole violation. The police department has now banned the use of chokeholds. “I don’t want another person to get hurt,” Sylvia Montoya, Valenzuela’s aunt, told the Sun-News. “I don’t want to see another family go through our pain and I don’t want to hear of another death at the hands of an officer. It’s not right.”