As Black Lives Matter protests continue around the world’s sports venues, a line in the sand has been drawn. But the question remains: will athletes and sporting establishments continue to succumb to moral mediocrity or will they be the connective tissue that helps heal society’s raging divides? It is a question that is yet to be answered and, as time moves on, the scales appear to be tipping the wrong way, despite the powerful influence sport can have in shaping and improving societies. “Sport has created a social licence with Australia, and billions of other humans across the planet, through the notion of ‘Olympism’ and creating a better world, but too often falls at the ever-present hurdles of politics and money,” says former Socceroos captain Craig Foster. Foster, who says he is “most interested in global change”, is an advocate for human rights and memorably called upon the different dimensions of the sporting sphere to help get the Australian refugee, Hakeem al-Araibi, released from a Thai prison last year. “Sports that still maintain the veneer of ‘neutrality’ while making political choices out of tune with modern society are losing currency. As has so recently been succinctly stated: silence is violence.” It is a prominent statement considering the current climate, as the NFL is forced to reckon with the juxtaposition of Colin Kaepernick’s peaceful protest and the death of George Floyd while in police custody. In Australia, the AFL is tasked with confronting its own fallacies, including their partnerships with Rio Tinto and BHP – companies which continue to mine on Indigenous land. No acknowledgement, therefore no resolution, has been found with Heritier Lumumba, whose claims of racial vilification throughout his career have received a non-response from the league for the seventh consecutive year. Meanwhile, supporters continue to rehash slurs from the Collingwood president’s playbook before slingshotting them directly at the AFL  great Eddie Betts. The AFL, under the chief executive Gillon McLachlan, boasts of a zero tolerance policy towards racism, but without it being implemented in totality, its commitment can be called into question. There is irrefutable evidence to support the notion that sport has historically either anchored the status quo or gone against the grain to shift the narrative. Whether it was Jackie Robinson becoming the first African American professional baseball player in the 1940s, the then world No 1 women’s tennis player Billie Jean King confronting gender inequality in the 1970s or Cathy Freeman elevating Indigenous excellence to the world stage at the 2000 Sydney Olympics, sport has been able to break down barriers and clear out prime real estate for new ideals. In 1995 and at the height of his country’s racial tensions, Nelson Mandela used rugby as the nexus to create a rainbow nation in the wake of South African apartheid. The Springboks, a team that previously was a pillar of South Africa’s segregative policies, lifted the Rugby World Cup on home soil and in the process set the nation on a steadfast trajectory toward fairness and prosperity. “Sport is more powerful than governments in breaking down racial barriers… it has the power to change the world,” Mandela stated. In recent years, sporting institutions and athletes have been leveraged for lucrative sponsorships and prolific broadcast deals, offering up their brands and jerseys as billboards for the highest bidder. Juicy short term profits have become the name of the game as athletes and sporting bodies frequently choose to carefully circumnavigate systemic racism and discrimination rather than directly and permanently address it. “The next step is substantive progress, for sport to implement human rights policies that provide focused advocacy for any athlete with a social conscience who wishes to do more than punch, paddle, catch or kick, and to enable athletes, and society, to hold sports accountable to the slogans they propagate,” says Foster. It is a refreshing solution considering most athletes and sporting institutions in the western world confront the same systemic challenges, albeit with differing responses. In the US, the Melbourne-born NBA All Star Kyrie Irving has suggested that the 2019-20 season should be cancelled so the country can address more than 400 years of systemic racism. His plea has been backed by Donovan Mitchell, Carmello Anthony and Dwight Howard, with Howard proclaiming that “basketball will only be a distraction” and that the “unity of his people would be an even bigger championship, that’s just too beautiful to pass up”. On the contrary, the AFL appears content with players taking a knee at the beginning of their round two fixture which, if it fails to incite any discernible action, runs the risk of being nothing but an empty gesture and the very distraction Howard and Irving anxiously want to avoid. In the past, governments and corporate institutions have urged players to revert to the bankrupt status quo, but for those living under the boot of oppression, the hope is for a more humane response this time. Although this is a pivotal moment, history has shown that we have been here before, and is waiting to see if we will be here again.