In John Singer Sargent’s 19th-century portrait The Daughters of Edward Darley Boit, three young girls in neat period dresses gaze blankly at the viewer, while a fourth turns away towards shadow, almost truculently reserved. There’s a truculent reserve to 31-year-old Casey Kasem, the down-at-heel narrator of Lily King’s new book. Casey is an aspiring writer and has been labouring over a novel for six years. She works at a restaurant and lives in a potting shed, grieving the death of her mother. She’s lonely. But gazing at Sargent’s portrait, she longs to “write something as good as right there, right where that belt cinches her pinafore”. She sees what she could strive for and how hard it will be to accomplish. “There’s a madness to beauty when you stumble on it like that,” she thinks. Casey encounters the painting at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, while on an uncertain date with an uncertain love interest. Pretty much everything is uncertain in Casey’s life. Her housing situation is precarious and her waitressing job is insecure. She is burdened by debts so heavy that at times she can barely breathe, and her sketchy health insurance is about to be rescinded precisely at the moment she needs it. The one thing Casey knows with a piercing clarity is that she needs to write. Writers & Lovers is a puzzling and beautiful novel about writing and love. Its beauty lies in its precise observations. King notices the “sea” of crusted glasses and lipstick-smeared napkins that clutter a restaurant at the end of service, and the jostling community forged by its jaded staff as “blue daylight” cedes to dusk on a long shift. What’s puzzling about the novel is how swiftly and intensely its quiet heroine captures your attention. Casey is a slight and elusive figure, getting soaked by rain as she cycles through lonely streets or shrinking from a bully at work. There’s a stomach-churning pathos to the paucity of her resources and a dogged naivety in her commitment to writing in such meagre circumstances. King makes her struggles feel monumental, grindingly bleak. Yet somehow, Casey takes hold with a vice-like grip on your heart. Reading the book feels like waiting for clouds to break – a kind of gorgeous agony. But it’s funny, too. King leavens Casey’s misery with a wry, undaunted humour. Her friends belong to a writing group: Maria who can’t bear reading Middlemarch and masturbates to get through it, and Muriel whose ankles “prickle” when she reads things that she likes. Muriel tries to matchmake Casey with George, who confesses to having written very little of his novel, “a sort of art heist [set] in the Golden Horde in 1389”. Casey wisely decides: “I can’t go out with a guy who’s written eleven and half pages in three years. That kind of thing is contagious.” Instead, she starts dating two different men: Oscar, an older and successful writer, recently widowed with two young children, and Silas, who kisses her on a footbridge and periodically disappears in a depressed funk. The romances are charming and believable. And King writes children with a palpable tenderness. When Casey stays overnight with Oscar’s scapegrace sons, they clamber into her bed for a cuddle and she feels “small hot feet against my shins”. Most of all, King writes writers with a rare acuity. She skewers the entitlement of male novelists who “believed they should already be famous, believed that greatness was their destiny”. If the struggles of male genius have too often been the subject of literary writing, there’s dignity and grace in how King honours Casey’s ambitions here. Her obnoxious landlord mocks her. “I just find it extraordinary that you think you have something to say,” he observes. But, Casey writes, not “because I think I have something to say. I write because if I don’t, everything feels even worse.” I can’t remember when I last read a sentence as simply true as that. King has a pleasing habit of describing in detail the writers that Casey loves best. William Styron’s memoir of depression, Darkness Visible, has, she explains, the “stark lucidity of someone trying to tell you the truest thing they know”. In these intimate moments, it’s hard not to feel that King, too, is telling us the truest things she knows. “Tough, making a living in the arts,” a kind stranger later observes to Casey. “But it’s worth a shot.” Is it really? The writer’s life is a hard wager with which to keep faith. King complicates Writers & Lovers with the realities of student debt, housing and healthcare. Casey lives in the real world: it is brutal and she is unbearably brittle in it. Perhaps that’s why King opts for an ending that grants Casey a kind of poetic justice. It’s the one part of the book that doesn’t ring true, but it’s everything you could want for a heroine you’ll cherish. • Writers & Lovers is published by Picador (RRP £14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.