When Spain’s 13-week coronavirus state of emergency finishes today, it will bring an end to one of the most fraught, frustrating and claustrophobic chapters in the country’s recent history – and nowhere more so than in the national parliament. Opposition parties in many countries have declared truces in the face of a national and international health emergency. But in Spain’s 350-seat congress of deputies, there has been neither consensus nor quarter, and the habitual insults and accusations have flown with renewed vigour and venom. As the pandemic has swept across the country, infecting more than 245,000 people and hobbling the economy, Spaniards have been treated to an even bloodier and more breathless version of the usual Punch and Judy politics. The six extensions of the state of emergency have been hard won by prime minister Pedro Sánchez’s Socialist-led coalition and have forced the government into pragmatic alliances with both Catalan pro-independence MPs and Basque nationalists. While Sánchez has claimed, perhaps a little disingenuously, that he has “no enemy but the virus”, his opponents have begged to differ – and vociferously so. Pablo Casado, leader of the People’s party, has repeatedly accused the PM of trying to hide the human cost of the pandemic and said he does not deserve the support of the opposition. “Your arrogance, your lies and your ineffectiveness are an explosive combination for Spain,” Casado said in April. Meanwhile the far-right Vox party, which is seeking to oust the PP as the dominant force on the Spanish right, has claimed that the socialists and their partners in the far-left, anti-austerity Podemos alliance are seeking to replace democratic normality with “a totalitarian one based on uncertainty that has brought Spain nothing but more death, more ruin, more unemployment and less freedom”. The barbs, however, have not been one-sided. Pablo Iglesias, Podemos leader and deputy prime minister, has a long history of sharing his unvarnished wisdom with the chamber. During the months of the crisis, he has suggested that Vox would like to see a coup d’état in Spain but lacks the courage to stage one, and told its MPs: “You’re not even fascists – you’re just parasites.” The insults and lack of consensus are further evidence of the divisions in Spanish politics following the 2008 economic crisis, the end of the decades-long duopoly of the PP and the Socialists and four general elections in as many years. “Spain was already very polarised after the repeat election last November: you had the express formation of a government that is seen as the most leftwing in recent history and a right that is fragmented and full of internal rivalries, and so feels compelled to get into confrontations with the government,” said Pablo Simón, a political scientist at Madrid’s Carlos III university. The pandemic, he added, has served as a “bit of a time tunnel”, accelerating existing dynamics and also affording some political actors an opportunity to reposition themselves. The centre-right Citizens party is a case in point: after a disastrous, and near-fatal, bid to abandon the political middle-ground and challenge the PP on the right, the party has been forced back to the centre in order to survive and has recently shown itself willing to lend its support to the government. Simón also points out that for all the bluster and fury, the polls have shifted very little during the pandemic. “If you unpack all the surveys and look at voting intentions, people on the left trust hugely in the government’s handling of the pandemic – despite the mistakes that may have been made – and the people on the right are deeply distrustful.” What happens next, both economically and epidemiologically, could change that, he added. For the time being, however, it’s business as usual – albeit at a shriller, Covid-19 frequency. Or, as Simón puts it: “It’s the same song we’ve always heard, but this time the lyrics have changed.”