When I first bought chicken in Australia, I was horrified to see how much blood oozed out of the packaging and congealed on my frying pan. I forgot that I was used to buying halal chicken in Malaysia, where the blood was drained from the carcass. I was so put off by my new Australian meat produce that for three months I shopped at a kosher butcher since it employs similar blood-draining techniques. The day I could buy and cook meat from a standard Australian market was when I knew my tastebuds had evolved. Do not let that paragraph fool you into thinking I am a capable cook with high standards. In fact, I never considered cooking an essential adult life skill because I subsisted on delicious, cheap hawker food in Malaysia. In 2014, I migrated to Australia and had to change my food habits because eating out daily was too costly. Luckily, learning to cook in Australia was a delightful journey, even if I had to first master the basics. I read local recipes and watched local cooking shows to understand techniques (roasting, baking) and shortcuts (use the food processor to mince onions; always use store-bought filo pastry). I roamed markets and grocery shops and became familiar with different produce (broccolini, kohlrabi) and herbs (sage, rosemary). The biggest lesson I learned is that everything tastes better with cheese in it. As someone whose idea of cheese was Kraft singles eaten between two slices of white bread, I experienced my first paradox of choice in the supermarket cheese aisle. Which cheese goes on a cheese platter and which one goes in pasta? How strong is strong parmesan? Which is the one that smells putrid? What is the difference between marinated and non-marinated feta? I am not alone in my surprise at the variety of food products in Australian supermarkets and grocery shops, a combination of immigration and the globalisation of our pantries. South Korean-born chef Christina Park trained as a commercial chef in Australia almost 20 years ago and has worked in Middle Eastern and Japanese restaurants. She recalls when she first saw the different types of rice available. “In South Korea, we mostly have short-grain rice which is also used to make sushi (or bibimbap). But in Australia, there is medium-grain and long-grain rice, with different fragrance and stickiness. There’s also arborio rice for Italian cooking and glutinous rice which is used in a lot of Chinese dishes. All this was new to me but now I can tell the difference.” She has adapted to different cooking styles and ingredients, but there’s one vegetable she’s still sceptical of. “I don’t get rhubarb,” she confesses. “I first thought it was a red celery because it looked like one. I put it in soup which was a huge mistake. I later found out that it is sour and better suited in desserts!” Rice may be ubiquitous, but the different ways to cook and consume it still manages to surprise people. José Escobar was used to eating bandeja paisa in Colombia which is a dish with rice, beans, meat, plantain and avocado. When he moved to Australia seven years ago, he was surprised to discover that there was no such thing as a “national dish” and that he could easily access any cuisine he wanted. His standout discoveries are Indian and Japanese-style curries. “Eating rice with my hands in an Indian restaurant was a completely new experience, because in Colombia we eat rice with spoons or forks.” Like Escobar, British-born Emma Whitby became more familiar with a wider range of Asian food after moving to Australia. In the UK, Asian food is usually synonymous with Indian or Pakistani food, with Chinese food as a catch-all for east Asian cuisine. “Someone asked if I wanted to go for Thai or Vietnamese food and I realised those were real options.” As a vegetarian, take-away sushi was a revelation. In the UK, sushi is served at high-end Japanese restaurants, not affordable takeaway joints – and it’s rarely vegetarian. “It’s not just me. My mum is vegetarian too and when she visited me, she pretty much ate that for three weeks.” While Whitby is content to be in a city with good vegetarian options, I am content for vastly different reasons: the affordability of good-quality red meat. In my first year in Australia, I ate copious amounts of frozen lamb or beef meatballs in tomato sauce. I then took it as a challenge to make each component of that meal myself. Now I have it down to a reasonable standard. I top it with couscous even when people tell me it tastes better with pasta. It took a few years, but I finally have a scrappy fusion dish to call my own.