The Super League season will resume on Sunday 2 August with a triple-header event that will include the champions, St Helens, after clubs approved proposals for rugby league’s version of Project Restart. Clubs agreed on Friday the season would be shortened from 29 rounds to 22, with a revised play-off series featuring only the top-four sides. The winners of the semi-finals will compete in the Grand Final in the last weekend of November. It remains to be seen whether that will take place at the event’s traditional home of Old Trafford. Until government guidance changes, matches will take place behind closed doors at selected venues. The competition will restart with three games that were postponed earlier in the season taking place at a single venue, likely to be Headingley. Hull Kingston Rovers will face Toronto at 1pm before St Helens face Catalans Dragons and Huddersfield play Leeds. All 12 teams will play the following weekend as the season resumes in full with round eight of the 2020 season. “We are in the final stages of confirming where the games will be played and we continue to work closely with Sky Sports to deliver the best possible broadcast schedule for our fans,” the competition’s chief executive, Robert Elstone, said. “Above all, we know that fans want to get back into grounds to support their teams. We will continue to follow government advice and work alongside the RFL, clinical advisers and ground-safety personnel to ensure that when that time comes Super League is ready to welcome back its fans at the first opportunity.” “Whilst the recent government announcements underline increasing optimism, the pandemic remains unpredictable. Our final fixture schedule needs to respond to opportunities that will unfold over the coming weeks and full details of fixtures, venues and season structure will be confirmed as they become known.” Super League hopes to allow spectators into games in either late September or early October, with a series of more profitable fixtures likely to be backloaded to later in the year to maximise income for clubs. The league has also agreed to delay the start of next season until the middle of February at the earliest, owing to the current campaign finishing six weeks later than usual.