Sitting on a newly painted bench at Place de la République in central Paris under the gaze of the statue of Marianne – France’s national icon – Laurent David suggested the square could be a metaphor for the capital. “It’s better than it was, but nowhere near as good as it could be,” he said. “They spent a fortune doing it up only a few years ago and now look. The place is covered in cigarette ends and the paving stones are so damaged and uneven people are falling over.” Even so, David, 72, a retired car company employee, says he will today be voting for Anne Hidalgo, the woman who has run Paris for the last six years, in the French capital’s mayoral elections. “She’s done some great things for Paris and I will hope she does more,” he replies, “But...” The sentence is left hanging. Life in France, as elsewhere, has been in a coronavirus-induced hiatus since the first round of the municipal elections took place across the country in March. The second round was cancelled as France went into a strict lockdown. More than three months on, Jérôme Fourquet of political pollster Ifop says his compatriots’ thoughts are elsewhere. “With all that has happened, these elections don’t seem very important for many French,” he says. “I don’t think their heads are in it right now, so we’ll probably see a high level of abstention.” In Paris, where the end of lockdown restrictions has coincided with a summer heatwave, it is a three-way race. Hidalgo, representing the Socialist party in alliance with the Greens and Communists, is favourite, followed by Rachida Dati, who was justice minister in Nicolas Sarkozy’s government. Agnès Buzyn, a former health minister representing Emmanuel Macron’s La République en Marche (LREM) party is trailing in third. Outside the capital, interest in the country’s mayoral elections is concentrated on a few political hotspots including French prime minister Édouard Philippe’s possible re-election as mayor in Le Havre; a six-candidate battle in Marseille; and whether Marine Le Pen’s far-right National Rally party will take Perpignan. Fourquet doubts LREM will win many town halls – the fledgling centrist party has failed to make a footprint locally where most mayors still represent the traditional left-right parties – but rejected suggestions this would cause major damage to Macron and his government. “I don’t believe the election will be of much consequence at a national level,” he says. “On paper, the figures suggest Emmanuel Macron is rejected by the French people, but if we compare his popularity with that of his predecessor at the same period in his mandate, he’s in a much better position. Whatever happens, it’s certainly not finished for Macron.” A straw poll of Parisians basking in the end-of-week sunshine at Place de la République, where the circling traffic and pollution are back to pre-Covid-19 levels, shows most want the same thing: a cleaner, greener, more orderly city. They disagree only on who will deliver it. Hidalgo has promised to continue her largely popular campaign to drive motorists out of the capital with an extra 50km or more of new cycle lanes, new pedestrianised areas, more parks and greenery and social housing. The problem is not that local politicians lack initiatives it’s basically a lack of money Dati, meanwhile, has picked up on increasing anger at City Hall’s failure to deal with the worsening litter problem, the deterioration of the streets and urban furniture and growing concerns over crime and safety. All three candidates promise more local police, though Dati and Buzyn, unlike Hidalgo, want them fully armed. Fatima Abdellaoui, 39, a doctor from Marseille, said she wanted the city to do more to help the many homeless in Paris, but supported Hidalgo. Across the other side of the square Jean-Claude, 74, a retired sailor, said he would vote for Dati, who is currently mayor of the 7th arrondissement, the most expensive in the city. “Her arrondissement is clean and has no problems,” Jean-Claude said. “Here, people are just doing what they want.” Mathieu, who runs a newspaper kiosk on the square, said he was undecided. “We need someone to change mentalities and make people more respectful,” he said. Laurine Da Costa,19, a cinema student from the Paris banlieue, said she would vote, but added: “Will it change much? Probably not. The problem is not that local politicians lack initiatives it’s basically a lack of money. I’m not sure the election will change that.” Despite the fact that one British newspaper described Paris as “hideous” last week, dozens of couples were to be seen dancing a sundown salsa at Place de la République. The joyous scene after months of gloom was pure City of Light.