Australian supermarkets have reintroduced national rationing of essential groceries after panic buying resumed in some states, provoked by a rise in cases in Victoria. The southern state reported its 10th straight day of new cases in double digits on Friday. Thirty new cases were reported after what premier Daniel Andrews called a “suburban testing blitz” in hotspot suburbs, involving ambulances and mobile test centres. In response to panic buying, which earlier in the pandemic saw shelves emptied of toilet paper, pasta, disinfectant and other staples, the Woolworths grocery store chain announced it would reintroduce countrywide buying limits on toilet paper. Woolworths initially brought in limits in Victoria alone on Wednesday. Customers were restricted to just two items of toilet paper, hand sanitiser, paper towel, flour, sugar, pasta, mince, long-life milk, eggs and rice. Coles, another supermarket chain, also brought in limits on buying hand sanitiser, flour, eggs, other groceries and toilet paper. Despite the spike in infections, Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison said on Friday he would stick with plans to further ease coronavirus restrictions.“There will be outbreaks and what matters is that we continue to build our capability to deal with those outbreaks,” Morrison told a media briefing in Canberra. Meanwhile, new cases continue to surge above 30,000 a day in Brazil and the United States. Brazil confirmed 39,483 coronavirus cases on Thursday, bringing the national total to 1,228,114 known infections. The number of deaths in the country is nearing 55,000, with 54,971 fatalities confirmed. In the US, at least 27 states reported increases in the number of daily cases being recorded. Texas confirmed a record 5,996 new coronavirus cases on Thursday, just one day after beating its previous record with Wednesday’s 5,551 cases, causing Texas Republican Governor Greg Abbott to put a hold on any further steps to reopen. Abbott also reimposed a ban on elective surgeries in some areas to preserve hospital space, after the number of patients statewide more than doubled in two weeks. US vice president Mike Pence will hold the first coronavirus task force press briefing in weeks on Friday, CNN reported. The US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) warned that they believe the US actually has had 10 times the number of known infections over the course of the pandemic so far, or 20 million cases. The CDC warned that there was a risk of “apocalyptic” infection in major cities. In a Fox News town hall on Tuesday, US president Donald Trump repeated claims that US cases were higher as a result of more testing, comparing the situation in the US to that in Germany, and saying Germany had much lower testing (Germany performs 65 tests per 1,000 people, while in the US it is 86). However, in the US, 8.2% of tests are returned positive, while in Germany that figure is 3.5%. The confirmed cases per million people in the US are 7,194.39 versus 2,292.55 in Germany. In the US, 124,355 people have died so far. In Germany, 8,940 people have died. Other key developments from around the world included: Cases worldwide neared 9.6 million on Friday, with the WHO saying it expected global infections to pass 10 million by the end of the week. The current total stands at 9,586,769. At least 488,740 people have died so far. In Sweden, people are losing trust in authorities’ handling of the coronavirus pandemic, as the man behind the country’s light-touch approach called lockdowns a form of madness and political parties demanded the Swedish strategy be reviewed before the next election in 2022. China reported 13 new cases, 11 in Beijing. Eleven were in Beijing, where mass testing has been carried out following an outbreak that appears to have been largely brought under control. The other two cases were brought by Chinese travellers from overseas, according to the National Health Commission. South Korea reported 39 new cases, mostly from the densely populated Seoul metropolitan area where officials have been struggling to stem transmissions amid increased public activity and eased attitudes on social distancing. Mexico pushed past a total of 25,000 deaths and 200,000 confirmed cases. The country’s finance minister, Arturo Herrera Gutiérrez, tested positive but is experiencing only “minor” symptoms, he said. A Europe-wide study shows child virus deaths are “extremely rare”. Fewer than one in 100 children who test positive die, although a small but significant percentage develop severe illness, the study showed. UK health secretary Matt Hancock threatened to close beaches, after tens of thousands of people descended in droves on beaches in Bournemouth and other stretches of the Dorset coast. Hancock said on TalkRadio he had the power to close the beaches if people did not respect social-distancing rules. New Zealand reported one new case of Covid-19. Like all of the country’s active cases it was diagnosed during the routine testing of quarantined travellers.