Poem My last of days was there to contemplatewhen words absconded from meas long ago as Nineteen-forty-one.I must have heard the nurses talk of death. My last of days was often in my mindwhen I was decked out in school uniform,clutching my mother’s hand for the assuranceit wasn’t in her nature to provide. My last of days was an obsession with mein all the years I was romantically inclined.I cherished the idea of being doomed.My happiest day was when a stranger saidI looked like Keats. My last of days was cast asidefor glorious intervalswhen I began to function in the world. My last of days returned to mewith the last days of friends I loved.I suffered an abundance of them. My last of days is getting closer now.I fear I have to welcome it. Paul Bailey, born in south London 1937, published his first poetry collection last year at the age of 82. Inheritance is a collection to engage not only the reader who knows all about contemporary poetry and probably writes it, but everyone who appreciates elegant craft, shapely storytelling and delicate love lyrics, with a touch of acerbic mischief to offset melancholy and no “poetic” pretentiousness whatever. Bailey is best known as an award-winning novelist, and a consummate writer in a number of prose genres. His “author statement” on the British Council website  is several years out of date, to judge by the bibliography, but its conclusion helps illuminate the style he brings to poetry. “I share Isaac Babel’s lifelong ambition to write with simplicity, brevity and precision,” he states. “It was he who said: ‘No steel can pierce the human heart so chillingly as a period at the right moment.’ I hope one or two of my full stops have done, and will do, just that.” Poem has exemplary “simplicity, brevity and precision” and lays bare the art of the well-placed period. The silent beat is important in any poetry kit, whether in the form of punctuation mark, line break, stanza break or the gaps and steps of the experimental poet’s work. Full stops are often pivotal, and sometimes final. Bailey’s Poem is concerned with the symbolic full stop as well as the literal: each stanza meditates on the “last of days” as they occur in the chronology of the speaker’s life, and there is a co-terminal full stop and a new opening sentence for each stanza, until the poem’s last word. I was reminded of the thought recorded by Henry James on suffering a stroke near the end of his life: “So here it is at last, the distinguished thing.” There is a common sense of expectation – even, almost, hope - fulfilled. (“So here it is at last …”) Poem is haunted by the anticipation of dying. It’s a common one, of course: there probably aren’t many writers who fail to rehearse the way their own story will end. It might be one of the psychological essentials for writing, though some (and some literary eras) are more drawn to it than others. Philip Larkin is another death-haunted writer who springs to mind. Bailey brings characteristic humour to his youthful self-portrait: “I cherished the idea of being doomed. / My happiest day was when a stranger said / I looked like Keats.” But death begins a lot earlier for Bailey, as a word temporarily to end all others. He recalls a childhood illness, undergone at a point when he would have been relishing the still-new gift of talk. As a result, “words absconded from me”: the intrusion of the “distinguished thing” – as word, as idea, and personally relevant – led to a new level of silent thinking. The word sank deep, and changed time itself. Bailey pursues the concept of time given shape by death in his refrain, “My last of days.” It’s not difficult to understand, and yet it has a mirage-like quality and defies exact interpretation. As it’s repeatedly applied to the different phases of the protagonist’s life it becomes incantation. The preference for the formulation “last of days” over a simple “last day” suggests a finite quantity of days inexorably running out. It diffuses the sense of conclusion over a wider time span: there are days before “the last of days” that are leading towards it. The contemplation is not simply melancholy: there’s an extended pleasure in it, too. I think this is why the phrase is particularly haunting: it opens an ambiguous space, a space to which any reader of poetry appreciates an invitation. In fact, all the small narratives incorporated into the poem are like that. Readers are given only the simplest of outlines. If we know Bailey’s work well, and have read his biographies, we can of course insert a richer landscape along the way, but it’s not a prerequisite for making imaginative connection with the poem. The clean, plain, prosaic lines of the narrative and the rhetorical, wistful music of the refrain are everything needed. In the penultimate stanza, the focus shifts from the self to the “last of days” of “friends I loved”. This “abundance” of mourning sharpens the reality and finality of death, and makes a bridge of feeling to the new self-perception of the terse last stanza. “My last of days is getting closer now. / I fear I have to welcome it.” The expression “I fear” may signal a typically English understatement, as if the writer really wanted to say, apologetically but perhaps with wry amusement, something like: “I know I shouldn’t admit this, but I’m afraid I welcome my last of days.” On the other hand “I fear” may signal simply that: fear. This doesn’t cancel out the positive aspect of “welcome” but suggests obligation. There’s an unnerving, but perhaps faintly bracing, absence of choice regarding the last full stop. One further, happier thought: this is a new poem, written since Inheritance was published, and it’s among Bailey’s best. 