Christina Tosi of Momofuku introduced the world to cereal milk with a better understanding than most about the power of memory and food, and how a particular flavour can take us back to a moment in time. Cornflakes, for instance, take me back to our little wooden kitchen in Brigg, Lincolnshire, in 1990, sitting at a plastic-covered table with dad dipping toast in his chai ahead of a surreptitious wipe of his Tom Selleck-style moustache before whisking my sister and I, with our double plaits and rucksacks, into his Datsun 260Z for the school run. When the ice-cream has hardened enough, be brave when pushing in the second sandwich layer of cornflake crumbs to form a biscuit – you want to be firm with it, so it forms a hard, crunchy layer and stays together. Unfortunately, clingfilm is the best option for lining the tin here, but if you’re very careful not to tear a hole in it, greased foil should also work. You’ll need a blender to make this. Prep 25 minCook 25 min Freeze 4 hrMakes 12 For the cornflake biscuit layers175g cornflakes, crushed into fine crumbs80g caster sugar100g coconut oil, melted250g raspberries, cut in half For the ice-cream75g cornflakes, scrunched up550ml Oatly whole milk150g roasted unsalted cashews60g golden caster sugar2 tbsp maple syrup1 tsp vanilla extract1 tbsp groundnut oilFine sea salt Line a 20cm x 20cm tin with clingfilm, making sure there are no gaps and that it overhangs at the sides. First, make the biscuit layers. In a large bowl, combine the cornflake crumbs and sugar, then pour in the melted coconut oil and mix to combine. Tip half the mixture into the lined tin (leave the other half in a bowl on the side for later) and press down as firmly as you can with the back of a spoon. Arrange the raspberry halves cut side down in neat lines on top of the biscuit base, then put the tin in the freezer while you make the ice-cream. Soak the scrunched-up cornflakes in the oat milk for 20 minutes, until the milk turns oatmeal in colour and the cornflakes are completely soggy. Meanwhile, put the cashews in a small pan, pour over enough water to cover, bring to a boil, then simmer for 20 minutes. Drain into a sieve (discarding the water), cool, then tip into a blender. Sieve the milk from the cornflakes into a jug and use a spoon to squeeze out as much milk as possible, before discarding the soggy cornflakes. Pour the cornflake milk into the blender with the soaked cashews, add the caster sugar, maple syrup, vanilla extract, groundnut oil and a big pinch of salt, and blend on high speed for at least four minutes, until completely smooth. Pour the ice-cream mix on to the cold raspberries and biscuit layer. Freeze for two hours, or until a (clean) finger is met with some resistance. Sprinkle the remaining cornflake crumbs over the solid ice-cream, and again use a spoon to press them down as firmly as you can. Freeze for another two hours, until completely solid. Bring up to room temperature for five minutes before slicing into 12 bars and serving.