Australia is battling a coronavirus outbreak in its second largest city – fuelled by family gatherings and birthday parties – that has resulted in large parts of Melbourne being shut down in an attempt to halt the spread of the virus just weeks after authorities lifted restrictions. On Monday, a national health committee recommended that more than one million people remain in their suburbs amid the growing health emergency in the southern state of Victoria. The state government is now considering making the stay-home advice legally enforceable. After months of lockdown, the majority of states and territories in Australia have been able to reduce their number of active cases to nearly zero, relaxing state borders and, in the case of Queensland, reopening sports stadiums. In the New South Wales capital of Sydney, life is largely back to normal, with schools and beaches open and relatively loose restrictions on social distancing. In Western Australia, crowds of 30,000 people will be allowed to attend sporting matches from Saturday and live music venues will open their doors again. But in Victoria, things are going the other way. Some 83% of the 116 cases reported in Australia in the last seven days originate in the southern state, with a large portion attributed to community transmission. On Saturday, the state’s leader Daniel Andrews said that restrictions were to be re-tightened, with large family gatherings blamed for the uptick in cases. He announced that for the next three weeks the number of guests allowed in a house would be reduced from 20 back to five, and public gatherings would once again be limited to 10. Victorian chief health officer Brett Sutton described the state as being at a “tipping point”, urging residents to take precautions. On Sunday, the Australian health protection principal committee, which is made up of each state’s chief health officer and the federal chief health minister, recommended that Victorians do not travel in or out of six heavily affected local government areas. On Monday, residents of New South Wales were advised to avoid travelling to the Victorian hotspots as school holidays loom. Andrews said further restrictions would be considered if community transmission continued to rise. “It may be the case in the days ahead ... we may need to, for instance, reinstitute the stay-at-home except for [essential] reasons,” he said at a press conference. “We all remember that time, it was deeply frustrating but it was very effective … we may need to go back to that setting in given geographical areas.” There were concerns that a Black Lives Matter rally that was held in the city two weeks ago could lead to a surge in cases. But Victoria’s chief health officer confirmed this was not the case. “I don’t think the Black Lives Matter protest has contributed. We are not seeing people who have clearly acquired it there,” he said on Monday. Of the around 30,000 attendees only four cases have been recorded, with no evidence that the virus was transmitted at the protest. Instead, Andrews said large family gatherings were to blame. “We’ve had cases of people gathering in large numbers at their home or another family member’s home … even though they had been told to isolate in their own home. We have even had people who have tested positive and have been told to go home and isolate and instead, they have gone to work. Instead, they have gone and visited loved ones in large numbers,” he said. “The experts tell us that, largely, the numbers are being driven by families – families having big get-togethers and not following the advice around distancing and hygiene. Andrews said on Saturday that half of Victoria’s cases since the end of April had come from transmission inside someone’s home. “It is unacceptable that families, anywhere in our state can just because they want this to be either pretend that it is,” he said. “You can see how this could happen. People feeling relaxed at home. Letting their guard down. Letting old habits creep back. But we are still in a pandemic – and people’s lives are still at risk.” The hotspots are caused by four or five major clusters. The two largest outbreaks are from family groups in the suburbs of Keilor Downs and Coburg, which have spread to multiple suburbs across Melbourne. So far, the outbreaks have caused multiple schools and shops to be shut for deep cleaning, and several aged care homes have been placed in lockdown after residents tested positive. More than a thousand close contacts have been asked to self-isolate. The local government area of Brimbank was also the site of a major meat works cluster in early May. The Cedar Meats outbreak was the country’s largest, ballooning to more than 100 cases. There have been 102 deaths from coronavirus in Australia, with more than 7,400 cases.