Tesco sales soared during lockdown as shoppers switched to buying online and in local stores as well as returning to big weekly shops at the supermarkets. The UK’s biggest supermarket chain said sales at established UK stores rose 8.7% in the three months to 30 May, with sales of food increasing by 12%. However, clothing sales dived by a fifth. Online sales rose by 48.5% and sales in convenience stores jumped 10%. Retail profits for the year are expected to be in line with last year as the chief executive, Dave Lewis, said the cost of adapting to the coronavirus pandemic had been “very significant”, including new safety measures in stores, covering sick pay for vulnerable staff who have had to isolate at home and bringing in 47,000 new workers to help with increased demand. He said he expected additional costs to be close to £920m, the upper end of expectations set out earlier in the year. “In the last three months the industry has changed beyond imagination,” Lewis said in his last results presentation before handing over to the new Tesco boss Ken Murphy in the autumn. Lewis’s departure is expected to be marred by a row over pay at Friday’s annual shareholder meeting. His pay rose by more than a third to £6.42m last year after Tesco’s board decided to remove the online grocer Ocado from a list of rivals used to rate performance. Poor trading at Tesco’s bank also marred performance in the quarter. Sales at the bank dived by just over a quarter as its travel money business closed temporarily and fewer people used ATMs. Tesco said it expected the division to report a loss of up to £200m. He said that Tesco’s efforts to keep price rises below inflation, including a new price match promise with Aldi, had helped it win shoppers from the German discounter for the first time in more than a decade. Tesco’s start-up discounter chain, Jack’s, also doubled sales during lockdown. On Friday, Tesco said it would be extending the Aldi price match to a further 500 products, from about 300 at present. Roberto Pozzi, an analyst at the credit ratings agency Moody’s, said Tesco’s plans would have implications for the whole grocery market in the UK: “Tesco extends its price-matching campaign to all branded products, challenging suppliers to lower prices in order to compete and regain market share from discounters. This will likely spark new price wars, a credit negative for UK grocers.” Thomas Brereton, a retail analyst at GlobalData, said: “The UK is almost certain to enter a recession that will take its toll on consumer wallets and for the next 18 months or so reducing grocery expenditure will be a priority for many. With that in mind, providing value for money will be crucial for success for both value and mid-market players, and Tesco appears to be gearing up for an all-out price war with the discounters.”  The biggest change flagged by Tesco was a switch to online, which now accounts for 16% of the supermarket’s sales, up from 9% before. Tesco has more than doubled its weekly capacity to 1.3m delivery slots in five weeks, with an investment of only £4m. The company expects to take £5.5bn of sales online this year compared with £3.3bn last year. About 590,000 vulnerable customers, including elderly people, had started shopping online with the supermarket, many of whom had never done so before and the group was confident it would continue to serve them. “We believe the increase [in shopping online] is permanent,” Lewis said, adding that he anticipated that about 12,000 staff taken on to help with online shopping during the pandemic would stay on.