Even if you had followed every twist of the Windrush scandal, last week’s BBC1 drama Sitting in Limbo, based on the appalling treatment Anthony Bryan received at the hands of a state that had declared him a non-person, was eye-opening; a textbook demonstration of how a real-life drama can take you to places that reporting sometimes can’t. It was raw, visceral, utterly enraging.This week, the BBC has another slice of real life playing over three nights – The Salisbury Poisonings, telling the story of the attempted assassination of Sergei Skripal in March 2018. It examines how a town responds to being suddenly thrust into the limelight and forced to lock down – a potent current theme – in response to the use of the nerve agent novichok. The contiguity of the two real-life dramas is no coincidence. Piers Wenger, controller of BBC drama, says they are a response to audience demand. “We live in an era of fake news,” he says, “and that has created a reason and appetite for true stories.” Wenger describes factual dramas – they used to be called “drama docs” but that name has gone out of fashion as the makers have distanced themselves from the word “documentary” – as “drama that is telling a true story”. The pitch is that these programmes will take you behind the headlines. “By telling it dramatically,” says Wenger, “we are able to offer the audience an insight into the emotional and moral lives of the characters at the centre of it that documentary can’t unlock in quite the same way.” In the case of The Salisbury Poisonings, it would have been easy to write an espionage drama focusing on the Russian agents who, according to the British government, came to the city to kill Skripal. The two men, Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov, said in an interview on Russian TV in September 2018 that they were merely tourists who had come to see Salisbury cathedral with its “famous 123-metre spire”. However it was not the story journalists-turned-screenwriters Adam Patterson and Declan Lawn wanted to tell. “For us, the human story hadn’t been told,” says Patterson. “Our fascination is with ordinary heroism. That blew our minds more than the spy story.” You have to shoehorn events that played out over many months into three hours The focus is on Tracy Daszkiewicz, the director of public health at Wiltshire council, who has to seal off the town to keep the population safe and at times wilts under the pressure. “In a drama you have to focus your view on someone,” explains Patterson, “and we thought Tracy’s story was amazing.” The other central characters are Detective Sergeant Nick Bailey, who was left critically ill as a result of being poisoned by novichok at the Skripals’ home, and Dawn Sturgess, who died as a result of being poisoned by the nerve agent, which was in a small bottle (they assumed it was perfume) found by her boyfriend. Patterson and Lawn used to work for Panorama but for the past seven years they have been slogging away trying to break into screenwriting, so they could bring their journalism to more people. “There’s a very certain type of audience that sits down to watch a Panorama,” says Patterson, “but you reach a different audience [with drama] and tell them a bit about the world under the subterfuge of entertainment.”“We put on our old journalistic boots and walked around town and knocked on doors in the dead of night,” recalls Patterson. For the most part people were willing to talk. Crucially, says Patterson, you arrive without a TV camera. “We were saying to them, ‘Listen, if you want to go on this journey with us, it’s going to be a long journey, but you will be there every step of the way.’ That gives people a level of security that often isn’t there with journalism and documentary making.” How sacrosanct is the truth when you tell these stories? “It is difficult,” admits Patterson. “You have to shoehorn events that played out over many months into three hours. Sometimes you have to take liberties. But unless there’s a compelling reason to change things we stick to what happened, and if we did have to make a change we consulted the real people and made sure they were happy with it.”“Trust” is the word that keeps coming up when you talk to writers and producers of factual dramas. “You are sympathetic to the story to begin with and then you have to gain the trust of the subject,” says novelist Stephen S Thompson, who wrote the screenplay for Sitting in Limbo. Thompson is Anthony Bryan’s half-brother, so a degree of trust already existed, but barriers still had to be overcome.“The facts of the story are one thing,” says Thompson, “but could I tease the emotion out of him? How forthcoming would he be?” Thompson says Bryan is a very private person, and that at times he had to forget they were brothers. “There’s a certain amount of journalistic integrity that you have to assert,” he explains. Thompson allowed himself some dramatic licence to pack a story that played out over three years into 90 minutes, but realised he had to stick to the key facts and chronology of the case. “We were constantly checking in on ourselves to make sure we weren’t straying too far from the truth,” he says. Jimmy McGovern, whose 90-minute drama Anthony about the racist murder of black teenager Anthony Walker in 2005 will be screened this summer, says he only writes real-life dramas when invited to do so by the people caught up in them. His mould-breaking 1996 TV film Hillsborough, telling the story of the 1989 disaster and its aftermath, was written at the behest of families of the victims. Anthony was inspired by conversations with Walker’s mother, Gee. “I went to Jimmy because I couldn’t think of anyone more suited who could depict, highlight and draw attention to the hard messages of a life not lived. Anthony’s unfulfilled dreams, his potentials and the many lives he would have impacted on – which now will never be realised,” she says.Anthony is an example of fact meeting fiction. The murder is dealt with in the second part of the film, but the first half is a brilliant imagining of what his young life might have been. “We had to find a new way of telling the story,” says McGovern, “and that’s why I hit on this – to show the life that had been snatched away. The night of his death is the only factual stuff in that drama, but that is nailed-on factual. That’s word for word what happened.”McGovern, who wrote Cracker and a host of other award-winning fictional dramas, says fiction is easier to write than factual drama. “You’re not going to get an army of lawyers descend on you when you write fiction. With Hillsborough every single word was lawyered, and it was so dispiriting and exhausting.” The other factual drama that will create a stir this year is Small Axe, an “anthology” of five TV films by Steve McQueen set in London’s West Indian community from the late 1960s to the early 80s. Four of them are based on true stories unearthed over a long period of research. “Steve thought this is a whole part of history that’s vanishing,” says producer Tracey Scoffield. “These people are dying off. There are several really important stories here that have been swept under the carpet of history. Why make it up? Why not tell the real stories, because they have that much more power?” Scoffield says some writers enjoy the discipline of working within a framework of truth, others less so because they reach a point where their imagination wants to take wing. Some deviation is allowable for dramatic effect, but the basic template has to remain intact. “You can make up dialogue but you can’t make up events,” she says, “and the real skill is taking real events and giving them a dramatic shape. Not many people can do that. Lots of factual drama is ‘this happened and then this happened and then this happened’, and it’s actually quite boring.” I always apply the iceberg theory. Is there the 70 or 80% of the story we don’t know about that people will find fascinating? If, however, you go to the opposite extreme and diverge from the truth too much, you are deceiving the audience. “There is little point in making things up,” she says, “because if an audience is being presented with something which purports to be true and yet some of it is fictional, what’s the value in it except as a piece of pure entertainment?” It’s a tricky balance: life is usually messy and dramatically shapeless, but give it an artificial dramatic logic and you risk subverting your claim to be telling the truth.Jeff Pope, head of factual drama at ITV Studios, has produced more factual dramas – and dramas with more controversial subjects – than anyone in the business. They include Appropriate Adult about Fred West; This is Personal: The Hunt for the Yorkshire Ripper; See No Evil: The Moors Murders; and The Moorside about the kidnapping of Shannon Matthews. His latest drama, Four Lives, will be shown by the BBC in 2021.It concerns the murders by Stephen Port of four young gay men in London, and will be told through the eyes of the victims’ families as they seek the truth about the botched police investigation. Pope says the story interested him because ignorance of gay lifestyles may have hampered that investigation, and the focus will be not on reconstructing the murders but on tracing the impact on the families. It may be significant that the working title has been changed from The Barking Murders to Four Lives.Pope says factual drama has to satisfy the need to be dramatic as well as truthful. “My approach has been to make these pieces work as dramas first and foremost. I’ve never allowed the illogicality of the facts or the chronology of the story be a justification for making a drama that doesn’t really work.” But what happens to the truth? Doesn’t that inevitably get distorted? “Entirely the opposite,” he insists. “One would imagine there would be a tendency to step back from the events and smooth off the rough edges to make a recognisable three-act drama, but my process is to go the other way. I go deeper and deeper into the DNA of the story.” That way, he says, you latch on to the specific characteristics of real people and avoid producing generic characters and storylines. He also looks for bit-players in news stories that we already think we know about, everyman (or woman) figures who give us our bearings. In the case of Appropriate Adult, that was the social worker Janet Leach, who had been attached to the case to make sure West understood what he was being accused of. That way, we are taken inside the story, but we are not being asked to identify with a serial killer or to get into his mind. Prurience can be kept at bay. “I always apply the iceberg theory,” Pope says. “There will be a bit of the story poking above the water – the bit we all know about. But is there the 70 or 80% of the story that we don’t know about and that people will find really fascinating? We all knew about Fred and Rosemary West but we didn’t know about Janet Leach, the appropriate adult. It’s also got to be greater than the sum of its parts. Is it speaking about something important? It can’t just be this happened, then this, then this, then this. There has to be something rising above that.”• The Salisbury Poisonings is on BBC1 on Monday 15 June and Tuesday 16 June at 9pm. Sitting in Limbo is on BBC iPlayer. Anthony will be broadcast in the summer, Small Axe in the autumn and Four Lives next year