What were you hoping for?To break the monotony of lockdown with someone interesting. To flex my rusty conversational skills. First impressions?Really relaxed, friendly, with a lovely smile, and patient while I struggled to get my sound working properly. What did you talk about?Grassroots theatre, standup comedy, nieces and nephews, gay bars, sexual health, cringe-worthy dating apps, cocktails and city living. Any awkward moments?With a 10-second delay it was hard to have a flowing conversation. We were pixels and black screens by the end. Good table manners?Emily wisely decided to order in cocktails, although why they had marshmallows in them is anyone’s guess. I think I managed my Italian food without major incident. How long did you stay on the call?Around three hours. Best thing about Emily?She was curious about me and had a dry sense of humour. Did you introduce her to your housemates?I’m on lockdown with my parents, so in true regressive teenage form, I enforced a do-not-disturb rule. Describe Emily in three wordsChilled, funny, engaging. What do you think she made of you?Hopefully: a friendly, charming, gorgeous distraction. Probably: a jittery mess who talked too much. Any connection issues?Lots – we switched to WhatsApp to avoid ghosting each other. And... did you swap numbers?We did, and independently saved the other person as “[Name] Guardian” in our phones. She spelled my name right first time, always a positive. How did the call end?I signed off after three hours as wine fatigue was catching up with me. I left a message saying hopefully we could speak again soon. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I worried I’d chattered on too much, so I would try to clam up a little more. Marks out of 10?7.5. Would you meet again in person?I’d be up for that, if she was, too. What were you hoping for?To meet someone new. A few cocktails. First impressions?Bubbly and easy to talk to. What did you talk about?The C-word (Covid), comedy, theatre, Manchester, dating apps, jigsaw puzzles. Any awkward moments?At one point my housemate burst in and announced she had burned the dinner she’d been making in exchange for a cut of the free cocktails. Good table manners?Perfect. How long did you stay on the call? Two and a bit hours before our technical difficulties, then instant messages for a short while before accepting defeat. Best thing about Ros?She seemed really genuine. Did you introduce her to your housemates?My flatmate and Frida the dog both made appearances. Meeting her parents on a first date might have been a bit intense. Describe Ros in three wordsFunny, animated and engaging. What do you think she made of you?I really don’t know. Any connection issues?Multiple. And... did you swap numbers?Yes. How did the call end?Via instant message. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?The weird mini-marshmallow garnish on top of all the cocktails. Marks out of 10?6. Would you meet again in person?Although I enjoyed the evening, I don’t see it going anywhere. • Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com