According to the poster for the Pilton Pop, Blues & Folk festival at Worthy farm, Somerset, the price of a ticket was £1 and there would – if the lure of the Kinks, Steamhammer and Duster Bennett was not sufficient – be free fresh milk from the farm and ox roast. There would also be a “lightshow, lightship, diorama and films, freaks and funny things”, all of which would in some form probably have been part of this year’s Glastonbury festival if it was taking place. Coronavirus has claimed this year’s event but the V&A will on Monday offer some solace with a seven-day online celebration of all things Glastonbury, coinciding with the weekend it was due to celebrate its 50th birthday. It includes a new collections page on the museum’s website where visitors will be able to see items from the extensive Glastonbury archive, which is looked after by the V&A. There will also be a callout to members of the public to provide their memories of Glastonbury, which will feed in to a bigger V&A project mapping the festival’s history. Any memory is good, say curators, although anyone remembering the Kinks in 1970 needs to have a rethink because they pulled out, apparently unsettled by seeing it described as a “mini-festival” in Melody Maker. Visitors had to make do with Marc Bolan’s Tyrannosaurus Rex instead. The online memory project stems from an exercise in 2016 when the museum asked festivalgoers to write down treasured recollections on postcards. With lots of people this week sat at home planning to watch and listen to archive Glastonbury coverage on the BBC, it seemed a perfect time to broaden that exercise, said Kate Bailey, a V&A curator of theatre design and scenography. Bailey said the archive was an ever growing resource that included tickets, posters, wristbands, photography, film footage, designs and artworks. “Generally each year we are acquiring new material,” she said. The objects collectively provide a unique window into the last 50 years, she said. “You couldn’t just invent a Glastonbury now. There is something about the organic way in which it has developed from that moment of the first festival.” The difference in scale and ambition between Glastonbury in 1970 and today is enormous, but the spirit is the same, she said. “That is one of the absolutely amazing things – it is still true to its founding principles.” The memories collected in 2016 include recollections like: “Seeing Muse – just after EU Referendum and the strength of young voices singing together as one, Cheered me up!” Another festivalgoer wrote: “Both my four- and eight-year-olds singing along with Adele and my youngest asking, “Is this happening in real life?” Bailey said her memory would be Stormzy last year performing Blinded by Your Grace, Pt 2. “It was so powerful and feels so relevant. That moment, that performance, looking at him, hearing the crowd, that staging … it was just phenomenal.” Glastonbury’s Emily Eavis said she was delighted the V&A was taking part in 50th anniversary celebrations. “The festival is witness to decades of creative, social and political change, and your memories are an integral part of this story. “Please do share your Glastonbury memories and join in the V&A’s seven days of festival fun.” For people who want to imagine they are really there this year, the V&A is making available a soundscape recorded during the 2015 festival by sound designer Gareth Fry. It gives you things which don’t happen on stage or you see on television, so the unzipping of tents, for example, or overhearing of conversations. Fry said: “Glastonbury is so much more than just music – there are comedians, circus acts, workshops, buskers, dozens of international cuisines. The camping, the walking, the people you pass by and the people you meet. There’s something unexpected around every corner.” Bailey called it “a great digital capture of what we can’t get next weekend. You can close your eyes and you’re there.” • The V&A is asking people to email their memories to glastonbury@vam.ac.uk.