In the final second before the football began again, with 22 men back in position after 98 days away, a voice among them gave one last instruction. “Play as if there were fans,” it said, but there were none. In Sevilla, Granada, Valencia, Barcelona, Vigo, Palma, Bilbao, Madrid and San Sebastián, stadiums stood virtually silent. In the Spanish city hit hardest by coronavirus it was quiet too, just birdsong and the sound of the ball, players shouting and the occasional siren from the fire station behind the stand. There should have been 11,454 people at Butarque for Leganés’ vital relegation clash with Valladolid on Saturday evening. There were 247. Santiago had been a season ticket holder for 52 years but he wasn’t there and nor were Candido, Félix, Manuel, Francisco, José, Jonas, Emilia, Andrés, Pedro Antonio, Ignacio, Antonio, Francisco, Eulalio, Mariano, Saturnino, Antonio or Rafael. The other 10,282 Leganés season ticket holders weren’t either, but they hope to be back one day. Those 18 will not: all of them passed away since the last time their team played. As football returned without them and so many others this weekend, the first round of games since early March offering a vague glimpse of normality and hope, their club released a video: “If Leganés has to suffer again,” it pleaded, “let it be because of the football team.” No city in Spain registered as many coronavirus cases as Leganés, nor had an infection rate so high. The health system virtually collapsed. Severo Ochoa, the city’s biggest hospital, trebled the size of its intensive care unit and was still overwhelmed. Patients lay on floors in hospital corridors. More than 600 people died, almost 300 in a single week in late March. Hospital staff suggested the daily rate was peaking at over 10 times the normal. Police could not keep up, nor could funeral services. As the crisis began, the club rang every member older than 60. The fitness coach, Pol Lorente, led daily online sessions for players and the population. An appeal was opened for Severo Ochoa, raising more than €250,000. They bought and delivered an ambulance. And Leganés announced that all season ticket holders will go free next year. For now, no one will of course although there are suggestions that some supporters, perhaps 10%-15% of the ground’s capacity, could attend games in July. On Saturday night, only 18 of those seats were occupied, a Leganés shirt with a No 12 and their name on the back quietly left there next to blue and white flowers as their team returned. Just in front of one of those shirts were the Leganés substitutes, all 12 of them sitting in the stand, four seats apart in their kit, gloves and masks. On the other side of the main stand, the Valladolid subs. At each end, spread out, a handful of photographers. A pitchside reporter with a microphone on a stick. Four board members per club. Half a dozen staff. Four ball boys, ready to wipe every ball. Six police officers. Six journalists, too. And two women spraying seats and surfaces with disinfectant. La Liga was back and like every other ground, Butarque had been disinfected the night before, before two buses turned up for each team – players are not allowed to sit next to each other. Referees arrived through a different entrance. At the gate in the corner, temperatures were taken before being allowed in. Rucksacks were disinfected and bags handed out containing gloves, mask and wipes. Before kick-off everyone is escorted to their seats, wearing bibs. As the players warm up, there is music (AC/DC’s Thunderstruck) but it doesn’t last long. The teams are read out to no one in particular. A couple of players even get a cheer. They go in, come out, the anthem plays, there is a minute’s silence and then they’re ready. Or not. It takes less than 100 seconds for Valladolid to lead, and it’s a gift. Leganés Chidozie Awaziem heads a nothing ball past his own goalkeeper, Pichu Cuéllar, who isn’t in his goal – and Enes Ünal runs it in. “God!” screams the keeper, heard from the stands. “Carry on, carry on, it’s OK,” someone up there says, but everything has changed already. Leganés had planned a long, physical game, their five changes to be employed later on, but now they trail. “That first goal was a hammer blow; it left us groggy,” Javier Aguirre says after the game. What he says during the game is a steady stream of instructions: hold, wait, make it, don’t touch him. A few metres away the Valladolid coach Sergio González wants two lines, he says. Behind them both, the subs are talking too, a lot. It doesn’t feel like chance: they clap, cajole, cheer, instruct and appeal anything and everything, like a mini supporters’ club conscious of the void they’re trying to fill. “In training we tried to simulate the scenario as much as we could, including the fact that there’s no fans,” Sergio says. “They all had a part to play: players, staff, doctors, players in the stands. When you see them sitting up there helping their teammates, correcting then, it makes you proud.” Mostly the shouts are standard enough, the soundtrack of any given park on any given Sunday. But then there’s the ball: hit so much harder, cleaner, every contact loud. Football looks different at professional level; it sounds a bit different, too. Close your eyes and you can hear some passes, the variety: tac or thump or whatever the move requires. Headers thud like their skulls are made of granite. And yet at the same time, when it’s like this, stripped of supporters, noise and some of its meaning, football doesn’t feel so far off the game everyone plays. Football without fans is not football, people say. But it is. It’s only football, the game and nothing else. Until, that is, someone whacks the music on full blast at half-time. The second half starts and Sergio wants control, calm. Aguirre starts to move, unable to be still, talking to anyone who will listen and many who won’t: the linesman nearest him probably isn’t enjoying this much. “Don’t dive in,” he says, so his defenders don’t, but Óscar Plano escapes just in front of him, runs into the area, clips the ball across and Raúl Carnero has his shot blocked. The rebound comes to Rubén Alcaráz who smashes it into the net and Valladolid’s substitutes leap up, cheering and clapping. The birds sing. With just over 35 minutes to go it’s 2-0, the match, maybe even the first division, slipping from Leganés’s grasp. There’s a foul. Aguirre hammers the top of the bench, fist on metal. “What a son of a bitch,” he says, repeatedly. The pace quickens, although it’s not a great game in truth. Replaced, Roque Mesa directs play from the stands, ice strapped to his thigh. Leganés get a penalty and Óscar scores with six minutes left. The home substitutes, long since on their feet, come further down the stand, drawn towards the match below them. They shout for a handball. The Valladolid players shout back, no way. Roger Assalé goes down and they scream for the referee to have a look, but he doesn’t. Athletic Bilbao 1-1 Atlético Madrid, Celta Vigo 0-1 Villarreal, Espanyol 2-0 Alavés, Granada 2-1 Getafe, Leganés 1-2 Real Valladolid, Mallorca 0-4 Barcelona, Real Madrid 3-1 Eibar, Real Sociedad 1-1 Osasuna, Valencia 1-1 Levante, Sevilla 2-0 Real Betis There’s another appeal, louder this time, a shout of handball. The referee pauses then continues. It’s obvious, they say, but he doesn’t agree. The final seconds slip away. Launch it into the area, someone shouts. Another satisfying thud and it’s headed out again, the final whistle going. Valladolid are lifted seven points clear, Leganés are left three from safety. Aguirre and Sergio bump fists and disappear immediately down the tunnel, with no one to wave at or applaud. The journalists leave, sitting in cars from where they connect remotely to a press conference taking place barely 50 metres away, their faces appearing on a screen set up in front of the manager, each question preceded, like every other conversation during lockdown, by a query: “Can you hear me?” The home manager is wearing blue gloves and a serious look. “I showed the players a lovely video the fans did to encourage them and we couldn’t have been better motivated. This is an opportunity lost, but we’ll keep fighting: there’s no time for laments,” he says. Then he gets ups and walks out, leaving behind an empty press room.