After Boris Johnson announced that thousands of businesses in England, from pubs to bingo halls, would be able to reopen on 4 July, the government has begun publishing sector-by-sector guidance setting out how they can do so. Here are some of the key points: Like cafes and restaurants, hair salons are being asked to keep a record of clients and their contact details for 21 days, so they can be traced in the event of an outbreak. They are also expected to operate an appointment-only service, and minimise the amount of time spent on each client. Customers should be encouraged to use hand sanitiser on arrival; and toilets should be cleaned frequently and be well-ventilated. Hairdressers and other close-contact services are also being asked to ensure piped music is not played so loud that customers and staff need to shout at each other. “All premises should ensure that steps are taken to avoid people needing to unduly raise their voices to each other. This includes, but is not limited to, refraining from playing music or broadcasts that may encourage shouting, including if played at a volume that makes normal conversation difficult,” the guidance says. As well as hotels, the guidance applies to all guest accommodation, from yurts to sleeper trains. Hotel reception areas must be cleaned more regularly than usual, and guests should be encouraged to use masks in shared corridors. Room service trays should be left outside the door – and guests encouraged to add tips to the bill rather than hand over cash. Some shared facilities – such as TV rooms or guest kitchens – will have to remain closed. Hotels should also ensure they prevent “close contact activities – such as communal dancing”, for example, by repurposing dance floors as seating areas. Showers can reopen if they are designated for one room. If not, they can only be used on a “reservation and clean rota”. For self-catering accommodation, keys must be cleaned, and handed over in a physically distanced way. Hosts should list all “hand-contact services”, and ensure they are cleaned as part of the changeover between guests. Campsites should carry out extra cleaning of shower and toilet blocks and consider introducing booked time slots for the showers to stagger usage. Customers should be encouraged not to lean on the bar or other surfaces, or to remain there after ordering – and self-service of “food, cutlery and condiments” should be avoided. Table service should be used where possible, with one member of staff allocated to each table to avoid cross-contamination. Customers should be encouraged to order online, on apps or over the phone, to reduce queues and stagger pickup times. Outdoor areas should be used as much as possible – and kept well-ventilated. Kitchen staff and other staff should avoid contact with each other, even on breaks – with food left to be collected by front-of-house staff. Access to walk-in facilities such as freezers and pantries should be restricted to one at a time. At castles, stately homes, formal parks and gardens, the government suggests removing visitor interpretation material that people are normally encouraged to touch, including items of clothing. Audio guides will need to be cleaned between use, and the staff who hand them out protected. Tours should be amended to minimise the risk of “aerosol transmission” by leaders having to shout over visitor groups. Covers may be needed for some objects or handrails in older buildings where constant bleaching with cleaning products could damage the material. One-way routes are encouraged in venues, and in areas where archaeologists, artists and heritage experts can typically be viewed working as part of the attraction livestreaming or social media could be used instead. Venues can make quite a lot of changes without needing listed building consent. They include: the installation of temporary screens to protect staff, temporary covering of surfaces, non-permanent floor markings and signage, the boxing-in of sensitive features and erecting items such as gazebos to provide shelter for queueing customers in the rain. For all the sectors allowed to reopen on 4 July, like those that have already done so, government guidance stresses that employers must carry out a risk assessment. Staff should still be able to work from home where that is possible, and employers should try to minimise direct contact with the public – and provide protections such as screens. One-way traffic systems should be introduced in areas such as kitchens to avoid staff coming into close contact with each other – and they should be organised into shifts to minimise interaction. Meetings should only be attended physically where absolutely necessary and if possible should be held outdoors – and break times staggered. Staff should be “supported” to wear a face covering if they want to – though it is only “marginally beneficial”, if distancing can be maintained.