If the National Trust evokes images of Jane Austen country houses, manicured gardens and cream teas, the recent Black Lives Matter protests and decolonisation movement has pulled into sharp focus the links between its properties and the slavery and colonialism that funded them. It is, acknowledged John Orna-Orstein, the trust’s director of culture and engagement, a “pivotal” moment. “It’s not that we haven’t explored this [topic],” he said. “What I would say is, this moment, the Black Lives Matter movement, has made us realise that we need to go much faster.” This stark realisation was not confined to the charity, or the heritage sector as a whole. “It is the whole world realising that we have to move more quickly, and we have to move with a bit more determination,” he said. The recent announcement that the National Trust, which counts about 300 historic country houses among its 500 properties, is to accelerate plans to incorporate these shameful elements into presentations of their properties may have been seen by some as a kneejerk reaction. In reality the charity, which has 5.6 million members, says it has been exploring these links at least since the 2007 bicentenary of the abolition of the slave trade. “Though, I think if I’m being completely honest, it would be fair to say we [the heritage sector] haven’t made the progress that we should have done since then,” Orna-Orstein said. “But kneejerk? No.” In September, the trust commissioned the Leicester University academic Dr Corinne Fowler to survey its property portfolio for colonial links, with research due to be published next month. A “Colonial Countryside” project involving schoolchildren is working with 11 properties. Programmes highlighting British imperial or slave plantation links are running at several properties. These include Penrhyn Castle in north Wales, built on the Pennant family’s fortune from the Jamaican sugar plantations; Kedleston Hall in Derbyshire, owned by former viceroy of India, the anti-suffrage Lord Curzon; and Quarry Bank Mill, Cheshire, with its links to the cotton plantations. Now the National Trust is speeding up implementation of similar programmes at other properties. “Because it is at the forefront. Because society has moved, and the expectation of society has moved,” said Orna-Ornstein. The charity had been determined for some time to tell the broad range of histories, he said. “And this moment in time has brought the importance of those absolutely to the fore, and made us reflect that we need to move at a quicker place to explore them and to share them.” Audience research has indicated members would broadly welcome the inclusion of such histories. It would take time “because we want to do it in a way that is thoughtful, and well-researched”, he said. “There is nothing political and ideological, I believe, in openly exploring histories of places and collections We are feeling positive about exploring the histories of our collections, and this subject. We are completely open to that, and absolutely feel it is something we should be doing.” Dr Katie Donington, an author and historian at London South Bank University, specialising in the transatlantic slave trade, said striking the right tone was crucial. “There are, of course, issues to do with the way people perceive what a country house should do. Is it scones and tea and a bit of Jane Austen-type fantasy? Or does it engage with the hard political and economic realities of where some of that wealth came from?” she said. “Does it do critical social history? Or is it a place of escapism where people just go to enjoy the grounds, and there is a resistance to being confronted with the unsettling realities of empire, race and slavery within that context?” Of the impact of recent Black Live Matter protests, she said the National Trust had already embarked on a process on the topics of colonialism and slavery, and “recent events will have crystallised in their minds that this is a really important piece of social cultural history that they really need to be engaging with”. “Cultural power was such an important part of ennobling wealth that came out of slavery,” added Donington. The merchant classes, on the make in the empire, integrated into gentlemanly society through the purchase of cultural capital from country house ownership to art collecting and philanthropy. “These are the kind of cultural legacies that are going to have to be dealt with by places like the National Trust because it’s where you see the tangible evidence of that accumulation of slave-based wealth.”