Live top-flight football is back. And, for the first time in 32 years, it is back on the BBC. The national broadcaster has a peculiarly distant relationship with the national sport, as least when it comes to league football. The BBC did not broadcast a full league game until December 1983 and it has not broadcast one since March 1988. Even in the five seasons when the BBC did show live league football, they only broadcast 26 games – and one of them was cut short so Wogan could go out in full. The clubs were hardly helpful partners in the early days. Worried about their already decreasing gates, they did not strike a deal with the BBC and ITV until the summer of 1983, when they agreed to let the TV companies show five games each for a sum of £5.2 million. ITV were the first channel to broadcast a live game in full, showing Tottenham’s 2-1 win over Nottingham Forest on 2 October 1983. There was certainly no overkill in those days. The BBC began their coverage by showing Manchester United’s exciting 4-2 win over Tottenham on Friday 16 December, but they did not even show all five of their fixtures. A technicians’ strike led to West Ham’s trip to Watford being canned. Friday night football was a thrilling innovation for viewers, but the fixtures chosen provided an early glimpse of how the needs of armchair supporters would be put before those of match-going fans. Tottenham away at Old Trafford; Manchester United at QPR; Liverpool at Southampton. Travelling fans were not the biggest priority. Neither, it seems, were pundits. With no studio to sit in, Jimmy Hill and Bobby Charlton were left to fend for themselves in freezing conditions at Villa Park in January 1984. That first season did, however, produce some highlights on the pitch. The cameras captured Ian Rush’s sublime hat-trick at Aston Villa as well as Danny Wallace scoring the goal of the season scored for Southampton against Liverpool at the Dell, with Barry Davies accompanying the overhead kick with a classic piece of commentary: “Oh I say, what a magnificent goal.” Their first two fixtures of the 1984-85 season – Everton’s win at Chelsea and Liverpool’s defeat at Tottenham – were a microcosm of a campaign in which Howard Kendall’s team thrived. However, yet again, the BBC failed to show all all five of their games. The cameras were present for Manchester United’s 4-2 win over Arsenal in November 1984, but it was another fixture involving Ron Atkinson’s team that gave an indication of how football was viewed by BBC executives. Manchester United were playing West Ham at Upton Park, but there was some debate over when the game should kick off. West Ham wanted a 7.30pm kick-off, but the BBC insisted that the game should kick off at 7.15pm as they did not want it to cut into the Nine O’Clock News or affect their broadcast of Wogan. Nigel Havers and Nik Kershaw were appearing, so you can see why. With neither side willing to budge, the viewers lost out. The BBC coverage started 15 minutes after the match had kicked off. Fortunately, all four goals in the 2-2 draw were seen in the 75 minutes that the BBC felt worthy of showing us. It was a portent of things to come. Before too long, any football on television would be rationed. The television blackout at the start of the 1985-86 season resulted in no football on our screens until January 1986, and just three live league matches were shown on the BBC. Viewers did at least get to see a turning point in the race for the title. Liverpool, 1-0 down at half-time at Tottenham, came back to win in the last minute, the start of a run that saw them take 34 out of a possible 36 points to pip Everton to the title. By the start of the next season, the BBC had secured seven league matches, typically involving the Merseyside giants and Manchester United. There was now even room for two pundits at matches, Denis Law and Trevor Brooking adding their insight during Everton’s 3-1 win over Manchester United. There was another thriller between Manchester United and Tottenham; a pulsating north London derby that gives a chilling indicator of conditions behind perimeter fences for fans; and a controversial Mark Falco winner for Watford against Everton – an incident that did not derail Howard Kendall’s push for a second title in three seasons. The BBC’s relationship with live top-flight football came to an end in the 1987-88 season, before ITV secured four seasons of exclusive rights between 1988 and 1992 for £44m. Little did we know that it would take more than three decades for live top-flight football to return to the BBC – or indeed that, when it did, the top division would be have a new name. One thing remained reasonably consistent during the BBC live era: the dominance of Merseyside and, in particular, Liverpool. They put together a 29-match unbeaten run at the start of the 1987-88 season, with cameras on hand to capture their 4-1 dismantling of Newcastle and comfortable 2-0 triumph over champions Everton. Steve Nicol’s hat-trick goal at Newcastle and Peter Beardsley’s strike against Everton – “Oh that’s a lovely goal, that’s a lovely goal,” as Davies put it – were nominated for the BBC goal of the season award, a competition involving 10 Liverpool goals and none from any other club. You can imagine the outcry if that happened in the social media era. John Gregory’s volley for Derby against Chelsea (in their questionable green kit) and a Gordon Strachan goal at Highbury were screened live to the nation and could easily have made the list. The last league match broadcast live on the BBC took place on Sunday 6 March 1988 in north London. At the end of the Arsenal v Tottenham game at Highbury, coverage switched to the European Indoor Athletics Championships in Budapest. And that was that: the end of the BBC covering live top-flight football. No fanfare; just a link to Steve Rider and goodbye for 32 years. It’s easy to look back and shake your head. Yes, the Wogan incident is staggering, there was only 10 minutes of build-up, and the coverage was not quite as slick as possible. But most of us were happy to see any live football, so the 25.833 matches given were very welcome. • This article appeared first on That 1980s Sports Blog• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter