The Premier League resumed on Wednesday night, and in most measurable respects was a resounding success. With no fans allowed inside stadiums, more than 3 million people tuned in to watch Manchester City beat Arsenal 3-0 on Sky Sports, almost double the broadcaster’s average television audience for the season. As with the early-evening game, Aston Villa v Sheffield United, viewers were given the choice of two audio tracks: one with fake crowd noise added, and one where the game unfolded in eerie laboratory silence. Neither was entirely satisfactory, of course, but for the majority of fans – not to mention the thousands of us who make an auxiliary living from the sport – it will have been infinitely preferable to no football at all. And given the 100-day layoff and the relative lack of full-contact training, the quality of the spectacle was surprisingly good, Arsenal’s entirely conceptual defensive display notwithstanding. It should be safer to run a recreational football game for 10 players and a referee than organise a Premier League game An hour before kick-off, speaking at the government’s daily coronavirus briefing from Downing Street, the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, was eager to associate himself with what he described as this “hugely symbolic moment” in the country’s return to normality. Describing it as the “best league in the world”, which merely confirmed that he couldn’t have watched very much of it this season, Dowden underlined the Premier League’s global reach, trumpeting its resumption as “a boost for our football-loving nation”.And yet, for me and so many others in our “football-loving nation”, Wednesday night usually has a subtly different connotation. It’s five-a-side night. And under normal circumstances this would have been a night for performing some extremely perfunctory warm-up exercises, turning out for my team Xmus Jaxon Flaxon Waxon in Division Three of the Vauxhall Powerleague, and only later catching up with the proper football.Of all the small graces we have been denied over the last few months, five-a-side is probably the one I miss most. It’s sport as ritual, from the inevitable late dash through rush-hour traffic to the post-match debrief over pints and breaded chicken strips, and one whose health and social benefits greatly outweigh the painful defeats and occasional knee prangs (most of which, admittedly, have stemmed from an inadequate warm-up). But as the Premier League rumbles back into gear and pundits breathlessly declare that “football is back”, our local five-a-side pitch – like most of this country’s grassroots sporting apparatus – currently lies dormant, and will do so until July at the very earliest.On one level this makes perfect sense, with the country still tentatively emerging from lockdown. Even so, the stark juxtaposition of public sport facilities lying empty while one of the world’s richest sporting leagues beats a path to restart offers some insight into how the government sees sport.It is – or at least should be – infinitely safer to run a recreational football game for 10 players and a referee than to organise a Premier League game with its cast of hundreds (a maximum of 300 people are being allowed to attend), its policing requirements, the fraught logistics of securely ferrying entire staffs around the country every few days, and the exhaustive testing regime required to test every player and coach twice a week until the end of the season.Of course, we all know what’s really driving this. The Premier League runs on broadcast revenue, and would have faced a potential bill of £762m had the current season not finished as scheduled. And despite being perfectly willing to use football to score cheap political points early in the pandemic – Dowden was critical of football clubs for using the furlough scheme, while the health secretary, Matt Hancock, urged footballers to “play their part” by taking pay cuts – the government has nevertheless pushed for the Premier League to resume as soon as possible. Why? Perhaps Dowden’s words offered a clue. “All but five countries” would be airing Wednesday night’s games, he beamed, “underlining football’s global reach and the soft power of UK sport”. And in this quietly revealing statement we glimpsed how the government really conceives of sport: not as a barometer of the nation’s physical or mental health, not as a genuine public good, but first and foremost as an asset, a source of soft power, a luxury good to be flaunted. In this view football exists only as a tool of influence: a populist bandwagon (which is why the government was so hasty to U-turn on its free school meals policy when Marcus Rashford intervened) and handy distraction. And so with that, football is back. Well, the important bits, anyway. As Manchester City v Arsenal played out their fixture at the Etihad Stadium, giant banners draped over the thousands of empty seats, a screen behind each goal displayed live reactions of City fans watching the game from their homes, arranged in a four-by-four grid. It was, in a way, the only real acknowledgement of the fact that this was once a sport for all of us. • Jonathan Liew is a sportswriter for the Guardian