Donald Trump courted controversy on Monday – and perhaps sought to deflect attention from reports about Russia placing bounties on US soldiers in Afghanistan – by retweeting news footage of a white couple in St Louis, Missouri who pointed guns at protesters marching for police reform. The president’s action came a day after he retweeted footage of protesters clashing in Florida in which a Trump supporter could be heard to say “White power! White power!” That retweet was deleted from the president’s account after a few hours, a White House spokesman saying Trump had not heard the inflammatory words before sending the footage on to his supporters. The protesters in St Louis were marching to the mayor’s home to demand her resignation. In a Facebook live briefing on Friday, Lyda Krewson read the names and addresses of several residents who wrote letters suggesting she defund the police department. The video was removed from Facebook and Krewson apologized on Friday, stating she did not “intend to cause distress”. On Sunday a group of at least 500 people headed towards the mayor’s home, chanting, “Resign Lyda, take the cops with you.” A social media video showed the unidentified armed white couple standing outside their home on Sunday evening in the Central West End neighbourhood, shouting at protesters. People in the march moved the crowd forward, urging participants to ignore them. It was not immediately clear whether St Louis police were aware of the incident. The names and addresses Krewson read out are considered public records but her actions prompted a heavy backlash. An online petition calling for her resignation had more than 43,000 signatures by Monday morning. “As a leader, you don’t do stuff like that … it’s only right that we visit her at her home,” said state representative Rasheen Aldridge, speaking into a megaphone at the protest on Sunday. Addressing Trump’s “white power” retweet, Tim Scott of South Carolina, the sole African American Republican in the Senate, said: “There’s no question that he should not have retweeted it and he should just take it down.” Andrew Stroehlein, European media director of Human Rights Watch, said on Twitter Trump’s retweet was “not surprising for a man who’s called neo-Nazis ‘very fine people’ and hired white nationalists to work in the White House, but still, immensely dangerous. “With his poll numbers falling, he wants a race war.” Trump’s retweet also came after a gunman in Louisville, Kentucky, shot dead a photographer during protests over the death of Breonna Taylor, an African American woman killed by police in her own home. A man was charged with murder. On Monday morning, Trump also retweeted a series of messages seeking to identify protesters involved in attempts to remove statues of figures from American history.