Ministers are expecting a wide-ranging government reshuffle in September in which Boris Johnson will sack key figures who are judged to have underperformed in the Covid-19 crisis. Cabinet sources said the move was now seen as inevitable. They believe sweeping changes will be made in an attempt to defuse mounting discontent on the Tory backbenches following a stream of U-turns and a fall in the party’s poll ratings. Among those seen as vulnerable are education secretary Gavin Williamson, communities secretary Robert Jenrick and work and pensions secretary Thérèse Coffey. Senior backbenchers and former ministers have become increasingly frustrated after a week in which Johnson’s government performed two further U-turns over free school meals for children from poorer families, and the much vaunted Covid-19 tracing app. There is also growing anger among Tory MPs at the way Downing Street is centralising control and refusing to listen to ministers or backbenchers. On Saturday night, Whitehall sources said government was ready to perform yet another U-turn by shelving much-trailed plans to extend Sunday trading hours. Instead ministers want to prioritise legislation necessary to loosen the lockdown by allowing more “al fresco” dining and drinking, which will be unveiled in the Commons this week. No one seriously thinks that this cabinet is the Conservative first 11 Writing on the Observer’s website, Sir Bernard Jenkin, chair of the House of Commons liaison committee, warns against centralisation by No 10. In what will be seen as criticism of the prime minister’s closest adviser, Dominic Cummings, Jenkin writes: “The government has looked on the defensive recently, mainly because of the nature of the crisis and what it inherited, but centralisation of power is not the answer. Great leaders listen and engage those around them, welcoming challenge. They treat all truths, however bad, as good news and as an opportunity to learn.” The mood is also increasingly rancorous among activists who are alarmed at the party’s slide in the polls. The former MP Paul Goodman, who now edits grassroots Tory website ConservativeHome, suggested a change of personnel at the top would help. “The government has the same operational problem as Theresa May did before the 2017 election – namely, a decision-making bottleneck. “It isn’t terminal, but it’s problematic. What would help would be bigger, braver cabinet ministers and a more relaxed, collegiate central operation. No one seriously thinks that this cabinet is the Conservative first 11.” Johnson is coming under pressure from some MPs to beef up his Cabinet team with more experience. Names being tipped for returns to the top table include Jeremy Hunt and Liam Fox. Downing Street sources said there were “no imminent plans” for a cabinet reshuffle. Johnson is expected on Tuesday to announce plans to relax the two-metre social distancing rule when the Covid-19 infection rate has fallen further. Legislation will also be introduced to allow pubs and restaurants more latitude to serve drinks and food outside. Ministers are also hoping to bring forward plans for travel corridors to be set up between the UK and up to eight other countries to allow more holidays. The arts sector is confident that ministers will soon bring forward plans to prevent the collapse of the West End and major entertainment venues. This follows interventions from West End producer Cameron Mackintosh, Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber and the director Sam Mendes.