It is sobering to remember that we should have been celebrating the 50th anniversary of the first Glastonbury festival this weekend. But the BBC will be doing its best to keep our spirits up with a flurry of repurposed Worthy Farm archive footage. First, a compilation of unseen material from performers including the Rolling Stones, Lizzo and PJ Harvey. And across the weekend, look out for Beyoncé, Jay-Z, Oasis, Arthur Lee and Love, Elbow and many more. Phil Harrison You’re never more than 10ft away from Jamie Oliver when watching TV, as this new show – hot on the heels of his lockdown rationing specials Keep Cooking and Carry On – proves. He kicks off with a speedy lamb curry, a harissa squash salad and pesto pasta with, you guessed it, a twist. Hannah J Davies Most TV creatives will have grappled with ways of creating new content in lockdown and this series is one of the most endearingly daft. Kevin McCloud narrates as pooches rigged up with cameras wander their homes in search of treats. But can you guess the identities of their celebrity owners? PH This extension to the Kermode-Mayo empire finishes its initial run by offering another batch of useful steers through the jungle of streaming content. Although induced by lockdown, the comfy bonhomie between the hosts suggests the format could easily return. Graeme Virtue The bonds of sisterhood remain strong in Holly Walsh and Pippa Brown’s sitcom. Even across the class divide and through the stress of moving house. Cathy (Ellie White) politely puts up with Marilyn’s (Siobhan Finneran) endless sexual TMI, but teaching Cat (Lauren Socha) to ride a bike? Ellen E Jones Season two of the beautifully realised adaptation of Elena Ferrante’s Neapolitan novels continues. Tonight, a party in the neighbourhood reveals that Lila and Elena are living increasingly separate lives. But the pair continue to haunt each other’s thoughts, and Lila comes up with a solution that brings them together. PH Blue is the Warmest Colour 11.05pm, Film4 This Palme d’Or-winning love story from Abdellatif Kechiche is an intense portrait of youthful passion, and much of that is down to the performances of his stars. Adèle Exarchopoulos is a thoughtful high-school student Adèle, who becomes fascinated with an art student, Emma (Léa Seydoux). Paul Howlett Netball: Tactix v Magic 8am, Sky Sports Main Event. Netball from New Zealand. Golf: The Travelers Championship 12 midday, Sky Sports Main Event. Day two from Connecticut. Championship Football: Brentford v West Bromwich Albion 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. High-flying West Brom visit play-off contenders Brentford.