Lisbon has been selected by Uefa as the venue for a mini-tournament to conclude this season’s Champions League. One-leg quarter- and semi-finals and the final will be played in the Portuguese capital from 12-23 August. A decision will be taken by 10 July as to whether the second legs of the four unfinished last-16 ties, including those involving Manchester City and Chelsea, will be played at their normal venues or in Portugal, with Guimarães and Porto available if needed. Those matches will be played on 7-8 August. Uefa said the clubs due to host second legs would prefer to play at home but health and safety considerations and quarantine arrangements would shape the decision. The executive committee of European football’s governing body confirmed Lisbon as the venue at its meeting on Wednesday and said the Women’s Champions League last eight would be hosted in Bilbao and San Sebastián from 21-30 August. Arsenal and Glasgow City face Paris Saint-Germain and Wolfsburg respectively in the quarter-finals. The men’s final had been due to be played in Istanbul, which will instead get the 2021 final. Other finals have also been pushed back a year meaning St Petersburg will get 2022, Munich 2023 and Wembley 2024. Atlético Madrid, RB Leipzig, Atalanta and Paris Saint-Germain have qualified for the last eight but half the last-16 ties were unfinished when coronavirus forced football to halt. Manchester City are due to play a second leg at home to Real Madrid, leading 2-1; Chelsea are 3-0 down from the home first leg against Bayern Munich; Juventus are due to host Lyon, who won the first leg 1-0; and Barcelona are due to play at home to Napoli at 1-1. The last eight of the Europa League is to be held in Germany from 10-21 August across four cities: Duisburg, Gelsenkirchen, Frankfurt and Cologne. None of the last-16 ties has been completed, with Manchester United (5-0 up from their first leg at Lask), Wolves (who drew 1-1 at Olympiakos) and Rangers (beaten 3-1 at home by Bayer Leverkusen) among the clubs in the competition. A decision on whether those games, to be held on 5-6 August, will be played as normal or relocated to Germany will be taken in due course. Uefa said it would rule by mid-July whether fans will be allowed to attend any matches in Lisbon or Germany. Even if they are, it is possible only locals will be permitted to come. The governing body also confirmed the 12 cities due to host Euro 2020 had agreed to hold games next year and the tournament would proceed as planned in summer 2021. The Euro 2020 play-offs are to be held on 8 October and 12 November during international windows which will be triple-headers.