At the entrance to La Gare jazz club, a former railway station in a northern district of Paris, customers form a physically distanced queue to sign up for the evening’s concerts. Julien de Casabianca, the venue director, adds their names to a list. “What’s your relationship?” he asks. In France, where personal privacy is jealously guarded, concert-goers look surprised, but Casabianca insists. In a time of coronavirus, the musicians are not the only soloists. They are playing for solo guests who take their turn for five minutes’ entertainment in the club’s basement. Couples or pairs of family members can watch together. Everyone else must go down separately. Each evening, three different artists give brief individual mini-concerts. By the end of this month, there will have been almost 3,000 such performances. “We like to foster a rapport between the musicians and the audience here,” Casabianca said. “Even before the coronavirus we would ask people not to talk during the concerts and never turn their back on the musicians. In most places, they say the customer is king, well at La Gare they’re not. The music is king. And we want people to give it their full attention.” Music venues, along with theatres and cinemas – all part of France’s exception culturelle – have been hard hit by the country’s strict two-month coronavirus lockdown. Although the confinement was relaxed on 11 May, Paris remained under restrictions as the virus was still circulating there. Clubs and cinemas were allowed to open this week, but must observe Covid-19 protection rules. Casabianca could open La Gare to a restricted audience with everyone keeping their distance, but says this would kill the atmosphere. The mini concerts are free; guests are invited to pay what they can or want. “At first I thought we’d put on concerts with everyone social distancing but it would have been impossible to create a rapport between the public and the musician. It would be a complete failure. I figured that if a person was alone with a solo musician for five minutes there would be this rapport each time for every one of them,” he said. “In this way, people are forced to be completely present. They are face to face with the musician, eye to eye. They can’t be thinking of their money problems or anything else. They have to respect the music and the musician.” Casabianca added: “Our short concerts generate a kind of magic. People become very emotional. Some come out in tears.” La Gare is in the capital’s northern 19th arrondissement in what Casabianca describes as a “quartier populaire” – shorthand for a district that is working class, gritty and still holding out against creeping gentrification. The former Pont de Flandre station is on La Petite Ceinture (small belt), a 39-station circular railway line built in the mid 19th century during the second empire under Napoléon III and his architect Baron Haussmann. It shut in 1934 with the arrival of the Paris Metro. In 2017, Casabianca bought the derelict station and turned it into a jazz club. The building still looks mostly derelict, covered in graffiti – or wall art – inside and out, except for end walls that feature huge murals painted by Casabianca, also a well-known street artist. On this sweltering summer, evening drinkers and concert-goers sit on the railway cutting walls either side of the now disused rails. A regular musician at the club is Rick Margitza, an American saxophonist who played with the jazz legend Miles Davis. Gaël Petrina, a bass player and composer, is one of the five-minute concert musicians. “At first, I’d get to five minutes and think, hang on I’m just beginning to warm up and I have to stop so it was frustrating, but it’s a very constructive experience. Now I do a condensed concert: quick little intro, something upbeat and then a finale. It’s a challenge. It’s very atmospheric and intense in a cool way. “It’s also very personal. You’re being closely watched and that can be a bit nerve-racking for the first 30 seconds. There have been some amazing responses from people” He added: “I wouldn’t want to do this all the time, but I’d love to do it occasionally. It takes a lot out of you but in a good way.” Elena Le Govic, 21, a cinematography student, was at La Gare with her friend Flora Morel. “It’s so different from a normal concert; a really new experience. It’s very intimate but also a little frustrating because we’d really like to have stayed longer than five minutes. But it was great,” Le Govic said. Outside, on what would have been the station forecourt, Casabianca is scribbling names on a piece of A4 paper. He says the solo concerts will continue until the social distancing rules are relaxed. “Relationship?” he asks one couple. They look at each other. “Friends,” says the young woman, a fraction of a second too quickly. “You go in separately,” Casabianca says. The next couple is less coy. “Lovers,” the man answers. “You can go together,” Casabianca tells them.