Eleanor Catton has taken on the job of adapting her own acclaimed novel for the screen, and the resulting drama is moody, atmospheric and reluctant to surrender its multiple secrets without a fight. At its heart is a love story of sorts, as solo adventurer Anna Wetherell (Eve Hewson) meets Emery Staines (Himesh Patel) on a boat arriving in gold rush-era New Zealand. But this charmingly romantic encounter is soon submerged under a barrage of darker plotlines ranging from the grimily earthy to the supernatural. Phil Harrison Last in the series of epic journeys across the universe inspired by Carl Sagan’s 1980 series. With Sagan and Neil deGrasse Tyson finding early inspiration at New York World Fairs, we see how a similar exhibition could look in 2039, with worries such as climate change under control. Hannah J Davies Much mystery still surrounds the Aztec empire, but, gradually, documentary-makers are getting to the bottom of it. Here, archaeologists (hopefully alongside some engineers) attempt to build a replica Aztec pyramid, explore ruins at the heart of Mexico City, and discover a set of hidden tunnels. PH A radical re-imagining of one of Shakespeare’s best-known texts. Simon Godwin’s acclaimed 2016 take on the tragedy of the Danish prince features percussive musical interludes, parallels with African politics and an almost entirely black cast led by the excellent Paapa Essiedu. PH Too self-consciously brooding and knotty as it sometimes is, this American motorcycle-gang saga certainly knows how to deliver a memorable season finale. The second of tonight’s two episodes nails the necessary deluge of revelatory moments, including one big twist and several enjoyable fatalities. Jack Seale Scandi noir meets French sunshine as the Provence seaside provides the beautiful backdrop to this new Walter Presents mystery. When the bride is found dead at a glamorous wedding, her long-lost sister, who’s just returned from Australia, teams up with a detective to investigate what happened. Hannah Verdier Leviathan, 1am, BBC Two The trials of Job are transposed to modern Russia to crushing effect in Andrey Zvyagintsev’s powerhouse drama of endemic corruption. Aleksey Serebryakov is Kolya, a blue-collar family man battling eviction. It’s both a small-scale story of vodka-soaked despair, and a tragedy on a universal scale. Paul Howlett Golf: The RBC Heritage , 11.45am, Sky Sports Main Event. The fourth day from Hilton Head, South Carolina. Premier League Football: Newcastle United v Sheffield United , 1pm, Sky Sports Main Event. With Aston Villa v Chelsea and Everton v Liverpool to follow. Tennis: Adria Tour, 1pm, Eurosport 2. Day two from Zadar, Croatia