I’ve spent the whole lockdown at home in Moscow. It’s funny, I’d actually planned to spend March and April at home, writing new music – that was the plan. But then all this happened and I can’t do a thing. Lots of people have been saying things like “don’t blame yourself”, and I know that. But it’s taken me a while to realise that it’s fine: I wish I could write music right now, but I can’t force myself to do it. Lockdown is so uninspiring, oh my god. Lots of my musician friends have postponed [releasing] their albums. But I just thought: OK, you can’t compete with everything that’s going on in the world, and I’m not trying to. If my music could help someone to get through this somehow, I would be so happy. I just finished editing the video for this song, so I’ve been listening to it over and over for weeks. That’s why I put it here, not just because it’s my song! We had a party filming it, back in December, way before all this craziness, but the song itself has just become even more relatable. It’s about the plans that we all need and have, and then what happens when everything changes: the absurd way that we wish someone else could figure everything out for us. Now it feels like it’s precisely about this period we’re all experiencing. We had plans, now we don’t! I couldn’t have expected anything like this, though. I’ve started watching Neon Genesis Evangelion – it’s an amazing anime about the end of the world. My friends were like: “Are you crazy? It’ll make you depressed!” But it’s actually a very empowering, intimate anime about robots and human beings and the connections between people. And the music is amazing. It uses a full orchestra and every track is just so kind and so warm. It reminds me of Alice Coltrane. It’s so powerful on its own, even without the anime, but knowing that it was made for the cartoon makes it even better. This song is almost impossible to find. It exists only on YouTube and the quality is very poor, but lots of people love it so much. It’s from this 80s movie, Взломщик (The Burglar), that I haven’t seen and is probably ridiculous, like all Russian films from the 80s. But when I heard this song for the first time I just thought, “Oh my god, I wish I could make something like this.” It’s so magical. The lyrics are about a toy store that has a kind of musical constructor in it, an object that you could use to build a song. But it’s also more abstract than that. It feels like it’s a song about a secret. At first I thought maybe I shouldn’t put this down. Maybe it’s too cheesy. I remember hearing it as a child, but when I listened to it more consciously I figured out that I like this track no matter what. I love how the verse builds up and up and up. And then the chorus just feels like a party, about how when you fall in love it brightens up everything that surrounds you. It’s always reminded me of Under the Sea from the Little Mermaid, but maybe I shouldn’t say that either! What a song. It’s the kind of pure pop hit that I love. I’ve been following her since Chairlift [Polachek’s first band] and she’s a goddess. The way she sings is insane. I joke that one of my friends has a crush on her because every time I call him he’s listening to this. But I’ve been listening to her on repeat too. I love cheerful songs, I love cheerful music: I’m just that kind of person. I’m definitely a major key person! For me, music’s not about escape but filling my inner child with things that bring me joy – and that’s even more important right now. • Kate NV’s album Room for the Moon is released 12 June.