Name: Tatler. Age: 119. Appearance: Monthly. A magazine, isn’t it? It’s the “society bible” and arbiter of upper-class tastes, jam-packed with photographs of posh people you haven’t heard of, who are also largely its subscribers. I don’t mean to be a pedant, but there’s a spelling mistake in the title. Tatler, originally a weekly, was named after a different publication – founded by Richard Steele in 1709 – with the old spelling preserved. So who’s on the cover this month? The Duchess of Cambridge is on the cover of the July/August issue, out now. Kate? How boring. The accompanying profile, by Anna Pasternak, does mention Kate’s “aura of blandness”, but also praises her survival skills. You mean she can snare lizards and drink dirty water? Royal survival skills. “There seems to exist within her a genuine stoicism,” writes Pasternak. “But one wonders if the criticism gets her down.” And does it? Apparently it does: it is reported that the Cambridges are now thought to be taking legal action against Tatler. For calling the duchess a bland survivor? Their main gripe is said to be the contention that the Princess feels “exhausted and trapped” by an increased workload in the wake of the Harry and Meghan’s retreat from royal duties. And she doesn’t? A royal source says: “There is no truth to their claim that the duchess feels overwhelmed with work.” Is that the extent of the complaint? By no means. Kensington Palace said: “This story contains a swathe of inaccuracies and false misrepresentations.” Ooh, what else? The article remarked on Kate’s weight in the context of the eating disorders suffered by William’s mother. “Kate has become perilously thin, just like – some point out – Princess Diana.” That’s not on. There were also sneering references to Kate’s mum, Carole (“Hyacinth Bucket aspirations of grandeur”), and sister, Pippa (“too regal and try-hard”). It also reported an unnamed friend describing the Cambridges’ Norfolk home as “very Buckinghamshire”. Calumny! What does it mean? In contrast to real posh houses with “threadbare rugs and dog hair everywhere”, Anmer Hall is “like a gleaming five-star hotel, with cushions plumped and candles lit”. I repeat: calumny! A royal source called the piece “class snobbery at its very worst”. Tatler could probably trademark that, if they don’t already have a slogan. Right now they’re using “The original social media”. I know which I prefer. What do the Cambridges want? At the moment they’re demanding the profile be removed from the internet. Will Tatler oblige? The magazine released a statement saying: “Tatler’s editor-in-chief, Richard Dennen, stands behind the reporting of Anna Pasternak and her sources.” Do say: “Don’t worry about Kate – she’s a real batler.” Don’t say: “Put out those candles! Unplump those cushions! Bring me another bag of dog hair!”