What were you hoping for?A spectacular “get together” story for the wedding speech, or something funny for the group chat. First impressions?A nice shirt and I’m glad he’s polite enough to laugh at my jokes. What did you talk about?Theatre and musicals, books, films, holidays, letter writing, Phoebe Waller-Bridge, the perils of hay fever. Any awkward moments?Nothing major. He did say he was in his 50s at one point, but I am pleased to say that was a joke. Good table manners?It looked difficult to eat arancini and pizza sitting on the floor, but he made up for it with a tartan fabric napkin – very sophisticated. How long did you stay on the call?Five whole hours! Best thing about George?He agrees that Mulan is the best Disney film. Did you introduce him to your housemates?I’m in solo lockdown, so no. Describe George in three wordsFriendly, well-travelled, enthusiastic. What do you think he made of you?My stories take three times as long as they need to. Any connection issues?The video link didn’t work for either of us. I sent a text after five minutes to try to get it sorted and he’d already called to say the same. I appreciate that level of punctuality and keenness. And... did you swap numbers? Yes. The Zoom call was going to end, so he asked for my number to send me the details to another. Very smooth. How did the call end?Deciding it was bedtime and discussing when we were both free later this week for a virtual theatre trip. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?We should have ordered food earlier, but got carried away talking about Les Mis. Marks out of 10?A strong 8.5, would Zoom again. Would you meet again in person?Yes. What were you hoping for?A fun evening with someone interesting and kind, who likes to laugh. First impressions?She was confident and had a lovely smile. What did you talk about?A lot of things. My highlights were playing Katie’s Build Your Own Adventure game and getting to fly to the Seychelles with Phoebe Waller-Bridge, talking about her volunteering and her work with children, and our mutual love of Éponine in Les Mis. Any awkward moments?Maybe when we pretended to be on the TV show Blind Date and I answered her question as contestant number three. My answer was awful, but that show was designed to be cheesy and awkward. Good table manners? We both ordered food that was easy to eat with our hands, so it wasn’t too awkward. How long did you stay on the call?Around five hours. Best thing about Katie?I liked how passionate she was about the things she does. She is a very genuine and open person. Did you introduce her to your housemates?No, I was in my room. Describe Katie in three wordsWarm, kind and creative. What do you think she made of you?She may have thought it strange that I was sitting on the floor for the date, but it’s the only way to get wifi in my room. I hope I didn’t talk too much. Any connection issues?We struggled to get connected initially. And... did you swap numbers?We did. How did the call end?We agreed to watch something via the National Theatre At Home together soon. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?To do it in person. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again in person?We are quite far apart, but if we found ourselves nearby, I would like to. • Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com