“It was a magical outcome,” Khadijah Mellah says as she remembers how her life changed last summer when, after sitting on a racehorse for the first time just a few months earlier, she won the Magnolia Cup at Goodwood. In August 2019, as the first jockey in Britain to race while wearing a hijab, the 18-year-old from Peckham urged on her horse, Haverland, to a thrilling victory which made news across the country. Mellah was in the midst of her A-levels while learning how to ride a racehorse. Her journey from the underprivileged Ebony Horse Club in Brixton to the winner’s enclosure at Glorious Goodwood was captured in Riding A Dream, an ITV documentary lit up by Mellah’s sparkling character and courage. It could lead to a feature film based on the incredible story of a young Muslim woman overcoming prejudice and subverting stereotypes. Ten months later, with the pain of institutionalised racism exploding across the world, the experience of a south London Muslim teenager conquering a corner of white privilege is even more uplifting. “It was a wild rollercoaster journey,” Mellah says as her face cracks open with another smile. “I loved it. I wouldn’t change a thing apart from, maybe, my maths grade. Who knew that three months before you could pluck this 18-year-old, who knew nothing about the racing industry, and get them to win a race?” Mellah’s hijab earned national attention but, now, while studying mechanical engineering in Brighton, she makes a searing point about how her mother suffered from racism and Islamaphobia years earlier. Her mother comes from Kenya, and her father from Algeria, and Mellah says: “My mum is a black Muslim woman and she used to wear a burqa. A lot of people in this country were very uncomfortable with her wearing a burqa, and they weren’t shy about telling her. She eventually took it off because it became a threat to her safety.” She is now an ambassador for Great British Racing, and passionate about the sport, but Mellah is candid when I say that racing seems an overwhelmingly white world. “Yeah. I went racing several times with my mum. It’s not an atmosphere I felt comfortable in at first. Knowing people like Oli Bell [the ITV racing presenter who produced her documentary] changed it for me. Oli could tell me what’s going on, and lead me to the right places. But going just with my family was very difficult. My mum was completely out of her comfort zone, being around laddish groups of rowdy drunk people. It wasn’t our culture. I was there for the racing while some people were there for the social aspect. “It was and still is, unfortunately, a place where sometimes I don’t completely feel in my element. But I’m comfortable walking into the parade ring and talking to old friends, people I’ve ridden for, and the jockeys. I love going to the races now. But for my family it has a strange intensity.” People in Brixton and Peckham were like: you’re in a running race? I said no, on a horse I like chatting to Mellah because we zip all over the place. After talking about alienation and prejudice we share our mutual love of boxing. This leads to a reminder that she has a black belt in karate and rides a moped. Mellah smiles when I say anyone with preconceptions about young women who choose to wear the hijab would be educated and energised by her story. “I’ve been using people’s ignorance to my advantage throughout my life. I’m surprising people wherever I go. I’m like: ‘That’s because you have a pre-conceived subconscious bias you shouldn’t have.’ It’s my job to change that bias.” Does she not get worn down by the predictable surprise of white people when they realise that, despite her exceptional spark, she is a normal 19-year-old? “If I think about it too much, yes. It shouldn’t be the case. Every time I chat with anyone, they’re pleasantly surprised. I thrive on that and always explain my decisions. I had a part-time job, and it wasn’t feasible cycling there. My parents and I didn’t have the financial resources for a car. The most logical route was a moped. People say: ‘Well, that makes sense.’ There is a huge difference between riding a moped and a racehorse and the offer to compete in the Magnolia Cup came out of the blue at Ebony. “They just said: ‘There’s this pretty big horse race and we’re thinking of entering you.’ I’d done a little pony race ages ago so why not? They then told me a documentary was going to be made and I was like: ‘Well, this is much better than I anticipated.’” In Brixton and Peckham most people were bewildered. ‘They were like: ‘You’re in a running race?’ I was like: ‘No, on a horse.’ They said: ‘You mean betting races? Proper jockey stuff? That’s weird.’ I started training during Ramadan and that was the worst few weeks of my life. I was getting no sleep, my blood sugar levels were low, dehydration, poor vision. It was brutal.” The horses were also unimpressed. “A lot of horses took advantage of the fact I’d gone too quickly through my training,” Mellah says. “One day four camera people were documenting me at Newmarket, at the British Racing School. On my last canter, my horse decided: ‘No. We’re going to go over a million miles per hour.’ I stormed past everyone.” Mellah needed to pass a proficiency test before she could race in the Magnolia Cup. She failed so embarrassingly that, “the instructor said: ‘Khadijah, I don’t know why you’re here. You’re not going to race this year.’ I was in tears. I was genuinely a wreck.” Late that night she called Bell to tell him it was all over. But he convinced the authorities to allow another test. “I did four weeks of intense training and came back to face the same instructor. He watched me with a beady eye. I was riding a different horse but he said: ‘I want her to ride the same horse, to see if she will fall off again.’ But I had improved a lot and I passed. I could race.” In the Magnolia Cup, Haverland was a 25-1 shot and, as Mellah says: “His previous history was coming fifth, third and sixth. He won once in his career when he was younger. But he didn’t like jumping out of the stalls because once he had bumped his head. He wasn’t raced much.” Mellah knew the start was crucial and, against more experienced amateur jockeys, her nerve held. “I was fifth and sitting behind four horses in a cavalry-type line. They were all much higher-rated horses but I was like: ‘Let’s give it a try.’ I pulled out and started overtaking. I was like: ‘Oh my God!’ I was screaming even before the race finished. ‘Go on, Haverland! Go on!’ It was very windy and I was very screamy. When I realised that I had won [in a photo finish] I just started crying. “My mum could not believe it. She took an iPad and accidentally left it recording. We’ve got this audio of her running around the race course, screaming: ‘My God. I can’t believe it. She won. I’m so glad it’s over. She won.’ It’s a very weird audio because the view is just her arm holding the iPad while she’s running to me. It’s gold – and the funniest thing.” Mellah has absorbed the magnitude of her achievement. “I now know that this is not how the racing industry works. You do not learn to ride race horses in three months. You do not then win a race within three months. It takes jockeys years to get their first ride, let alone their first win. So I now know how big a deal it was from a riding perspective. But it also impacted so many people. I was getting messages from people who didn’t even come from my background and they related to my journey. I ended up making a lot of important friendships.” She misses the intensity of that experience and, while she rarely talks about it to her new university friends, Mellah loves racing. She even went to the Cheltenham Festival just before the lockdown. “It was amazing. I was lucky to be put in a very nice box with some very interesting, cool people and the races were incredible. I even met Sir AP [McCoy]. “People kept asking me: ‘When is your next race?’ They didn’t understand I had entered the Magnolia Cup with the logic I was going to do this one race, have some fun, then get on with my life. It was never supposed to be life-altering. But as soon as I won I was eager to race again. Obviously it’s not so simple. I need my licence unless I do another charity race. I’m actually thinking of doing another one next year. But I want to get a licence – I don’t want to be the fake jockey. I don’t want all this public attention and not be a genuine jockey. I want that accreditation saying ‘you’ve made it as a professional jockey’. “I was still riding when I started uni but it was difficult getting up early, travelling to the yard and making it back in time for my lectures. I would come in my riding gear, smelling of horse dung, and walk into my lab session. People were like: ‘What are you wearing?’ I’d say: ‘Don’t worry about it.’ But I was exhausted. I was carrying my gear on the bus and it took 45 minutes to get there and it was too much. So I said: ‘Let me focus on one thing. My degree.’ “The plan is I come out with a genuine degree and then throw myself into racing and work hard. Racing is not something you can do part-time. In the holidays I will keep riding out at [the trainer] Charlie Fellowes’ to make sure I stay on top of my riding. But, yeah, as soon as I hit 22 and finish my degree, I should be causing chaos in the racing industry again.”