If the way Watford clambered back to their feet after Ben Chilwell’s heavyweight blow is how they mean to go on, Nigel Pearson can be confident his team will fight until the end. They refused to give in after falling behind to a cracking goal from Chilwell in the 90th minute and rescued a point just when all looked lost, Craig Dawson summing up their defiance when he fastened on to a flick from Christian Kabasele and volleyed past Kasper Schmeichel in the Leicester goal. It could be a priceless strike from the centre-back. Watford had battled hard to contain superior opponents and they could have folded after conceding. Yet they played with heart all afternoon and were given a boost in their scrap against relegation when Leicester left Dawson unmarked in stoppage time, leaving Brendan Rodgers frustrated after his talented side wasted a chance to go 10 points clear of fifth-placed Manchester United with eight games left. “I felt we were deserving of the win, especially as the game went on,” Leicester’s manager said. “We score a brilliant goal right towards the end. It was just so unfortunate. I felt it was going to be a long throw or a corner that may undo us but we dealt well with crosses into the box. It just goes over Jamie Vardy’s head and pops off the guy’s toe to the guy who finishes it. But it’s still a good point.” For Leicester, it was a reminder never to underestimate a Nigel Pearson side scrapping for survival. Five years have passed since he defied the odds by saving Leicester from relegation and there have been glimpses of his ability to inspire an improbable escape act since pitching up at Vicarage Road in December, not least when Watford pulled off the most surprising result of the season just before lockdown, ending Liverpool’s unbeaten run in stunning style. Ismaïla Sarr was the star on that February evening, tearing Liverpool’s defence apart, and the winger was Watford’s most dangerous player in their first game back. The 22-year-old spread unease in the Leicester back four whenever he charged down the right and was entitled to ask why none of his teammates were able to seize on any of his inviting crosses during a tight first half, though anyone searching for the answer was able to find clues in Pearson’s constant shouts of “shape” from the touchline. Watford were determined not to give anything away. They sat deep from the start, allowed Leicester the ball and worked to ensure there was no space for Vardy to chase down his 100th Premier League goal. It was pragmatic but necessary from Watford, who might have been carved open had they given James Maddison and Youri Tielemans space to release the centre-forward. Vardy’s only clear opening, a vicious effort that swerved narrowly wide in the 16th minute, stemmed from a rare error from Kabasele. Leicester were not quite at their sharpest in the final third and the best chance of the half fell to Watford, Wilfred Ndidi’s risky touch allowing Abdoulaye Doucouré to test Schmeichel. The Dane was called upon again at the start of the second half, racing from his line to deny Sarr. Watford were starting to show more ambition and they went close again when Troy Deeney’s header went narrowly wide. You sensed Watford needed to score during that flurry. Rodgers shook his side up by bringing on Demarai Gray for Harvey Barnes, while the introduction of Hamza Choudhury allowed Leicester to reassert themselves in midfield. The mood changed and Watford escaped when Marc Albrighton hit the inside of the post. Moments later Maddison’s low drive was pushed away by Ben Foster. “Leicester created more chances in the second half,” Pearson said. “Both sides were trying to find goalscoring situations but when you concede so late it can be very difficult to recover. We created one last chance and were able to take it. I’m really pleased for the players.” Leicester were pushing hard and they took the lead when Chilwell, showing why Chelsea want him, popped up on the left before finding the far corner with a rising drive. It was a goal worthy of winning any game. Dawson had other ideas.