Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: According to researchers from Johns Hopkins University, at least 6,339,005 people are known to have been infected, while at least 378,266 are known to have died since the outbreak began. The figures, which are based on official and media reports, are likely to significantly underestimate the scale of the pandemic due to differing testing and recording regimes, as well as suspected underreporting. A senior US army vaccine researcher says it is reasonable to expect that some sort of vaccine could be available to some parts of the US population by the end of the year. The US defence secretary, Mark Esper, has promised Washington will collaborate with the private sector to produce a vaccine to treat US citizens and partners abroad in 2020. France’s death toll rises by more than 100 in a 24-hour period for the first time in 13 days, as the country enacts a new easing of lockdown measures. The French health ministry says the number of fatalities has risen by 107, or 0.4%, to 28,940, the fifth-highest tally in the world. Iran confirms its second highest number of new cases in a 24-hour period since its outbreak began, with the country’s health ministry saying 3,117 people have tested positive. The number of new daily infections in Iran has now returned to levels previously seen at the peak of its outbreak in late March. Germany’s travel warning for Europe will be lifted on Wednesday, its foreign minister, Heiko Maas, announces. The worldwide travel warning still applies. But, for countries of the EU and associated states, the warning will be replaced by travel advice that will give travellers detailed information about the situation in each state. The pandemic is exposing “endemic inequalities” that must be addressed, according to the UN human rights chief, who highlights the protests triggered by George Floyd’s death. Michelle Bachelet references the situation in the US and a series of other countries, saying data shows the crisis has had a worse impact on members of racial and ethnic minority groups in those countries. The UK’s official death toll passes 50,000 as the Office for National Statistics releases its latest figures. The total differs from the government’s daily counts, which only include deaths in hospitals and care homes where the person had tested positive.