Birmingham shoppers returned to the high street with many in the rest of England on Monday, as queues formed at “non-essential” retail names such as Zara, H&M, Sports Direct and Primark. “It’s good to get out and have a bit of normality. I’ve been coming into town fairly often and it was like a ghost town. It is a bit weird to see people again,” said Simone Radway, 37, queuing to buy some cycling gear in Sports Direct in central Birmingham after a trip to the nearby Primark. But any retailer hoping for a Christmas-style frenzy would have been disappointed. New Street station was quiet and shoppers said they had no trouble finding a parking spot. Nonetheless, Birmingham was busier than it had been for months and shoppers were prepared to queue up outside stores, all of which have to limit the number of customers under new government rules. The restrictions meant waiting more than an hour to get into some favoured stores and there were few places to try on clothes, as changing rooms remained shut in most stores. At the Apple store there was a two-hour wait for the technical support desk. The Bull Ring shopping centre was also quiet as its coffee shops and restaurants are still shut, while stores including its large Debenhams and Victoria’s Secret are shuttered after calling in administrators. Eve Dunne, 16, sisters Anisa and Aliyah Scott (15 and 13) and Izzah Al, 15, said they were first in the queue for Primark after arriving in town at 4am. “We wanted to be first but there wasn’t a massive queue,” said Anisa. “I wanted to get some joggers and some earrings. We wanted to go to Victoria’s Secret as well but I think it’s gone bust.” Dunne added that they enjoyed being able to get up when they want and do school work when it suits them. “I’ll be coming every day,” she said. While there were no queues outside Primark after opening time, there were large queues inside as people waited to pay. More than 60 people per floor were waiting half an hour or more in physically distanced lines winding their way right across the flagship store. Half the store’s tills were shut to ensure distancing for staff, who were protected behind new screens. Shoppers said that they had felt reassured by the hand sanitiser available by many shop doors and at the entrance to the Bull Ring shopping centre. Some were concerned that not everyone was wearing masks, but others felt happy that shopping under the new rules was not too different. “It felt quite normal, it was quite a relief,” said Sharon Mitchell, 54, reflecting on her first trip to a clothing shop in months. She was queuing outside Zara in the hope of picking up a dress she’d seen in the window just before lockdown. “I was here at 8am. It’s not as busy as I expected. It’s the first day off I’ve had since before lockdown. I’ve been working right through. I thought it would be a memorable day and I would come and check it out. I bought a couple of tops and some flip-flops in Primark. Even if you can’t go anywhere, it’s still stuff you can wear day to day.” Other shoppers reflected that they had mixed feelings about the return to the high street, given the uncertain economic environment. “I’m spending more money, but it gets you out of the house,” said Kam.