The six-time Formula One world champion Lewis Hamilton is to set up a commission to try to increase diversity and boost BAME representation across motor sport. Hamilton, who said he felt “so much anger, sadness and disbelief” after the death of George Floyd, has spoken widely on race in light of protests over the killing in Minneapolis. The Mercedes driver said the aim of his commission would be to make the sport “become as diverse as the complex and multicultural world we live in”. The 35-year-old wrote in the Sunday Times that racism was “only too familiar to me” and said while people were quick to condemn racist gestures like monkey noises being shouted at black footballers, structural issues also need to be addressed. “I’ve been fighting the stigma of racism throughout my racing career, from kids throwing things at me while karting to being taunted by fans with blacked-up faces at a grand prix [in Spain in 2008], one of my first Formula One races,” Hamilton said. “I’m used to being one of very few people of colour on my teams and, more than that, I’m used to the idea that no one will speak up for me when I face racism, because no one personally feels or understands my experience.” Hamilton described the project as a “research partnership, dedicated to exploring how motor sport can be used as a vehicle to engage more young people from black backgrounds with science, technology, engineering and mathematics, or Stem subjects. The ultimate aim, Hamilton added, is to “employ them on our teams or in other engineering sectors”. During May, Hamilton had aimed criticism at his F1 colleagues on Instagram. “I see those of you who are staying silent, some of you the biggest of stars, yet you stay silent in the midst of injustice,” he said. “I would have thought by now you would see why this happens and say something about it but you can’t stand alongside us.Hamilton wrote in the Sunday Times that the “institutional barriers that have kept F1 highly exclusive persist”, adding that the thousands of people employed in motor sport need to be more representative of society. “Winning championships is great, but I want to be remembered for my work creating a more equal society through education,” he added.