My wife and I didn’t properly hear about the Reading knife attack until Sunday morning, as we were driving to the Suffolk coast for the day. We spent Saturday afternoon and early evening sociably distancing in our friends’ garden, enjoying the novelty of seeing our WhatsApp group in 3D for the first time in nearly three months. There were some parents from our nursery alumni group, with whom we’ve stayed friends since Jack and then Joe were there in the mid-1990s. They were there for us when our son Jack was killed in the London Bridge terror attack in November 2019, together with his colleague Saskia Jones. “Police said the attack was not terror-related,” the newsreader said. The police line changed later that day: what happened in Reading was now being treated as a terror attack, but they have said they are keeping an open mind on motive. Whether it actually was or not, time and the inquests will hopefully tell. Not that it mattered to us at that point why James Furlong, Joe Ritchie-Bennett and David Wails were killed; our thoughts were with their families and friends, because we knew exactly what they were going through. Reports in the media of killings, whatever the context, have taken on a new significance for us since Jack was murdered. The memories of that terrible day come rushing back into focus: the initial report, the frantic train journey to London, waiting in the hospital, the police’s family liaison officers asking us questions about Jack that we later realised were intended to confirm that it was him, while we hoped against hope that he wasn’t one of the “two casualties” being reported in news bulletins on our mobile phones. Then reproaching ourselves for wishing such a thing on another family. Then that moment at 10.45pm when the police came back into the room and told us that Jack was dead. The foundations of our world were rocked in that moment. We were there with Jack’s girlfriend and three of his friends who were meeting him after work for drinks in London. It didn’t seem possible. It was impossible; there must have been a mistake. This couldn’t be happening to us. Being driven home by the police, stopping in Cambridge on the way to collect our youngest son from the pub, and break the news to him on the pavement outside. Breaking the news to family and friends the next day: an unimaginably traumatic duty. We knew that variations on this theme are repeated for the families of anyone violently killed and would be for the families of the friends killed in Reading, all outstanding people in their own ways, all loved and respected. The shock, the disbelief, the overwhelming grief. The heartfelt tributes from family and friends and colleagues and neighbours and acquaintances. The steady procession of reporters to the door, in between visits from grief-stricken family and friends bearing gifts and sympathy and offers of help: anything they could do, just ask. Our way of coping was to go public, against the advice of the police, and try to take control of the narrative away from Boris Johnson, who seized an opportunity to score points during a general election campaign by playing the law and order card, proposing longer sentences for all serious offenders. We told Johnson and Priti Patel that was not what our son would have wanted. They didn’t listen. Our and Jack’s friends formed a protective ring around us, dealing with media enquiries and helping us organise Jack’s funeral and a celebration of his life that was truly life-affirming. But that’s another story. We don’t know why Jack’s killer did what he did, and we may never know; he was shot dead by police on London Bridge. The inquest will hopefully shed some light on his killer’s motives and any failings by the statutory services – police, probation, the deradicalisation initiatives in prison – that could lead to lessons being learned and increasing the chances of future attacks being prevented. We are not looking for people to blame. The inquest is a narrow process, largely about the how rather than the why; it won’t really consider wider issues, such as what led Jack’s killer down such a hateful, destructive path. Was it the influence of Islamist hate preachers, online indoctrination, drugs, mental health issues, UK foreign policy in the Middle East, an inability to come to terms with liberal secular society in the UK; or some, none or all of these? Not that any of these things can possibly justify what they did; understanding is not condoning. I doubt we will ever really know. After Jack and Saskia were killed, the government promised to “learn lessons”, but they have said this before. There was the Streatham attack, which followed hard on the heels of London Bridge, and before that came Manchester Arena, the first London Bridge attack, the killing of four pedestrians and a police officer outside the Houses of Parliament, all the way back to 7/7. Cuts to police, probation and prison budgets, mental health and deradicalisation programmes over many years have left the capacity of the state to prevent such attacks severely strained. I fear that the Covid-19 pandemic and its impact on the public finances will only make things worse; prison programmes, however effective they might be, will rarely be prioritised over more popular, more “deserving” services when resources are particularly scarce. We feel for anyone caught up in a violent killing. Right now our thoughts are with James’s, Joe’s and David’s families and friends. We hope they have good people around them to help them through this impossibly difficult time. This is the reality of any sudden violent death in the family. People say they can’t imagine what we are going through. We tell people not to try: it’s too painful, and what’s the point? But we know. We will always know. • Dave Merritt is the father of Jack Merritt, who was killed in the London Bridge terror attack on 29 November 2019