Mo Qazalbashi, 27, publicist, lives in Croydon with his wife, Sara, and their 10-week-old son, Abid Having our first baby during lockdown has been interesting, to say the least. At one point, because of Covid restrictions, we weren’t sure I would be allowed in the birthing room. Then, Sara and Abid had to spend five days in the hospital alone after the birth. Fatherhood makes you super protective. It’s frightening, but I feel complete. I feel so responsible, but I feel so much love. There is a gravitational connection that pulls you towards your child. I worry, I check up on him in the night – and it puts everything else in my life into perspective. Sara and I live with my parents. The multigenerational set-up works and especially when you have a child. It’s so interesting being part of this club now. I see a completely different side to my own dad than I’m used to seeing. He’s always really sweet and caring with his grandkids. It’s nice to see him relaxed – he’s lovely. He didn’t have that sort of time when we were growing up. My dad is a classic success story, a Pakistani immigrant who came here with nothing and worked his way up. He always instilled hard work into his kids and we get that from him. Being at home and furloughed for a couple of months means I’ve been able to be really present. It’s also opened my eyes to parents or families when one person has to stay at home and the other has to work, it’s not easy. Father’s Day is a chilled one for us, we’re a tight-knit family and my brother and sister come over with my nieces and nephews and I usually cook lunch. My wife has been teasing me, telling me to buy my own card seeing as I’m going to the shops anyway. I do love being a dad, there’s not a moment when I’m not in love with him. My camera roll used to be screenshots of future holidays or furniture Sara and I want to buy, now I keep scrolling and it’s just pictures of him. Nat Davies, 39, digital editor, lives in north London. She lost her father, Richard Davies, six years ago Dad was a pretty mercurial character. He was extraordinarily gifted and won a scholarship to study art at the Royal Academy at 15, but his dad wanted him to get a trade. So he studied graphic design in Cardiff. He had his own business when I was growing up and I remember him in his shiny 80s suit, driving a Nissan Sunny to his offices in a warehouse. For a couple of years he was a single dad, it was just me and him before he met my stepmum and my sisters came along. I think that’s partly why our bond was so strong. Richard was really handsome, charming and talented. Draw your own conclusions, but there were a lot of glamorous women at his funeral ,weeping and telling us they were sorry, and we had no clue who they were. He had a bit of a drinking problem and took recreational drugs but not in a shady, crackhead way. He always had this glamorous, bohemian side and he’d met his heroes – Hendrix, the Beatles, the Stones – running around as an art student in Cardiff. When I was 16, he got cancer. The next few years were horrible. He became really angry and occasionally violent. He was getting chemotherapy when he insisted I go to university, and I felt huge guilt but I also couldn’t wait to escape. He did recover from cancer but his life was in tatters and his marriage collapsed. I think his mind was shot, his emotions were everywhere and he was full of rage. I had to confront him with a lot of his behaviour and said I’d stop speaking to him. At that point, he got counselling and that’s when he changed – he started painting again, he met a new partner. We went on holidays together, he’d show me his poems. Those last eight years of his life we had an incredible relationship again. I could tell him anything, and we saw each other regularly. Father’s Day was a big occasion for us. All my sisters and I would go for dinner with him back home and he would cry at every card. He became a big softie. I was at a loss to know what to do this year. I haven’t been able to see my sisters since February. I might share some drawings from his old sketchbooks and try and celebrate him. He was 67 when he died with complications from flu. The first few years are the hardest, they’re just so sad and you just don’t know how you’ll cope. Dad was my person and he loved me so much. The day-in, day-outness of living without him is the hard thing. I don’t think I’ll ever be loved like that by anyone else again.