Justin Bieber has denied allegations that he sexually assaulted a woman in March 2014, sharing a series of tweets he believes prove that “this story is factually impossible”, and saying that he will be “working with Twitter and authorities to take legal action”. The singer was accused by a woman who identified herself as Danielle and withheld her last name. In a Tweet dated 20 June, which has since been deleted – along with the account – she claimed that she met Bieber when she was 21, and he was 20, at a music event in Austin. She claimed that on 9 March, after he performed a surprise set, Bieber invited Danielle and her friends to the Four Seasons hotel, where he took her to a seperate room and assaulted her. The Guardian was not able to contact the woman to seek comment. She has given no further details of the allegations other than her Twitter post. The allegation was initially denied by Alison Kaye, the general manager of Scooter Braun’s SB Projects, who represents Bieber. Kaye said the allegation was “factually impossible”, saying on Sunday that Bieber stayed at AirBnB the night in question, and that his hotel reservation in Austin didn’t begin until the following night, and was at the Westin, not the Four Seasons. Later on Sunday, Bieber followed up with his own tweets, sharing photos, receipts and emails which he says show that he stayed at an AirBnb in Austin on 9 March, and at the Westin hotel on 10 March. He said he was in Austin with his then-girlfriend, Selena Gomez. “There is no truth to this story,” he said on Twitter. “Every claim of sexual abuse should be taken very seriously and this is why my response was needed. However this story is factually impossible and that is why I will be working with twitter and authorities to take legal action.” In the past 24 hours a new Twitter appeared that told a story of myself involved with sexual abuse on March 9, 2014 in Austin Texas at the Four seasons hotel. I want to be clear. There is no truth to this story. In fact as I will soon show I was never present at that location. Rumors are rumors but sexual abuse is something I don’t take lightly. I wanted to speak out right away but out of respect to so many victims who deal with these issues daily I wanted to make sure I gathered the facts before I made any statement.