Boris Johnson has proclaimed that to remove offensive statues – whether of Bristolian slave traders or his own heroes – would be “to edit or censor our past” and “to lie about our history”. But when it comes to slavery and abolition, we have been doing that for centuries. Over the last 10 years, initially as a PhD student then as a lecturer and scholar, I have been researching two political campaigns of the 1820s and 1830s: the first to abolish colonial slavery, the second to defend it. You may think that these campaigns are well-trodden paths on Britain’s national journey, but they are not. For one thing, these campaigns should not be confused with the abolition of the slave trade. Although William Wilberforce ascended to the British pantheon when parliament abolished the trade in 1807, this did nothing to remedy the plight of the more than 700,000 Africans who remained in bondage in the colonies. At the time, Wilberforce himself declared that “before [slaves] could be fit to receive freedom, it would be madness to attempt to give it to them”. It was not until 1823, 16 years later, that the British campaign to emancipate colonial slaves in fact began. Even then, it took another 10 years – and a great deal of pain, luck, and several momentous slave rebellions – to force emancipation through parliament. The intervening decade should teach us several important lessons about the truth of British history. Certainly, the idea that Britain was “first” to abolish slavery is laughable nonsense. Revolutionary France abolished slavery in 1794 and Haiti declared it illegal in 1804. Vast swathes of Spanish America beat Britain to the punch, too. Even in the United States, where slavery would plunge the Union into crisis in the 1860s, abolitionism had swept the northern states long before the British campaign for emancipation had even been conceived. Moreover, as much as we may wish to celebrate the humanitarian aspects of British history, we need to face the uncomfortable truth that until Britons started congratulating themselves for abolishing slavery, it was thought perfectly acceptable to promote the same. Slaveholders such as Edward Colston have become figureheads for today’s anti-racism activists, but he and men like him were merely cogs in a much wider machine of oppression, injustice and brutality which defined Britain’s relationship with Africa and the Caribbean. Nor did British slaveholders wilt in the face of emancipationist pressure. Directed by the fearsome “West India interest” – which counted dozens of MPs, peers, and commercial grandees among its members – pro-slavery mobs attacked voters who had the temerity to support abolitionist candidates; in the West Indies, they tarred and feathered missionaries who dared preach freedom. And at the rhetorical level, the British pro-slavery campaign of the 1820s and 1830s used parliament, press, and the pulpit to promulgate theories of the utmost repugnance. In public lectures, in bestselling books, and in the Times and Spectator, the interest and its allies insisted that the Bible condones slavery (because it does), that enslavement to cultured British planters was “civilising” the African, that protecting slave-grown sugar with tariffs was essential to national prosperity, and that nothing should be done for enslaved Africans before domestic poverty was considered first. The last of these arguments was the direct ancestor of present-day opposition to foreign aid and international development. We cannot dismiss the men who made these arguments as kooks on the lunatic fringe. Besides the wealthy planters and merchants whose livelihoods depended on slavery, not to mention their friends in the conservative press, the defence of British colonial slavery involved most of the “great men” of the day. Their statues now decorate the parliamentary estate. As foreign secretary and then as prime minister, George Canning was a titan of European diplomacy. Yet he sought desperately to prevent British campaigners from pressing the issue of emancipation. He used racist epithets to disparage plans for manumission. And in 1824, he urged parliament to refrain from freeing colonial slaves by comparing “the African” to Frankenstein’s monster. Robert Peel was a transformative home secretary who re-founded the Conservative party in his own image before sacrificing his career to the repeal of the Corn Laws. Yet he was a pillar of parliamentary resistance to slave emancipation. In one speech he stated that “moral improvement … alone” could prepare Africans for freedom. In another, he drew parliament’s attention to the great problem of amalgamating “two distinct and separate races” in a free society. William Gladstone later became the paragon of the liberal political tradition, but in the 1820s he believed that slavery was not “necessarily sinful”. First elected to parliament for Newark, Gladstone ran as an explicitly pro-slavery candidate. And what of the Duke of Wellington? He was the hero of Waterloo and, as prime minister, he suborned his own principles to pass Catholic emancipation. Yet he was the most ardently pro-slavery politician of the 19th century and historians know that he stood “four-square” behind the West India interest. King William IV was no better. He had sailed to the colonies as a younger man and believed the slaves to exist in a state of “humble happiness”; he deemed it “impolitic and unjust to abolish the slave trade”, an enterprise which employed “immense capital” and was “highly beneficial to this country”. He thought freedom “would reduce [the slaves] from a state of comparative ease & Comfort to one of misery & Starvation, & would ruin the Proprietors”. The West India interest was not simply supported by “the establishment”; it was the establishment. For too long, Britain has quarantined the atrocities of slavery at the distance of several thousand miles and several hundred years. It cannot do so any longer. • Dr Michael Taylor is a historian. His book The Interest: How the British Establishment Resisted the Abolition of Slavery will be published in November