A white security guard and former Tulsa sheriff’s detention officer with a newly revealed track record of alleged racist behaviour and mistreatment was charged with first-degree manslaughter after he provoked and then killed an unarmed African American man in a motel parking lot Tulsa, Oklahoma, earlier this month. The Guardian has seen previously unreleased CCTV video footage of the incident, showing the moment Carlos Carson, a 36-year-old unarmed African American father of three, was shot dead after he was attacked by former Tulsa detention officer Christopher Straight. Documents reviewed by the Guardian and other media outlets also reveal that Straight, who worked as a guard at the city’s jail under the command of Tulsa county sheriff’s office, has been accused of racist behaviour against a black colleague and neglect by inmates at multiple points during his career. Straight resigned from the department in 2018 after 16 years. He submitted his resignation letter the same day jail officials told him he would be demoted. It is unclear what prompted the demotion. The revelations come shortly before Donald Trump visits the city of Tulsa, the site of one of the worst episodes of racist violence in modern US history, on Saturday to hold a widely criticised indoor campaign rally during the coronavirus pandemic. The rally also comes during a nationwide reckoning over racially-biased policing in the wake of George Floyd’s in-custody death in Minneapolis last month. The incident, which occurred around noon on 6 June, began when Straight used pepper spray on Carson as he walked near his car in a motel parking lot. Carson was a guest at the hotel and was asked to leave the premises earlier that morning after complaining his car was vandalized and getting upset, according to the police report. When Carson returned to the property a few minutes later, Straight, working as a security guard, got out of his truck and sprayed Carson with pepper spray. Carson then confronted Straight and the two men fought as Carson attempted to pull Straight out of the car. After a few seconds, Straight shot Carson in the head. The 53-year-old later admitted to police that Carson “did not actually make an aggressive move towards him to provoke him”. He told investigators he used pepper spray to “deter” him from being aggressive and planned to detain him for trespassing until police arrived. Security footage obtained by the Guardian shows Carson was walking away from Straight’s truck when Straight deployed pepper spray. Straight was arrested after the incident and released on a $50,000 bond. On Thursday, the former officer declined to comment on the charges and the circumstances of his resignation from the sheriff’s office when visited at home, and demanded the Guardian leave his property. The Tulsa county sheriff’s department did not answer questions about Straight’s departure. Ananias Carson is an active-duty Tulsa police officer, serving in the department for 14 years. Asked if he viewed his brother’s killing in the context of the nationwide discussion on race and policing Ananias Carson said: “It’s not a positive yes or no.” Ananias Carson, Carlos’s older brother, described him as a “good dude” who “loved his family, loved his kids and didn’t really have to do anything but be around family. “He did not deserve to be killed in that manner in a totally unprovoked situation. Where this white man just felt that he had the right to do whatever he wanted to do when he wanted to do it.” Ananias Carson will not be patrolling in Tulsa on the day the president visits the city due to bereavement leave. Records reveal that since 2005, Straight had been reprimanded for several infractions during his work as a detention officer at the Tulsa county sheriff’s office, according to documents obtained by the Guardian. In 2005, he was demoted from a supervisor position and in 2013, he was suspended for five days and ordered to take supervisory training, according to the documents, which were first reported by Fox 23 News. That suspension came with a memo saying Straight “compromised the professionalism of the sheriff’s office and will not be tolerated again for any reason”. In 2018, when Straight resigned from his job, he wrote jail administrators placed him in a “no win” situation and apologized for being unable to live up to management’s expectations. “I have really tried to set a good example for the troops and to go above and beyond in boosting moral [sic] on my shift, but it has become an uphill battle this last year where I seem to stay on the chopping block for one thing or another,” he wrote in his resignation letter. Straight was also the subject of a handful of complaints from inmates and even a colleague in recent years, court documents show. In a 2015 sworn deposition, Godwin Ehiremen, a former prison guard who is black, said Straight suggested he was in the country illegally and was going to investigate his green card. Ehiremen had sued the sheriff’s department after losing his job due to allegedly inappropriate conduct with female inmates. The former officer claimed he was sacked by the department because of his race but lost the case in 2016. In 2018, Franklin Smith alleged via a civil lawsuit filed in federal court that Straight had failed to protect him in a 2016 fight in the Tulsa county jail. In a 2017 civil case, John Edgar Williams III, another inmate, said Straight and other jail guards had wrongfully accused him of theft. A decade earlier, James Bell, another inmate, brought a similar case against Straight and other jail officials after he was placed in isolation and forced to give up a bowl he bought from the jail commissary to comply with a new policy. All three cases were dismissed in federal court. All the accusers represented themselves in court. On Facebook, Straight had been posting frequently in support of law enforcement. On 5 June, one day before he killed Carson, he posted a meme dismissive of the Black Lives Matter movement that said “all lives matter” and “no one’s life is more important than the next”. “Put your race card away and grow up,” it says.