With the prime minister struggling to breathe, the Queen on TV comparing the crisis to the second world war and Dominic Cummings in County Durham despite the lockdown, Easter week found Britain on the back foot against coronavirus. The death toll was not far from double the usual rate and we now know it was the peak of a devastating 22 days in April in which more than 1,000 people in the UK died from Covid-19 every day. That didn’t stop Boris Johnson’s “designated survivor”, Dominic Raab, trying to reassure an anxious nation with news the PM was still in “good spirits” and leading the government from his hospital bed. The death toll Raab announced on Easter Monday did not look too bad: 439, though weekend reporting is always down compared with weekdays. That weekend, Prof Neil Ferguson, a government Sage adviser before he quit for breaking lockdown rules, had even suggested overall fatalities could be as low as 7,000. Then reality bit. Johnson was moved into intensive care and his fate was “touch and go”, Raab later admitted. Any suggestion of slowing fatalities proved a mirage. Death tolls announced by Downing Street, it would emerge, were a significant underestimate. An analysis of official figures shows that 1,210 people died on 5 April – almost three times more than Raab reported. The Downing Street figures included only confirmed deaths in hospitals, which overlooked how the virus had quietly seeded in thousands of care homes, killing the most vulnerable as well as several of their carers. The darkest day came on 8 April, which coincided with a projection from a world-leading disease data analysis unit in Seattle that the UK would become the country worst-hit by the coronavirus pandemic in Europe. Ferguson was among those disputing the figures. But the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) in Seattle predicted 66,000 UK deaths from Covid-19 by August. The current figure stands at over 52,000. Instead of deepening resolve at Westminster to toughen the lockdown, there was pressure to loosen the rules. Death tolls were falling in Spain, France and Italy, and the UK chancellor, Rishi Sunak was pushing for urgent planning to ease the lockdown and avoid economic damage. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, was also calling for an exit strategy. China had zero deaths for the first time since January. On the frontline, the atmosphere was different. Easter week proved to be the worst for many of the UK’s worst-affected areas including Birmingham, Liverpool, the outer London boroughs of Brent, Barnet and Croydon, and County Durham, where Cummings had relocated his family during the lockdown, causing a political storm and widespread public anger when it was revealed by the Guardian and Mirror. In Liverpool, council bosses braced for deaths. Some discussed how to “grease the mortality highway” to prevent backlogs in mortuaries and crematoriums. Refrigerated shipping containers were pressed into action to accommodate extra bodies. Storage usually used for corpses for dissection by university medical students was commandeered and crematoriums opened seven days a week from 8.30am to squeeze in more services. “I have been in this industry for 35 years and I have never seen anything as busy as that,” said Alan Sheldon, who runs Liverpool city council bereavement services. “It was a hard time.” The UK public seemed to recognise the threat. On 5 April, the day Boris Johnson was admitted to hospital and it was reported that 1,156 people died from Covid-19, 46% of people polled by YouGov wanted tougher lockdown measures and the same proportion said the existing measures were about right. Since the last Thursday in March, people had also been showing their concern by clapping for NHS workers, and later care workers and others on the front line, outside their homes. In the minds of many were workers in intensive care units across the NHS, whose efforts in full personal protective equipment were detailed nightly on TV news. “Enormous numbers of patients were coming in with the same disease process,” said Dr Daniele Bryden, the vice-dean of the faculty of intensive care medicine. “We were learning quickly about how it behaves.” Dealing with the dying patients was “emotionally very difficult” without being able to communicate properly with relatives who were kept out of many hospitals. And being wrapped in PPE for up to four hours at a time made work hot and hard in a team specialism such as intensive care. “You can’t hear properly, communication is really difficult and all you can see is somebody’s eyes,” she said. Shortwave radios were deployed to help. After their shifts, doctors went home and tried to better understand how the novel disease kills. “I don’t think people knew then quite as much about how it behaves as they do now,” Bryden said. “We didn’t appreciate from the data coming out of China how significant the risk of thrombosis and embolism [in the lungs] was.” Care homes were feeling the pain too. They were struggling still to acquire enough PPE and still being told to accept patients discharged from hospital without a test. The virus spread fast in buildings designed more for communal interaction than isolation. At Wren Hall nursing home in Nottinghamshire, Easter Monday brought news of a 10th death. Bedrooms stood empty and staff felt “broken inside”, recalled the manager, Anita Astle. “It is just soul-destroying,” she told the Guardian at the time. “We have deaths normally, but they are good deaths. We have the family around the person.” By mid-June, more than 16,000 UK care home residents had died from confirmed or suspected Covid-19, including 1,000 at the largest private provider, HC-One, where more than one in six of the people who got the virus passed away. The rolling average death rate is now back down to where it was shortly after lockdown at the end of March. But for many frontline workers who endured those 22 days in April, what happened cannot be consigned to the past. They are thinking now about how they will cope when, not if, the next wave comes. 