The total number of Covid-19 cases across the Pacific stands at 314, with new cases reported this week in New Caledonia, Northern Mariana Islands and Guam. New Zealand is under increasing pressure, both internally and from across the region, to consider Pacific countries as part of its proposed travel ‘bubble’, alongside, or even in place of, Australia. The foreign minister, Winston Peters, initially rejected including Pacific island nations, but later backtracked. There are growing concerns in some Pacific countries that measures designed to safeguard public health are being used to undermine civil rights and democratic principles. The Samoa Observer argues the prime minister is using emergency powers to push his own ideological preoccupations by seeking to ban all commercial activity on Sundays. In Papua New Guinea, the new – but retrospective – public health emergency bill may be the subject of a constitutional appeal by the opposition. The government stands accused of wasting millions of kina in the early days of the crisis and the bill would make oversight of government expenditure more difficult. A three-country study by Plan International Australia has shown supplies of pads and tampons have dropped, and prices increased, during the coronavirus pandemic, leading women to have to decide between their sanitary needs and food. ● West Papua: The Jakarta Post reports 1,457 confirmed cases as of 14 June, and 10 deaths. West Papuan independence sources accuse the government of Indonesia of shooting at and beating villagers attempting to return to their villages. The alleged attack was said to be an attempt to enforce Covid-19 restrictions on movement. The ULMWP leader, Benny Wenda, now says security forces, not rebels, shot and killed two health workers in May. ● Papua New Guinea: With no new cases reported for more than 40 days, PNG has declared itself Covid-19-free. However, the level of testing is very low at 5,354. The state of emergency came to an end on 16 June but the national operations centre will remain in place. ● French Pacific Territories: Another infection has been reported in New Caledonia, bringing the number of confirmed cases to 21. The person is in hospital receiving care. Domestic restrictions have been lifted, borders remain closed other than for flights from Wallis and Futuna and limited repatriations. In French Polynesia, the number of confirmed cases remains at 60. ● CNMI: The Marianas reported two new cases, both of them asymptomatic. The people infected were in quarantine, having recently travelled. This brings the total to 30. ● Guam: The WHO reported four new cases this week, brining the total to 185. A reported case at Andersen Air Force based later tested negative on multiple occasions and was declared a false positive. The navy member was under restricted movement orders at the time, having travelled recently. ● Cook Islands: Rallying behind the cry that “we are family”, Cook Islands has been vocal in exhorting New Zealand to take a Pacific-first approach to its mooted travel bubble. Business owners have argued travel is needed to restart the tourism-dependent economy. However, some community leaders want the borders to remain closed to protect against risk of Covid-19 getting into the country. ● Fiji: No new cases have been reported, leaving the number of confirmed infections at 18. A number of people have been repatriated from New Zealand. They are required to spend 14 days in quarantine followed by a further 14 days self-isolating at home. ● Solomon Islands: Aid and assistance is being coloured by geopolitical complications. The premier of Malaita province, Daniel Suidani, publicly thanked Taiwan for donations of medical equipment and food rations, only to be rebuked by both the foreign minister, Jeremiah Manele, and the Chinese representative in Honiara. Solomon Islands changed allegiance from Taiwan to China late last year. On Sunday, the premier accused the national government of confiscating some or all of the donated goods. The police said the goods were intercepted because their despatch was ‘suspicious’. Solomon Airlines has announced that regular international flights will remain suspended until 31 August. ● Tonga: Schools will close on 30 June to test how students, teachers, and parents cope with at-home learning. ● Vanuatu: More than 300 businesses have applied for the small and medium enterprise grant from the government. People who are not formally employed have argued they are locked out of the government’s bailout package. ● Marshall Islands: The number of testing kits available was reduced by half following a directive from the US Centers for Disease Control to suspend use of Abbott ID Now lab equipment. GeneXpert testing kits are still available. ● Papua New Guinea: The IMF has approved financing in excess of US$360m to help PNG meet its financial obligations. A drop in resource revenues will take an estimated 4% off GDP growth this year. ● Bougainville: The state of emergency has been continued until 14 August. This means that the forthcoming elections will be held during the state of emergency. ● Fiji: The minister for the economy, Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum, has said that the government is awaiting certification from both Apple and Google Play stores for its contact tracing app. He also said he had spoken with New Zealand’s high commissioner about establishing a travel bubble that includes Fiji. ● Vanuatu: The state of emergency has been extended for another month. The ministry of health has certified that the national parliament is safe to enter. This follows an opposition boycott last week, after it was discovered that a government minister had entered a quarantine zone. ● Solomon Islands: In an address to the nation, the prime minister, Manasseh Sogavare, has predicted a contraction of almost 5% of GDP in 2020 to be followed by a ‘V’-shaped recovery in 2021. ● Tonga: The state of emergency has been renewed until 8 July. ● Samoa: There has been further relaxation of restrictions. Weddings can now be held with up to 50 guests and places of worship can hold more than one service on their Sabbath day. Street vendors are now allowed to ply their trade, but not on footpaths. ● Marshall Islands: The government’s most recent travel advisory extends the border closures until 5 July. ● French Polynesia: The last Covid-19 patient in Tahiti was released from hospital last week. The patient was an Ecuadorian from a fishing boat that had requested emergency assistance. Days later, the territory saw its seventh relief flight arrive from Paris, carrying 202 returning residents. ● Federated States of Micronesia: The government has announced a plan to assist citizens stranded abroad with cash payments of up to US$1,500. Two new cases have been confirmed in New Zealand, bringing the total to 1,156 with 22 deaths. The country has now moved to ‘level one’ restrictions. In Australia, New South Wales and Victoria have been the main contributors to the rise in cases to 7,333, which is an increase of 73 from last week. The number of deaths remains at 102. A chatbot that operates on Facebook Messenger, currently providing Covid-19 advice and information in English and Mandarin, is now being aimed at the Pacific. The service, named Ᾱmio, was developed by a trio of New Zealand doctors. Fijian, Tongan and Samoan languages are now being considered as possible delivery media for this service. We need to help out. If we don’t help out this way we’ll be helping out in aid. It makes more sense to keep their economies going or try and revive them as fast as possible. New Zealand’s foreign minister, Winston Peters, coming around to the idea of opening his country’s borders to the Pacific first. Matangi Tonga caused a kerfuffle with a report that 50 Tongans would be repatriated from New Zealand this week. The government has since advised that this is not the case although there was a ‘logistics and coordination’ drill on Tuesday as part of preparing to reopen the country’s borders. In Solomon Islands, the order of 26 March that public servants should only receive 50% of their salaries has been revoked and they are back on full pay. Infection and fatality figures in this article are valid as of 15 June. They are based on WHO daily situation reports, and supplemented in some cases by national government updates. Inconsistencies in running sum totals may result because of reconciliations in country totals, and revisions of previous data.