The leaders of Fine Gael, Fianna Fáil and the Green party have struck a deal to form a coalition government in Ireland four months after a general election scrambled the political landscape. The proposed coalition, which still needs to be ratified by grassroots members, would bridge a century of rivalry between Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil and inject urgency into Ireland’s response to the climate crisis. It will also need to steer new laws, including for a €6.5bn (£5.8bn) coronavirus support package, through a fragmented parliament. Leo Varadkar, the taoiseach and Fine Gael leader, Micheál Martin, the leader of Fianna Fáil, and Eamonn Ryan, leader of the Greens, signed off on the five-year plan for government after weeks of marathon talks. Varadkar and Martin are expected to take turns being taoiseach. Members of all three parties must support the plan – a process that could take up to two weeks – before the proposed alliance can replace Varadkar’s caretaker administration. Approval is not guaranteed. If just over a third of Green party members say no, the deal will collapse and a fresh election may ensue. Government formation talks unfolded in slow-motion despite a dramatic backdrop of Covid-19 infections, lockdown and economic disruption. Varadkar’s handling of the crisis has boosted his poll ratings. The centrist Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil have dominated Irish politics and alternated in power since their founders took opposite sides in the 1922-23 civil war. The proposed coalition would also be only the second time the Greens have taken office. However, many interpreted the election on 8 February as a mandate for a different historic coalition led by Sinn Féin. The nationalist party – a pariah in the south during the IRA’s bloody campaign in Northern Ireland – confounded expectations to win almost a quarter of first-preference votes, more than any other party. It rode a wave of anger over homelessness, soaring rents and hospital waiting lists as well as disillusionment with the traditional political duopoly. Its leader, Mary Lou McDonald, declared a “revolution”. However, parliamentary arithmetic and political obstacles blocked Sinn Féin from power. It failed to muster enough small leftwing parties and independents for a majority in the 160-seat Dáil Éireann, the Irish parliament’s lower chamber. Varadkar and Martin ruled out entering government with Sinn Féin, citing ethical and policy reasons. Some analysts say the result suits Sinn Féin: it can consolidate as the official, mainstream opposition and avoid blame in the looming economic reckoning. In anticipation of stormy times – possibly worsened by Brexit – the putative coalition has tried to nail down agreement on ministerial posts and policies on taxation, social welfare, pensions, farming and the environment. The lengthy draft plan envisages a jobs stimulus package, extra funding for public transport and cycling infrastructure, increasing carbon tax and speeding up Ireland’s carbon emissions reduction to an average of 7% a year. It also proposes bans on offshore gas exploration and imported fracked gas and an end to the direct provision system for asylum seekers, which critics say is inhumane.