Boris Johnson and Keir Starmer marked the third anniversary of the Grenfell Tower fire in video messages as the commemoration moved online because of the coronavirus pandemic. The prime minister said the people of Britain were with the Grenfell Tower community in spirit, and the Labour leader pledged to do everything in his power to prevent a similar tragedy . Sunday marked three years since a small kitchen fire in the west London high-rise block turned into the most deadly domestic blaze since the second world war. Seventy-two people died and more than 70 were injured. In a video message played at a virtual service of commemoration hosted by the Bishop of Kensington, Johnson said: “We can all remember where we were three years ago today when we saw this tragedy unfolding on our screens and across the London skyline,. That night, 72 men, women and children were taken from us in the cruellest of circumstances. “As a nation, we are still dealing with the consequences of what happened and working to make sure it never happens again. While those affected by Grenfell are not able to gather in person, all of us in this country are with you in spirit.” The prime minister also said the government was working to implement the recommendations of the first phase of the public inquiry into the disaster. The second phase of the inquiry was paused in March because of the pandemic and is due to restart on 6 July. Labour estimates that 56,000 people are still living in homes clad in the same flammable panels as Grenfell. Starmer said in his message: “In the midst of their suffering, the Grenfell community came together to campaign for justice, safe homes and change, because no one should ever go through the loss and pain they experienced. “But three years on and, unbelievably, tonight people will go to bed in unsafe homes. Three years on and there has been little justice or accountability. Three years on their campaign continues. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, also paid tribute to those who died. He said: “I know the bereaved, survivors, residents and wider community are understandably frustrated at the lack of meaningful change and they are fearful that a similar tragedy could happen again. I too share their concerns. “While struggling with their own personal grief and recovery, they have continued to campaign for building safety and are demanding change to keep others safe in their homes. “I will continue to be relentless in holding those responsible to account and doing everything within my power to ensure the Grenfell community gets the justice they deserve, and all Londoners can feel safe again in their homes.” The Fire Brigades Union (FBU) said high-rise residents faced a postcode lottery in terms of how many firefighters would be sent to their building in the event of a blaze. It said “many brigades would not be able to mobilise anywhere near the scale” that was needed to tackle the Grenfell Tower fire, and pointed out that there was a large variation in the number of engines sent as standard to high-rise fires between different forces. The FBU’s general secretary, Matt Wrack, said the loss of 72 lives at Grenfell was deeply traumatic, but that there was “a good chance that the next Grenfell will be outside London, in an area where fewer resources are mobilised to a fire, and the loss of life could be worse still”. In tribute to each victim who died in the blaze, bells of London churches tolled 72 times and green lights were lit from tower block windows. The singer Adele paid tribute to the victims and survivors of the fire on Instagram: “Today, Sunday, is three years since Grenfell. Seventy-two lives will be forever in our hearts,” she wrote. Adele visited the Grenfell Tower area shortly after the fire to speak to victims and their families. Fellow artist George the Poet also paid tribute. “RIP to all who lost their lives in the Grenfell tragedy. Justice is still pending,” he wrote. The children’s TV presenter Floella Benjamin said: “The Grenfell catastrophe must never be forgotten as the legacy for those who died has to be for change to happen.” The rapper and author Akala said: “Rest in power to all the people that lost their lives and Grenfell three years ago and love to all the bereaved and survivors.”