Alicia: “After my best friend gave birth at the start of March and a pregnant friend told me she was shielding, I started thinking about how people were coping with pregnancy and birth during lockdown. With women only allowed to have one birth partner and home births restricted for a time, I spoke to women and men about how having a baby during lockdown has been for them and their new families. The project is ongoing.” Michelle Misgalla, doula, 54 Misgalla lives in south London and has been a doula for 4 years. She’s currently supporting Cath, who has undergone solo IVF, via Zoom. “I’ll be Cath’s birth partner, I’ve been supporting her since November. Sometimes doulas don’t do very much at all, but just seeing someone else’s face is enough, especially while pregnant women are in self-isolation.” Cath Rooney, 44 Rooney lives in south London but is currently self-isolating in Bedford with her sister and brother-in-law and their three sons. “I was 42 when I started talking about IVF with friends. Once I’d decided, it all happened pretty quickly. A friend and I got pizza and a bottle of prosecco one night and went through the website. “Michelle and I did a lot of the preparation together and she was there during the birth, looking after me. “Gaspar looks just like his cousin Jude when he was a baby, he feels like a total Rooney. Grandma and granddad are besotted. We Zoom with them every few days.” Saima Kara, 33 Kara has been a doula since 2017, supporting Becky and her son Silver, four weeks old, who live in Wirral. “I started supporting Becky on the day of her C-section, from when she went to hospital to immediately after the birth. Mums need a lot more support in the first week, then it gradually tapers off. Hopefully I’ll get to visit when lockdown’s over. It’ll be lovely to see them in person.” Thando Zwane, 35, doula Thando has been a doula for seven years, supporting women around London and Bristol and attending hundreds of births. “It was horrible not being able to attend Colleen and Joe’s birth. I spoke to them on video call, but environment is everything in birth – you need intimacy and privacy. I haven’t met James and Juliet yet, we’ve had a telephone chat and a video chat instead of meeting face to face. I’ve been working with them since March. “We mother the mothers. Birth is really simple, we just overcomplicate it. Being a doula is such a beautiful thing.” Colleen McKeever, 39, and Joe Weber, 36, with baby Mae, born 26 March From the US, McKeever and Weber relocated from New York to north London three years ago. Thando has been their doula since February. McKeever and Mae were in hospital for eight days following her birth. Weber: “Mae was in intensive care for the first few days because she had jaundice. We’d meet up in NICU during the day, then Colleen would go back to her room and I’d come home and play Nintendo. I delivered supplies to Colleen in the days after. We could meet downstairs but not with Mae. Colleen held her up to the window for me.” Emily de Groot and Rashid Ariori with twins Maya and Joshua, born 21 March De Groot: “The twins were born by cesarean [section] on the evening of 21 March. I was a bit oblivious to it all. We’ve been in a little bubble really. Two weeks ago we started going outside because I said, ‘I’m going to go crazy in the flat,’ and the neighbour said we could use his garden. “My mum was going to come for a couple of weeks to help – that’s been hard because our families haven’t met them yet. My brother might come on Sunday and wave through the window.” Leah Bedwood, 35, south London, whose baby is due at the end of June ‘I am determined to have a home birth with the sisterhood around me, women who are experienced birth keepers who’ve had their own children – my mum, my sister, my aunt – and my partner. At the moment my local hospital have suspended their home birthing service. They should be up and running again by the end of June, so hopefully the baby waits! “I had a socially distanced baby shower. I saw balloons and then suddenly this convoy of cars started coming down the road! We played games, everyone was guessing the sex of the baby, we had a bit of music, sweets. That was probably the nearest to having a social connection with people. It was a surprise, I really appreciated it.” Reyhan Akyıldız-Gladstone, 31, Jack Gladstone, 30, and Aphra, born 16 March Akyıldız-Gladstone: “We had Aphra at home 10 days before they shut down the local home birth team. She was born at 9am on the day everyone started working from home. I was quite aware that everyone was around in their houses! I went into labour at 4.30am and by 10am we were in bed and everyone had gone. Everything happened at a crazy pace. “We have no idea when our parents are going to meet her. My dad lives in Turkey – he had flights to come over but they were cancelled. “It’s had advantages, getting to know her and her getting to know us. The three of us have our little routine.” James Dow, 36, and Juliet Cochrane, 34, east London, who are expecting a girl on 21 June Cochrane: “It’s definitely going to be different. The grandparents and siblings will have to self-isolate for two weeks when she’s born, and even then they might not be able to hold her. They might, it’s so hard to know what the right thing to do is. There’s a real plus side in slowing down and having time to really plan and get things organised. It’s quite good for us as a family.” Nilufar Anwar, 35, Johan Bjerke, 38, and baby Alma, born 13 April Anwar: “At hospital, my midwife’s name was Rachel. I wouldn’t be able to recognise her again as she wore a mask the whole time. It’s strange to go through such an intimate, intense, life-changing experience with someone you can’t really see. I would have loved to have given her a hug. But the pandemic has given us time to do nothing but adore every move and sound that Alma makes, and slowly grow into our new role as parents.” Raquel Ruiz Tognetti, 40, with baby Leonardo, born 20 April “I’m a solo 40-year-old mum, and had a complicated delivery in the worst weeks of the pandemic. My parents were supposed to come and help, but they were stuck in lockdown in Venezuela. In hospital you could feel the fear in everyone. Since the delivery, things have been much better, but I’ve been weighing my baby at home as the midwife visits stopped. Sometimes I think Leonardo thinks I’m the only human on earth.” Helen Ward, 35, and Oli Evans, 37, with daughters Emily, 4, and Erin, born 19 March Ward: “We feel a lot calmer now. the start of this was insane. I was so anxious, crying all the time, really stressed. Now Erin’s putting on weight, I feel better about things. Emily has been remarkably fine. So far only Oli’s sister has met Erin, no one else. Friends have come for distanced drive-by drinks and cuppas so they’ve only seen her from afar. The experience has been otherworldly at times. Erin isn’t registered with a birth certificate yet, so coupled with no one meeting her, it’s almost as if she doesn’t exist.” Elle Taylor, 23, due 1 August “It’s nerve-racking taking the bus to maternity appointments. Even though you have a mask on and other people have a mask on, you still feel on edge. My partner can’t come to any scans, so we’ve booked a private 4D one so he can see her. “I’ve mostly been worried about the baby when she’s here, I’m not worried about myself. I think her grandparents can meet her with a mask, not touch. Maybe everyone can meet her around Christmastime. Hopefully it’s over by Christmas!” Sherica Spence, 34, and baby Caleb, born 4 March “The morning we checked out of hospital, I heard them say they had two confirmed cases of coronavirus. I just wanted to go home. We saw family and friends for the two weeks before lockdown, but after that we couldn’t see anyone. Everyone made sure we had food in the house: toilet rolls, nappies and wipes. “That was weird, having to rely on people. I’m a person that does everything myself. Celeb’s dad thought he might have the coronavirus, so he was at his house, doing video calls, making sure we were OK. I’m just lucky that he’s a peaceful child. He’s so good!” Lena Buhler, 31, and Johnson Aboaba, 27, due 1 September Buhler: “We were supposed to travel for work over March, April and May, but that was all cancelled. The hardest thing is not having a routine – that can make you feel a bit lost. My mum would have come over from Switzerland during this time but instead she’s been ordering baby stuff to the house. After the initial worry and anxiety subsided, I’ve found this to be good for us as a couple. Johnson’s been good. It’s a strange time for him but he’s been very calm.” Nissa Moger, 36, with baby Indy, born on 8 April “Indy was born in hospital and we were home 12 hours later. We were planning a water birth at home, but at that time they’d stopped the service, so we went in. It wasn’t what I planned, but the midwives were brilliant. “I work at St Thomas’ on the labour ward as a midwife and I teach hypnobirthing. All the classes moved online in March as soon as they said mums were at risk. It’s worked really well. I think initially my clients were more anxious because it was the unknown, but they seem more settled now.” Tammy Woodhouse, 30, and Adam Woodhouse, 28, due 9 August Tammy: “They announced the lockdown the night of our 20-week scan, so off we went to our appointment. There were signs up, but we didn’t really read them, we just went up, and they told Adam he couldn’t be there. We had no idea. I just sat in the waiting room crying! It was a shock. “They let me FaceTime Adam in the appointment, but it turned out I had my hand over the microphone the whole time! In the first trimester I was sick quite a lot, but the second one’s been an absolute dream. I’m a little bit sad I had to spend it indoors. “I’ve deleted all my news apps – that was probably the best thing. I think it was just watching the numbers go up and up and feeling completely helpless.” Esther and Shahin Najafipour, both 31, with baby Milo, born 21 May Esther: “I was in hospital for two days when I had him. No visitors were allowed. I work as a costume maker for film and had made 85 pairs of scrubs for the local hospitals while I was on furlough. Some of the nurses were wearing ones from the same batch. The midwife that delivered him was wearing some.” Shahin: “Normally, I would get two weeks’ paternity leave, so I’d go back next week, which doesn’t seem that much. It was kind of a blessing to be home as well and help where needed.” Farah Habibi, 28, and Faisal Imadi, 27, two-year-old Araaz and baby Zaayan, born 6 March Habibi: “Zayaan was born two weeks before the lockdown. My mum stayed for two weeks, then I sent her home. She would usually have stayed with me a lot longer. We FaceTime with her and my sister everyday. “My sister’s been dropping food outside the flat for us. We were self-isolating with him, but I’ve started going in the garden now. Today was the first proper walk I did with Araaz – he mostly goes out with his dad.”