On Wednesday, Jenny Slate and Kristen Bell, two white American actors, announced that they would step down from voicing their mixed-race characters in the animated comedies Big Mouth and Central Park respectively. Slate gave up her gig as the character Missy, explaining that she had realised that it was “an act of erasure of black people”. Bell quit her part, too, saying that she was “happy to relinquish this role to someone who can give a much more accurate portrayal”. Their decisions come after a month when race and racism have been interrogated on a global scale, and where much of popular culture is being seen for what it is: wholly problematic. The initial conversation around blackface on TV, and the withdrawal of shows such as Little Britain and an episode of Fawlty Towers from streaming services (the latter has since been reinstated by UKTV) distracts from the more systemic change needed. Offensive and vulgar as many of these shows were, the answer was surely to preface them with content warnings rather than to bin them, and stoke the fires of an often idiotic culture war. Tabloid conversations about “woke” PC culture in a frenzy are a diversion from the bigger issues at hand: the persistence of white supremacy, and the fact that it had taken another kind of media – the killing of George Floyd, broadcast across the world – for many white people to acknowledge the existence of racism in the 21st century. There is of course a conversation to be had about why these programmes, especially in the case of David Walliams and Matt Lucas’s output, were still being made until as recently as they were – and the “ironic racism” that went along with them. However, as the conversation grew, it was evidently a distraction from bigger structural issues. A colleague pointed out that none of the young people they were interviewing at Black Lives Matter protests had even heard of Fawlty Towers. Which brings us back to Slate and Bell, and the active role that the TV and entertainment industry can play in addressing racial disparity now that those black squares on Instagram and promises to “do better” are but a memory. This week, 3,500 people working in the UK TV and film industries signed a letter calling on broadcasters to take action. No longer are nebulous conversations about bringing in “diverse talent” the order of the day: the emphasis is on specifics, from enlisting more independent producers to making sure that people parachuted in on diversity schemes are allowed to progress rather than stagnate in lower roles (which, of course, mean lower salaries and ever-widening pay gaps). You could ask (as I had before they resigned) why these actors accepted these jobs in the first place. As we’ve seen in the past month, much of this comes down to the way some people have been allowed to centre themselves in the world, and the misguided belief that living your life in a polite, passive, kind of anti-racist way is the same thing as actively being anti-racist (spoiler alert: it isn’t). But there is a chance now to make things right through genuine engagement. Quitting a role is one thing, but how can both actors make sure that they take the responsibility they’ve pledged to take going forward? What things can they, and others, call out or not allow to continue? bell hooks said: “While it is in no way racist for any author to write a book exclusively about white women, it is fundamentally racist for books to be published that focus solely on the American white woman’s experience in which that experience is assumed to be the American woman’s experience.” The same could easily be said for TV, where representation is still often of the stereotyped or siloed kind. I draw the line at praising Slate or Bell for giving up their roles, as this commitment to people of colour appears to be an afterthought (while Bell was newer to her role, Slate had played hers for three years). However, it is something. In a world where actors like these can play any role that they like, some things just shouldn’t be on the table. Now: let’s make sure their replacements are on the same salaries.