To mark World Refugee Day on Saturday, Goal Click and UNHCR, the UN Refugee Agency, have launched a new photographic series, Goal Click Refugees. The series is collaborating with refugees and asylum seekers around the world to tell their personal stories and experiences through the common language of football – in refugee settlements and their new host communities. Goal Click, the global football storytelling and photography project, gave each refugee participant a disposable camera to capture the realities of their football lives and communities. From refugee camps in Jordan and Kenya to the playing fields of Middlesbrough and Sydney, the stories give a chance to hear the voices and see the perspectives of marginalised and dispossessed people around the world. My name is Khadija Ahmadi, I am 20 and originally from Afghanistan. I came to Austria at the end of 2015. A year later, I heard from a supervisor in the youth accommodation where I was staying that there was an opportunity here for women to play football. This is how I came to the Kicken ohne Grenzen team. At the first match we played with the men, some of the guys were still saying that we should stay at home. We talked to them and tried to show them that we belong here. Football doesn’t belong to men alone. It’s not a man thing. We can play it too if we want. A week later, the guys apologised. That was a good thing. Women can also play football well; it is just that men have been playing it for longer. I was also able to learn what being a referee is all about. I have since refereed a few games. When there are disputes, it is a big challenge to keep the teams under control. Sometimes you also have to be strict. I have seen a lot of Vienna thanks to football. We have been to districts I had never been to before and we have been able to get to know the city better. Through football and my new friends, I’ve been able to find myself again. When I say that, people may think that it’s an easy thing to say. But in my case, it was different. I didn’t know the language; I didn’t know anyone. It’s as if you are being born as a baby again. I think you can only understand it if you’ve experienced it yourself. One thing that’s changed over all these years is that only a few team members still wear a headscarf. I barely wear the hijab anymore. But that’s only partly to do with football. I simply wanted to integrate. I want to look like who I am and not be seen differently just because of a scarf. It was difficult for me to take a decision. I’d been used to wearing the hijab my whole life. And I always heard that if you don’t wear the hijab you go to hell. But now I feel free. I just want to have my peace and quiet here in Austria. I had to wait two and a half years for the asylum decision. I finally got a positive decision a year ago. Now I want to live independently. I thought an apprenticeship would be good in order to have a stable life. I applied for an apprenticeship as a dental assistant. Unfortunately, I wasn’t taken. I still wasn’t self-confident back then. It’s got a lot better since. Now I have an apprenticeship as an optician. When you arrive somewhere new, things aren’t very easy to start with. My name is Mehdi Rakhshandeh and I was born in Rasht, in the north of Iran. I played football regularly as a goalkeeper in Iran, not at a high level, just games with my friends from the local town. I was a sport photographer and reporter in Iran for 15 years. I worked for a news agency and was a photographer for the club Sepidrood Rasht SC, but I left Iran in November 2017 and arrived in Middlesbrough in January 2018. Growing up in Iran, the team I supported was Esteghlal FC but now I have adopted Middlesbrough as my team. I moved to London in November 2019 and have been doing photography in the city. Sometimes I play football with my friends. I want to work in a football club, preferably a top club like Chelsea, Tottenham, or Arsenal. Unfortunately, I don’t have a job right now, but I would like to find a job in London. In the future I hope to return to my true passion of sports photography and journalism. I hope one day to be able to do this in my new adopted country. One day I could be photographing Middlesbrough lifting the Premier League trophy! This photograph features one of my teammates and was taken in Middlesbrough during a tournament in Refugee Week called the Justice First Football Tournament. Football is important to me as it is a way of bringing people together and sharing a common love for the game. It also helps in life because it can make you feel lots of different emotions. From the thrill of winning a match, scoring a goal or saving a penalty, to the disappointment of losing or the pain of getting injured. Football played a big role in my life as I got accustomed to my new surroundings in Middlesbrough in particular. I played each week with the MFC Foundation and it helped me to meet new people, learn about my new surroundings and improve my English! The football club really made me feel welcome and part of the community. Girls can play football. Football is not just for men. It is a great sport. Football is important in our community as it entertains people, and it gives them positive energy. I did not play football in Syria before I came to Jordan because of the war. Jordanian people are like us, there is no difference. At first, I used to play football in the street, but my parents wouldn’t allow me. After that they started to be convinced that it was good for me to play football. This photo was during a UNHCR tournament in the camp. Many organisations had teams participate. For me, football is everything in my life. I wish I could be a professional player. I dream of being a famous footballer. I wish I could win the World Cup. Football is important because back in the day it was only for males and now, we can play it. It used to be that gymnastics was for females and now we can all play anything we want. I am from the East region of Cameroon. I was born in Bertoua, where I studied. I left for the Adamawa region in 2014 for university but I did not finish due to limited financial resources. For that reason, I returned to Bertoua and began to volunteer and project manage community projects. In 2016 I began coaching – I have been coaching for three years and am a coach with Red Deporte. These photos reflect the activity of the public school of Bindia, a school supported and built by Red Deporte in 2012. These kids belong to the community and many of them are refugees from Central African Republic. The refugees came with their families around five years ago. Most of the children know how to play football because they used to play in their home country. Most of the children do not share their experiences and usually we do not try to make them tell their history. Instead we work to bring them joy, peace and hope through our programme. Although I noticed that many of the refugee children, when they were asked to draw something from their country, they often drew soldiers and airplanes, especially the boys. The primary school of Bindia is a public school where students from refugee families are in majority. In the classrooms we have both Cameroonian and Central African children. And they play together during breaks. They also meet outside school as they live in the same areas and communities in Mandjou. The refugees are well integrated into the communities because many of them have developed businesses. Every boy dreams to be Samuel Eto’o, but even if they won’t be that, they enjoy the dreaming and the process of personal improvement – and the friendship that is built on the way to this dream. To read more stories from Goal Click Refugees click here.