Emma Nicholson has been removed from her honorary position as vice-president of the Booker Foundation after a groundswell of opposition from the literary world objecting to her allegedly homophobic views. Lady Nicholson of Winterbourne is the widow of Sir Michael Caine, who helped establish the prestigious British literary prize. Her position as honorary vice-president of the Booker Foundation was challenged by writers led by Damian Barr, who objected to what the novelist and memoirist described as Nicholson’s “very public and very powerful homophobia”, and called for her removal from the post. The peer voted against the same-sex marriage bill in 2013, and was criticised earlier this month for her views on the subject. This week, the model and transgender activist Munroe Bergdorf announced that she would be referring Nicholson to the parliamentary commissioner for standards over her social media posts about the trans community. On Wednesday, Nicholson rejected the accusation of homophobia. “I did indeed vote against same-sex marriage in 2013,” she told the Guardian. “I have not yet learned from my critics how I am offending by perceived homophobia. In other words, they have offered no evidence.” After initially distancing itself from Nicholson’s views, and saying that she played no role in selecting judges or novels for the award, the Booker responded to the mounting criticism from writers, publishers and literary agents with an emergency board meeting, issuing a second statement on Wednesday night in which it announced the abolition of the “honorary titles” used by the foundation. “Upon her retirement from the Board in 2009, Baroness Nicholson was made an honorary vice-president, a role that gave her no say in the governance or operations of the foundation or prizes,” said the Booker’s board of trustees in a statement. “In recent days there has been some confusion about the nature of honorary titles used by the foundation. Too many believe that these titles in some way symbolise the prizes. That is not the case. “We have today decided that these titles and roles should, with immediate effect, cease to exist. Those holding them have been informed and thanked for their longstanding interest.” The statement said that the trustees of the prize “deplore racism, homophobia and transphobia – and do not discriminate on any grounds”, reiterating that Nicholson’s views were her own. “Literature is open, plural and questioning. We believe every author’s work should be approached by readers in the same spirit. Integrity is central to both Booker prizes, whose judging process is conducted at all times in keeping with these values,” said the trustees. Responding to the decision, Nicholson told the Guardian she was happy to have contributed to the Booker’s success. “I’m content to have assisted the Booker survive when Booker PLC withdrew,” she said, “when my input made a significant difference in setting up the foundation, but I am not a literary person so I resigned once it was successfully reestablished independent of sponsoring company. Since then I have been a quiet admirer, a place which does not demand a title or honorary position.” Barr welcomed the Booker Foundation’s “decisive move”. “I think it sends a really clear message to other arts organisations that there is no room for discrimination and hatred,” he said. But he insisted that the Booker still needs to take further action: “I hope they realise the steps they’ve taken are part of a journey and that has to include a diversity review, which is well resourced and funded and public, so that faith can be restored in the prizes.”