The Glastonbury ExperienceIn lieu of fields, Glastonbury’s 50th anniversary goes virtual, with the BBC pumping out umpteen landmark sets from the festival’s archives next weekend. On BBC iPlayer and BBC Sounds, Thursday, 10am, to Sunday, plus a live highlights show on BBC Two presented by Clara Amfo, Lauren Laverne and others (Friday, Saturday & Sunday, 8.30pm). Kitty Empire On the RecordA major talking point at Sundance this year, Kirby Dick and Amy Ziering’s riveting documentary views the music industry through a #MeToo lens, probing multiple sexual abuse allegations against hip-hop mogul Russell Simmons. Online from Friday. Guy Lodge IrresistibleUS politics might be beyond satire, but that doesn’t stop writer/director Jon Stewart giving it a shot. Steve Carell stars as a Democrat strategist, Chris Cooper is the retired marine he convinces to run for Mayor. Online from Friday. Wendy Ide A Midsummer Night’s DreamCaptured live from London’s Bridge theatre last year, Nicholas Hytner’s high-flying production includes among the cast Gwendoline Christie, Oliver Chris, David Moorst and Hammed Animashaun. Available on the National Theatre’s YouTube from Thursday, 7pm, for seven days. Susannah Clapp Secundino HernándezAn extended reality show of new paintings by this highly original Spanish artist, whose semi-abstractions run all the way from calligraphy to a Turneresque sublime: strange and beautiful. At victoria-miro.com from Tuesday until 25 July. Laura Cumming Live: Portrait Artist of the WeekMary Beard is the celebrity sitter, as previous winners of the week take turns to paint her. Hosted by Joan Bakewell. Sky Arts, today, 1pm. LC RinaldoGlyndebourne is making past productions available online for free each Sunday at 5pm. Today it’s Handel’s Rinaldo, a Crusades tale given a riotous schoolroom makeover in Robert Carsen’s 2011 production. At glyndebourne.com until 5pm on 28 June. Fiona Maddocks Splendid Isolation: Lockdown DramaLisa McGee, the genius behind TV’s Derry Girls, is one of six of Northern Ireland’s finest dramatists exploring the ups and downs of Covid-19 lockdown in this set of five-minute dramas directed by, among others, Game of Thrones’ Conleth Hill. Commissioned by BBC Arts NI and Belfast’s Lyric theatre, with the Arts Council of Northern Ireland. BBC Two Northern Ireland, Thursday, 10pm; then on BBC Four and BBC iPlayer. Clare Brennan HaimDelayed then brought forward again, Women in Music Part III (WIMPIII for short) is the LA sisters’ third LP, taking in UK garage, jazz and country. Out on Friday. KE ManonManon was created by Kenneth MacMillan for the Royal Ballet and is most familiar in their version, but the English National Ballet’s production is a stunner, and this digital stream features a glorious cast including Joseph Caley as the student Des Grieux and Alina Cojocaru, one of the very best interpreters of the part of Manon, the socially ambitious beauty he falls for. It leads to tragedy, naturally. Music by Massenet. From Wednesday, 7pm, for 48 hours, on ENB’s YouTube and Facebook. Sarah Crompton This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.