New details have emerged about a book by Donald Trump’s niece, which its publisher says will “explain how her uncle became the man who now threatens the world’s health, economic security, and social fabric”. According to the publisher, the book will describe “a nightmare of traumas, destructive relationships, and a tragic combination of neglect and abuse” that explain the inner workings of “one of the world’s most powerful and dysfunctional families”. News of Too Much and Never Enough: How My Family Created the World’s Most Dangerous Man, which is scheduled to be released in July, broke in the US on Sunday evening. Further information has since emerged on the book’s Amazon page. According to the publisher’s blurb, Mary L Trump, “a trained clinical psychologist and Donald’s only niece” will “shine a bright light on the dark history of their family” and offer a “revelatory, authoritative portrait of Donald J Trump and the toxic family that made him”. Mary Trump was reportedly a key source for the New York Times’ Pulitzer prize-winning coverage of the family’s tax affairs. The Amazon blurb for her book says she “spent much of her childhood in her grandparents’ large, imposing house in the heart of Queens, where Donald and his four siblings grew up”. “She describes a nightmare of traumas, destructive relationships, and a tragic combination of neglect and abuse. She explains how specific events and general family patterns created the damaged man who currently occupies the Oval Office, including the strange and harmful relationship between Fred Trump and his two oldest sons, Fred Jr and Donald.” Fred Trump Jr, Mary Trump’s father, left the family business and died in 1981, aged 42, of heart problems arising from alcoholism. Mary Trump has a brother, Fred III. Donald Trump’s surviving siblings are Maryanne Trump Barry, a retired judge, and Robert Trump, a businessman. Mary Trump studied English at Tufts and Columbia and clinical psychology at Adelphi University. In 2000, she gave a rare interview to the New York Daily News, in which she said her “aunt and uncles should be ashamed of themselves” for their behaviour over Fred Trump Sr’s will and their treatment of a nephew with cerebral palsy. She has expressed opposition to her father on Twitter, in a rarely used account which currently features a prominent picture of Black Lives Matter Boulevard, a street near the White House which was renamed after Trump ordered an assault on peaceful protesters so he could stage a photo op at St John’s church. Mary Trump now plans to offer “unsparing detail [on] everything from her uncle Donald’s place in the family spotlight and [his first wife] Ivana’s penchant for regifting to her grandmother’s frequent injuries and illnesses and the appalling way Donald, Fred Trump’s favorite son, dismissed and derided him when he began to succumb to Alzheimer’s”. As the blurb says, “pundits, armchair psychologists and journalists have sought to parse Donald J Trump’s lethal flaws”. Previous titles in such vein include Trump on the Couch and The Dangerous Case of Donald Trump. According to publisher Simon & Schuster – which is also behind former national security adviser John Bolton’s imminent tell-all and Bob Woodward’s Trump books – Mary Trump “has the education, insight, and intimate familiarity needed to reveal what makes Donald, and the rest of her clan, tick. “She alone can recount this fascinating, unnerving saga, not just because of her insider’s perspective but also because she is the only Trump willing to tell the truth about one of the world’s most powerful and dysfunctional families.” Trump has threatened to block Bolton’s book, which is due out next Tuesday, although most observers suggest any effort to go to court is unlikely to work given first amendment protections of free speech. The president has not commented on reports about the book by his niece. Too Much and Never Enough is scheduled to be released on 28 July.