It’s not the first time that vitriolic disagreement over transgender rights has been characterised as a generational clash, but the pitting this week of the author JK Rowling, a long-time feminist campaigner in her 50s, against a swathe of Harry Potter stars in their early 30s, has been especially stark. After Rowling published a lengthy essay explaining the development of her critical stance in sex and gender debates, the lead actors of the Potter movie franchise, Daniel Radcliffe, Emma Watson and Rupert Grint, have all made public their support for transgender rights. While equalities groups point to research showing that younger people do tend to be more supportive of transgender equality, others suggest the evidence is more nuanced. “In terms of awareness and language, there is definitely a generational shift going on,” says Finn Mackay, a sociology lecturer at the University of the West of England and author of a forthcoming book on female masculinities and the gender wars. “We know that Generation Zers, a marketing term used to define those born roughly between 1995 and 2003, are most likely to use different pronouns like they/them, or to identify as non-binary, and they see these terms as a lot more fluid.” Mackay adds: “Also, we know that plenty of young people too have questions about sex and gender, and about including trans women in women-only spaces or not, and there are a lot more people still who are in the middle and don’t even understand what the row is about.” Elena Soper, national programmes coordinator for YWCA Scotland and in her late 20s, said her generation “are definitely more relaxed about transgender rights”. “Perhaps it’s because we’re the first generation able to get instant information online, and so much work being done debunking anti-trans arguments that we’re less likely to take things at face value. Growing up, we’ve also been more exposed to trans people, so it’s not a strange thing to us. We knew people at school or university who were trans, and there’s just a lot more acceptance.” There is anger directed towards the older generation of feminists who question transgender rights, says Soper, and she argues that is understandable in context. “Some of the arguments put forward are really frightening, for example the supposed threats to children, and some of those voices are very loud. There’s so much misinformation out there and it’s really saddening. There’s a lot of anger of both sides, because it’s so frustrating, but it’s very difficult to know what we an do to take the poison out of it.” But Lucy Hunter Blackburn, of the policy analyst collective Murray Blackburn Mackenzie, which has produced a number of critical papers on proposed Scottish government reforms, believes that talk of a generational divide must also confront the ageism inherent in much online discussion. “This debate has become an excuse to parade some pretty ugly attitudes about the right of women over a certain age to have a public voice, and the value of older women’s political views. An unflattering veil has been drawn back on attitudes towards older women, particularly it appears among younger men, despite the fact that polling shows that at all ages it’s men who have views based more strongly on physical sex. “It’s been thought-provoking to see how quickly language steeped in sexism and ageism is invoked by people who are very quick to linguistically police others.” Sara, a Glasgwegian trans woman in her early 20s, says that simple familiarity informs the attitudes of most of her peers. “Lots of older people don’t even know what a trans person is, or have made lots of assumptions based on their fear of the unknown, or fear of being wrong,” she says. Sara adds that, while a few of her trans friends are active online, many others are just trying to get on with their lives. “I don’t want to be an activist, I just want to live my life. But with all the toxic stuff online, that is getting increasingly hard.”