As protests continue throughout the US in reaction to the death of George Floyd, the African American man who died under the knee of a white police officer in Minneapolis, the Guardian has spoken to readers about why they have taken part in demonstrations – and what needs to change. Here are some of their responses: I’ve been protesting in Oakland because I don’t want any more suffering of my people and I want society to change. I shouldn’t have to explain to my seven-year-old sister that we are treated differently because of the color of our skin and I don’t want to one day have to give my own children that talk, that you’re black, you’re going be treated differently and you need to be more careful than everyone else. I don’t like that we are still fighting to achieve Dr Martin Luther King’s dream of equality. It’s been like this for over 400 years. And when I saw the video of George Floyd being suffocated to death lying in the pavement I saw my friends, family and even myself there. It made me angry as hell. None of us should be ashamed of who we are. But we’re just going to keep dying, unless we continue to protest. Sage De Zion Kopelman, 13, student athlete, California I started protesting in Columbus after much deliberation. I am concerned about the spread of Covid-19 and also about being in the wrong place at the wrong time. However, I am brown, my family is multiracial and my students are black and brown. If I don’t take part in these protests, I am allowing systemic injustices to affect people like me and those I serve indefinitely. We are Americans and we deserve to live with the same freedoms as everyone else in this country, these include peaceful protesting and exercising our right to free speech without fear of aggressive police or government response. The tensions have been high all weekend here so to see Trump inflaming the situation was horrifying. Then, soon after, our streets were taken over by teargas and Swat teams, it was surreal. Rachael Underwood, 33, teacher, Ohio My family and I marched the first night following the death of George Floyd. We marched because it was obvious that an injustice had been done at the hands of those we pay to maintain justice. We also joined in peaceful protests at the capitol building in St Paul. I also joined in prayer at 38th and Chicago with a group of local clergy who led the crowd in prayer for nine minutes. It was powerful. Unfortunately, we were in the crowd at the third precinct in Minneapolis when someone in the crowd threw the first brick. Our experience is that the protests have been overwhelmingly peaceful and the leaders of the protests have consistently discouraged violence. Patrick Doherty, church minister, Minneapolis I live in Marin county, an affluent, mostly white county just north of San Francisco. Some of us decided we needed to put ourselves in the street to protest against white supremacy and show that black lives matter to us. We reached out to friends and we ended up with between 60 and 70 people. We lined a block of the road for over an hour, with signs. It was a small protest but every voice counts. It’s necessary that white people especially come out and show that we reject this white supremacist system. This has been going on for the entire history of the US, and it has to end now. It’s time. People of all races are coming together to demand change, but this administration cannot respond. We are worried about the future. It feels like we are at a tipping point. We have to choose sides: are we for equality, or are we for racism? There is no other position. Rachael Vaughan, 57, professor, California I was at the White House on 31 May and 1 June, and will continue protesting to help keep momentum. I have known people that have been beaten up by police and am furious that law enforcement are not held accountable. With police increasingly militarized, I am scared for my friends and family. Unarmed protesters in front of the White House have been confronted with police armed with assault rifles and flash-bang grenades in armored trucks as military helicopters fly above. When I speak with older people who protested in the 60s and 70s, they talk about having appointed mediators who would go and talk to the police to ensure fewer people would be hurt or de-escalate tensions. I could not imagine such a role now given how well-equipped yet poorly trained this new generation of officers seems to be. Mohammad Soroush, 33, public health worker, Washington DC* I have advanced multiple sclerosis, and because of my frail health my husband and I have been in lockdown since early March. Wednesday 3 June was our first public outing, joining over 1,000 protesters who lined up along two intersecting boulevards during rush hour. The site was near enough for me to get there on my electric wheelchair. As teachers of working-class students, many of them African American and other minorities in the community college and state university system, we are well aware of and utterly fed up with the double inequality of race and class in this country. It was a moving experience, especially when everyone fell silent and knelt for nine minutes. I’ve been protesting against racism since my early 20s. It is a ray of hope that as we near the end of our lives we can see so many of our fellow Americans finally rise to take a stand. Gretchen, 77, retired teacher, Baltimore I had told myself I would not protest. It made no sense in the midst of a highly contagious outbreak while police cars are mowing demonstrators down and knees are still being used to pacify us. I was scared and I imagined the headline: “Black man dies protesting death of black man.” But change will not happen if we are not prepared to press our agenda. I realised this is something I need to do. Black people’s needs, wants, desires and rights have been capped for so many years. We’ve been banging on that cap for so many years because life beneath it is so much less than we deserve. And in the meantime we’re being killed. The only way forward is to fight through that barrier and get to the point where we can actually breathe. We don’t feel safe, secure or relaxed; you live with it but it means feelings of peace are fleeting. We’ve got to keep the pressure on and we need to become fully entitled to justice just like everybody else. Cav, 54, MC from the Wonderground Dance Party, Brooklyn I protest because I and those I love have been subject to harassment from the police our entire lives. It’s no secret that America is heading towards being a hyper-militarized police state and one community is being prolifically abused. There are good people but the black community has been oppressed and enslaved for the vast majority of this country’s history. You can’t calculate how many black people have died. It’s criminal and we demand change; it starts with the police system because that is the linchpin of control over communities. The protests aren’t going to stop. Donald Trump’s pulling from the old dictator playbook and it goes really, really deep for us out here in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and elsewhere. It’s just one travesty of justice after another. We want real oversight and for the entire system to be reformed from the inside out. We’re past the point of just wanting to work with the authorities. Erik Shepherd, 40, hospitality professional, Oklahoma Some names have been changed