What was the situation like when the league was suspended on 13 March? United were almost as frustrated as Liverpool at the timing of the break. They had just completed their first league double over Manchester City in a decade and after an up and down season under Ole Gunnar Solskjær were looking a good bet – only three points behind Chelsea – for a fourth-place finish. A lot of that confidence was down to Bruno Fernandes, who provided an almost immediate uplift on his arrival from Sporting Lisbon in January, and partly because of that signing a confidence was spreading through the squad that Solskjær might be the right man in the right place after all. United are virtually assured of a place in the Europa League last eight after putting five goals past LASK away from home and are still in the FA Cup, with a quarter-final at Norwich awaiting the go-ahead.What about now? United supporters just want to see their club playing again, to check the improvement was real. Solskjær perhaps unwisely suggested a wealthy club such as United may be in a position to cherry pick the best players from less fortunate ones once the coronavirus crisis has blown over. The idea was quickly rejected by the executive vice-chairman, Ed Woodward, who said the club would be subject to the same straitened financial circumstances as everyone else. Judging by the number of top-level players United have been linked with during the hiatus Woodward was not widely believed but a more immediate concern at Old Trafford is whether Paul Pogba is ready to rejoin the fray after missing most of the season. Marcus Rashford is also understood to be close to fitness after missing United’s past few games with a back injury. What needs to be done to have a successful end to the season? A Champions League place has always been at the forefront of United’s ambitions and it looks as if it could be accomplished by a top-four finish rather than the more arduous and unpredictable Europa League route. If that is achieved Solskjær will be judged a success, no question, despite some hairy moments in his first year in charge. United are not the sort of club who can pretend winning the FA Cup makes everything wonderful, two managers ago Louis van Gaal was sacked the day after a Wembley triumph. If Solskjær can oversee a return to the Champions League other bits of the jigsaw will fall into place and Mauricio Pochettino’s availability will be less of a distraction. Success may also include getting Pogba back on the pitch. Since the arrival of Fernandes there has been a feeling he may no longer be needed and United would be wise to cash in, though potentially the pair could provide a dynamic midfield partnership if they get the chance.Have players and staff behaved during lockdown? United have enjoyed, if that is the word, a quiet lockdown. Unless you count Pogba and Anthony Martial shaving their heads in the first couple of weeks.Any unsung/community heroes? Rashford received special recognition from the High Sheriff of Manchester for his charity work during the lockdown. The England striker helped raise over £20m for FareShare, a food-bank charity, and has also been involved in projects working with homeless people in Manchester.Key player in the run-in? Fernandes, if he keeps up his impact, or Rashford, if he is able to return in time. Pogba remains a possibility but United fans will believe it when they see it.End-of-season prediction Fourth place in Premier League. Silverware might beckon on two other fronts but United know what needs to be done and they had begun to resemble a team capable of doing it. In normal circumstances Solskjær might have had a tricky decision to make about which games to prioritise but the Europa League being pushed back in the calendar could work in his favour. Remaining fixtures (all times BST): Fri 19 June Tottenham (a) 8.15pm, Sky Sports Wed 24 June Sheffield United (h) 6pm, Sky Sports Tue 30 June Brighton (a) 8.15pm, Sky Sports TBC Bournemouth (h), Aston Villa (a), Southampton (h), Crystal Palace (a), West Ham (h), Leicester (a).