Tens of thousands of people have protested across the UK against racism following the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis, and there are growing calls for steps to address institutional discrimination. Here we speak to people about why they have been demonstrating, what needs to change and whether they will continue protesting. Seeing so many generations of black people was emotional. It was empowering and really motivated me to strive for change – specifically in education. What are we teaching our kids? We don’t learn about migration and the British empire but if people realised that Asians and Africans helped build this country, and contributed so much to what we call Great Britain today, they might open their hearts more. It makes some people feel uncomfortable, seeing black people protesting in this way. It’s hard for people to admit their ancestors have done wrong and that society has to change. Sometimes we need to accept criticism because that’s the way forward. I’m not impressed with the government. I think Priti Patel’s completely ignorant and doesn’t care about why we’re protesting and is even telling us not to. All lives don’t matter until black lives matter. Inara Andre, 16, Manchester I’m standing in solidarity with black people across the world. As a black race we’ve continually been subjugated to oppression and systemic racism and we are not taught our own history. We need radical change to policies that keep black people disproportionately in prison, excluded from healthcare and education, and suffering from mental health conditions. We need to be able to have our voices in prominent places but in order for that to happen ideologies have to change. I feel completely obliged to attend upcoming protests. This is a historic moment and I want to be a part of it, show my solidarity and be able to tell my daughter about it. I want her to grow up in a society where we invest in each other, where the best isn’t kept for the elites. A lot of people are getting behind the movement because they can relate to the disenfranchisement that black people have felt for so long. I want there to be a community again, so much has been torn down by this government. Chantelle West, 32 London As a British Asian woman, I know that racism is still a huge issue. BAME people have been silenced by society because people are blind to racism or are afraid of admitting there is a problem. People need to admit, especially in government, that racism is still a big issue in our country and they need to listen to the black community more. The diversity training in businesses is not good enough, we need harder conversations; and the curriculum needs to change, it’s focused on American slavery rather than Britain’s role. If I decide to have kids one day, I don’t want them to suffer because of the colour of their skin, to be harassed like I have been. I was always called a “paki”. Even now if I walk down the street with my white partner, he has “paki shagger” shouted at him. But what I’ve experienced is nothing like what the black community has endured. Leitisha, 25, Manchester I was effectively imprisoned in this country even though I was born here. My mum came over with the Windrush generation and I wasn’t able to get a passport even though I had a birth certificate and went to school here. My little sister went to Jamaica and couldn’t come back to the UK for a year and a half. People have been deported because the Home Office scrapped our boarding papers and I had to do a citizenship test to get my passport, we learned about the Spanish armada and Winston Churchill. Have you ever walked down a road and seen a woman hide her bag from you? Are you pulled over multiple times by police every week? Do you have security guards following you around shops? I’ve learned to deal with this because I’ve accepted it as normal behaviour. There’s deeply rooted racism but it’s been amazing to see how much people from different ethnic backgrounds have stood up for these protests, it’s the start of change. We need to start building communities, respect and equality. Faron Paul, 34, London Even though we’re in the middle of a pandemic, there’s too much at risk by not going out and protesting. I feel like it’s my responsibility to raise my son to question the status quo when it negatively impacts the most vulnerable in our society. There is police brutality here in the UK. And look at the way black and brown people are dealt with by police and in the justice system. In 2012 a judge cleared an officer of calling a man the n-word even though it was caught on tape. People go over and above to defend white people, but this is not extended to black and brown people. There really needs to be a move within mass media and more people of colour need to be represented in analysis, editorial and coverage. It’s a whole system, the way the narrative is framed. There’s no serious analysis about why people are burning things or causing disorder, it’s often those who have been systematically deprived of owning property and access to capital. Manda Molina, 30, Edinburgh I have always thought of myself as an ally to causes such as Black Lives Matter but I have done this from the comfort of my home in the safety that my white privilege allows. Events in the US have been a wake-up call to do more to highlight the serious issues within our own society. I had never attended a protest before until Saturday and I was quite nervous about the persisting risks of coronavirus but felt like I needed to go. Everyone was really respectful; the feeling and the energy was incredible. It was a very emotional experience. Black history in British culture and especially in education is completely whitewashed. I came out of studying history at university and school knowing absolutely nothing about black history in the UK and it seems to be we will happily ignore the sins of our past and instead learn about those of other countries. I really think that needs to change. It’s time to be anti-racist, not just non-racist. Rob S, 33, Milton Keynes