Lost on the Frontline contributors Tue 2 Jun 2020 11.00 BST Lost on the frontline is a collaboration between the Guardian and Kaiser Health News that aims to document the lives of healthcare workers in the US who die from Covid-19, and to understand why so many are falling victim to the pandemic. Each week, we’re documenting new cases of healthcare workers who have died on the frontlines of the coronavirus pandemic. Here are their stories: Devin FrancisDedicated dad and technologist ‘was as smart as they come’Age: 44Occupation: Radiology technologistPlace of work: Jackson Memorial hospital in Miami, FloridaDate of death: 8 April 2020 Devin Francis was due to get married on 27 June to his longtime love, Micela Scott, mother of their 11-year-old daughter, Dekayla. Scott said her fiance was a devoted father. “He’d take [Dekayla] to school every morning. He’d help her with her homework,” she said. “He just wanted peace to his life and us to have a good life.” “He had a very jovial spirit,” said his youngest sister, Junette Francis. Francis said she urged her brother, who worked in the emergency room, to get tested when she noticed that his usual light cough had become pronounced. (She and Micela later tested positive for the virus; both are now healthy.) Devin took a Covid-19 test at Jackson Memorial after his shift on 6 April – it came back positive. His breathing became labored and he died early on 8 April after EMS arrived at his home. His family and a hospital representative said it was unclear whether he came into contact with patients with Covid-19. Devin also worked in fleet services for American Airlines. Colleagues admired his work ethic. “No matter where we were in life, he never had less than two jobs,” said Milton Gonzalez, a hospital co-worker. “He was as smart as they come.” – Sharon Jayson Krist Angielen Castro GuzmanYoung nurse lived a life of ‘no regrets’ Age: 35Occupation: Licensed practical nursePlace of work: Meadowbrook Manor in Bolingbrook, IllinoisDate of death: 2 May 2020 Krist Guzman packed a lot into her short life. She worked full time while studying to become a registered nurse. She had three children, including a newborn. Smart, funny and outgoing, she nurtured relationships. “Hers was a life of no regrets,” said a cousin, Jeschelyn Pilar. In a navy family that moved often, she was close to her brother, Anjo Castro. “She was my role model,” said Castro, who also pursued a medical career as an independent duty corpsman in the navy. The pandemic hit home when their uncle, pediatric surgeon Dr Leandro Resurreccion III, died on 31 March. Guzman told family she had seen patients with Covid-19. Worried she didn’t have adequate protective gear, she scrambled to find some online. Meadowbrook has registered the worst Covid-19 outbreak in Illinois, with more than three dozen deaths. A representative for the nursing home said in a statement: “Meadowbrook puts the safety and welfare of its residents and staff at the forefront of everything we do.” She did not address whether there was sufficient protective gear. – Mary Chris Jaklevic Bishop Bruce Edward Davis, 57He practiced what he preached, caring for inmates with mental illness Age: 57Occupation: Shift leader for forensic service techniciansPlace of work: Central State hospital in Milledgeville, GeorgiaDate of death: 11 April 2020 In sermons at his Pentecostal church, Bishop Bruce Davis preached love. On weekdays, he practiced it by feeding, bathing and caring for patients at a maximum-security psychiatric hospital. Davis worked for 27 years at the state facility, said his wife, Gwendolyn Davis. As a boy, Davis would break his pencils in half to share with his twin sister. At church, he hosted youth parades and gave away computers, bicycles and groceries. He distilled the Bible into simple lessons, she said, once winning over a parishioner with a sermon based on The Wizard of Oz. When Covid-19 emerged, Davis and his co-workers at the psychiatric facility were told they couldn’t wear masks or gloves because it wasn’t part of their uniform, she said. Five days after a close co-worker tested positive for Covid-19, Davis was hospitalized, she said. More than 70 workers at the hospital have tested positive for Covid-19, according to state data; Davis is one of two who have died. A hospital spokesperson declined to comment on Davis’s case. After Davis’s illness, his entire household – Gwendolyn, three children and a grandchild – got sick with Covid-19, Gwendolyn said. Their adult son, who has autism, was hospitalized, Gwendolyn said. Their daughter, 22, recovered and returned to work at the same hospital. “It is extremely hard for her to go back to work there,” Gwendolyn said. – Melissa Bailey Felicia AilendeAs nurse and minister, she tended to her patients, flocks – and garden Age: 67Occupation: Registered nursePlace of work: Bria of Forest Edge in Chicago, IllinoisDate of death: 20 April 2020 Felicia Ailende was a beacon of unity to her family and members of Maranatha chapel in Evergreen Park, Illinois, where she was a minister. She counseled many, helping keep marriages intact and lives on track, her son Elijah Ailende said. Though her six children were very different from one another, she saw the best in each. An immigrant from Nigeria, she planted a garden each year and used the produce to cook west African dishes. When there were too many cucumbers, hot peppers or greens, she shared with neighbors. At Bria of Forest Edge, a nursing home, Felicia cooked for residents at times or prayed for them, Elijah said. Administrator Julie Kosman said in a statement that Ailende was a hardworking nurse who was pleasant and funny and had a great rapport with residents. She is one of three workers at the facility who have died of Covid-19; two residents also died. The facility reported 132 infections. Elijah said staffers had to reuse surgical masks provided by the facility. Administrators did not tell them when residents and other staff members got the virus “so they could take precautions and safeguard their lives”, he said. Kosman’s statement says “full PPE” – personal protective equipment – was available to staffers and there is no reason to believe Ailende was exposed to Covid-19 “within our facility”. She “had no known contact with any resident or staff member who showed symptoms or had tested positive for Covid-19”. – Christina Jewett Shenetta White-Ballard, 44Psychiatric nurse knew her patients’ home towns and hobbies Age: 44Occupation: Licensed practical nursePlace of work: Legacy nursing and rehabilitation of Port Allen, LouisianaDate of death: 1 May 2020 Eddie Ballard was baking a pecan pie at the Piccadilly Cafeteria in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, when Shenetta White leaned over the buffet counter to grab a Jell-O. “She gave me this look,” Ballard said, and he gathered the confidence to ask for her number. On their first date he quickly realized “not only was she beautiful, but she was mature beyond her years”. That maturity manifested across her life. As a nurse to psychiatric patients, she was adored by those she “saw as people more than just patients”, Ballard said. She knew their parents’ names, their home towns and hobbies. At home, White-Ballard was “queen of the house”, Ballard said. She handled the errands and the finances, while “her two boys [Ballard and his son, Warren] hung on whatever she asked”. Due to a prior illness, White-Ballard depended on supplemental oxygen. She died on 1 May, just three days after developing Covid-19 symptoms. In an email, a Legacy spokesperson wrote that the facility had followed all guidelines and “had more than enough PPE”. The first piece of jewelry Ballard bought his wife was a bracelet that read: “Love is patient, love is kind, love never ends.” “I hadn’t read that in 11 years,” he said, “but boy, it’s still true.” – Eli Cahan