There were nerves, excitement, laughter – and some tears – as children, who have been stuck at home since schools were closed as part of a national lockdown to contain the coronavirus, returned to their classrooms for the first time in 10 weeks. For staff, who have had to work flat out to adapt their schools and timetables to ensure safe social distancing in the Covid era, it was a happy – though anxious – moment to see children back in classrooms that have remained largely empty, apart from small numbers of children of key workers and vulnerable pupils. While many parents remained fearful and chose not to send their children back, despite the government’s exhortations, those pupils who arrived could be seen queueing patiently at school entrances, keeping two metres apart, before being welcomed back to school and promptly sent to wash their hands. At Cooper Perry primary school in Stafford, in the West Midlands, head teacher Emily Proffitt said she had been “very relieved” that the first day back had gone to plan as some reception, year 1 and year 6 pupils returned. “I’ve been the most nervous I’ve been as a headteacher. When all the staff came in this morning, you could just see the nervous energy amongst us,” said Proffitt, who added that she didn’t manage to sleep on Sunday night. “Our fears were unwarranted, because the children came in brilliantly. They were automatically social distancing. Even our reception pupils were stood at two-metre intervals down the line.” All children are in groups of 15 or smaller, while break times are on a rota to allow each group space to play safely. Teachers have also been encouraged to head out to the school’s playing fields and adjoining forest area for classes because there is less risk of transmission outdoors. Among the most excited to return to school were year 6 pupils. “They were the worst at social distancing this morning – they needed to be reminded a little bit. You could see the excitement in their faces coming down the path. They were excited to have somebody to chat to and engage with,” said Proffitt. At Watlington primary school in Oxfordshire, headteacher Yvonne Hammerton-Jackson said the return of more pupils had marked a “successful, happy and safe day” but that only half of students from reception, year one and year six were invited back on site as there is not space for them all to be distanced. “We’re running a rota, which is not what we’re supposed to be doing, but it’s the only way I can do it,” she said, of the system where classes have been split into two, with half coming in for two days a week and the other half for two other days. Of those eligible to return, about half did on Monday. “We’ve given parents the option to revisit their decision in a fortnight’s time if they feel more confident, and I’m sure they will, so we’re expecting the numbers to grow,” she said. Children were given their own carpet tiles to sit on and many classes were taught outside. “They’ve been so pleased to see each other again,” Hammerton-Jackson said. “We’ve been teaching them how to stay apart but how to be friends. We’re keen for them to be in and have face-to-face experiences again.” At Bridgetown primary school in Stratford-upon-Avon, headteacher Jane Tailby said some children arrived at school wearing masks. “We’re not encouraging it,” she said, adding: “Most staff are not wearing masks and I’m quite pleased about that. It provides a reassuring and familiar environment for kids. “Some of the kids said it reminded them of Victorian days, because of the desks being separately set out in rows two metres apart and the vigorous hand-washing.” She added: “This isn’t about providing the richest curriculum, but simple activities to support children’s wellbeing, and talking to them about what they’ve been up to at home, to bridge [the] gap between home and school. “Everyone is apprehensive and a little bit nervous. But I think there’s also a sense of wanting to be back to school.” At Moorgate primary academy in Tamworth, Staffordshire, about 70% of pupils in the specified year groups turned up for classes. “It’s gone really smoothly,” said headteacher Jonathan Williams. “Obviously, it’s very different. “Some children are no longer with their normal class teacher. Some of them have found that a bit tricky. There’s been a few tears this morning – not too many. Most children were very excited and happy about being back.”