I am rich. Not in money, status, property, or any traditional form of wealth (unless bootleg Bart shirts count?), but in family. So I consider myself a rich kid, an aristocrat of sorts, in that I have a lot of something that I didn’t earn, and probably don’t deserve. A Jobseeker Prince from a Great House, a storied line of nurses, teachers, train drivers, wharfies, socialists, rabbit hunters and water-bombers. If you could be taxed for having too many cousins, I would be lobbying the government every damn day to leave me and mine the heck alone. Instead, I’m with my cousins, chilling out, playing Tony Hawk, and eating. I am the only only child (excluding the newies) in a family of 147. My mum is the youngest of what we call The Magnificent 7 (now the Fantastic 4), the children of my grandparents Bill and Francis Shea, who seemed to outpace the chickens on their farm when it came to hatchlings. And lo! Uncle Alan begat Cousin David who begat 2nd Cousin Soren, and so it goes. Enough begetting to make the Book of Matthew look like a vasectomy clinic. I know all my family well. We are all close. We all grow up together, play, hang out, holiday, and – most importantly – eat together. In a family that is 50% shit-stirers and 50% the easily stirred, the act of eating brings us together in a moment of silence (not really, we talk with our mouths full); but it certainly strengthens the family bond. Generations of us came up in and around my grandparents’ house in Palmyra, Western Australia. Over time, we established a litany of traditions, artefacts, and rituals that we maintain to this day. The most important of these are the lunches, which we hold weekly. At one point, there were three regular family lunches. Tuesday at an aunt’s, a small affair (10 or so), usually for the elders, their adult children, and their tots. Friday at the former women’s asylum in Fremantle (now the Fremantle Arts Centre) – the most consistent lunch these days – where we sit around, gossip and discuss cooking shows, plus who died of what this week. Attendance can be three, usually runs around 10, but can get up to 20-plus depending on who’s doing what. Then there’s Saturday lunch, which, at its peak, was the longest running and largest of the lunches. Traditionally held at my grandma’s before her death in 2001, it has since been a roving affair held at various houses and, more often than not, picnic spots. Usually a minimum of 20, maxing out around 40 or 50. Then there are the holidays, birthdays, and annual events like The Royal Show, which are attended like church. And seeing as it’s always someone’s birthday, they happen just about every other week. We have our own Facebook group, “Shea Family Stuff”, to help us manage all this. There we post family updates, plans and share old photos so that we can all look back fondly on Brad’s old NOFX jumper (iconic!). My family has its own micro-culture: we Millennial and Gen-Z cousins share memes with one another, making fun of the family’s eccentricities. It is hard to imagine a world where my family is not constantly together, eating and being loud. When Covid struck, I didn’t have to imagine it. Suddenly, gatherings of groups larger than two were illegal. Heck, even when it went up to 10 a month later in our state, that was still too small for a family that’s collective noun is “herd”. Our big Easter lunch was suddenly a strangely atomised drive-by, with my mum dolling out chocolate eggs to little cousins as they ran by our gate, their parents setting up picnic chairs on the pavement six feet apart and yelling conversation at one another. Picnics that have been held on the same day, in the same park, in the same spot (literally under the same tree), for 50 years were suddenly verboten. If there’s one thing that makes my family anxious (other than our history of chronic anxiety disorders), it’s change. Storytelling, be it tall or otherwise, is important to maintaining The Shea Family as an institution of sorts. Our elders are what ground our ever-expanding story in its past. Everything can be traced back to something someone said or did in some infamous anecdote from 60 years ago. To have them, our foundation, suddenly categorised as “high risk” and vulnerable sent out a shockwave of fragility. The lockdown was a sudden and startling combo breaker. If I am not being told the story of how my Uncle Alan learned about the birds and the bees after he took the family cow to be bonked by a giant bull, did it even happen? Does my 83-year-old Uncle George only seem so youthful because we are constantly reminded that he was a serial Dennis the Menace in his youth, building a ballista to fire at the nuns that lived next door? Does my cousin Charley Farleigh truly “rootdie dootdie” if there is no one around to hear it? Adapting our interesting dynamic to interesting times has been a challenge. I thought I knew my family well enough until I had to endure looking up their nasal cavities during video chats. Communal conversations became one-on-ones, which feels strange for folk who are used to yelling three separate conversations across 11 people simultaneously. The Joycean sing-song interruptions (literally my Uncle Syd standing to sing the Internationale) – so integral to our circular chit-chat – are lost when three of us are sitting six feet apart with one single horrid topic, the plague, hovering over our heads. We love talking about illness and death more than anything (a lotta nurses), but not on this scale. Last Friday, we had our first “Friday Lunch” at the old asylum since lockdown. There were 12 of us in attendance. We were the cafe’s only customers, and as the poor understaffed manager stood by saying “Cappuccino? cappuccino? Who ordered the cappuccino?”, totally unnoticed by incredibly deaf uncles and aunts, I knew that things were returning to normal, or at least our version of it. The crushing loneliness I felt throughout Covid-19 was eased solely by the knowledge that, at the end of the day, I have a metric shit-tonne of cousins that will always be with me, plague or no plague, to argue over who gets the last chicken wing and who gets to play as Eddie Gordo in Tekken 3. I literally have 50+ safety nets to fall through if anything goes (more) wrong in my life. It’s an immense comfort in a world that offers so few.