Broadcast across three nights as lockdown kept us glued to our sofas, ITV’s Quiz was the first new drama in a long time that felt like event television. Unlike an unwieldy, 10-season drama or a densely-packed one-off, the story of Major Charles Ingram’s dubious Who Wants To Be A Millionaire win was presented as a three-part miniseries, one of many that have attracted dedicated audiences in recent years. From Chernobyl (five episodes), to Netflix hits Unorthodox (four episodes) and Unbelievable (eight episodes), or self-contained anthology series such as American Crime Story, miniseries have become increasingly popular in recent years, offering a low-stakes way for harried TV viewers to get immersed in scripted drama. As well as Quiz, another British hit, The Nest, garnered impressive ratings, with 9 million viewers tuning in to the first of its five episodes. In the groundhog day mood of lockdown, their blink-and-you’ll miss-them nature perhaps felt even more vital, a few brief moments of connection to the outside world as everyone hunkered down in separate living rooms. There have, of course, long been serials on TV, from Roots to Band of Brothers. However, “miniseries” or “limited series” (the preferred term in the US) have come into their own in the highly competitive streaming age, where attention spans are ever-shorter, and a self-contained narrative – whether three or 12 episodes long – is often the “Goldilocks” option when compared with hasty one-offs or eight-series fantasy epics, which might end in disappointment. Previously merged with the movies category and also featuring single seasons of longer shows, today the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Limited Series heaves with one-series wonders; recent contenders have included Netflix’s When They See Us, The Assassination of Gianni Versace: American Crime Story, and Fargo. Writing in 2016, Kaitlyn Tiffany of US entertainment site The Verge described miniseries as a way for networks “to take creative risks, pushing the medium forward even if a particular show doesn’t become a zeitgeist-dominating TV event like Breaking Bad or The Sopranos”. And yet, a mere four years later, miniseries are at the heart of TV viewing, rather than hors d’oeuvres in our viewing diets. Chernobyl is a case in point; as well as winning in the Emmy Limited Series category last year, it scooped awards for every other category available to a limited series, bar supporting actor. Once made up of a hodgepodge of TV movies and a single series (see Downton Abbey in 2010), the Limited Series category was no more cogent than ever. And the hits seem unlikely to stop anytime soon. Hot on the heels of the Netflix documentary smash Tiger King (itself a limited series), it has been announced that Nicolas Cage will play its protagonist, Joe Exotic, in a separate eight-part show. Meanwhile, Anna Delvey, the Robin Hood “heiress”, who scammed half of New York, is also the subject of an upcoming Netflix miniseries, Inventing Anna, created and produced by Shonda Rhimes. Much of the popularity of miniseries seems to come back to the idea of not outstaying their welcome, and of taking a truncated approach to storytelling. However, there is also an undeniable starriness that draws audiences in. Actor and writer Niccole Thurman, who has worked on shows including HBO’s A Black Lady Sketch Show sees limited series as more enticing than their multi-series cousins, thanks to well-known actors and ambitious set-ups. “[Programme makers] can get those Hollywood names who don’t want to sign up to do seven years on a TV show,” says Thurman, who counts the Riz Ahmed-starring The Night Of as one of her favourite miniseries. “The actors on these shows are either incredibly famous or you’ve never seen them before in your life. I also really love the filmmaking aspect of it – I love really well-shot, well-lit programmes, and these are almost like movies because they’re more contained. The producers are putting that effort in to make something stand on its own, too – they’re like, we have six episodes to say everything we want to say. In other shows they’re not thinking of quality, they’re thinking of quantity.” The success of programmes like Sharp Objects, Big Little Lies and Little Fires Everywhere also highlights a growing part of the miniseries ecosystem: book-to-TV adaptations. “The development of and investment in miniseries for TV has seen a real boom in the sale of film and TV rights”, says Juliet Mushens, literary agent and CEO of London-based agency Mushens Entertainment. “The space was dominated by film for quite a long time, but in more recent years I have seen a real increase in TV production companies acquiring book rights – even in competitive situations.” Big names both in front of and behind the camera, says Mushens, can “make them more attractive to authors – and of course they have a positive impact on book sales, too.” From Mushens’s roster, Jessie Burton’s The Miniaturist and The Feed by Nick Clark Windo have been adapted for TV, with Chernobyl director Johan Renck in talks to work on bringing her title Girl A by Abigail Dean to the small screen with Sony’s 3000 Pictures. However, ITV’s head of drama Polly Hill says that all is not lost for the returning, long-running series. “Writers, producers and commissioners have always made a mix of both,” she says. “I don’t think that that love for returning series and investing in something where the character development can run and run has gone away. It’s just about storytelling, and doing that in different forms, tones, shapes and commitments. I think it’s important for choice. Something like Quiz was three parts because that’s what James [Graham] wanted to write – it was never going to be anything more than a miniseries. And for something like Quiz or White House Farm [the drama based on the Jeremy Bamber murder case] – those stories have an end and they’re not ever going to be a series. What I do is choose a mix.” But what happens when audiences want more than a limited run can offer? Following the huge success of Normal People, which broke records for BBC iPlayer in April, rumours have abounded of a second series following starcrossed Irish lovers Marianne and Connell. While these remain unsubstantiated, director Lenny Abrahamson has said that he has “a fantasy of ... you know, seeing where they are in 10 years’ time sort of thing”. The miniseries, then, perhaps cynically, could be seen as the ultimate win/win for broadcasters; if a show is a hit it can be extended without any prior commitment, while, if it fails, there are no further decisions to be taken. For a hit programme like Big Little Lies, originally adapted as a miniseries from Liane Moriarty’s novel, adding a second series of soapy intrigue may have seemed a no-brainer to programme makers. However, many critics and viewers alike deemed the second season a tacked-on mess – even with Meryl Streep joining the cast. Writing in the New Yorker, Doreen St Félix explained how the spell had been broken. “The electricity of the performances by [Nicole] Kidman, Streep, and Laura Dern … pumped into existence a thousand memes and a million gifs, but the currents were not strong enough to distract us from the weak plot of this encore season, which probably should not have been made, or, rather, recycled from the first.” Similarly, while there have been calls for a second series of HBO’s hugely successful Watchmen adaptation, its creator Damon Lindelof has said he won’t continue with the show, though he would hand it over to someone else: “Unless you’re compelled to say something new, I don’t think that you should do it just because you did it once successfully.” It seems, then, that while miniseries are hugely popular, they can also be a halfway house for programme makers trying to cater to an ever-changing world where commitment isn’t guaranteed, and where TikTok is as much of a competitor as a rival channel. But, when done correctly, they are perhaps the best kind of television: the sort that leaves you wanting more, while also not needing it. And, at the very worst, unlike Game of Thrones, you won’t have watched 60 episodes to get there.