In these post-Game of Thrones times, it takes a lot for a TV show to be so gruesome as to elicit a genuine wince from the viewer, but Perry Mason (Sky Atlantic) manages it at several points during its gory opening episode. This is no reboot-replica of the Raymond Burr 50s/60s series – rather, it’s an origin story that grimly dwells in the darkest corners of post-Depression Los Angeles. Here, pre-legal career, Mason is a dour, burned-out PI, with a broken marriage and a drinking habit (aren’t they all?) investigating a horrifying crime that becomes a media sensation. As a series, it takes itself desperately seriously. The episodes are called chapters. Men glower from beneath their brimmed hats, and there is a lot of intense TV smoking, characters furrowing their brows and dragging on cigarettes as if breathing their last breath. When a missing child case takes a grisly turn, Mason and his loose collection of sort-of-colleagues step in to defend the parents against any unseemly accusations. The LAPD are not to be trusted. The population of the city is “starving, scared, hopeless”, according to one studio boss, who sees the movies as their dollar’s worth of escapism. The main case twists and turns its way through this opening episodeand forms the bulk of this eight-part first season. It is promising enough to suggest that it’s worth sticking with, just about. Matthew Rhys is fantastic as this new, younger Mason, down on his luck in his personal life, but with a keen eye for a mystery. He manages to cut through all the heavy portent to show some decent signs of a personality, though he is bogged down by the occasionally clunky line that pulls him right back to your regulation moody private investigator (“I’m not here to judge anyone, I’m just here to get paid,” he says, at one point, very un-1930s-ish-ly). And visually, it’s a stunner. A few crucial scenes take place on New Year’s Eve, giving an excuse for extremely dramatic fireworks, and the kind of old Hollywood party that looks so good on screen. Hollywood lingers in the background, not yet at the fore. There is a subplot involving a sting and attempted blackmail, which offers a fun-ish distraction from the weighty main story, as Mason is sent to snap a man in flagrante, and accidentally catches him in the act with the studio’s biggest new starlet. This is a show that seems to pride itself on not flinching, and what these two consenting adults get up to is shown with gleeful frankness. Mason tries to up his price; naturally, the studio executives have more than just power at their disposal, and don’t take too kindly to being squeezed. One of the more wince-inducing moments is a sign that one should not let a cigarette lighter get too close to a gun. I’m still desperate to know how Mason is going to crack the case While well-executed and gripping enough, largely thanks to a cast that also includes John Lithgow as Mason’s mentor, EB Jonathan, and Juliet Rylance as his assistant, Della Street, it does not yet feel particularly comfortable in its own skin. There is clearly plenty more to come, not least in the form of Lili Taylor and Tatiana Maslany, who feature heavily in the trailer but are not in this opener. Withholding such terrific performers from the first episode is a bold move, and I can’t help but wish they had showed up. The tone also sometimes veers between straightforward noir, and parody. At one point, Mason drunkenly spreads his paperwork out on the floor, as if he is Homeland’s Carrie Mathison, in full pinboard mode. The humour is either witty or hammy. On one of Mason’s regular visits to the morgue, it becomes clear that he is only examining the corpses to borrow a tie from one of them (“I got a domestic stabbing in a three-piece if you want,” says the pathologist), but at times, his weariness borders on the comical. When Mason goes to see a Laurel and Hardy film with his partner and friend Pete, he doesn’t find the slapstick funny. “A fuckin’ horse kicked him in the ass, how do you not find that hilarious?” asks Pete. “I grew up on a farm,” replies Mason, miserably. That said, thanks to Rhys, the fact that it’s so good-looking, and the promise of a radio evangelist waiting in the wings, I’m still desperate to know how Mason is going to crack the case – even if I do have to keep covering my eyes.