NFL commissioner Roger Goodell said in an internal memo to staff that the league will recognize 19 June, popularly known as Juneteenth, as a permanent company-wide holiday in support of racial diversity. Juneteenth commemorates the abolition of slavery by Abraham Lincoln’s Emancipation Proclamation, which was belatedly announced in the state of Texas on 19 June 1865, after the end of the Civil War. “This year, as we work together as a family and in our communities to combat the racial injustices that remain deeply rooted in to the fabric of our society, the NFL will observe Juneteenth on Friday, June 19th as a recognized holiday and our league offices will be closed,” Goodell said in a statement on Friday. “It is a day to reflect on our past, but most importantly, consider how each one of us can continue to show up and band together to work toward a better future.” Goodell’s decree comes one day after the NFL announced an increased financial commitment of $250m over 10 years to “combat systemic racism and support the battle against the ongoing and historic injustices faced by African-Americans”. “The power of this historical feat in our country’s blemished history is felt each year, but there is no question that the magnitude of this event weighs even more heavily today in the current climate, “ Goodell said. “Juneteenth not only marks the end of slavery in the United States, but it also symbolizes freedom – a freedom that was delayed, and brutally resisted; and though decades of progress followed, a freedom for which we must continue to fight.” The move comes following the death of George Floyd, an unarmed black man, while in custody of Minneapolis police triggered widespread protests against racism and police brutality, while also reigniting the debate on diversity and inclusion among corporate companies. Last week, Goodell admitted the NFL made mistakes in not listening to its players when they denounced police violence against black and brown people at the 2017 height of Colin Kaepernick’s protest movement. “We, the National Football League, admit we were wrong for not listening to NFL players earlier and encourage all to speak out and peacefully protest,” said Goodell. “We, the National Football League, believe black lives matter.” Goodell, who offered his condolences to the families of Floyd, Breonna Taylor, Ahmaud Arbery, made no mention of Kaepernick in last week’s remarks. The declaration comes at a time when Juneteenth finds itself in a national spotlight after Donald Trump chose the date for his first election rally during the coronavirus pandemic, prompting critics to accuse the US president of “racially motivated trolling” and timing akin to “blasphemy”.