National League side Dover Athletic have said they are likely to become insolvent by the end of the month without further investment or an alternative solution, becoming the first professional club to warn of collapse because of the Covid-19 pandemic. The chairman, Jim Parmenter, has made the entire squad available on free transfers in an attempt to cut costs, after he claimed the players refused a temporary pay cut of 20%. “The board have been busy assessing the club’s financial position and immediate future due to the very difficult circumstances of the Covid-19 pandemic,” Parmenter wrote in an open letter to supporters. “The club is still unsure of its income in the coming season but the board are clear income will be greatly reduced. “The club has 14 players under contract for next season and at a meeting last week the club’s position was explained in detail to the players and staff. “At that meeting the players and staff were asked to accept a 20% short-term reduction in salary to assist the club in its efforts to stay solvent and keep the club alive bearing in mind the club will move from four to three days’ training. “The management have accepted the proposal, however unfortunately the players have not agreed. “I must further inform supporters that if a solution or further investment cannot be found by the end of August it is likely that the directors will consider the club insolvent and as a consequence will be forced to cease trading.” Dover finished 12th in the National League during the curtailed 2019-20 season. The 2020-21 season is due to begin on 3 October, a date designed to coincide with the planned return of spectators to stadiums. Harrogate will start work on replacing their artificial 3G pitch on Tuesday following promotion to the Football League. Town secured a place in the Football League for the first time by beating Notts County 3-1 at Wembley on Sunday in the National League play-off final. The North Yorkshire club must start life in the top four divisions next season away from their CNG Stadium after confirming it will take 10 weeks to lay a new grass pitch. Town chairman Irving Weaver has confirmed the club has received permission from the EFL to ground-share for their first few home matches. "It's a small price to pay," Weaver told the PA news agency. "Obviously maintaining a grass pitch is going to be more expensive. There will be an increase of around £20,000 in groundsmen's work." Weaver said Town also hoped to relocate their first-team training base to York St John University. "We've just set up an agreement with the university, who want some identification with us and that is an extremely attractive offer," he said. "They have all the technology, MRI scans, all the fitness-monitoring facilities and that will be a good move for us. Eventually, and we're working hard, the plan is to get our own set-up away from the ground, with a 3G installed there, we're working on that now." PA Media According to the government 1 October is the earliest date by which fans could make a comeback, but there are doubts over that possibility after the prime minister paused pilot events owing to a resurgence in Covid-19 infections. The viability of the National League as a whole would be under question if fans were unable to return to grounds because gate receipts are a primary source of income for clubs.