Everton must overcome objections from Unesco, Historic England and The Victorian Society to build a new stadium on Liverpool’s waterfront after the organisations raised concerns over plans to fill in Bramley-Moore dock. Everton have continued preparation work on the proposed 52,888-capacity stadium during the Covid-19 pandemic and spent recent months responding to planning queries from Liverpool city council, among others. As a result, the club will submit revised designs next month – a new full planning application is not required – and expect a decision from the council’s planning committee in December, two months later than originally anticipated. The main changes are the addition of a stepped plaza overlooking the River Mersey, the removal of a multi-storey car park and a reduction of the roof height to meet world heritage site guidelines. As expected, however, the council has received objections from several heritage groups regarding Everton’s plans to fill in what is currently a disused and inaccessible Victorian dock. Historic England, which has had input on the stadium design and landscaping, ICOMOS, a heritage body acting on behalf of Unesco, and The Victorian Society all oppose infilling a dock on what is a world heritage and conservation site. Everton’s proposals include restoring several heritage features at Bramley-Moore, such as a Grade II listed hydraulic tower and tramlines. They would also preserve the dock walls under the stadium so that the site could be reverse-engineered back into a dock should the club ever leave. Colin Chong, Everton’s stadium development director, responded: “While we understand the position of these organisations, we also know that local politicians, the more than 60,000 people who took part in our public consultations, our business community and third sector stakeholders all have a different view and fully support our proposals. The local public has told us – in huge numbers – that they believe the public benefits of our plans far outweigh the suggested level of harm to the heritage assets. “That is not to say that the public do not appreciate the heritage of Liverpool’s world-class waterfront. They do. It is just that they would prefer to see our project come forward at Bramley-Moore Dock and see history and heritage showcased through a new vibrant development which respects and reflects our dockland history.” Chong added: “We strongly believe this development represents a vital economic and social catalyst for the north of the city at a time when it has never been more needed, while, at the same time, celebrating and showcasing the heritage of the site and the surrounding area.” Everton estimate the scheme will be worth £1bn to the economy and generate up to 15,000 jobs, making it a key part of the city region’s post-Covid recovery plan. The club has appointed JP Morgan and MUFG to arrange funding for the estimated £500m project but financing will be secured only when planning permission is received. If government intervention is not required, and planning secured in December, Everton hope to be on site in early 2021. The construction is expected to take three years.