Entering the Competition 1. The BT TV Football Weekly host super sub competition (the “Competition”) is open to UK residents aged 18 and over. 2. The Competition is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & Media Limited (“GNM” or the “Promoter”), their group companies or family members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Competition. 3. Entrants into the Competition shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms and Conditions. 4. To enter the Competition you must visit the competition webpage at www.theguardian.com/supersub and submit an answer to the following question on the form provided in a maximum of 500 words: “If Football Weekly were a football team (from any country or era), which would it be and why?” No purchase is necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or otherwise in connection with the Competition, please email us at podcasts@theguardian.com with “Super Sub” in the subject line. 5. Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the cost (if any) of sending your Competition entry to us. 6. GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM. 7. The Competition opens at 15.00 on Thursday 20 August 2020 and closes at 23.59 on Sunday 23 August 2020. Entries received outside this time period will not be considered. GNM reserves the right in its absolute discretion to extend the closing date where the entries received are of insufficient quality. 8. You own the copyright to your Competition entry as its author. 9. By submitting an entry to the Competition, you give GNM:a. Permission for your entry to be published on GNM websites including but not limited to theguardian.com (“GNM Websites”) and on any social media account controlled by GNM, including but not limited to Facebook and Twitter accounts (“GNM Social Media Accounts”), and you grant GNM a non-exclusive, royalty-free, worldwide licence to use and publish your Competition entry in electronic format (including on GNM Websites and GNM Social Media Accounts) and hard copy (including in GNM publications) for purposes connected with the Competition, and to adapt the entry to enable such publication (including to crop or otherwise edit it for such purposes), and you hereby irrevocably waive, for the benefit of GNM, all moral rights in the entry to which you are entitled; andb. The right to use your name and county of residence for the purpose of identifying you as the author of your entry and/or as a winner of the Competition. 10. Your entry must not be copied, must not contain third-party materials and/or content that you do not have permission to use, must not promote any goods or services and must not be obscene, defamatory, distasteful, offensive, or in breach of any applicable law or regulation, or in breach of any confidentiality obligations owed by you to third parties. If we have reason to believe your entry is in breach of this paragraph 10 then we may not consider it and may disqualify it. 11. We may disqualify your Competition entry for the following reasons: your entry does not comply with these Terms and Conditions; you are not eligible to enter the Competition; or you cannot be contacted. In the event of disqualification, we may select a new winner in accordance with the selection process outlined below. Picking the winners 12. A panel of judges, including at least one member who is independent of GNM, will select two winning entries from all valid entries received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The names of the judges are available on request to podcasts@theguardian.com. 13. When choosing the winners, the judges will consider the entries’ demonstration of knowledge of the game of football, knowledge of Football Weekly, creativity and sense of humour. 14. The judges will select the winning entries on or after Tuesday 25 August 2020. The judges’ decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into. The Prizes 15. The winners will each receive an opportunity to guest present Football Weekly in a slot of approximately five minutes’ duration in the week beginning 31 August 2020. Each winner will feature in either the 1 September or the 3 September edition of the podcast (at GNM’s discretion). The winners must be available to record their contribution to the podcast (from their home) on the morning of 31 August or 2 September. The winners must have broadband internet access, headphones and an internet-connected device with microphone for the purpose of the recording. Only one winner per household. GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize that are not expressly included in the prize. 16. The winners will be notified by phone or email on or after Tuesday 25 August 2020 and given details of how to claim their prize. The selected winners must respond to notification of their win within 24 hours. If a selected winner does not respond to GNM within 24 hours of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with the process described above (and that winner will have to respond to notification of their win within 24 hours or else they will also forfeit their prize). If a winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of these terms, the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner. 17. The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for cash or any other prize. Some other rules 18. The name and county of the winners can be obtained after Friday 4 September 2020 by sending a stamped, addressed envelope to the following address: Football Weekly, Audio Editorial, Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. 19. The winners may be required to take part in promotional activity related to the Competition and the winners shall participate in such activity on the Promoter’s reasonable request. The winners consent to the use by the Promoter and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the Competition for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, photograph and name for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and films, and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and its related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the Competition, all entrants consent to the same. 20. The winners will not be paid for their contribution to the Football Weekly podcast and will have no right to control or restrict the Promoter’s use or exploitation of the episode on which each winner appears. The winners may be required to sign a contributor release form in relation to their contribution to the Football Weekly podcast. 21. The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you supply to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy, and in accordance with data protection legislation. By entering the Competition, you agree to the collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in order to process and contact you about your Competition entry. The promoter intends to make available the surname and county of residence of the winners as outlined in paragraphs 9 and 18 above. If you do not wish your surname and/or country of residence to be made available for these purposes then please notify us by no later than Sunday 23 August 2020 by sending an email to podcasts@theguardian.com with “Super Sub” in the subject line. 22. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Competition or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Competition. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or personal injury resulting from its negligence. 23. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Competition with or without prior notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Competition is final and no correspondence will be entered into. 24. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations relating to this Competition where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure. 25. The Competition and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English law and entrants to the Competition submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the English courts. 26. Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, N1 9GU.