John McDonnell has stepped up pressure on the government to extend a ban on evictions in England and Wales beyond next week, amid fears of a surge in homelessness among private renters. Demanding that the government take urgent action, the former shadow chancellor said a ban on landlords evicting tenants was required for at least another year while the threat of a second wave of coronavirus infections loomed. Last week the Scottish government outlined plans to extend a ban on evictions by six months. McDonnell said: “Many people are becoming desperately worried that they will now face evictions. Many cannot rely upon the goodwill of their landlords to prevent them losing their homes. That’s why it is premature to end the ban on evictions, especially with so many jobs being lost and incomes drying up.” From 24 August, private landlords in England and Wales will be able to go to court to initiate eviction procedures against tenants, prompting fears among housing groups that there could be a rush of cases and a rise in homelessness. The shadow housing secretary, Thangam Debbonaire, has previously called for the moratorium on evictions to be extended. McDonnell said sweeping reforms were required to curb the power of landlords and tackle Britain’s housing crisis. His proposals for the post-Covid economy include an increase in capital gains tax for second homes, a legal limit on the number of properties that individual landlords can own, a ban on the purchasing of homes through companies, and cancelling rent arrears caused by Covid-19. Ministers introduced the ban on evictions at the onset of the Covid-19 crisis, initially for three months, and extended it until August as the scale of the pandemic became apparent. The government had promised last year to ban section 21 “no fault” eviction notices, which allow landlords to evict renters without a reason following the end of their fixed-term tenancy period. However, it has so far failed to act on the pledge, meaning tenants could be evicted without landlords needing to give a reason from next week. A spokeswoman for the housing ministry said it had changed court rules to require landlords to provide more information about their tenants’ situation when seeking an eviction. Laws passed in March force landlords to give tenants at least three months’ notice. The spokeswoman added: “We will provide appropriate support to those who have been particularly affected by coronavirus when court proceedings start again.”