Peaky Blinders, the TV series, has some truly iconic moments. Ada casually strolling in the path of a tense standoff at the end of the first season. Alfie Solomons’ speech about the difference between bread and rum. That bit where Tommy and Arthur hold down two levers so Finn can go through a gate and hold down another lever? Not so much. For every really good bit in Peaky Blinders Mastermind, the British-made tie-in video game, there are 10 levers. If you’ve ever played the venerable Eidos Commandos series – or, more recently, the excellent Shadow Tactics or Desperados III – you’ll recognise the setup here. You direct the Shelbys around little staged puzzles, combining their different skills and manipulating the timeline to pull off elaborate plans. Ada can wander around Small Heath with impunity in front of copper’s noses, where any of the boys would be spotted. She can chat them up, too, reducing their awareness and allowing other Shelbys to saunter past. Tommy can convince specific marks to do his bidding, like holding a door open, or passing a set of keys through a window. Finn can climb through small spaces, John can use lanterns to burn obstacles, Arthur can batter folk, and so on. The 10 levels form a serviceable B-plot set before the first season. A trauma-tinged fever dream in which Tommy slips in and out of wartime hallucinations is a highlight, as is a Shelby family effort to hinder a police inspector’s route through Small Heath. There’s no voice acting, but the written dialogue has an authentic Birmingham brogue, even if the writing lacks the flair and smarts of the show’s colourful monologues. There’s more or less a single, static solution to each puzzle, leaving the player little room for creativity. Many of the obstacles feel woefully contrived. “You’re one microscopic cog in his catastrophic plan,” sings Nick Cave on the TV series’ theme Red Right Hand; here, you could replace “cog” with levers, pulleys, sliders, and other mechanisms that transform Blinders’ brilliantly realised gothic-industrial Birmingham into a plasticky Rube Goldberg contraption. The game is shorter than a six-hour season of the show, but most of that runtime is spent on stages that feel like tutorials. The final two levels, with all five Shelbys and Polly at your control, offer a frustratingly inventive glimpse of what Mastermind could have been if it trusted the player more. Instead, you’ll be drip fed each new ability, character, and puzzle type. The reins are only removed when the finish line is already in sight. I won’t hold it against Peaky Blinders: Mastermind that there’s very little actual action – but what action there is feels overzealous. In the TV show, on the rare occasions when the Shelbys use their cap-sewn razorblades, it’s in intense bursts of deliberately uncomfortable brutality. Here, watching Arthur and John finish off each and every goon with wide, bloody cap-slash, like a fatality at the end of a fighting game combo, feels cheap. Peaky Blinders: Mastermind is stuck between abstraction and fan fiction, ambition and restraint. At its best, it’s streamlined; at worst, stifling and predetermined. Give me an Alfie Solomons rum-empire management game, and you’d have my attention. Peaky Blinders: Mastermind is out now, £19.99