The estate of Iain Banks has blamed timing for the demise of a planned Amazon television adaptation of the late author’s beloved Culture series. The adaptation of the Scottish author’s sci-fi books was announced in 2018, when Amazon Prime Video acquired the global rights to a TV version of Consider Phlebas, the first Culture novel. The author’s estate was set to serve as executive producer, but in a statement to the Guardian on Wednesday, it said the “timing wasn’t quite right” for it to go ahead. “The interest and devotion that Iain’s work continues to inspire is a testament to the enduring relevance of his ideas and imagination,” said Banks’s estate. “The estate is hugely grateful for all the care and creative energy that went into the early stages of the project.” Banks died in 2013 aged 59, two months after revealing that he had terminal cancer. After publishing well-received novels including The Wasp Factory in 1984, he introduced the world to the universe of Culture, a post-scarcity, hedonistic society run by benevolent AIs, in his first sci-fi novel, Consider Phlebas. Banks would publish 10 Culture books under the name Iain M Banks. Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos described the series as “a huge personal favourite” when the television deal was announced in 2018. Bezos is not the only billionaire fan of Banks’s sci-fi series: Elon Musk named his SpaceX drone ships after starships from the Culture novels, including the vessel Just Read the Instructions. Utopia writer Dennis Kelly, who was working on the adaptation’s script for Amazon, told Den of Geek that he had been in conversations about the project for two or three years, and that he had written “probably 20-30 pages of the bible” when he started to get the “sense that it wasn’t going to happen”. “In the end, I just think the estate didn’t want to go through with it. It wasn’t the material. They hadn’t seen anything [he had written], it was just because I think they weren’t ready to do it, for whatever reason. I’m a little mystified, to be honest,” he said. “I think I sort of smelt that something was coming a little while before and decided I had to stop working on it. I thought, if I’m not going to get the chance to write these, I can’t get emotionally involved in it.” When the deal was announced two years ago, Kelly said that Banks’s “innate warmth, humour and humanism shines through” in the Culture novels. “Far from being the dystopian nightmares that we are used to, Banks creates a kind of flawed paradise, a society truly worth fighting for – rather than a warning from the future, his books are a beckoning,” he said in 2018.