So there we have it. A Test summer billed as English cricket’s financial salvation, organised at considerable expense and to a staggering degree of logistical precision. A summer, too, in which England would seek to hone an attack that could lead them to victory overseas. It was with a certain bemusement, then, and not a little anticlimax, that shortly after 5.30pm a global television audience was treated to the sight of Dom Sibley jogging in to bowl his club-level leg-spin. As Sibley was tossed the ball for the first time in international cricket, he studied it with an intense puzzlement, as if it were an entirely alien projectile: a scotch egg, perhaps, or a human kidney. Gingerly, reluctantly, he trotted up and threw down a horrifying long hop. Then a full toss. Then another long hop. By the time he finally took his leave, having delivered six legal deliveries and three no-balls, even the England fielders were unable to conceal their mirth. In a way, Sibley’s surreal coda felt like a decent metaphor for England’s summer: superficially encouraging, and yet curiously deflating at its denouement. What was this, really? What had it all been for? And ultimately, what had we learned? For Joe Root’s side, this is the pressing concern. The bare facts are that England have now won three straight series for the first time since Andrew Strauss’s team beat India in 2011. They have not lost a home series since 2014. The weather may have denied them full expression, but after stealing the first Test they snuffed out the third with a ruthlessness that has not always been their hallmark. Jofra Archer began the series with the new ball and ended it as a sort of souped-up bailiff And yet, that niggling doubt in the back of your head is not incorrect. Peer under the bonnet and you will find a team where half of the top six failed to pass 50, where 24 of their 41 wickets were taken by their two oldest bowlers. Was this England’s summer of discovery, then? Learning that, yes, James Anderson and Stuart Broad are very good in English conditions? If this series was an online course, you’d ask for your money back. The weirdness of this compressed summer rendered it ripe for experimentation, for future-proofing the attack into the sort of unit that might one day bowl teams out away from home. Instead after losing the first Test to the West Indies, roasted by Broad’s multi-pronged PR assault and blindsided by Jofra Archer’s ill-advised trip home, England’s management retreated into the safe and familiar embrace of their 85mph seamers. Nothing illustrated this better than the fate of Archer, who began the series with the new ball and ended it as a sort of souped-up bailiff, ordered by Root and coach Chris Silverwood to rough up Pakistan’s batsmen in short, sharp bursts. This he did to decent effect in the first innings and mixed effect in the second, but for a bowler who relies on rhythm and fluency the impression is of a rich and varied talent being channelled in a single, boring direction, like buying an iPad solely to take pictures of ham. The low-flying debate over Archer’s best role for England has often strayed into over-complication, incorporating the idea that he needs to be “managed” or “harnessed” like some frightening new energy source. How best to “use” Archer? Erm, just give him the ball and let him bowl. If he bowls badly, give it to someone else. When he’s tired, take him off. He’s a professional cricketer. This doesn’t need to be hard. At the other end of the scale you have Dom Bess, the sort of spinner that would barely give Austria’s batsmen sleepless nights, let alone Australia’s. If that sounds harsh on a willing and improving player, then the evidence of this series – three wickets in 71 overs – suggests he still has plenty of improving to do. Again, this needn’t be complex: England already have a perfectly adequate Test spinner in Jack Leach with international experience and the ability to take the ball away from the right-hander. Yet while Bess has wheeled away ineffectively, Leach has spent much of the last 10 weeks sitting by the boundary in blue latex gloves. Root insists England are “improving as a team”, and he’s not wrong exactly. Zak Crawley has been the find of the summer. Jos Buttler’s return to form has been timely. But as the bubble bursts and England’s players go their separate ways, the prevailing sensation is of missed opportunities, of a team that could have been smarter and braver. Can Chris Woakes lead an attack? Can Archer take the new ball? Can Wood get through back-to-back Tests? Is Leach still a viable option? And can Sibley be their third spinner on the subcontinent? Alas, as England go into an uncertain winter they only have one of the answers.