In many ways lockdown was the perfect time. Families stuck together for hours on end, desperate to find something to do that didn’t involve watching a screen. If you were one of those who dusted off an old board game – or, more likely, played one of the latest games that have taken the world by storm – you are in very good company. Strategy board games such as Ticket to Ride and the aptly named Pandemic have been flying off the shelves at online retailers, fast replacing the likes of Monopoly and Scrabble in many people’s hearts. “We’ve just had our busiest two months ever,” says Angus Abranson, who runs the BoardGameGuru online store based in Southampton. “Board games were already riding a big wave of interest long before Covid and the lockdown, but it’s really taken off. Lots of people have clearly used the time playing games, found they really enjoyed it, and have been trying new ones. The orders kept coming in.” Abranson says that while the UK market has grown hugely in recent years, it is still some way behind Germany, where board games are so popular that its games of the year awards are shown live on national television. While many people’s experience of this particular breed of board game will be limited to the 25-year-old stalwart Catan – where you build roads and settlements and trade resources – he says there is now a game for every group. Family games such as the hugely popular Ticket to Ride (RRP £39) – where players collect and play train cards to claim railway routes – can be learned in a matter of minutes and typically take 60-90 minutes to play, says Abranson. At the other end of the spectrum there are more complex and engrossing fantasy/historical games such as Great Western Trail (£40) – which typically takes two to three hours to play. Another hugely popular fantasy game, Gloomhaven, can cost up to £140, but that has not stopped it selling hundreds of thousands of copies. While that might sound like a lot of money, this tactical combat game is a big beast. It boasts 18 highly detailed plastic miniatures, 95 scenarios, 47 different enemy types, more than 1,700 cards and a map board, all weighing in at almost 10kg (22lb). The fact that many of the new generation of games can be played in two hours or less has seemingly helped their popularity, as has the fact that an increasing number are now collaborative – meaning the players join forces rather than fighting it out to the death. There are now also plenty of demos on YouTube showing users how to play, meaning they don’t waste hours poring over the rules. “Board games are a really good antidote to modern life because they are a great way for families to get everyone away from their laptops and doing something together,” says Carl Sharman, who runs Wargames Workshop in Milton Keynes. He has a long-established shop, and a more recently added a board games cafe where customers can, in normal times, try out a long list of games while having a coffee or sandwich. He says the popularity of TV shows such as The Big Bang Theory, in which the stars constantly played board games, and Stranger Things, helped move the games into the spotlight. The crowdfunding platform Kickstarter has been instrumental in this resurgence enabling games designers to bring their concepts to market. “Stars like Wil Wheaton [who appeared in The Big Bang Theory] have really promoted the genre, and it has become a huge business. The fact that something like 4,500 board games were launched around the world last year tells you all you need to know,” says Sharman. One family whose board game habit has taken over during lockdown are the Wyers from Hertfordshire – to the extent that Saturday night is now games night in their Hitchin home. “We were already into playing board games, but it has definitely accelerated during lockdown because we have all been around so much more,” says Vicky Wyer, who along with her 26-year-old son Jack, has been scouring the web for the most interesting games. “It’s got a little bit out of hand in that our games collection now fills a small cupboard, but it’s fairly harmless and something we all really enjoy as a family,” she says. “The great thing is that you have to put your phone away and concentrate. Yes, they can get frustrating at times – particularly when you are falling behind – and things can get pretty competitive, but different people win different games. For me, games playing has been a wonderfully immersive diversion from life in lockdown.” Ticket to Ride Europe, from £32 This five-star game has sold millions of copies in its various local formats. Players aged six and upwards vie to claim train routes on the board. It’s much better than it sounds and seems to be universally loved. If you try one new game, this should be it. Takenoko, from £24 Roughly translating as “bamboo sprout”, this board game is all about tending to the needs of a hungry panda. Set in the Japanese emperor’s garden, you will have to decide to feed the panda or grow the garden. Can be played in just 45 minutes. Pandemic, from £24 If ever there was a game for our times, this is it. Pandemic is based on the premise that four diseases have broken out in the world and threaten to wipe out a region – sound familiar? Players work collaboratively, making this a great choice for those competitive families for whom Monopoly used to ruin Christmas. Forbidden Island, from £20 Prepare to embark on a do-or-die mission to capture four sacred treasures from the ruins of this perilous paradise. Another collaborative game that can be played in as little as 40 minutes. Wingspan, from £65 During the first few months of the pandemic, Wingspan was changing hands for big money. Players are bird enthusiasts trying to attract the best birds to wildlife preserves. It’s pricey but worth every penny, say fans. Prices quoted were the best online deals at the time of writing.