Steve Bannon, Trump’s former campaign chief, appeared in Manhattan federal court via video on Thursday afternoon after his arrest for allegedly siphoning money from a fundraising campaign to build the president’s controversial border wall with Mexico. Bannon waived his right to appear in person for his initial court appearance, in keeping with Covid-19-prompted safety measures at the courthouse. As a result, press attending Bannon’s arraignment watched him on a giant screen, in the jury assembly room, while seated 6ft apart in red leather chairs. The Manhattan US attorney’s office alleges that Bannon “received over $1m from the ‘We Build the Wall’ online campaign, at least some of which he used to cover hundreds of thousands of dollars in [his] personal expenses”, through a non-profit he controlled. Bannon, who was elsewhere in the courthouse, was visible from his torso up; he donned a light button-down shirt with thin vertical stripes and a white face mask. Bannon, known for his unkempt dress sense, did not appear particularly more disheveled than in the past; his hair was mussed up and stringy, and his shirt was rumpled. His face appeared sunburnt, which would make sense, given that he was arrested on an 150ft yacht off Connecticut’s coast at 7.15am on Thursday morning. Appearing on the video panel next to Bannon was the magistrate judge Stewart Aaron, who led the proceedings from a courtroom elsewhere in the building. Bannon rocked back and forth and kept his eyes on the camera. On several occasions, he leaned in so closely that his face took up much of the frame. Aaron asked the defendant a string of questions. “Mr Bannon, are you able to hear me OK?” “Uh, yes, I can,” Bannon replied. He used “your honor” when responding to the judge’s subsequent questions. One of Bannon’s attorneys entered a plea of not guilty for him. The proceeding was brief and calm, off-brand for a man who has built his career on controversy. There was no bail fight. In fact, prosecutors and defense attorneys had agreed to a bail package prior to his arraignment: a $5m bond, backed by $1.75m in cash or real estate. Bannon has about two weeks to come up with this collateral. He is not permitted to travel on private planes, boats or yachts while out on bail, the judge said. The drama intensified outside, however, about two hours after Bannon’s proceeding ended. Before fully exiting the building, Bannon pulled off his mask, flicking his hair to the side. Sporting a round smile, he waved to the dozens of journalists who were waiting to see him leave. As Bannon walked to a black SUV that awaited him, he lifted his hand, index finger pointed outward, and addressed the crowd. “This entire fiasco is to stop people who want to build the wall,” Bannon said, before getting into the SUV.