Having spent an unprecedented amount of time in the company of adults throughout lockdown, kids must surely be fed up of their parents’ overweening company. Everyone knows that for fictional children to thrive, the grownups need to be absent, dead, ill or cruel. Cue the over-representation of runaways and orphans in children’s books – plucky types whose early trauma fosters the risk-taking they need in order to get to where their plot is going. Hana Tooke’s The Unadoptables (Puffin, £12.99) throws up a skinny Baltic townhouse full of brave souls hellbent on escaping the drudgery at Amsterdam’s Little Tulip Orphanage. The home’s villainous matron, Gassbeek, is in cahoots with a vicious ship’s captain keen to adopt – really to enslave – them. The retro Dutch setting, the web of mysteries that landed them all there and the hairy, scary perils the children find themselves in set this winning series opener – about the families you make – apart. That rich historical setting is echoed in a new series by Pushkin Children’s Books called True Adventures, which reformats global tales of derring-do. One of the first out is Queen of Freedom by Catherine Johnson (Pushkin, £6.99), about a larger-than-life legend: Queen Nanny, the Boudicca of Jamaica, who is said to have caught bullets in her bare hands as she defended her freed people’s encampments from the British. Fast-paced, slim and with one reasonable use of the word “shit” to describe animal faeces, Queen of Freedom drills down into the tenacity of the freed slaves and the cunning lengths they went to to live free. Zana Fraillon wrote The Bone Sparrow, much feted in 2017. Her latest, The Lost Soul Atlas (Orion, £6.99), surfs the tween/YA border with its tale of young Twig, desperate to find his missing da in a bleak landscape that alternates between a familiar dystopia and the afterlife. The riddles that the dead Twig needs to solve, and his bone raven helper Kruuk, are very middle years. The perils he and his gang of hardscrabble friends face(d) – persecution by corrupt police and the local crime boss – might give a sensitive youngster pause. (Or perhaps it takes a much older reader to see the parallels with reality, until the afterword spells them out.) Fraillon’s lyrical style contrasts with the modern Dickensian setting; the story is really about loyalty and the urgency of remembering. More noggin-busters enliven The Ten Riddles of Eartha Quicksmith (Firefly, £6.99, out 10 September), the inventive first fantasy novel of Loris Owen. Chess club stalwart Kip finds his way into a parallel plane, where kids like him attend an elite boarding school. Extraordinary eccentrics are the norm, surfing around on air-boards called “skimmis”. Leaving his dad behind is hard, and leaving his mum in the care home harder – but worth it, if Kip can find a cure for her suffering the after-effects of a lightning strike. But soon, Kip and pals are called upon to safeguard their new haven against sinister forces. Those forces abound in The Monsters of Rookhaven (Macmillan, £12.99 hardback, out 17 September) by the Carnegie-nominated Pádraig Kenny, in which the titular monsters actually have no parents: baby horrors just arrive in their gothic abode through some ectoplasmic woo-woo. The (much) older reader will thrill at how this book subverts hackneyed monster tropes with glee, and how Kenny drops an S-bomb on page one (“sibilance”), crediting readers with the wherewithal to handle a polysyllable. But make no mistake, this is a children’s book, in a big font size, magnificently illustrated by Edward Bettison. It asks: “Who are the monsters?” Some tasty humans (orphans!) accidentally arrive at the monsters’ gabled keep through a tear in the magical defences; they are given asylum by Mirabelle, a monster with no superpower, upsetting the ancient status quo. Soon, though, the monsters’ modus vivendi is threatened by pitchfork-wielding villagers – and, worse, a soul-sucking reaper. The mortals – and Mirabelle – have to choose sides in this totally absorbing tale, where the most fearsome monster is one that reveals everyone’s deepest fears to all the others. • To order any of these books for a special price click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15