Given that there hasn’t been a lot to celebrate over the past few months, it hasn’t been a great year for sparkling wine. Prosecco seems to have survived, as it always does, though even that hasn’t shown the dramatic increase in sales of many still wines, but champagne has had a particularly torrid time: shipments in April, for example, were down 68% overall, and a dramatic 74.6%, or nearly seven million bottles, down in its main market of France; May’s figures weren’t a great deal better, either. So is this the opportunity that producers of alternatives to champagne have been waiting for? Well, it should be, but when you can still buy a bottle of champagne for £12.49 (Veuve Monsigny at Aldi), why would you pay more for a less prestigious appellation? (In passing, Aldi is top dog when it comes to cheap fizz, with its award-winning, £7.99 Organic Prosecco and the innovative cava in the panel below among its offering.) The answer is that there are many sparkling wines that offer something different. Not everyone likes the rich toastiness of champagne or the comparative sweetness of prosecco, after all. You can find fizz that’s made from different grapes, in different colours (such as the real lambrusco below), different levels of sweetness, lower levels of alcohol (such as gloriously summery moscato d’Asti) and even different amounts of fizz (fashionable pet-nats, or pétillants naturels, being a case in point), as well as in different packaging such as cans, as I pointed out the other week. If a wine sells well as a still wine – Provençal rosé or New Zealand sauvignon blanc, say – someone will have a go at making a sparkling version. If you’re a Gavi fan, try the pleasantly crisp, refreshing La Battistina ‘Metodo Classico’ Gavi Brut 2017 (£14.99 on Majestic’s mix-six deal, 12.5%). It might surprise you how many French wine regions have their own fizz, even Bordeaux. Alsace, which is better known for its aromatic white wines, is another. In fact, the attractively creamy crémant d’Alsace accounts for 29% of the region’s total production and is the next best selling sparkling wine in France to champagne, although over 90% stays in the local area. Again, Aldi does a good one in its Exquisite Collection range for £8.49, but I prefer the one below. Maybe one day we’ll even come back to champagne again - after all, babies still get born, birthdays and anniversaries get celebrated, couples get engaged, and lives that have been lost are remembered and treasured. I’ll raise a glass to that. Cave de Turckheim Crémant d’Alsace £13.49 Waitrose, 12.5%. My favourite of the French crémants: smooth, rounded and appley – almost like apple pie and cream. Corney & Barrow Blanc de Blancs Extra Dry £13.50, 12%. Posh-looking, crowd-pleasing champagne alternative that’s perfect for parties and weddings. Jaume Serra Ice Cava £6.99 Aldi, 11.5%. It will no doubt offend purists, but in summer I love serving this off-dry cava over ice with raspberries and mint. Instant cocktail! Lambrusco Grasparossa di Castelvetro Grappolo d’Oro £13.99, or £11.49 as part of a mixed case, Averys, Laithwaite’s, 10.5%. Deep red, wild cherry-flavoured fizz: the real Lambrusco. Great for a barbecue or, even better, a porchetta party. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.com