Kawhi Leonard and the Los Angeles Clippers had enough answers to withstand Luka Doncic’s record-setting debut especially after the 21-year-old’s running mate was thrown out of the game. Leonard had 29 points and 12 rebounds, and the Clippers got a big boost from the ejection of Kristaps Porzingis to beat the Dallas Mavericks 118-110 on Monday night in Game 1 of their Western Conference playoff series. Doncic finished with 42 points, the most ever by a player in his first postseason game, and added nine assists and seven rebounds. He had the No 7 seed hanging right with the Clippers for much of the night. “I mean, he’s great,” Leonard said. Doncic himself begged to differ. His evaluation of his historic performance? “Terrible,” he said. “I should never have 11 turnovers. That’s 11 more possessions I can have. The thing about this game is I’ve got to be way better than that for sure.” Los Angeles pulled into the lead when Porzingis was ejected for picking up his second technical foul in the third quarter and Doncic couldn’t bring the Mavs all the way back. “KP had my back. He did it for me. He did it for his teammate. He had my back,” Doncic said. “Not just me, but the whole team appreciates that. I don’t think it was fair to take him out of the game, especially in the playoffs.” Porzingis got his second technical foul during a scuffle with Marcus Morris. Referees gave both players technical fouls. Porzingis had picked up his first technical foul in the first half for his reaction to a foul called when he believed he’d blocked a shot. Porzingis snagged his 2nd technical foul over this scuffle and has been ejected.(via @FoxSportsWest)pic.twitter.com/fmgYFC6rmg Morris didn’t think either player deserved a technical. “Playoffs man, nobody should get thrown out in the playoffs,” he said. “I know that really hurt their team so, not my fault though.” LeBron James, who may admittedly have an interest in seeing the Mavericks beat the Clippers, agreed. “Man that was BOGUS AS HELL MAN!!!!! Cmon man,” he wrote on Twitter. Elsewhere in the opening games of the playoffs on Monday, Denver, Toronto and Boston beat Utah, Brooklyn and Philadelphia respectively.