Selfridges must embrace changes in shopping habits that have pushed ethical and environmental concerns to the front of the queue, according to the department store’s boss. The upmarket store group, which recently cut 450 jobs after a tough year, is introducing clothing rental, a second-hand fashion shop, beauty pack recycling and a “concierge” to help organise product repairs as part of a five-year sustainability plan intended to adapt to new ways of living. “I think the pandemic has changed everybody’s thinking forever,” said Anne Pitcher managing director of Selfridges as she launched the department store’s Project Earth five-year sustainability plan. “I don’t think it’s as simple as [shopping online] and not walking into stores any more. I think [consumers] will shop with businesses that they trust, that they know care, businesses that they feel are their friends or that they can relate to, businesses that choose doing the right thing over making money, and businesses who are transparent in the way they do business. “I think we’ve all changed and people will care not only about how you do business, but how you place people and planet at the heart of your thinking. So many businesses are so far away from that and I’m proud to say that I think [Project Earth] is transformational.” Pitcher supports the permanent pedestrianisation of London’s Oxford Street, home to Selfridges’ flagship store, following other schemes that have attracted diners and shoppers across the country. “We need to ask ourselves whether Oxford Street, and not just Oxford Street, all of our town centres and cities, are comfortable, easy and enjoyable places to shop and also then how do we protect the environment. Of course Oxford Street should be pedestrianised,” she said. Selfridges joins a swathe of brands from John Lewis and Ikea to Gucci that have stepped up their ethical profile. The department store is signed up to the Fashion Pact launched at last year’s G7 meeting in which more than 20 brands, including Gucci, H&M and Zara’s owner Inditex promised to address their environmental impact. Brands are responding as growing numbers of young people turn to reuse and resale sites such as Depop in the UK, The RealReal in the US and YCloset in China. The second-hand market is expected to grow faster than fast fashion in coming years. John Lewis is launching a furniture rental service and is mulling a marketplace to sell used products. Laying out a new strategy for the business, which also owns Waitrose, its chairman Sharon White said last month: “The themes of tackling inequality, of wellbeing and sustainable living will be at its core. These have never felt so relevant, with the economic uncertainty and social inequality coming out of the pandemic.” Ikea has invested in renewable energy and mattress recycling, promising to phase out single-use plastics as part of plans to spend at least €3bn (£2.7bn) on sustainability from 2009. Chana Baram, a retail analyst at market research firm Mintel, said: “Since the pandemic happened, people have become far more aware of the processes of supply chains because all this has made the news in a big way.” She said the headlines highlighting poor conditions in a Leicester garment factory linked to online fashion shop Boohoo and reports on the treatment of workers in warehouses during the pandemic had put workers’ rights at the top of the agenda. She said these community concerns were part of a trend in more conscious shopping – sparked by David Attenborough’s BBC documentary series Blue Planet, followed by Extinction Rebellion and Greta Thunberg – and had inspired protests on broader environmental issues. “People have high expectations now of what retailers should be doing,” she said. They could not focus on just one issue, such as plastics use, but had to work on all aspects of ethical business as well as they could. Selfridges’ Project Earth, was ready to launch in April but was delayed until this week because of the high street lockdown. The retailer is working with brands including Prada to promote recycled materials such as nylon made from plastics pulled from the ocean and more sustainable fabrics like organic cotton. Its resale service, called Resellfridges, will host a series of vintage collectors selling specially curated collections. After that, customers will be able to sell their own accessories for store credit. Selfridges is also launching its first collection for hire with specialist Hurr Collective. Pieces from more than 40 brands including Zimmermann and Emilia Wickstead will be available to rent for between four and 20 days. The company is also pledging to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from its stores and office by 2023 and eliminate waste by reducing unnecessary packaging. Specific commitments on key ingredients and materials include buying all cocoa from sustainable sources by 2025 and ensuring all plastic packaging will be recyclable, reusable or compostable by 2025.