I’d been driving along country lanes for an hour. The area felt both familiar and unfamiliar. As if I’d forgotten it completely and yet could remember it all. I hadn’t been out here since I was a boy, when I was concerned only about the next corner and the one after that, as if the future was something you could rush towards and the past could be left behind. Later, I imagined that the past is not behind us at all, but unseen beneath our feet. We are supported by it as we walk, sometimes balanced, sometimes not, and if we tried we could reach below to grasp the person we once were. It might even be possible to pull them up to join us. Now I wonder if our past is always nearby, and our future too, and if we look carefully we can see both. But who wants to look carefully? There’s certainly no time for that when you’re racing along and there are trees rushing past that you could reach out and touch. Gripping the wheel with both hands, leaning forward in my seat, I’d expected to find a discreet place to pull over in five minutes. Lying next to me on the passenger seat was my father’s porn collection in a cloth carrier bag. The face of the PG Tips monkey, printed on its outside, looked up at me, giving nothing away. I found an empty field and stopped parallel to a five-bar gate, with another similar opening across the road, and the car settled into silence. The interior warmed rapidly, the cold air turned off with the engine. All the roadside bushes were in leaf and insects flew about chaotically, looking for wild flowers, or aphids, or whatever they look for. Some have a single month of life, just one sight of the moon. Perhaps it feels like our three score and 10, their 30-day turd hunt, that’s if they’re not eaten by a blackbird on day one, or splatted by a motorcyclist’s visor on day two. The sky was blue, dotted with white fluffy clouds. It would be nice to come back as a cloud, in the so-called next life. People go on about returning as cats, or lobsters, or Golden Eagles, no one ever says a cloud. Drifting along on the breeze, watching the cars and the cows and the crop circles, before falling exhilaratingly to earth, rushing together into a stream and then being spirited up again. That’s a nice life, if you can avoid cisterns and urinals. It might even be pleasant to evaporate, a good way out. Maybe some water never disappears, stuck for ever in one existence. How awful. I didn’t want to look in the bag... I looked in the bag I stayed in the car. The gate looked heavy and the cloud I envied had gone. I was in P for park. If there was no other life, before, during or after this, I needed to be ert not inert. I didn’t want to check out. A pristine white Range Rover Evoque appeared in my rearview mirror, a fast-moving reminder that other people were out here, and this was not going to remain a private place. I sank into my secondhand car seat as this engineering marvel approached; it was over-equipped for this B road, but just the sort of vehicle you’d expect to see among all these large properties. Buying one is thriftless and I felt a pang of jealousy at the fearless spending it represented. The chucking away of money is beyond me, handicapped as I am by the pitiable passed-on characteristics of poor taste and bean-counting. This is the true inheritance tax of life. Behaviours and habits, ingrained, your own but not your own, a duty on your existence, a tariff to be levied on those who try to love you. As I waited for the Range Rover’s windblast I held on to the monkey bag, with its envelope full of my dad’s favourite photos. This was not an inheritance. It was contraband from a theft carried out by my stepmother. Dad had accrued this latest portfolio only after she had found one such image stuck fast in their home printer. He then admitted he had some similar items hidden in his built-in wardrobe. It turned out there were hundreds of pictures, which they had secretly burned in their back garden eight or nine years ago, when they were both in their 70s, shuffling about curiously in the night-time with a box of matches, making a pensioners’ Pact of Fire, blackening the lawn beyond the crazy paving where a magnolia tree once stood, all in lieu of the torching of their suburban reputation. Now that the Evoque had gone and I was in peaceful solitude, among the birds and the bees, I didn’t want to look in the bag. “I don’t think you’ll like it,” my stepmother had said, but that wasn’t what was stopping me. Taking this step might shift too many supporting pillars in my emotional infrastructure, which already resembled a makeshift shantytown put together after a hurricane, with psychological corrugated sheeting and unbalanced blue tarpaulins. It lacked stability but it held, some new life had grown up around it, there hadn’t been a storm for a while and I didn’t want my shack of feelings blown down, like a little pig’s in a fairytale. I looked at the face of the knitted monkey, took a breath, reached across and pulled out… my phone. I typed PG Tips into the search bar. Launched by the Brooke Bond Tea Company in 1930, PG Tips was marketed as Pre-Gest-Tea, to be drunk before meals to aid digestion. Such claims were subsequently outlawed but the PG brand remained and Tips was added in reference to the part of the plant used. Dad loves tea, he makes a sound of approval with every sip, but if he doesn’t have a teaspoon he’ll say: “I haven’t got a teaspoon,” and my stepmother will hurry in from the kitchen to find him one in the sideboard, a few feet from his chair. I looked in the bag. There was a large manila envelope inside the folder and, having checked my wing mirrors several times for dog walkers, I slid out the contents. Now they were available to view, I stared through the windscreen, down the long straight road ahead, where some cyclists had appeared, four grown men in colourful skin-tight outfits. It seemed unlikely that they were in a race, more that they were pretending to be. They edged nearer in their garish amateur peloton, but they were a long way off, so I looked down at the first picture. It featured a boy of about 15, wearing an unsmiling expression and nothing else, kneeling on a bed looking straight at the camera, playing up a little with a manufactured sneer. He was a pinkish white colour, his dark hair cut short, his chest pale, with little muscle definition or body fat, not skeletal but not yet full-grown. He was at rest. There was no fake tan or waxed skin, just moles and blotches. I looked around the edges of the image for any sign of the website it had come from. There was no clue as to who this kid was, or where the picture was taken, or whether the law would consider him a child. Or whether his parents would. I realised that the cyclists were seconds away. I’d forgotten them, and everything else, as I looked at the picture. They were fast, could it be the Essex Police Road Racing team on a training ride? My window was down so I held the envelope and the photos against my chest, in case the slipstream from the peloton drew the pictures out to flutter across the countryside, some settling in hedges for schoolboys to find, others being snatched up by the gloved hand of a wannabe Bradley Wiggins. He’d look down at me across his handlebars, and I’d gaze up over his ventilated helmet, longing to be a cloud. I turned away to avoid eye contact. They went past. A fly bonked into my windscreen. I looked at the next picture. Two teenage boys this time, also naked and concentrating intently as they stared at the glans (from the Latin for acorn) of one as if it were independent of them both, in between them and readying to dock, like a shuttle nearing a space station. This was not a well-lit photo and there was evidently no art department on hand to choose bedclothes. Again there was no indication of where or who they were, or whether they should have been at school that day. But this one bore a logo in the corner, Teens, a word now made ugly, a mask of everyday normality thrown over a private peepshow. The font was swirly and colourful as on a child’s birthday card, with puffed-up letters squidging against one another. Does my father become excited when he looks at these joyless images created in squalid polyester bedrooms for secretive voyeurs? What a misstep in life for all concerned. The pictures piled up, all naked boys together. My stepmother said that they were “vile”, but they just seemed sad, with nothing tender to be seen, no warmth or affection. There were occasional shy smiles in some but in others no faces at all, just limbs, buttocks and cavities, a smear of something here and there, and graphics in the corner saying “teen” or “twink” or “boy” in various bright and breezy typefaces usually reserved for children’s television channels. I started the engine and surged alarmingly across the lane into the other entrance and then reversed without coming to a stop, before setting off the way I’d come, fighting the urge to accelerate up to 80 or 90 miles an hour. My dad liked to drive fast, he got me into cars. I could speed along until no one was behind me and then unseal the electric sunroof and lift the pictures clear of the opening into the wind before releasing them like a vapour trail of depravity, followed by the monkey. ************* Maybe my mother thought I was dead, since I wasn’t responding to her cries. She came barrelling into the living room at top speed, wearing an anxious look I hadn’t seen before. Crawling about beneath the table in the bay window, I’d become tangled among the gate-legs that pulled out either side to support a pair of drop leaves. As I bumped about, the vase on top fell over. A big, white, Art Deco thing, with bulging sides in sections, creating the impression of wavy lines going from top to bottom. Mum had put some flowers in it, yellow ones. I was frozen in fear and looking at the doorway before she arrived, expecting to be in trouble, since she’d shouted and then come running. She was going to be cross about the vase, though I don’t remember it being broken or even any water from the flowers dripping down. That I expected her concern to be the china, not me, might say something about how I saw myself in the household pecking order, aged three. Or it might mean I broke a lot of stuff and was used to people, not me, picking up the pieces. I do remember breaking a light fitting once, years later, but she was dead by then so I just lied about it to my dad, since he would be livid either way. Her relief flooded over me and transformed inside me to joy… I know what love feels like, it feels like that Maybe I had seen that anxious look on Mum’s face before, I don’t remember, but it was an unexpected delight that she coaxed me out from under the table and hugged me, not even looking at the vase, comforting me when she realised I was frightened by the crash and the shout and the running and the thought that I’d broken something. Her relief flooded over me and, in the mysterious world of emotional alchemy, transformed inside me to joy. That is a memory of love, I know what love feels like, it feels like that. The main table in our house was not that gate-leg one in the window, with flowers from our garden sitting on top in a nice old vase, it was the dining table at the other end of our knocked-through downstairs rooms. I have no memory of my mum at the dining-room table. This seems inconceivable. Where did she sit when we ate? I do remember her in her bedroom, attaching stockings to a girdle that looked like a parachute harness. Sitting at her dressing table, being called “Darl” by my dad. I remember her in the kitchen, making jam, and then jam tarts, and letting me bang saucepan lids together like the man on the cymbals in Trumpton. I remember her putting me in the bath when I still had socks on, and how my laughing made her laugh. I remember a blue plastic bucket with a lid and before you got in the bath she would hold the lid upside down so you could do a little wee into it, which she would tip into the basin. Better that than weeing in the bath. I remember her reversing her black Morris Minor Traveller into a ditch outside infants’ school and being inside the car while men pushed us back up on to Staples Road, which had Epping Forest running all down one side, and if we hadn’t stopped we might have rolled all the way to Dick Turpin’s old hideout, I imagined. But I don’t remember her at the dining table, though we must have had so many meals together, Sunday roasts and teatimes. I don’t remember a single breakfast with her. All the times she tucked me in, all the stories she must have read, but I don’t remember her in my bedroom. I was nearly six and a half when she died. Six years, five months and 16 days, in fact, or six years and 169 days, or 2,361 days (including the leap years of 1968 and 1972). She was born on 5 February 1934 and was 38 when the leukaemia finished with her, so she would have been a white-haired old lady by now, if she’d lived, but she might have died another way, of course, a vase falling on her head or something. I don’t see the point of leukaemia. Some diseases are using you as the host for a time and then they transfer to someone else, they survive that way, those pathogens, airborne or waterborne, jumping from person to person or cow to cow or rabbit to rabbit. But leukaemia just sets up a malfunction in you that you can’t survive. Nothing grows or thrives except tiny cell-size tumours inside your bones. No one knows what causes it. It’s a genetic mutation that occurs when you’re making jam or putting your kids in the bath. The advice is: don’t smoke and eat more vegetables. That’s the best they can offer, even now in 2020, never mind 1972. My mother did not smoke and was in the greengrocer’s almost daily. What a pointless thing it is. And people say they don’t understand why there are wasps. It is thought that 90sr can cause that genetic mutation. It’s a radioactive isotope of strontium produced by nuclear fission and is of concern in the event of nuclear fallout or leaks. 90sr is known as a Bone Seeker. As far as I know, the nearest nuclear power station to us was Sizewell on the Suffolk coast, 88 miles away. It opened in April 1967, 13 months after I was born. They have nearly had leaks, and some radioactive material has been found on Southwold beach, but I don’t think we ever went there. Mum wasn’t caught out by a Bone Seeker, she just mutated by herself, like the X-Men, and her white blood cells went on the rampage. After Mum was gone Dad put a half-size snooker table next to the dining table, a competition-standard dartboard on the wall, and then, in a new extension at the back, a full-size table tennis table. On the other side of new plate-glass sliding doors was a paved area with a wall you could hit balls against, and up the garden, past the swing, was a badminton court marked out in whitewash on the lawn and finally a wooden goal net he’d had made, standing in front of Mum’s rose bed. He liked sport. When we played Trivial Pursuit at the dining table and he landed on Art & Literature, he’d groan and say: “Oh no, Aaarrt and Litch-ra-chure,” in a voice that told you that art or literature alone were boring but together they were so life-threateningly tedious he couldn’t even speak properly. In a glazed bookcase in my dad’s bedroom were my mum’s souvenir books from Shakespeare productions at the Old Vic, dating from the 50s. She loved Shakespeare, she loved Richard Burton and she loved me as well. So he hated Shakespeare, and Burton, and maybe he hated me sometimes, with my jaunty ways learned in her company as her little friend. Perhaps Mum loving me bothered my brother, too. There’s nothing to suggest she didn’t love him, but one day, when he was two, he pulled my pram over when I was asleep in it. Another time, long after she was gone, I was sitting at the dining table while my brother was playing darts, and I managed to become so irritating that he threw a dart at me. He deliberately missed, opting for a shot across my bows, and the dart stuck in the carpet in front of the sofa. Foolishly, given he still had two darts in his hand, I mocked his aim and his inability to go through with his threat. Could those bleak recollections of our dining table have overlaid memories of my mum, like the ash from Vesuvius that covered Pompeii? I have fonder memories of the gateleg table because of the love I felt under there, and I can bring those memories back because I’m writing this in my own house, sitting at that same table. © Alan Davies. This is an edited extract • Just Ignore Him by Alan Davies is published by Little, Brown on 1 September (£18.99). To order a copy for £16.52 go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15