When Kingsley Coman stole into space at the far post, he knew that the right delivery from Joshua Kimmich would give him the opportunity he had dreamed of. The Champions League final had been tight and tense, with a few chances for either team but, until this point, no clinical edge. That was about to change. Kimmich’s cross was perfect and Coman’s eyes lit up. There was a time when his ambition had been to win Europe’s elite competition with Paris Saint-Germain, his hometown club and the one at which he progressed through the youth ranks, having joined them as an eight-year-old. But Coman would come to fear that there was no pathway into the PSG first team after the Qatar Sports Investment takeover and so he moved to Juventus before winding up at Bayern Munich. He watched Kimmich’s centre onto his forehead and, when he guided the ball into the far corner, he had put his club en route to a treble of trophies this season and a sixth triumph in this tournament. What a way it was for him and, perhaps more dramatically, the manager, Hansi Flick, to round off the campaign. This is Flick’s first job in top-flight management, one that the 55-year-old accepted last November when Bayern sacked Niko Kovac and were in disarray. The reboot that Flick has overseen since then has been nothing short of astonishing. Playing an attractive, high-pressing game, Bayern have bulldozed their way to 33 wins and just two defeats in 36 matches in all competitions and it has long since passed the point where it feels as if Flick can do no wrong. His major decision for the final was to recall Coman at the expense of Ivan Perisic and the winger proved the star turn. He was supported by Manuel Neuer, the captain, who made two fine blocks in goal, and Thiago Alcântara, the playmaker. This was a first appearance for PSG in Europe’s showpiece final – as opposed to Bayern’s 11th – and the chance to scratch the itch that has become an obsession for their owners. Since the Qataris assumed control in 2011-12, they have funnelled lavish amounts of money into creating a team to win this trophy only to see them fall short time and again – sometimes in faintly ludicrous fashion. The last-16 loss to Barcelona in 2017 stands out when they threw away a 4-0 first-leg lead and conceded three times after the 88th minute of the second game to crash 6-5 on aggregate. There have been other horrors. Prior to this season, PSG had won only four knockout ties in seven Champions League campaigns but Thomas Tuchel has broken down psychological barriers. Having secured a domestic treble, he and his team arrived at the Estádio da Luz sensing history. PSG shaded the first half and, had they taken their chances – and they were good ones – they might now be telling a different story. They fought until the last and, deep into stoppage time, there was Neymar almost forcing the equaliser. Yet in the end, the Brazilian’s tears spoke of PSG’s heartbreak. Many of their players removed their runners-up medals almost as soon as they were draped around their necks. Flick stuck to his principles, playing a high defensive line and trying to establish his team in the PSG half. But as in the semi-final against Lyon, the tactic left spaces and Tuchel’s front three of Neymar, Ángel Di María and Kylian Mbappé almost exploited them. Each had a clear opportunity before the interval. Neymar’s followed a pass from Mbappé that left him with only Neuer to beat – the goalkeeper blocked with his leg – while Di María’s came on 24 minutes, following a rapid thrust from halfway led by Neymar. After Di María had exchanged passes with Ander Herrera, his drive flashed high. Mbappé’s chance was in the gilt-edged category. With PSG pressing high, David Alaba played a loose pass straight to Mbappé and, when he got the ball back from Herrera, he had time and space in front of goal – eight yards out. He scuffed tamely at Neuer. Bayern’s first-half threat was carried by Robert Lewandowski, who entered the game with 55 goals from 46 appearances this season. His first chance was the big one and it was mostly his own work. His touch to kill an Alphonso Davies cross was excellent and, on the spin, he sent a low, bouncing shot against the post, with PSG goalkeeper Keylor Navas beaten. Lewandowski would also work Navas with a header on 31 minutes while Bayern finished the half with Coman screaming for a penalty after he had outstripped Thilo Kehrer – and not for the first time. Coman’s pace and awareness was too much for the PSG full-back. Coman appeared to go to ground a little too easily but the replays did show that Kehrer had clipped his heel, as well as putting a hand on his shoulder. The clip was difficult to see in real time and, in VAR terms, not in the clear and obvious bracket. The thought occurred that the game might hinge on an error but instead it came down to a burst of Bayern slickness. The breakthrough was a wonderful team goal, with Thiago finding Kimmich and him working a triangle with Serge Gnabry and Thomas Müller before crossing. Coman did the rest. What did PSG have left? Di María played in Marquinhos, who was denied by another vital Neuer block, and there was controversy when Kimmich appeared to catch Mbappé inside the area. No penalty, said Daniele Orsato. The glory belonged to Bayern.