Leeds United are interested in signing Udinese’s Argentinian international Rodrigo De Paul but have been told any move for the midfielder would cost in the region of €30m-€35m. The 26-year-old, who scored seven league goals in Serie A last season, had a breakthrough year in 2019 – playing a key part in helping Argentina to the semi-finals of the Copa América – and has since developed into one of the brightest talents in Italy. Marcelo Bielsa is very keen to bring the No 10 to Elland Road, following the recent arrivals of Robin Koch from Freiburg and Rodrigo Moreno from De Paul’s previous club, Valencia. Leeds are also in advanced talks for centre-back Josko Gvardiol from Dinamo Zagreb. Everton have agreed a deal with Napoli for Allan. The Brazilian is likely to cost at least £22.3m, with the fee expected to rise with performance-related bonuses. The Premier League side have already agreed personal terms with the defensive midfielder, who is due to complete his medical this week. Carlo Ancelotti is keen to revamp his midfield after an underwhelming season in which Everton finished 12th, 10 points from European qualification. James Rodríguez is another name that could be added, with Everton in talks with Real Madrid, who see the Colombian as surplus to requirements having not played a league game for Zinedine Zidane since October last year. Rodríguez, who signed for Real for a reported £63m in 2014 after a successful World Cup, is 29 years old and could be keen to join Ancelotti, under whom he played at both Real Madrid and Bayern Munich. On Sunday, Everton signed Michael Keane to a new five-year contract, rewarding the defender’s end-of-season form which led to his inclusion in Gareth Southgate’s England squad last week. Fulham have signed Southampton midfielder Mario Lemina on a season-long loan deal. The 26-year-old spent the bulk of last season on loan at Galatasaray, but will now return to Premier League action. The deal contains an option for a permanent move for the Gabon international at the end of the loan agreement.