Most weekdays south Auckland’s Ōtara shopping centre is alive with the blur of brightly coloured lavalava and the cacophony of clashing music thumping out from car loudspeakers. But this week, in the midst of New Zealand’s second lockdown, the atmosphere is subdued and strained. Security guard Sam Brown shepherds a steady stream of cars past rows and rows of orange cones to a makeshift Covid-19 testing station in the middle of the car park. It’s a long four-hour wait, but he’s found that if he tells locals this news with a smile, they’re happy to wait. “People go ‘Oh man, that’s a long time’, and then they just go through and wait anyway,” Brown says. “In Polynesian culture, especially with church, you learn you’ve got to learn to wait.” Auckland, in particular the south of New Zealand’s largest city, is home to the largest Polynesian population anywhere in the world. Last week it became the epicentre of New Zealand’s latest Covid-19 outbreak. The first wave of the virus in New Zealand, thought to have been eradicated on 8 June, was by and large associated with Pākehā (New Zealand European) people arriving back from overseas travel. But the most recent cluster has hit closer to home. Of the 58 new cases linked to public transmission, the Pasifika community has taken the brunt of the blow, making up 74% of the active cases. Māori have also fared poorly, accounting for 16% of the cases. Pasifika health leaders – already wrestling with high rates of poverty and historically poor health outcomes – fear the outbreak could make for a dangerous cocktail. “It’s nothing to do with the virus, it’s the socioeconomic conditions,” Dr Colin Tukuitonga, the director general of the Pacific Community, told the Guardian. “It’s those things that cause the virus to disproportionately affect Pacific islanders.” The disproportionate impacts are clear in the statistics. Modelling from Te Pūnaha Matatini projects that the infection fatality rate for Pasifika people will be more than double that of Pākehā. “It’s clear that Covid runs a high risk of having a devastating impact on our people, so that’s why it’s even more important that we stamp it out now,” Dr Maryann Heather, a GP at South Seas clinic in Ōtara, said. On 12 August, Auckland moved to alert level three, restricting movement across the city and ordering its resident to maintain a tight household “bubble”. However, there are serious concerns from health leaders that many south Auckland households cannot effectively isolate. While not specifically naming the Pasifika community, New Zealand’s director-general of health, Dr Ashley Bloomfield, last week mandated government-run quarantine – rather than home isolation - for all active cases in the current cluster, saying household cross-infection was to blame for continued transmission. Data from Environmental Health Indicators New Zealand shows that 48.5% of Pasifika households in south Auckland are overcrowded – meaning there’s a need for at least one additional bedroom. According to Heather, job losses and the added financial pressures of Covid-19 are causing these typically multigenerational homes to become even more overcrowded, as families look for ways to cut bills. “Most of our Pacific families are in huge households, and at the moment lots of these homes are getting to 20-plus people,” Heather said. “Even before the latest lockdown, even before Covid, this was a big problem that causes some really big issues with infectious diseases.” Pacific Islanders have long faced entrenched systemic racism and inequality in the New Zealand healthcare system. Last year the country saw a major measles outbreak which wreaked havoc on Pasifika communities, before being carried to Samoa, where it claimed 83 lives. Situations like that do little to gain the trust of those most impacted by this latest viral outbreak, Tukuitonga said. “It’s very difficult in our communities. There’s often distrust of officials.” To reassure the community, places of worship like the Congregational Christian Church of Samoa in Auckland’s Māngere East, have set up their own pop-up testing stations to service church members. “We learned a lot in the last lockdown, and I think this time we’re a lot more prepared in what we need to do to get services up and running,” Heather said. For Sam Uoka, who steals a moment’s break for lunch between shifts at a local warehouse, he knows intergenerational education is going to be essential to maintain the government’s lockdown orders, particularly with the elders. “I’ve talked with my parents and they know that when we come to drop something off, we just wait on the lawn and don’t come inside,” Uoka says. “It’s tough, especially with the cook-ups Mum does on Sundays.” The combined efforts appear to be working, as Pacific Islanders lead all ethnic groups in testing rates. While south Auckland is living testament to New Zealand’s rich ethnic diversity, there has been a slew of insidious, baseless rumours on social media about the first family who were identified as contracting the virus on 31 July. The racism and vitriol has complicated the health messaging and made things more difficult for community leaders. “We’ve seen a lot of misinformation over the last few days and people being not so nice on social media so I’m very focused on making sure we’re communicating the correct information,“ Heather said. It’s nothing new for Uoka, who has seen years of negative rhetoric smearing the south Auckland region. “To me I’ve gotten used to it, ae,” Uoka says. “Any negative publicity it’s ‘south Auckland’, something good comes and it’s just ‘Auckland’.” Regardless of the rumours circulating on social media, Heather is confident the spirit of community and selflessness that she feels so strongly from the Pasifika community will help them triumph over the virus. “It doesn’t matter what island we come from, we have that bond we share and I think a lot of it comes down to our faith. We’re always going to try and look after one another and care for one another.”