Traditional whole-animal butcheries have become a rarity in many developed countries. The overwhelming majority of domestic and export meat in Australia is traded through the commodity meat market. Much of the meat produced for this market will be sourced from farms that are organised around the primary goal of maximising turnover of animals. As a system that rewards volume and speed, it works brilliantly. But if you’re a farmer or butcher or consumer interested in other dimensions of value, such as traceable animal and environmental welfare standards, then it will come up short. This is because when a farmer sells into the mainstream commodity market, their animals disappear into a generic product pool. Filled with crusading zeal for a better food model, we decided that our commitment to transparency and a whole-animal practice meant two things. First, we would seek out diverse breeds of animals grown on farms managed with the goal of improving the entire ecosystem. Second, we wouldn’t buy boxed meat from a wholesaler, but instead would always buy meat on the bone direct from the farmer, offal and all. Of course, if your business is built around buying the whole animal, then you also have to sell it, which can be challenging. Many of us have lost the traditional skills that allowed us to prepare and consume the whole animal. Eating offal was something quaint our grandparents did, and these days we spend more time watching cooking shows than we actually do preparing food. All of this means we default to the cuts we know how to cook, and we’re less likely to choose the unfamiliar ones. Change is hard and change is slow but from little things big things grow. Feeds: 4-6 Active prep: 15 minutesCook: 8 hoursChill: Up to 24 hours “When we first started selling our pastured pork, I had only been eating meat for about seven years, after a decade of vegetarianism, and was determined to make use of every part of the animals we raise with such care. And so my crispy pig’s ear banh mi was born, of necessity and respect, inspired by regular visits to Vietnam over the years. Banh mi are best when there is a balance of fat, fresh, sweet, sour, salt and spice, all wrapped up in a crispy baguette with a soft centre. These crispy pig’s ear banh mi capture that formula perfectly, and also leave room for everyone at the table to self-determine their own ratios of each constituent flavour.” – Tammi Jonas, producer and activist For the pigs’ ears4 pasture-raised pigs’ ears1 leek, coarsely chopped3 garlic cloves, lightly crushed, still in skin50g palm sugar300ml pasture-raised pork bone broth or chicken stock200ml Shaoxing rice wine200ml soy sauce6 star anise1 cinnamon stick3 eggsPlain (all-purpose) flour, for dusting60g panko breadcrumbsLard or rendered animal fat, for deep-frying For the banh mi4-6 fried eggsFreshly made mayonnaise or aioli, to serve40g lightly pickled carrot2 cucumbers, cut into batonsLong red chilli, coarsely chopped, to tasteCoriander leaves, to serveFish sauce, to serveCrusty baguette or white rolls, to serve Start this recipe one or two days ahead. Preheat oven to 120C (235F). Place pigs’ ears in an ovenproof dish with leek, garlic, sugar, broth or stock, Shaoxing, soy sauce and spices. Cover with baking paper, seal tightly with foil, and braise for about eight hours, or overnight, until very tender. Place ears on a cooling rack in the fridge to dry out for up to one day. Slice ears into thin strips. Beat eggs in a wide bowl and place flour and breadcrumbs in separate bowls. Dust pigs’ ears in flour, shaking off excess, dip in egg, then coat in breadcrumbs. Melt 5cm fat in a deep, heavy-based saucepan until shimmering, then deep-fry ears for two to three minutes until crisp and golden. Remove with a slotted spoon and drain on a wire rack. Serve pigs’ ears in baguettes or rolls, and offer fried eggs, mayonnaise, pickled carrot, cucumber, chilli, coriander and fish sauce for people to fill as they like. Voila – a crunchy, salty, sweet, sour, spicy banh mi made with a part of the pig most people wouldn’t know what to do with. Uncommonly delicious. Feeds: 2-4, depending on the size of the liver Prep: 15 minutesCook: 30 minutes “I’m an artist, but my father was a butcher, and we had a nice little herd of Black Angus for a while. My first cooking job was to make the Saturday morning butcher’s breakfast, before I did the deliveries. So I used whatever morsels were around – liver, ends of bacon, kidneys, little lamb chops – fried them up in an old electric frying pan, then served them on a slab of thickly buttered bread. It was a tough gig, as butchers don’t like their meat ruined, so timing was everything. I love good fresh liver, served medium–rare, with jammy onion and pan-roasted tomatoes. Sear the liver at the last minute while the sourdough bread is toasting.” – Christopher Hodges, Feather and Bone customer 40g butter, plus extra for spreading2 tablespoons olive oil2-4 brown onions (1 per person), diced250g cherry tomatoes, halved1 lamb, goat or calf (veal) liver, rinsed, membrane removed, sliced into 1.5cm strips1 handful flat-leaf parsley leaves, chopped2-4 slices sourdough bread Add a generous knob of butter to a frying pan over medium-high heat. Swirl for two to three minutes until lightly browned, then add a good dash of olive oil. Add onion and a large pinch of salt, reduce heat to medium-low, and cook, stirring gently, for 15-20 minutes. The onion will slowly turn golden, then brown, sweet and yummy. Meanwhile, heat a separate frying pan over medium-high heat. Add tomatoes – they’ll sizzle as they hit the pan – then add a bit more butter, season to taste with salt and freshly ground black pepper, and cook, turning once, for five minutes or until lightly browned and juicy. Drizzle liver all over with remaining olive oil. Heat a heavy-based frying pan over medium-high heat, add liver and sear it quickly, without turning, for one minute until sealed and caramelised a little, then turn it quickly and sear for another minute until nicely browned but still rare in the middle. Transfer to a plate, season to taste with salt and freshly ground black pepper and top with parsley, then cover with an upturned bowl or a lid – it will keep cooking so by the time you serve it will be cooked through but still pink in the middle. Meanwhile, toast sourdough in a toaster. Butter toast, and top with onions, tomatoes and liver to serve. Feeds: 4-6 as a shared entréePrep: 20 minutesCook: 2 hours (five minutes with pressure cooker)Special equipment: Pressure cooker (optional) “This recipe is from northern China, where middle Asian and Arabian influences blend with the complex beauty of Sichuan cooking to shine brightly. It often uses sliced pork belly but I think lamb tongue, with its tender buttery texture, is much more luxurious. This recipe is also a good way to use up any leftover roast lamb.” – Norman Lee, Feather and Bone customer For the tongue500g lamb’s tongues2 small star anise2 cloves½ cinnamon stick1 tablespoon Sichuan peppercorns3 bay leaves1 tablespoon sunflower oilCoarsely chopped coriander leaves, to serve1 teaspoon toasted sesame seeds Numbing chilli-oil vinaigrette25g crushed Sichuan peppercorns100 ml sunflower oil2 tablespoons black (Chinkiang) vinegar1 tablespoon chilli oil (I use Lao Gan Ma brand)1 garlic clove, finely chopped Tahini sauce1 tablespoon tahini1 tablespoon sesame oil½ tablespoon light soy sauce If you have a pressure cooker, fill it with the minimum amount of water, then add tongues, star anise, cloves, cinnamon, Sichuan pepper, bay leaves and one teaspoon of salt. Heat until it comes to full pressure, cook for five minutes, allow to cool, then drain. Alternatively, add tongues, spices, bay leaves and salt to a large saucepan, add enough water just to cover, bring to the boil, skim surface, then reduce heat to medium-low and simmer gently for two hours or until just tender – a skewer should pass through with only a little resistance. Rest the tongues until they’re cool enough to handle, then peel off the skin with a small knife while they are still warm. Slice tongues thinly lengthwise – you should get about four slices per tongue. Meanwhile, to make vinaigrette, warm crushed Sichuan pepper in oil in a small saucepan over low heat for three to five minutes or until fragrant – be careful, it can burn quickly. Remove from heat and steep for 10 minutes to extract all the fragrance. Strain, discarding Sichuan pepper, and combine oil with remaining ingredients. Whisk all tahini sauce ingredients with three tablespoons of warm water until smooth and silky. Add more water if needed; sauce should be a pouring consistency. Season to taste with salt. For a cold summer dish, arrange tongue on a plate. (For a warm dish, heat oil in a frying pan over medium–high heat, add tongues, and cook, turning halfway, for three to five minutes until crisp and golden.) To serve, spoon the tahini sauce over. Splash on the chilli-oil vinaigrette, pile chopped coriander in the middle, and sprinkle with toasted sesame seeds. Toss at the table and serve. This is an edited extract from The Ethical Omnivore by Laura Dalrymple and Grant Hilliard, photography by Alan Benson. Murdoch Books RRP $39.99.