The fried calamari of Rhode Island only had a 30-second spot during the second night of the Democratic national convention, but managed to get its tiny tentacles on to the national stage. In a made-for-social-media moment sandwiched between other states’ calls to fight poverty and end racial injustice, a lawmaker and a restaurateur with a heaped plate of sauteed squid stood on a beach and proclaimed Rhode Island the calamari comeback state. The appearance came during the virtual convention’s roll call, which took viewers on a whistlestop tour of US states. As Rhode Island’s Democrats formally nominated Joe Biden for president, the calamari became an instant social media sensation. Rhode Island trended for hours overnight on Twitter. Rhode Island was a big sensation at the virtual Democratic National Convention for its unconventional video plugging calamari — the state's official appetizer. https://t.co/C8j5epDiZI #odd Americans, including some Rhode Islanders, didn’t seem to know quite what to make of the calamari cameo. “My new home state of Rhode Island is trending over calamari and I have never been more hungry and confused at the same time,” tweeted Andrew Wortman, a volunteer firefighter and political activist. The backstory: Joseph McNamara, who chairs the state Democratic party and appeared in the video, lobbied successfully in 2014 to make calamari Rhode Island’s official state appetizer. McNamara said in the DNC spot: “Rhode Island, the Ocean State, where the restaurant and fishing industry have been decimated by this pandemic, are lucky to have a governor, Gina Raimondo, whose program lets our fishermen sell their catches directly to the public and our state appetizer, calamari, is available in all 50 states.” He added: “The calamari comeback state of Rhode Island casts one vote for Bernie Sanders and 34 votes for the next president, Joe Biden.” McNamara’s calamari comeback comment touched off a flurry of social media posts, but the real star was the chef who stood silently next to him John Bordieri, executive chef at Iggy’s Boardwalk, a seafood restaurant on Narragansett Bay. Masked and clad entirely in black, Bordieri held a huge plate of lightly battered squid, an image that for many epitomized the littlest state’s outsized personality. “Rhode Island casts 25 pieces of calamari served by a ninja to Bernie Sanders, and 32 pieces for the next president of the US, Joe Biden,” Adam Gaffney, a Harvard Medical School physician and public health researcher, wrote on Twitter.