With clubs such as Leicester, Crystal Palace, West Ham, Tottenham and Everton all courting Bournemouth’s David Brooks, Liverpool are reportedly readying themselves for what is generally known in transfer parlance as a “summer swoop”. Having missed most of last season with an ankle injury, it seems fitting the 23-year-old attacking midfielder is seen as the ideal replacement for the recently departed Adam Lallana and the Premier League champions are said to be preparing a £35m bid. As reported in the Guardian, Liverpool have also agreed an £11.75m fee with Olympiakos for Kostas Tsimikas and the 24-year-old left-back is en route to Anfield for a medical. Tsimikas will sign a four-year deal and act as back-up for Andy Robertson after Liverpool refused to meet Norwich City’s £20m asking price for Jamal Lewis. Already linked with a return to Manchester United, where he spent time as a teenager, Brooks’s Bournemouth teammate Josh King will have woken up on Monday to read speculation suggesting Paris Saint-Germain are interested in acquiring his services. Despite struggling in front of goal last season, the £25m-rated Norway international is believed to be wanted by as many as 10 Premier League clubs. The Italian sides Roma and Lazio are also reported to be keen on securing his signature. The departure of Maurizio Sarri from Juventus will have repercussions at Stamford Bridge, where Chelsea had been hoping to offload their former manager’s favourite midfielder Jorginho by selling him to the Italian champions. Now that Andrea Pirlo has taken up the cudgels in Turin, it looks like another buyer will need to be found. Meanwhile at Lazio, Simone Inzaghi needs a back-up striker for the European golden shoe winner Ciro Immobile and assorted news outlets are reporting he might be considering a move for Burnley’s burly Kiwi Chris Wood. With his place under further threat because of the imminent arrival of Willian, the France international Alexandre Lacazette is fed up with life at the Emirates Stadium and is ready to move to Atlético Madrid for £30m when or if Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang commits his future to Arsenal. Frank Lampard hopes to shore up his decidedly porous Chelsea defence by signing John Stones from Manchester City, in a move more cynical folk than the Mill might liken to trying to extinguish a fire by dousing it with petrol. The out-of-sorts England international could be available for as little as £20m. Lampard is also interested in signing Ben White from Brighton but will have to fend off serious interest from Leeds and Liverpool if he is to secure the 22-year-old centre-back. White was an ever-present fixture in Leeds’ successful promotion push while on loan last season, so it’s no great surprise Marcelo Bielsa would like to get him on board again. Bielsa’s spies have been busy keeping tabs on the Slavia Prague winger Nicolae Stanciu and have clearly been impressed with what they’ve seen – Leeds are preparing a bid for the Romanian and are also hoping to sign the 20-year-old midfielder Conor Gallagher from Chelsea. Pre-season friendly or not, always a sucker for corner volley goals: Nicolae Stanciu, for Slavia Prague pic.twitter.com/wxd8ovT7jN Nottingham Forest’s Joe Worrall is attracting interest at Burnley, where Ben Gibson is surplus to Sean Dyche’s requirements and likely to be shipped out on loan to Norwich or Middlesbrough. And finally, Newcastle United fans may not be getting the big-money signings they were dreaming of in recent months, but they can console themselves with the prospect of getting the Republic of Ireland midfielder Jeff Hendrick on a free transfer following his departure from Burnley.