Tottenham have been contacted by Milan over a potential transfer for Serge Aurier, although Spurs must find a replacement first before they can sell the Ivory Coast international. Aurier has been a regular starter under José Mourinho having been signed by his predecessor, Mauricio Pochettino, from Paris Saint-Germain in 2017. Despite making 33 appearances in the Premier League this season, the 27-year-old who has two years of his contract remaining is likely to be allowed to leave for around £20m. Danny Rose says he would be happy to see out the final year on his Tottenham contract and that he wants to make at least one last appearance in front of the club’s fans. The 30-year-old left-back, who spent the second half of the season on loan at Newcastle, is not a part of Spurs’ long-term thinking and they would prefer to sell him to raise funds for transfers. Mourinho intends to persist with Ben Davies at left-back, with the 18-year-old Dennis Cirkin in line to provide cover. Spurs tried to sell Rose last summer – he was left off their pre-season tour to Asia to allow him to find a club – only for nothing to materialise and he said last November he had no intention of leaving before the end of his contract. “I am very happy to stay at Tottenham and see my last 10 or 11 months out, I would love to,” Rose said on the Second Captains podcast. “There is nothing I want more than to play one more time in front of the fans. “My last game for Spurs was a 1-0 defeat to Liverpool and at the time I didn’t know that was going to be or could be my last game for Spurs. I want nothing more than to play in front of the Tottenham fans one more time, just to cherish all the moments we have had over the years with them. “They have always been good to me. I have possibly given them reasons in the past not to be so good to me, but they know when it was game time I gave everything for them. I will continue to do that as long as I am contracted to Tottenham.” Rose has had his ups and downs at Spurs, with one of the latter coming after he criticised the club’s wage structure and transfer policy in 2017. He was fined two weeks’ wages. “It was an expensive conversation but am I supposed to regret what we speak about in the dressing room or what the majority of the fans are thinking?” he said. “I am not going to regret that because that is what the changing room was saying, that is what the majority of fans were saying. “I don’t regret it, maybe the timing was incorrect because it was leading up to our first game of the season so it was an unnecessary distraction for the lads, the club, so I fully take that on board.”