Thousands of demonstrators gathered in Minsk on Saturday at the spot in the Belarusian capital where a protester died in clashes with police, calling for the country’s authoritarian president, Alexander Lukashenko, to resign after 26 years in power. Saturday was the seventh consecutive day of large protests against the results of the presidential election in which election officials say Lukashenko won a sixth term in office. Despite harsh police action against the protesters, including the detention of 7,000 people, the demonstrations have swelled into the largest and most sustained wave of protest since Lukashenko took power in 1994. Lukashenko and the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, discussed the protests in a call on Saturday, the first publicly known direct contact between the two leaders since the election. Born in August 1954 in Kopys, Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko has served as president of Belarus since the establishment of the office in July 1994. On his initial election, Lukashenko set about establishing an effective dictatorship, sustained by shamelessly rigged elections. Over the years, Lukashenko has offered his people a sort of Soviet-lite system that prizes tractor production and grain harvests over innovation and political freedoms, and the key part of his political offer has always been political and economic stability. Lukashenko tried to push this line again into the run-up to 2020’s disputed presidential vote, painting Belarus as an island of stability in a world buffeted by economic crises, political unrest and coronavirus. But the scale of discontent has shown that for many Belarusians, this messaging will no longer work. The 2020 elections have been described as the deepest crisis he has faced in his career, and in order to secure his supposedly crushing victory, Lukashenko required what appears to be some of the most brazen vote-rigging in recent European history. He appears to have subsequently forced his main opponent, Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, into exile. After the election, in a congratulatory message, Vladimir Putin urged Lukashenko to consider further economic and legal integration with Russia, which the opposition has warned would undermine Belarus’s sovereignty. The man sometimes described as “Europe’s last dictator” may have engineered a sixth term in office, but the balance of power has shifted away from him in a way few would have thought possible even a month ago. A Kremlin statement said Putin and Lukashenko both expressed hope for a quick resolution of the tensions. “These problems should not be exploited by destructive forces seeking to harm the mutually beneficial cooperation between the two countries within the framework of the union state,” the Kremlin said. Russia and Belarus reached an agreement in 1997 about closer ties, in a union stopping short of a full merger. Recently, there have been disputes between the countries, with Lukashenko suspicious that Putin wants to absorb Belarus. A funeral was held on Saturday for Alexander Taraikovsky, a 34-year-old protester who died in Minsk on Monday under disputed circumstances. Belarusian police said he died when an explosive device he intended to throw at officers blew up in his hand. But his partner, Elena German, told the Associated Press that when she saw his body in a morgue on Friday, his hands showed no damage and he had a perforation in his chest that she believes is a bullet wound. About 5,000 demonstrators gathered on Saturday in the area where Taraikovsky died. There were no immediate reports of detentions. Lukashenko had earlier issued an appeal to Russia, his long-term ally, as he faced growing pressure to step down after last Sunday’s disputed election, which has triggered protests at home and condemnation abroad.Tens of thousands of people have taken to the streets in Belarus, accusing him of rigging the vote and calling for him to step down. Lukashenko suggested the impact of the protests might spill beyond Belarus’s borders. “There is a need to contact Putin so that I can talk to him now, because it is not a threat to just Belarus any more,” he said, according to the state news agency Belta. He said: “Defending Belarus today is no less than defending our entire space, the union state … those who roam the streets, most of them do not understand this.” The Russian news agency Interfax, citing Belarusian media, said Lukashenko had discussed the situation with Putin in a telephone call. The European Union is gearing up to impose new sanctions on Belarus in response to a bloody crackdown in which at least two protesters have been killed and thousands detained, while the leaders of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania called on Belarus to conduct new, “free and fair” elections. The opposition’s presidential candidate, Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, who fled to neighbouring Lithuania on Tuesday, has called for more protests and an election recount. Officials have confirmed two deaths in the unrest: Taraikovsky and another man who died in custody after being arrested in the south-eastern city of Gomel. Russia sees Belarus as a strategic buffer against Nato and the EU, but ties between the two countries had been under strain before the election. Moscow scaled back financial support to Minsk and Lukashenko rejected Russian calls for closer political and economic union. Lukashenko has accused the protesters of being in league with foreign backers and warned Belarusians to stay at home to avoid becoming “cannon fodder”. Born in 1982 in Mikashevichy, Belarus, Svetlana Tikhanovskaya rose to prominence as an opposition leader to Alexander Lukashenko, after her husband Siarhei Tsikhanouski, a popular YouTuber, was arrested while preparing to stand for election. After she announced her intention to run in his place, Belarusian authorities thought they could safely leave Tikhanovskaya on the 2020 election ballot to provide a window dressing of democratic competition. Instead, Tikhanovskaya emerged as a formidable opponent, describing herself not as a leader, but a symbol, and promising swift new elections if she attained power. One of the “Chernobyl children” hosted in Ireland to help them recuperate from the effects of the nuclear accident in neighbouring Ukraine, as an opposition figure she drew crowds of thousands even in small cities, where people sang along to Changes, the 1987 song by the Soviet rock band Kino that became the soundtrack of a previous generation of people demanding a new kind of politics. Tikhanovskaya had sent her children out of Belarus during the campaign after she said she had received threats, and then in a video published days after she rejected the official result of the disputed election, a visibly distressed Tikhanovskaya indicated she had faced an ultimatum involving her family. She was forced to flee to neighbouring Lithuania. “God forbid you face the kind of choice that I faced,” she said. “Children are the most important thing in our lives.” Moscow this week also accused unnamed countries of “outside meddling” in Belarus. Russia has been wary of unrest on its borders since governments fell in Georgia’s 2003 rose revolution, Ukraine’s 2004-05 orange revolution and Kyiv’s 2014 Maidan protests – events in which it says the west backed the protesters.