It is easy to get carried away with the results of one round of football, especially in France where we have been deprived of Ligue 1 for more than five months. Cardiff City and Norwich City have enjoyed early 3-2 wins over Manchester City in recent Premier League seasons, but both sides went on to finish bottom of the table. So, while newly promoted Lorient and Lens are historic clubs with passionate fans who will be popular with neutrals in Ligue 1, we must take their fine performances on Sunday with a grain of salt. That said, neither side appears likely to drop back into Ligue 2 immediately and they seem determined to stay up while playing some surprisingly compelling football. Lorient hosted Strasbourg on Sunday, playing a 4-2-3-1 with record signing Adrian Grbic leading the line, the Austrian youth international having shaken off a knee injury. Grbic, who finished as the second top scorer in Ligue 2 last season while at Clermont, combines physical power with plenty of innovation and a keen ability to involve his teammates. Lorient’s front three of Grbic, Yoane Wissa and Stéphane Diarra (who was unfortunately forced off early), left the Strasbourg defence – normally the picture of calm under the organised Thierry Laurey – chasing shadows with their pressing and insistent running. Strasbourg took the lead thanks to Mehdi Chahiri’s speculative effort from distance, but Christophe Pelissier, having already wrought one miracle in recent seasons by keeping Amiens in the top flight, appears likely to do the same with Lorient. This time, he is adopting an approach that utilises a high press and the incredible pace of Wissa and right-back Houloubang Mendes. By combining both pressing and width – two thoroughly modern concepts not often seen in promoted sides – Lorient stormed back to win 3-1. Strasbourg’s narrow midfield diamond and lack of pace in attack made Lorient’s tactics that much more effective, but Pelissier deserves praise for identifying the assets at his disposal – most notably Wissa – and building a system that makes the most of his team’s talents rather than employing an overly negative set-up, playing solely on the counter-attack or relying on unimaginative tactics that may have worked in Ligue 2. Further south, Amine Gouiri’s superb double propelled Nice to a 2-1 win over Lens at the Allianz Riviera. Despite the disappointing result for Lens, the club long associated with the mines of northern France delivered a performance that was anything but workmanlike – which was no mean feat given the churn of players in their squad this summer. Nearly half of their starting XI were playing elsewhere last season and that was without record signing Seko Fofana or right wing-back Jonathan Clauss, the latter absent as a result of Covid-19. The Lens players will also need some time to get acquainted with new manager Franck Haise, whose supplanting of Philippe Montanier in February, when the club were second in Ligue 2, was a surprise. Lens set up in a 3-4-1-2 formation and were constantly a threat. Their forwards, Ignatius Ganago and Florian Sotoca, powered their press and put Nice on the back foot. The burly pair may not score many goals this season, but there is something of the Montpellier about them. Perhaps Haise noticed how the burly yet mobile and hard-working pair of Andy Delort and Gaëtan Laborde gave Montpellier plenty of joy last season. There were a few negatives, of course. Facundo Medina failed to impress on the left side of the back three and Clément Michelin showed his limitations as a wing-back, offering up a poor final ball despite frequently getting into good positions. That said, the Argentinian is young, playing in a new tactical system and will no doubt benefit from learning from Issiaga Sylla, who is set to become the regular left-sided wing-back. On the opposite flank, Clauss is a more natural fit and looked far more comfortable in attack than Michelin. Lens and Lorient are not likely to challenge for Europe or even finish in the top half of Ligue 1, but they have laid down a serious argument for the benefits of playing a well-organised and contemporary style of football. Other promoted clubs across Europe could learn a lesson from these so-called farmers. • New season, same brilliant teenager. Eduardo Camavinga was instrumental in steering Rennes into the Champions League last year. The midfielder came off the bench against Lille on Saturday and was quick to offer a reminder of his brilliance, bossing the midfield and setting up his side’s equaliser in the 1-1 draw. The 17-year-old is improving all the time and will help Rennes challenge both domestically and in Europe this season. • Nîmes, who only avoided the relegation play-off last season because of the premature end to the campaign, got off to a flyer with a 4-0 win over Brest. The Breton side were hapless, missing their first-choice defensive pairing of summer signing Christophe Hérelle (Covid-19) and Denys Bain (knee injury), but still could have held out some hope against Nîmes, who were themselves deprived of Nolan Roux and Anthony Briançon. It wasn’t to be, however, as Jérôme Arpinon enjoyed a happy debut as a manager. Hérelle will be back soon, as will Romain Perraud, but Brest may find this a long campaign indeed. • The weekend’s final word should go to Monaco. The club have undergone their usual shuffle of players this summer, as well as hiring Niko Kovac to replace Robert Moreno as manager. Kovac underwhelmed at Bayern Munich but his success at Eintracht Frankfurt had marked him out as an innovative manager who favours a high-energy pressing style. However, Monaco’s defensive woes – seen last season under both Moreno and Leonardo Jardim – appeared again in their 2-2 draw with Reims this weekend. Reims had the second-poorest attack in Ligue 1 last season, scoring just 26 goals in 28 games, but they managed to score twice against Monaco in the first 20 minutes. Using a cooling break to regroup his side, Kovac sent the hosts back out full of vigour and they earned a draw. If Monaco can start their matches with the same intensity with which they finished this one, they may challenge for the Champions League places. Monaco 2-2 ReimsLorient 3-1 StrasbourgNimes 4-0 BrestNice 2-1 LensDijon 0-1 AngersLille 1-1 RennesBordeaux 0-0 Nantes • This is an article from Get French Football News• Follow Adam White, Eric Devin and GFFN on Twitter