Joseph DeAngelo typically crept into his victims’ homes under the cover of night. This week, he will face them in the light of a Sacramento courthouse. Beginning on Tuesday, dozens of women and men will speak over three days about the trauma of surviving the crimes committed by DeAngelo, better known as the Golden State Killer, who terrorized California during the 1970s. Survivors say the violence prompted moves, divorces and left them with an unshakeable fear, but also a desire to help those with similar experiences. The Golden State Killer had long been one of America’s most notorious unsolved serial killer cases, until law enforcement identified DeAngelo using DNA in 2018. DeAngelo, a 74-year-old former police officer, pleaded guilty in June to 13 murders that spanned the state from the Sacramento suburbs to Ventura, as well as 13 kidnapping-related charges, and admitted to dozens of rapes in northern and central California between 1976 and 1979 that he could not be charged with due to the statute of limitations. Now the people who waited four decades for answers will get to speak as part of a sentencing hearing. DeAngelo will be sentenced to life without the possibility of parole on Friday morning as part of a plea deal that spares him the death penalty. In attendance will be some of the family members of those he killed and the survivors of his sexual assaults. “It’s a moment that is mine and not his,” said Kris Pedretti, who at 15 became the 10th victim of DeAngelo, then known as the East Area Rapist, when he raped her in her home in a Sacramento suburb in 1976. “He has to stand there and listen. He doesn’t have a choice, and we didn’t have a choice when he was telling us to shut up and do all the things that he told us.” Tuesday will begin with the survivors of the Sacramento assaults speaking in chronological order in a hearing that is expected to go from 9am to 5pm. Survivors of attacks in the Bay Area and Central Valley will speak on Wednesday and families of the murder victims are scheduled to appear in court on Thursday before DeAngelo is sentenced. The courtroom will include socially distanced seating and for the first three days will be primarily reserved for those speaking, though the hearings will be livestreamed. Each survivor and family member is permitted to have 15 supporters in the courtroom as they speak, Pedretti said. Some have asked family members not to attend due to concerns over Covid-19. Along with family and friends, several of those giving victim impact statements will have fellow survivors sit in the courtroom as they speak, a testament to how close the group has grown in the two and a half years since DeAngelo was arrested, though some have known each other much longer. They have developed friendships, gathering before and after hearings and on milestones such as the one-year anniversary of his arrest, supporting each other in court and facing media coverage, such as the new HBO documentary I’ll Be Gone in the Dark, together. They typically meet at Pedretti’s home, congregating in a sprawling garden dotted with oak trees and a lone palm, or at the residence of Carol Daly, who worked as a detective on the case in the 1970s. “We visit each other and get together and just have fun. It’s an environment of complete acceptance and understanding that enables you to just be yourself,” said Gay Hardwick, who, along with her husband, Bob, was attacked by DeAngelo in 1978. “If it weren’t for the network of the survivors I would have been quite left in the dark during the last two years. My local San Joaquin county officials did not stay on top of the case and did not keep me informed.” Hardwick will sit in the courtroom as a supporter for Kris Pedretti when she speaks, along with Pedretti’s sister, husband and daughter; Carol Daly; and Jennifer Carole, whose father and stepmother, Lyman and Charlene Smith, were murdered by DeAngelo in 1980. Carole says the friendships she has gained have been a silver lining and made it easier to attend court appearances. “When we walked in, I knew everybody,” Pedretti said of a June hearing. “[It] was absolutely un-intimidating, it felt safe, I could look around and see my friends and that was super reassuring.” Pedretti will be among the first survivors to speak on Tuesday, when she intends to tell DeAngelo and all those who have followed the case about her journey from a teen who was violently attacked four decades ago, burdened by shame and unable to talk about what had happened, to a woman who now offers support to people who have survived sexual assault. “You didn’t win, DeAngelo. You didn’t. What you tried to do, what you set out to do, you failed,” Pedretti said. Will DeAngelo, who some law enforcement say has feigned frailty to garner sympathy, absorb what they have to say? Some of the survivors say it doesn’t make a difference. “The victim impact statements are actually for us – they’re for the victim,” Hardwick said. “I don’t feel anything I say will have any impact on Joseph DeAngelo. I don’t view him as someone capable of normal human reactions and feelings.” Hardwick will speak Wednesday and hopes to reach beyond the case by touching on the way society avoids talking about sexual assault and blames victims. Survivors say knowing DeAngelo will spend the rest of his life in jail is a comfort. “My mind would be much more at rest knowing he’s … as far away as possible,” Hardwick said. “Then the rest of us can live out the rest of our lives the best we can, make all the remaining years the best we can make them. And we deserve that.”