The mother of TV presenter Caroline Flack, who was found hanged at her north London home in February, said her daughter had faced a “show trial” and been hounded by the press over allegations she assaulted her boyfriend in the weeks before she took her life, an inquest heard. In a statement read to court, Chris Flack said: “I believe Caroline was seriously let down by the authorities and in particular the CPS for pursuing the case.” The 40-year-old, who hosted Love Island and The X Factor, was found dead at her flat in Stoke Newington on 15 February. She was facing trial for assaulting her boyfriend, Lewis Burton, a former tennis player and model, in December. Her sister Jody Flack said she believed Caroline had tried to kill herself in December, before her first court appearance for assault. Family and friends painted a picture of the TV star falling apart in the weeks leading up to her death, with worried friends staying with her because they were so alarmed. Asked by the coroner Mary Hassell, sitting at Poplar coroner’s court in east London, whether Flack had said “she actually wanted to kill herself”, Flack’s friend Louise Teasdale replied “yes”. Flack’s mother said the evidence in the criminal proceedings against her daughter was “disputed”. But the resulting media attention had “forced Caroline to leave her home which she loved, I believe eventually to take her own life”. Through it all, Flack was told not to “tell her side of the story”, her mother said in a statement. “The only person who was hurt that night was Caroline,” she said. “She lost the job she worked so hard at.” Flack had been called an “abuser” in the newspapers, her sister said. “Her life and reputation she worked hard to build was falling apart … because of a false accusation,” she added. Flack had “spent months hiding inside”. “Caroline seemed very sad the day before her death – she seemed to have lost her fight,” she said. She said Flack was in a “very anxious” state of mind. Ambulances had previously been called on four occasions. Tamsin Lewis, a psychiatrist and lifestyle practitioner, who was called by Flack’s personal assistant on 17 December, told the court she was told Flack was “in the middle of a media crisis and could not sleep”. She was “incredibly distressed” and tearful, Lewis said in a statement. “She was scrolling the media reports on her phone.” She had a bandaged finger, which she explained was the result of a “lovers’ tiff” with Burton, “heightened by alcohol”. Lewis added that her mood appeared low and “she reported having panicky feelings all day – a sense of impending doom”. Flack did not say she had suicidal intent, added Lewis. “She said she had been drinking excessively to numb herself. She said sleep had been impossible.” Burton, Flack’s boyfriend who she was accused of assaulting, described her as “not in a good place emotionally”, “devastated” and said she sometimes talked of taking her own life. He said in a statement: “The media were constantly bashing her character, writing hurtful stories, generally hounding her daily.” He added: “What was worrying her most was the police case and losing her presenting job on Love Island, plus not being able to see me.” Burton had asked the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) to drop the case. David O’Toole, a paramedic called to Flack’s flat on 15 February, said it appeared she had been dead for hours. A postmortem found no traces of alcohol, but the presence of zopiclone, used for insomnia, just above the therapeutic range. Diazepam was present in a therapeutic amount. The pathologist Prof Michael Sheaff found Flack died from hanging. The inquest continues. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. 