Mary Trump has revealed more audio recordings she says are of her aunt, Maryanne Trump Barry, that aim pointed criticism at the US president’s children, Ivanka and Eric. On the latest tape, Barry targets Donald Trump’s daughter and White House adviser, Ivanka Trump, for posting an Instagram image in 2018 of herself and her young son that coincided with the Trump administration’s policy that saw undocumented migrant families forcibly separated after crossing the US-Mexico border. The recording was released by Mary Trump, the president’s niece, on MSNBC News late on Friday evening. The recordings were made when she was researching her recent book that describes nightmarish relationships inside the Trump family and how Donald Trump’s bullying father shaped a man without kindness. “That damn Ivanka puts this picture of the ‘Madonna and child’ on Instagram when the big news of the day was how kids are being ripped from their families,” Barry is heard saying. At the time, comedian and satirist Samantha Bee slammed Ivanka Trump but was later obliged to apologize for calling the president’s daughter a “feckless cunt” on her TV show. WATCH: President Trump's niece, Mary Trump, shares new recordings of the president's sister criticizing the Trump family. https://t.co/n8hsErKHhE On the latest tape, however, Barry reportedly remarks to Mary Trump that: “I’d never heard of Samantha Bee before. I couldn’t blame what she said.” Then the audio moves on to talk about Eric Trump, the younger of Donald Trump’s adult sons, as well as more on Ivanka. “Meanwhile, Eric’s become the moron publicly. Ivanka gives a shit. She’s all about her,” according to Barry. Mary Trump points out about Ivanka that: “Yeah, she’s a mini Donald,” referring to her uncle, the president, whom she has described as lacking empathy. “She’s a mini Donald, but yet he’s besotted with her. He always has been. She’s always been his favorite,” Barry said. The latest tapes follow clips published in the Washington Post, where Barry said Donald Trump has no principles and lies. Barry was a source for Mary Trump’s recent book, Too Much and Never Enough: How My Family Created the World’s Most Dangerous Man, which describes Donald Trump and his siblings’ upbringing as dysfunctional.