Normally, when considering this section’s image, I ask myself “Does it push you out of your comfort zones?” and “Will it shake you out of your makeup rut?” Now I ask “Will it work with a mask?” This experimental but minimalist look – as seen at Richard Quinn AW20 – does. Draw a “cat’s eye” across your lid, use a balmy sheer eye shadow above it for a light-reflecting youthfulness, and finish with white eyeliner at the bottom to brighten eyes. Seeing as it’ll be covered for hours, I wouldn’t bother with a lip. 1. Slip Silk Face Covering £39, sefridges.com2. Nudestix Nudies Bloom £28, cultbeauty.co.uk 3. KVD Vegan Beauty Super Pomade £18, boots.com 4. MAC 209 Eyeliner Brush £16.50, maccosmetics.co.uk 5. Sensai Liquid Eyeliner in 01 Black £32, harrods.com A few years ago, I attended a dinner at which a well-meaning person feigning an interest in what I do for a living asked me what was new and exciting in beauty. I responded with silence. I couldn’t think of anything remotely conversation worthy. Today, I am amazed at just how much that has changed. Beauty has pulled its finger out and there are now a slew of innovative brands and products that I am genuinely excited about. Take StriVectin, for example. Known for its advanced clinical studies and impressive results, it is the top independent prestige skincare brand in the US, loved by anyone interested in targeted solutions for ageing skin. This serum has taken two very potent, notoriously difficult to combine, gold standard ingredients, Vitamin C (superb brightening skills) and Retinol (the ultimate skin-refining, anti ageing hero) to create an absolute powerhouse. It brightens and smooths skin texture and wrinkles while also firming. I noticed visible results after a week, so now I am mainlining it. Anyone who has read this column long enough knows I place great beauty products into an ‘I’d drink it if I could’ category. This is right up there. Particularly because, considering the potency of the ingredients, it does its work without causing irritation. Nevertheless, it still leaves skin vulnerable to the environment – so an SPF is non-negotiable. Strivectin Super C Retinol Serum, £62, strivectin.co.uk Clean bee Honey is at the core of this hydrating cleansing oil, hence it removes all traces of makeup and pollution without disturbing the skin’s PH balance. Guerlain Abeille Royale Cleansing Oil, £55, johnlewis.com Shower affection This shower oil not only smells magnificent – with up to 28 pure essential oils – the oil-to-milk formula cleanses and moisturises, too. Aromatherapy Associates Shower Oils , £26, aromatherapyassociates.com Fit for a pharaoh Created by a British/Egyptian duo, this Hibiscus, Moringa, Macadamia and Jojoba oil blend is an amazing treatment for sun damaged, dry and lacklustre hair. Also excellent for dry scalps. Khali Min Rescue Oil, £38, khalimin.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto