In the sample clues below, the links take you to explainers from our beginners’ series. The setter’s name often links to an interview with him or her, in case you feel like getting to know these people better. This section is guaranteed free of what we are calling This, so no need to skip ahead if you prefer your puzzles to provide escape. Not that the rest of the paper has exactly been comforting, as the virus-related stories have sometimes moved down the front page. When we interviewed him for our “Meet the setter” series, Azed told us that he aims to keep three months ahead of schedule. Does this mean that topical material is impossible? Not if the image is as timeless as this … 32ac Recoil shocked about e.g. Johnson backsliding – or his namesake perhaps? (8)[wordplay: anagram (“shocked”) of RECOIL surrounding (“about”) abbreviation for prime minister (“e.g. Johnson”), reversed (“backsliding”)] [COILER surrounding PM reversed][definition: description of a namesake of Johnson] … and nice to leave the clue while thinking about the other Johnson, the one who was a COMPILER of a dictionary. Meanwhile, Qaos reminds us … 20ac Perhaps Boris Johnson welcomes special European (8)[wordplay: what Boris Johnson is example of, containing abbreviation for “special”][ETONIAN containing S][definition: European] … of that period in the middle of the previous decade when the clue ESTONIAN could not be indicated with reference to the prime minister of the day. On which topic, here is Maize in the Independent … 25ac Agree to accept ‘Leave’ with difficulty (10)[wordplay: synonym for “agree” containing synonym for “leave”][COMPLY containing EXIT][definition: difficulty] … reminding us of a coming COMPLEXITY. As for the thing itself, newish arrival Bluth gave us this imagery … 4ac Cummings on COVID’s return, embodying King Henry VIII, perhaps (8) [wordplay: Cummings’ initials, next to (“on”) COVID, both reversed (“return”), surrounding abbreviation for Rex (“king”)][EE and COVID reversed around R][definition: what Henry VIII is example of] … where the Cummings in the clue DIVORCEE turns out mercifully to be the poet. Here is Hectence with one of her puzzles in the quiptic, the Guardian’s series for beginners and those in a hurry: 1d Quietly feeding dogs upset by simple tail trim (6)[wordplay: musical abbreviation for piano (“quietly”) inside (“feeding”) word for “dogs” reversed (“upset”) next to (“by”) last letter of (“tail”) SIMPLE][P inside CURS reversed, then E][definition: trim] So “trim” becomes an adjective meaning SPRUCE. Spruce, of course, is also a noun: for at least 600 years, we have used it as the name of a conifer and the word in this sense means “Prussian”. So what about the kind of spruce that Hectence is referring to? A spruce chest and spruce deal were made of the wood of a spruce tree, naturally – but not so spruce ochre and certainly not spruce leather. These are “spruce” in the sense of fancy: but the origin is ultimately the same: various merchandise brought from the Baltics by the Hanseatic League were named spruce to indicate that they were posh enough to befit a glamorous Prussian. Ah, Prussia, which has also gifted us Tilsit cheese (also the pseudonym of someone who knows a thing or two about crosswords and an excuse to revisit this Mastermind moment … … the patronage of CPE Bach, which leads us to our next instalment of Healing Music Recorded in Isolation to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen to … … the sadly obsolete minced oath “what the Hanover” and the subject of our next challenge, Fe3+4[Fe2+(CN)6]3. Reader, how would you clue PRUSSIAN BLUE? Many thanks for your clues for PINS AND NEEDLES. I enjoyed the relative topicality of GeoScanner’s “Stormy Daniels pens end of a sensational episode” and the actual pins and needles of Albery’s “A feeling they’re in the etui?”, as well as Johan1209’s “You get them within and without a cushion”. Now, the audacity award. 10FootClaudicant comes close with a rarely seen dummy spooner in “Nervous reaction as Spooner’s second home regularly scanned by narks” and PeterMooreFuller reminds us of the rarely seen letter bank with “Once, twice or three times these characters led Spain to arrange torture”. But for inventing a clue type, the award is Porcia’s “‘Ladies’ nen spend freely for formication (4,3,7)’ clued in the Guardian?” Do read all about the graunism, a topic to which we will return. The runners-up are Phitonelly’s elaborate “Deadpan Les Dennis performance has ad withdrawn due to limited circulation” and Harlobarlo’s “Sends in Pelé and creates sensation”; the winner is Catarella’s daft suggestion: “Rub nettle between legs for an unpleasant sensation”. Kludos to Catarella and please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition – and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics – below. Every so often, the wordplay just isn’t where you thought it was, as with Pasquale’s sly clue … 16d What Scot does in street – refuses to budge (5,4)[wordplay: how the word SCOT can be seen with reference to abbreviation for “street” and company (“firm”)][definition: refuses to budge] … for HOLDS FIRM – and it can be very satisfying when you see what is really going on. Stay safe.