Amateur angler Bob and Paul are back for another series of their charmingly sedate road trip-cum-fishing show. Tonight’s opening episode sees the comics back in Scotland on the River Tweed, hoping to fulfil Bob’s dreams of catching a salmon. Tree-lined hillsides provide the stunning setting for the real star of this show: their meandering conversations. There’s talk of favourite artists, favourite jams and the nuances of a good skin maintenance routine to contend with. Ammar Kalia Timothy West and Prunella Scales’s boating escapades have made for touching viewing over the past few years. This show looks back on their adventures in Wales and the West Country. It’s an area of significance for the couple as they relive their honeymoon. Phil Harrison Giant collar aficionado Harry Hill turns TV critic in this new series, each week taking viewers on a journey through the staples of British TV genres. Up first are soaps, with Hill offering his guide to making the perfect one, from dialogue to dramatic weddings, featuring archive from Corrie, Crossroads and much more. AK This series sees the Amazing Spaces host explore shuttered National Trust sites, essentially getting his own private tours in lockdown. Tonight includes Dorset’s Kingston Lacy, although its Italianate beauty has competition from Clarke’s husky pup. Graeme Virtue In this final episodes of the twist-filled true crime series, the former high school football star Greg Kelley at last hears the appeal court’s verdict on his sexual assault conviction. Private emails found by Kelley’s lawyer lend credence to his denials and there is more news on an alternative suspect. Ellen E Jones This Tom Hanks-produced series takes viewers through the history of cinema, from the golden age of the early 20th century to present-day blockbusters, all told through interviews with on- and off-screen talent. We open with the rise of talking pictures in the 1930s in the wake of the Great Depression. AK Boyhood, 11.40pm, Film4 Twelve years in the making, Richard Linklater’s gently compelling, completely wonderful family drama is a real labour of love. It follows the life of Mason (played by the extraordinary Ellar Coltrane) as he ages from six to 18, Linklater returning each year to shoot his scenes. Paul Howlett Test Cricket: England v Pakistan 10.30am, Sky Sports Main Event. Third day coverage of the final Test in the series. British Touring Car Championship 11.50am, ITV4. Motor racing coverage from the Knockhill circuit. Uefa Champions League Final 7pm, BT Sport 1. Top-flight head-to-head from Estádio da Luz in Lisbon.