Arsenal’s David Luiz made two careless mistakes in the opening minutes of this game and got away with both of them. First he brought down Georginio Wijnaldum of Liverpool with a flailing attempt at a rugby tackle and saw Virgil van Dijk’s neat finish to an Andy Robertson free-kick correctly ruled out for offside. A couple of minutes later he needlessly passed the ball out of play to set up the position for Neco Williams to cross from the right, James Milner heading too high in the middle when he should probably have hit the target. Even though there were barely 10 minutes on the clock at that stage it appeared the pattern of the game had been set. Liverpool had their famous front three on the pitch and Arsenal had Rob Holding, thought to be heading for Newcastle some time soon, in the back line as well as the unpredictable David Luiz. With Mikel Arteta stressing beforehand that four or five days of training was far from ideal before meeting the champions at Wembley, it was easy to suspect Arsenal would be in for a long afternoon. Jürgen Klopp was not particularly impressed with the timing of this game either, describing it as coming “halfway through pre-season”, though Liverpool had been back in training for a week longer than their opponents. Those first impressions were altered, however, as soon as the 18-year-old Bukayo Saka got hold of the ball. Many thought the teenager unlucky not to make Gareth Southgate’s England squad last week, and here he showed why people are tipping him to break into the national squad before long. After 12 minutes in which Arsenal struggled to get out of their own half, Saka picked up the ball on the right and sent over a superb cross-field ball to pick out Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang on the left. The Arsenal captain’s finish was sublime, nudging the ball away from an exposed Williams to give himself space for a right-foot curler that flew past Alisson from the edge of the area, though it was the accuracy of the pass from Saka that gave the striker the time to utilise the space around him. That and a run from Kieran Tierney that might have distracted Liverpool’s reserve right-back. That was Aubameyang’s fifth goal at Wembley this summer, and with his new contract still unsigned on the table and subject of much discussion in north London, the striker Klopp used to manage at Borussia Dortmund looked to have upstaged the inconspicuous Mo Salah, Sadio Mané and Robert Firmino as the story of the day. Saka, though, had other ideas. A wonderfully unselfish pass midway through the first half allowed Eddie Nketiah to shoot almost without breaking stride. It was a good effort too, right where Nketiah would have wanted it to go, but Alisson showed his class in getting down low to push it away. Saka set up Nketiah with another shooting chance before the half was over, then turned up on the left to play a ball across the six-yard line that none of his teammates anticipated. To say Liverpool were not at their best would be to understate the case. They could easily have been a couple of goals down by the interval. Perhaps the normal service from the flanks was missing with Trent Alexander-Arnold out injured, though Robertson did his best to compensate with a succession of inviting crosses from the left, yet when Arsenal went forward they seemed to do so with a little more purpose and imagination than the slightly sluggish champions. Saka faded a little in the second half, it must be said, though he might have managed to get himself on the scoresheet had Aubameyang been able to summon a little more accuracy with his crossing. Arsenal were trying to withdraw him when Takumi Minamino scored his equaliser, and by the time Saka departed some seven minutes later he was not the only white-shirted player looking dead on his feet. Just for a while, with Holding, David Luiz and Ainsley Maitland-Niles looking calm and composed in defence and even stroking the ball around to each other in the six-yard area, it had appeared Arsenal would keep Liverpool at bay, until Klopp’s substitutions successfully introduced a little more urgency. Liverpool would most likely have won in normal time but for Emiliano Martínez twice leaving his line quickly to deny Mané, though with both sides enjoying a bright half each, a level scoreline was a fair reflection of the game overall. Both teams will play a lot better when the real season starts, but Arteta and his players must be quite pleased with their showing after so little preparation. As long as Aubameyang sticks around Arteta definitely has something on which to build.