The two men shot dead when white armed extremists disrupted a Black Lives Matter protest and at least one agitator opened fire on a group of protesters in Kenosha have been identified. The victims were Anthony Huber, 26, and Joseph “Jojo” Rosenbaum, 36, both men from the Kenosha area. They died on Wednesday night in the small Wisconsin city 40 miles south of Milwaukee, where demonstrations against police brutality have continued in the days after local father Jacob Blake was shot in the back by a police officer on Sunday. Rosenbaum had a two-year-old daughter, according to local reports, while Huber leaves behind a stepdaughter. A third man, Gaige Grosskreutz, a 26-year-old from West Allis, 30 miles north of Kenosha, was shot but is expected to survive. Huber, who lived in Silver Lake, 15 miles west of Kenosha, was a keen skateboarder, the Chicago Sun-Times reported. His girlfriend, Hannah Gittings, addressed protesters on Wednesday night, describing Huber as “one of the most amazing people”. “He had nothing but love in his heart for this city … he took down an armed gunman with nothing but his fucking skateboard, and he took that fucking bullet,” Gittings said, according to the Sun-Times. Exact details of what happened on the street leading up to the two deaths have not yet been clarified, but a 17-year-old from Antioch, Illinois, about 15 miles away, Kyle Rittenhouse, was arrested on Wednesday and has been charged with two murders. An online fundraising page said that Huber also leaves behind a stepdaughter. Rosenbaum was originally from Texas and had moved to Kenosha within the last year, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported. The 36-year-old leaves behind a fiancee and a young daughter, the Sentinel reported. Rosenbaum’s sister told the Sun-Times her brother was a compassionate father. “He loved his daughter very much,” she said. In a Facebook post his sister, who has not been named, wrote: “May you forever be with the angels and rest easy bro. I love you!” Grosskreutz was recovering in a Milwaukee hospital on Wednesday, the WTMJ news channel reported, after being shot in the arm, the limb almost severed from the force of the high-powered bullet. Friends told the channel Grosskreutz had volunteered as a medic at Black Lives Matter protests in Milwaukee this summer, and WYMJ reported the 26-year-old had been volunteering the night he was shot. • This article was amended on 28 August 2020 to correct an instance where Joseph Rosenbaum’s age was mistakenly given as 32.