They called him a mouse. A sheep. A coward. A loser. A peasant. A terrorist. A nothing. The latter two accusations made against Brenton Tarrant in the high court of Christchurch this week were the most factual; convicted of 51 counts of murder and an act of terrorism, his sentence of life without parole has consigned him to the void. He will cease to exist. Good. He was bad rubbish, sentenced with all the beautiful and solemn efficiency of English law as practised in New Zealand, but the thing everyone will remember about the past few days is the testimony from those who survived the attack and the families of the victims. They transformed the sentencing, reclaimed it, made it their own story – again, Tarrant was obliterated, made nothing. The images of the killer in his grey prison rags and his balding head are not going to burn themselves into the national consciousness. He was a forgettable sort of person. And while no one is going to fall over themselves in a mad rush to ascribe any kind of virtue to the man who executed defenceless men, women, and children, at least he got out of the way at the high court. For all the fears he would use the sentencing to make a hate speech, he opted to keep quiet. He didn’t laugh or stare down or confront, or anything like that. Dignity is probably going too far but he showed something resembling restraint. Justice Mander asked him if he’d like to address the terms of his sentence.“No, thank you,” he said. And that was all he ever did say, a polite little sign-off from an otherwise blank presence. Tarrant’s sentencing will act as some kind of cleansing. Justice was seen to be done. “The harm to the survivors, the victims families, the Muslim community of Christchurch, and to the rest of New Zealand, is irreparable,” prosecutor Mark Zarifeh said in court. That’s a pretty big claim to make about the rest of New Zealand. It’s true that we’ll continue to live with the knowledge and the horror of Tarrant’s attack; even school children know what 15 March means. But the sentencing has removed him from sight. We learned from a psychiatric report that: “He said he was terribly unhappy”. You don’t say. “The offender described it [the attack] as non-personal, chaotic, and confusing”. The vague terrorist, the baffled perpetrator of the worst case of murder in New Zealand history. He regretted to police that he hadn’t killed more people – he was on his way to nearby Ashburton to attack another mosque when officers rammed his car – and there was a new piece of information revealed in court about a Fijian man who Tarrant drew up alongside in his car, and tried to shoot, but the gun failed to fire. Tarrant is extraordinary as a terrorist and the only man to be given life without parole – “whole life” they rather satisfying call it in the English courts – since legislation was introduced in 2010. But little else about him seems very interesting. He’s gone from not much to nothingness. “New Zealanders,” wrote the historian Michael King, “whatever their cultural backgrounds, are good-hearted, practical, commonsensical and tolerant. Those qualities are part of the national cultural capital that has in the past saved the country from the worst excesses of chauvinism and racism seen in other parts of the world.” King’s resounding sentences conclude his great work The Penguin History of New Zealand, a book so massively popular that it was as though it had been mailed to every household in New Zealand. It was published in 2003. You will note the words “in the past”. The worst excesses of racism and sheer hatred visited New Zealand on 15 March, 2019. But the nobility shown in the law courts in Christchurch this week from one Muslim New Zealander after another, and the outpouring of public sympathy and support, affirmed King’s assessment of a good-hearted country. Yesterday was a good day. Steve Braunias is a journalist and author who lives in Auckland, New Zealand