Redundancies at theatre companies owned by the leading west end producer Sir Cameron Mackintosh are set to total more than 850. It emerged over the weekend that Mackintosh, the producer of shows including Les Misérables and Hamilton, had notified staff of mass redundancies. The company has declined to give any numbers but the entertainment union Bectu said the figure was around 185 for Cameron Mackintosh Ltd and 669 for Delfont Mackintosh. The head of Bectu Philippa Childs said it had included the numbers in its most recent tally of 5,000 job losses across the wider theatre industry, redundancies brought about because of the coronavirus crisis. She said: “The situation has definitely been forced upon the industry by both the pandemic and a government unwilling to understand the disastrous predicament of theatres unable to reopen safely or viably with social distancing restrictions. “The entire industry has been shocked by Cameron Mackintosh’s unwillingness to use the coronavirus job retention scheme in full or deploy resources beyond the furlough months to support his backstage and front of house staff. “Other West End employers have done their utmost to find creative ways to safeguard the livelihoods of their staff and pursue the bigger mission of saving the world class skills and talents critical to the success of theatres up and down the country. “There are extremely limited options for theatre workers to find employment at the moment and we continue to urge employers to take a holistic approach and retain talent wherever they can.” A spokesperson for Cameron Mackintosh Limited and Delfont Mackintosh Theatres said: “It is a very sad time for everyone affected by this thankless situation, one we could never have imagined would have been forced upon the industry.” Mackintosh, who owns eight West End theatres, has previously complained that there had been no “tangible, practical support” from the government “beyond offers to go into debt”. Theatres, performance spaces and concert halls closed in March, and most people in the industry cannot see them reopening fully until 2021. Last month, the government announced a £1.57bn arts recovery package, but that money is primarily aimed at the survival of buildings and organisations – it is not meant to directly save the jobs of workers. Employers say they have a choice: make redundancies or go bankrupt. Ambassador Theatre Group, one of the biggest employers in British theatre, has announced that it will lay off 1,200 casual staff in September. The Southbank Centre and the National Theatre have announced the loss of 400 jobs each.