Oil prices rose sharply. The summer sales for clothing, footwear and household goods were less generous than they were a year ago. Activity across the economy has started to recover. As Britain begins to return to normal, it should come as no surprise that the annual inflation rate has ticked up to 1%. In truth, it is a bit more complicated than that. The UK does not have an inflation problem and is unlikely to have one for some time. July’s official cost-of-living data was a one-off: the next move will be sharply down. That will come too late, of course, for rail travellers, who will be clobbered with a 1.6% fare increase in January because the government insists on using the July retail prices index – a gauge of inflation considered flawed by the Office for National Statistics – to calculate the annual fare increase. The Covid-19 lockdown means there have been problems, too, for the ONS in calculating the consumer prices index, the government’s preferred measure of inflation. Collecting prices proved hard, and in many cases impossible, because so many businesses were shut. As firms have started to open, the ONS has more real data to work with and that is probably one factor behind the July rise. Continued physical-distancing rules are also likely to be pushing up prices because they mean shops and restaurants are having to restrict the number of customers. In order to boost takings, they are nudging up the cost of a haircut, a bowl of pasta or a pair of shoes. Not by a lot but by enough to show up in the inflation figures. This trend, though, is not going to last for two big reasons. The first is that Rishi Sunak guaranteed that prices would come down by announcing in his July mini-budget a temporary cut in VAT from 20% to 5% and his eat out to help out scheme. There is no guarantee that businesses will pass on the VAT cut to their customers or that everybody will take advantage of discounted meals. However, Ruth Gregory, the senior UK economist at Capital Economics, notes that if 75% of firms pass on the VAT cut and 75% of people participate in eat out to help out (which is unlikely but possible), the annual inflation rate for August would drop by 1.1 percentage points and turn negative. The second factor, sadly, is that unemployment is likely to rise sharply over the coming months. Longer dole queues will mean weaker price pressure.