An ancient Egyptian “how-dunnit” has been solved, according to researchers who have used imaging techniques to peek beneath the wrappings of mummified animals. From birds to crocodiles, lions and beetles, the ancient Egyptians had a penchant for mummifying animals. While some were pets buried with their owners, millions of animals were killed and mummified as votive offerings to the gods. Now researchers have harnessed a high-resolution, non-invasive 3D imaging technique called X-ray microCT imaging to gain unprecedented insights into animal mummies and the thriving industry that surrounded them. “As soon as we scan with [this technique], we are seeing something someone hasn’t seen for thousands of years,” said Richard Johnston, a professor of engineering at Swansea University and a co-author of the study. “It is potentially more useful than unwrapping, not just because it is not destroying [the mummy], but actually everything is in position as it was pretty much at the time [of mummification].” Writing in the journal Scientific Reports, the team report on how they looked inside three animal mummies from the collection of the Egypt Centre at Swansea University – a cat, a bird and a snake. While the latter looks like an oval bundle of rags, the scans revealed it contains a coiled, juvenile cobra – a snake of great symbolism to the ancient Egyptians – that had a spinal fracture. The team say that together with damage to the snake’s head, this fits with it being killed by being grabbed by the tail and smashed against a surface like a whip. The head of the mummified cat, which had a painted burial mask, was detached from the rest of the mummy, and the team say scans suggested the animal was less than 18 weeks old and probably domesticated. The animal had been strangled or had its neck broken, potentially so that its head could be positioned upright on the body. Scans of the bird revealed that is was probably a Eurasian kestrel. The cause of its death remains a mystery. The team say the scans also shed light on the lives of the creatures: the cobra appears to have had calcified kidneys, suggesting gout, which has been found in modern snakes kept in poor conditions. Johnston said this and the snake’s young age suggested it could have been reared for sacrifice. The team found the cobra was mummified with its mouth open, and small amounts of a substance called natron seemed to have been placed very precisely in the mouth. Johnston said this potentially suggested a ritual known as “opening of the mouth”. In another twist, the cobra’s fangs were missing. While these may simply have fallen out, the team suggest they could have been removed to prevent injury to the embalmers. Johnston said the findings offered fresh insights. “It starts to build the picture not just of [a] mummy as a specimen in a museum, but you start to understand more about life at that time,” he said. Salima Ikram, a professor of egyptology at the American University in Cairo, who was not involved in the work, said the study was very interesting, “particularly the idea that snakes might have been kept for mummification purposes, as has been posited for cats, dogs and kestrels.” But she said it is unlikely the cobra underwent an opening of the mouth ritual. “Putting the natron and resin in the mouth might be to ‘neutralise’ the snake in the afterlife,” she said.