Google has launched an international scare campaign targeting YouTubers, asking creators and viewers to swamp the Australian competition watchdog with complaints about its proposed mandatory news code. The messaging seeks to pit YouTubers and their fans against “big news businesses” that Google suggests could misuse personal data and make unjustified demands for money to the detriment of YouTube users. It includes an email address for the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. The YouTube campaign follows Google’s targeting of Australian users with pop-up warning ads that link to an open letter about the mandatory news code that the ACCC says contains “misinformation”. The YouTube you know and love is at risk in Australia. A proposed new law, The News Media Bargaining Code, could have a significant, negative impact on creators in Australia. Your voice matters.→ https://t.co/gR5Hf81DIH pic.twitter.com/oPnC6fi3If The campaign claims “vloggers”, “educational creators” and “music artists” are among those who will suffer if the mandatory news code, which will force Google to share advertising revenue with publishers, comes into effect. When negotiations regarding remuneration for news content stalled between Google, Facebook and publishers, including Nine Entertainment and News Corp Australia, the ACCC announced a mandatory code would be imposed. The search giant is now appealing to the public to demand the ACCC drop its plan, arguing the code would have a “significant, negative” effect on content creators. “YouTube may be obligated to give large news publishers confidential information about our systems that they could use to try to appear higher in rankings on YouTube, disadvantaging all other creators. This would mean you could receive fewer views and earn less,” Google tells users. Google on Twitter is actively encouraging people to contact the ACCC, stating: “We’re engaging directly with the government, including elected representatives in the federal parliament, but your voice is also important – we’ve shared an open letter with the Australian public … and will have more ways to get involved in the coming days. “There are several areas that deeply concern us about this proposed law because it prioritises the traditional news industry over smaller creators of content and the platforms where they find an audience,” the company states. “We are particularly concerned that it provides unfair advantages to large news businesses over anyone else online.” You can help support your favorite creators – you don't have to be based in Australia to send your views on the draft code to the ACCC, just email bargainingcode@accc.gov.au by 5 pm AEST on 28 August 2020. We’ll share more ways to get involved in the coming days too. Google told users the code will “force us to provide you with a dramatically worse Google Search and YouTube, could lead to your data being handed over to big news businesses, and would put the free services you use at risk in Australia”. On Monday, the ACCC hit back at Google’s claims, stating: “Google will not be required to charge Australians for the use of its free services such as Google Search and YouTube, unless it chooses to do so.” Google returned fire on Tuesday, saying they “strongly disagree and are concerned that our view of the code has been represented this way during a consultation phase”. “We did not say that the proposed law would require us to charge Australians for Search and YouTube – we do not intend to charge users for our free services,” Google said. “What we did say is that Search and YouTube, both of which are free services, are at risk in Australia. That’s because the code as it is drafted is unworkable.” The YouTube you know and love is at risk in Australia. A proposed new law, The News Media Bargaining Code, could have a significant, negative impact on creators in Australia. Your voice matters.→ https://t.co/gR5Hf81DIH pic.twitter.com/oPnC6fi3If YouTube told users the code “gives large news organisations an unfair advantage over anyone else online”, including creators, and encouraged them to email the ACCC. Nine Entertainment accused Google of misleading users about the code and the chief executive of Free TV, Bridget Fair, said Google was trying to divert attention from the real issue, which was paying a fair price for news content. Facebook Australia, which also opposes the code, declined to comment.