It took General George Armstrong Custer to get Katybeth Davis on the ballot this November. For years, Davis passed a statue of the vanquished US cavalry commander perched imperiously on his horse outside her church in the heart of Monroe county, Michigan. She was angered at the place of honour given to a man she describes as a genocidal killer of Native Americans and a rapist. But the 36-year-old construction company supervisor felt there wasn’t much she could do about it in her mostly white and increasingly conservative county that swung heavily from Barack Obama to Donald Trump four years ago. Then the Black Lives Matter protests swept the country following the death of George Floyd at the hands of the Minneapolis police in May, shifting US politics and bringing a focus on who and what America commemorates. Davis, who calls herself “super-mixed race”, with African, Native American and European ancestry, seized the moment. She led protests to remove Custer that, to her surprise, drew sizable crowds and swiftly widened to represent demands for broader change. Before long Davis found herself running for elected office for the first time in her life, to be a township trustee in the blue-collar county just south of Detroit – and campaigning against another leader, Donald Trump. “I think we’re all sick and tired of being sick and tired. He’s politicised everything. He’s politicised a medical pandemic,” she said. “I can’t just sit around and watch it on the news or read it on Twitter any more. Now I have to do something.” Davis is not alone. The surging death toll from coronavirus under Trump’s chaotic leadership, and the groundswell of protest against racial injustice, have mobilised voters in Monroe county who long felt powerless. Monroe, a county already transformed by the loss of thousands of jobs with the closure of a Ford car factory in the last recession, was an important part of the puzzle that gave Trump victory four years ago. Amid promises of new jobs, the county swung from twice voting for Obama to delivering a thumping victory for Trump by more than 16,000 votes. That was more than enough for the president to win Michigan by just 10,704 votes. Victory in the state in turn proved crucial to Trump winning the electoral college and the White House. Four years later, Republicans and Democrats are squaring up over those same voters who switched from Obama to the president as opinion polls show Trump falling significantly behind the Democratic candidate, Joe Biden, in Michigan. But swing counties like Monroe are won by more than just those who flip from one party to another. They are also decided by people who choose not to vote, including young voters. The backlash against Trump, and regret among some Democrats who stayed home in 2016, was expected to increase turnout this year. But coronavirus and Black Lives Matter created an urgency that drew people like Davis into political activism. That has bolstered support for Biden and given the Democrats a shot at winning back the swing county they did not think they had just a few months ago. Late last year, Ruchita Coomar was listening to a professor at the University of Michigan explain that it is highly unusual for a president not to be re-elected unless there is an economic recession. The 18-year-old student of public policy, and first-time presidential election voter, was despairing. “I felt like I was up against history. It felt hopeless. But then, out of nowhere, Covid happened and brought a lot of issues to light, like the bare bones of the welfare state and infrastructure and all these other support systems. And which groups of people were being left out and left behind,” she said. It took the Black Lives Matter protests, though, to mobilise a new generation in significant numbers in Monroe. Coomar was struck by how Floyd’s killing drew young people into political debate on social media. “I saw this surge of progressive voices in Monroe which I’d never really seen before and didn’t know were there. So I just messaged a bunch of other youth who were leading other random initiatives,” she said. Together they founded the Monroe Area Youth Alliance (Maya). The group is focused on registering young people to vote and encouraging them to turn out. “I sense a disenchantment, a disconnect between younger people and political systems with the whole Trump thing going on. When you look at climate change, young people feel like everything’s being shoved in our direction without actually having a seat at the table,” she said. But coronavirus and Black Lives Matter has brought an immediacy to politics for the young that Coomar said was hard to ignore. “There’s been so much anger and frustration and this unforeseen pandemic. We are in a moment. There’s so much up for grabs right now,” she said. Which means Coomar, Davis and others who have raised their voices in Monroe will be voting for Biden, but without any great enthusiasm. “I think it’d be best if Joe was president but I just have this fear that once Joe Biden is president, it’s back to the same old, like, status quo,” said Coomar. “The whole reason the Democrats chose Joe Biden is this moderate middle ground, but a lot of young people are tired of establishment Democrats.” Neither was Coomar enthused by Biden’s pick of a black woman, Kamala Harris, as his running mate. “This is difficult because Kamala Harris quite obviously isn’t an ideal pick. I’ll be voting for the Biden ticket anyway. I don’t think now is the time to air those grievances,” she said. Davis is more enthusiastic about Harris, saying she would like to see her as president. But she said one of the lessons of the Obama years is that it is a mistake to look to a single leader to change the country. “Nobody’s looking to Joe Biden for change,” said Davis. “We’re telling Joe Biden to implement the change that we are making happen.” Even for older voters, the pandemic has driven into the background issues that just a few months back were the focus of discussion about Trump among Monroe county voters, including immigration, impeachment and the president’s relationship with Russia. Another Democratic activist, Christopher Slat, saw Biden as a weak candidate with no significant policies who risked repeating the mistakes that cost Clinton the election, particularly if he was cast as the “Anybody But Trump” candidate. Now Slat, who is running for a state legislature seat lost by the Democrats in 2016, has changed his mind. “When Biden became the presumptive nominee, I was pretty convinced that he could not win. Now I think it’s almost impossible for him to lose. In this area especially, he might actually have coattails that will help me a lot,” said Slat. “The change in his electability is just really a perfect storm of Trump’s incompetence on coronavirus and Black Lives Matter. Both of those have exposed Trump’s complete inability to lead and also have made people long for a return to normality, which is what Biden’s been running on this whole time.” Slat is challenging a Republican incumbent, Joe Bellino, for the seat in the state legislature. Bellino said he welcomed the surge of interest among younger voters. “I’m glad that young people are getting out and getting political because there was none of that going around when I was 18. It’s wonderful. So long as they’re involved in the process,” he said. But Bellino acknowledged that probably was not going to benefit Trump or his own campaign. “Probably not, no. I don’t think I’m going to get support from a lot of 18- to 25-year-olds,” he said. “I voted for Jimmy Carter twice. One victory, one loss. But once you start working hard, paying taxes, you tend to get more conservative.” Bellino, who owned a beer and wine store until earlier this year, said he was confident that Trump would again win Monroe county even though he admitted support for the president was falling in other parts of Michigan. “I think that the president’s polling numbers are similar to where they were four years ago, and he was never going to win that election either. I thought the president was going to lose by 10 or 12 points,” he said. “But the president resonated with people in Michigan. People that want proper border control. People that want China to play right with us on trade, and Mexico and Canada. People were fed up. We lost a lot of jobs because of Nafta. And it’s funny, though, the last three years, jobs are coming back and people are making more money.”Davis’s first victory came before the ballots have even been cast. The statue of Custer, who spent much of his early childhood in Monroe, was unveiled in 1910 by President William Taft and the slain general’s widow, Elizabeth Bacon Custer. “There were people that wanted to get ropes and chains and put him in the river,” Davis said. “I saw people were doing petitions for other things like George Floyd, get the cops arrested for Breanna Taylor, and so I thought we’ll do one to get the statue moved. I wanted to show we could be diplomatic and bipartisan.” Davis expected to get a few hundred signatures. Within weeks she had more than 13,000. But as support rose, so did resistance. One man drove around the protesters flying a large Confederate battle flag from the back of his truck. Another person in a ski mask held up a sign: “Black Lives Don’t Matter.” Men with guns turned up claiming they were defending the statue. For all that, the momentum was with the protesters. City councillors acknowledged that the statue was a problem. Last month, the council reached a compromise whereby the statue will remain but information on Custer’s military career with be added in consultation with Native American tribes, the county museum and others. Davis said she was pleased with the decision, which presented the chance to turn the statue into a “real learning opportunity”. She also thinks it gives momentum to the push to defeat Trump and flip Monroe county back to the Democrats. “I think a lot of the reason why people didn’t vote in the past was because they didn’t really think that even had a chance to change anything. Now people are seeing we can change things,” said Davis. “Even me – I never imagined myself being into politics. I never imagined myself doing this.”