Portugal is being added to the UK’s travel corridor list, meaning arrivals from the country will no longer have to quarantine, but Croatia, Austria and Trinidad and Tobago are being removed, it has been confirmed. As revealed earlier by the Guardian, UK government ministers including the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, agreed on Wednesday to changes affecting Portugal, Croatia and Trinidad and Tobago. But, after final discussions and the agreement of the UK’s devolved administrations on Thursday afternoon, Austria is also being taken off the travel corridor due to concern over its coronavirus infections. Scotland is also moving separately to remove Switzerland from its own travel corridor list. Shapps announced the move on Twitter. Data shows we need to remove Croatia, Austria and Trinidad & Tobago from our list of #coronavirus Travel Corridors to keep infection rates DOWN. If you arrive in the UK after 0400 Saturday from these destinations, you will need to self-isolate for 14 days. Data also shows we can now add Portugal to those countries INCLUDED in Travel Corridors. As with all air bridge countries, please be aware that things can change quickly. Only travel if you are content to unexpectedly 14-day quarantine if required (I speak from experience!) The move to exempt arrivals from Portugal from 14-day Covid-19 quarantine measures is a major boost for the country’s tourist industry which was dealt a blow when it was left off the travel corridor list earlier this summer. Croatia is being taken off the travel corridor list after a surge in infections, with Austria and Trinidad and Tobago joining it in being removed, leaving thousands of holidaymakers returning from the locations little more than 30 hours to get back in order to escape quarantine measures. It is understood that Greece is being kept under a close watch amid concern over rising Covid infections. Individual decisions on whether or not to remove destinations from the travel corridor are taken by devolved administrations, but last week’s removal of France from the list was taken in unison by the four UK nations. All four governments, which each have legal and political responsibilities for enforcing these travel regulations in their own jurisdictions, held joint talks on the fresh quarantine measures on Thursday afternoon before finalising the announcement. Scotland’s justice secretary, Humza Yousaf, tweeted: “If returning to Scotland from Austria, Croatia, Switzerland & Trinidad & Tobago you will have to self-isolate for 14 days. If returning from Portugal you will *no longer* need to self-isolate for 14 days. Above applies to Scotland, all changes come into effect 4am Sat 22nd August.” It comes after the Guardian revealed that officials at the Joint Biosecurity Centre had highlighted specific coronavirus cases imported to the UK from Croatia. It is not known how many cases have been identified or where in the country, but it is understood that the number of imported cases is at a similar level to that shown by Spain when it was removed from the travel corridor last month with just a few hours’ notice, prompting chaos for holidaymakers. On Tuesday, Croatia reported 199 new Covid cases. As of Thursday, according to the European Centre for Disease Control, the 14-day cumulative number of Covid-19 cases in Croatia was 41.7 per 100,000 people and 30.8 in Austria, compared with the UK’s 20.9 and Portugal’s 27.8. The World Health Organization (WHO) warned on Thursday that the Balkans region, of which Croatia is part, was a “hotspot” for coronavirus. Dr Catherine Smallwood told a WHO press conference: “The situation in the Balkans has been a concern of ours since early June when we started to see cases increase and it’s been very much a sub-regional hotspot over the summer period.” From Wednesday this week until the end of September there were 767 flights run by large airlines scheduled to fly from the UK to Croatia, with a total seat capacity of nearly 130,000, according to the aviation data analysts Cirium. The travel consultancy PC Agency, which has been monitoring travel corridor developments, has estimated that there are 20,000 British holidaymakers in Croatia this week. Darija Reic, the director of the Croatian national tourist office in London, said: “We are confident that Croatia is still a safe place for tourists, with the majority of the coast having low numbers of infections. Croatian authorities are continuously monitoring and adjusting Covid-related safety measures to ensure we are controlling the virus at all times.” Trinidad and Tobago’s removal comes after moves in recent weeks to take off nearby Bahamas, the British overseas territory the Turks and Caicos Islands, and the island of Aruba, a Dutch constituent country in the Caribbean. 