The former England goalkeeper Joe Hart has joined Tottenham on a two-year contract. The 33-year-old was a free agent after leaving Burnley. Hart will provide competition alongside Paulo Gazzaniga for the regular No 1, Hugo Lloris. During 12 years at Manchester City, Hart won two Premier League titles, two League Cups and an FA Cup. “I am here to help the team in any way I can, be it on the field, off the field,” Hart said. “I am here to try and push the club forward. [There is] no getting away from it, [it has been] a difficult couple of years for me on the football field but I feel like I’ve got so much to give, I feel like I’ve got a lot of quality, I’ve obviously got a lot in the bank.” José Mourinho, whom Hart describes as “one of the world’s best coaches”, will be hoping the goalkeeper can be a positive influence in the dressing room. It is likely Hart will struggle to oust Lloris as the first-choice goalkeeper but the former Manchester City player is hopeful he will be able to learn from the World Cup winner. “I’ve got huge admiration for Hugo, one of the world’s greatest goalkeepers and genuinely really excited to work with him.” Hart made only three cup appearances for Burnley last season and will be hoping for more opportunities in north London, considering Tottenham’s packed schedule. “I feel like I am starting again and I quite enjoy that feeling. My body is certainly ready for me to start again. I have worked hard, I have tried to grow as a person and grow as a player.” Hart fell out of favour at the Etihad Stadium after Pep Guardiola’s arrival in 2016 and had loan spells at Torino and West Ham. He joined Burnley in 2018 and made 24 appearances but was behind Nick Pope last season. Hart, who started his career at Shrewsbury, has 75 caps for England but has not played for his country for almost three years. It was also confirmed on Tuesday that Hart’s replacement at Manchester City, Claudio Bravo, has left the club following the expiry of his contract. The Chilean joined City from Barcelona in 2016 but endured an error-ridden first season and was thereafter largely confined to cup appearances. Overall, the 37-year-old made 61 appearances for City, collected two Premier League winners’ medals and helped City to their recent Carabao Cup triumphs.