In January 2020, fleeing violence and poor economic conditions, a group of Hondurans organised a huge migrant caravan that travelled through Guatemala into Mexico. After travelling for eight days, the caravan crossed the Suchiate River into Mexico and were met by the recently established Guardia Nacional composed of former federal, military and naval police. Families Stay Together, 15 January 2020. Migrant families squeeze onto vehicles to get a ride to the next town on their journey as they leave San Pedro Sula, Honduras. Sometimes two or three families at a time. It is a dangerous way to travel, as many migrants are reported to fall off these overpacked vehicles and suffer serious injuries. The Mexican president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, has historically called for safe passage for migrants, but when the US president, Donald Trump, threatened to impose tariffs, Mexico reversed its policy and deployed soldiers to keep Central American migrants from entering Mexico. Worship, January 2020. Early in the morning in El Ceibo, Guatemala, before starting their journey, men pray in unison that God will grant them safe passage north to the US. They pray for God to change the hearts of the Mexican and US government leaders. Their first prayer is Our Father. Ashley, El Ceibo, Guatemala, January 2020. Ashley is a 27-year-old trans woman from Honduras. She left her country because her life was in danger after she received threats on her life. Honduras has one of the highest murder rates in the world for members of the LGBTQ+ community. The Migrant Camps, Tecun-Uman Guatemala, January 2020. The migrants set up camps consisting of makeshift tents and cardboard boxes as beds. There is no food served: people share their food with those who have no money to buy their own. Left: Ariana Elisabeth is five months old and the youngest in the caravan; her parents are escaping life-threatening gang activity in Honduras. Next to them is a Guatemalan border guard. Right: after sleeping in a wasteland by the Guatemala/Mexico border, José, a six-year-old travelling with his father from Honduras, is waiting to start his journey once more into Mexico via the Suchiate River at 3am. Two days before, the caravan attempted to cross into Mexican territory via the Suchiate River, and the Mexican National Guard – carrying semi-automatic rifles – mobilised, trying to target the groups and detaining people where they could. There were pushes and struggles to persuade migrants not to cross illegally. Many people were apprehended at the river; others, such as José and his father, managed to escape. The Migrant Caravan, January 2020. An estimated 4,000 people left San Pedro Sula on 15 January and walked more than 500 miles a week. The caravan split into two groups: 800 members travelled to the border of El Ceibo and Tabasco, Mexico, while the larger group went to the border of Tecún Uman and Chiapas, Mexico. Casa del Migrante, January 2020. Men from Honduras wait for their turn to eat at La Casa del Migrante in El Ceibo, Guatemala, a Catholic-run shelter. Most Catholic shelters separate men from women, children, and trans people. Families Waiting in Guatemala, 18 January 2020. Migrant families wait patiently at the gates of the border crossing between Guatemala and Mexico. More than 600 people had crowded together since the early hours of the morning after accepting the deal handed out by the Mexican federal government, which offered to regularise the immigration conditions of the newcomers and give them work in the state of Tabasco, in exchange for abandoning the purpose of reaching the US and remaining in Mexican territory. These promises were false as the majority of people were deported back to Honduras. Teargassed, 23 January 2020. Upon arriving at the Mexican-Guatemalan border, about 800 people managed to cross into Mexico and walked several miles to Frontera Hidalgo. Hundreds of troops descended upon the caravan and forcibly herded people onto buses using teargas and riot shields. Women and children were caught in the chaos; many suffered chemical burns and other serious injuries. People attempting to enter Mexico split into two major groups. The largest group crossed the Suchiate River and were teargassed by the Guardia Nacional. Forced to retreat, they waited by the river’s edge for two days. Their second attempt across the river 4am was a success, but hours later the Guardia Nacional surrounded them, put them on busses and sent them back to Honduras. Crossing the Suchiate River, 23 January, 2020. People cross the Suchiate River as they enter Mexico from Guatemala. Two days before, the Mexican government teargassed a group of 500 people who had arrived at the border and attempted to wade across the river into Mexico. Despite the event, the caravan persisted. Out of desperation, they tried crossing the river again. This time they succeeded and pushed forward several miles into Mexico. Joel Crosses the Suchiate River, 23 January 2020. The caravan successfully crossed the Suchiate River from Guatemala to Mexico. Having travelled across two countries in eight days, Joel, a Honduran man with one leg, makes his way across the river with crutches, trying to keep up with the rest of the group. Second Leg of the Suchiate River, 23 January 2020. After numerous pleas to López Obrador to open the Mexican border gates, the Mexican government said ‘no’ to hundreds of Central American migrants and asylum seekers who formed the caravan. So they made their way down to the shallow waters of the Suchiate River, and they walked a few miles into Ciudad Hidalgo. Soon after they were surrounded by hundreds of Mexican National Guard troops. Sleeping By the River. One-year-old Elan sleeps on top of a sack by the river. He is travelling with his four-year-old sister and their parents, who are running away from death threats in their hometown. The caravan is being blocked at the Suchiate River by the Mexican government, and the migrants are forced to set up camp on the Guatemalan side. The smaller group amassed in the border town of El Ceibo in Guatemala and were met by the head of foreign relations in Mexico. He welcomed people in groups of 10 to enter Mexico and seek asylum. They were briefly kept in detention centres, and against the head of foreign relation’s promises, they were deported back to Honduras without being given the opportunity to seek asylum. Whatever It Takes. Initially, Mexico closed its doors to migrants at the El Ceibo border. This frame captures an unaccompanied minor trying to cross illegally under the gate. National Guard Troops. This is the newly formed Guardia Nacional, established in 2019 and deployed to the border because of Trump’s tariffs on Mexican goods. The Marines surrounded the caravan to deter their journey north, teargassed migrants – including women and children – as they arrived at the border. Tricked Into Deportation. After travelling for days, about 1,000 members of the caravan set up in front of the gate at Mexican customs at the remote border between El Ceibo, in the department of Petén, and the Mexican state of Tabasco. The people pleaded with the authorities to open the gates. Eventually, officials allowed passage to small groups. The travellers then boarded busses that passed the National Institute of Migration. They were promised a “secure location” to prepare their migration paperwork and offer them work. Unfortunately, the migrants and asylum seekers wound up in inhospitable migratory detention centres. They were denied phones and separated from their families. Recently, the López Obrador administration announced its intention to deport most of them. Trump has effectively barred asylum seekers from entering the US by threatening to impose tariffs and cut foreign aid to Central American countries. The human cost of the US president’s political agenda is denying people their fundamental human rights. For many asylum seekers, deportation will result in a life of extortion, impoverishment and even death. The full effect of Trump’s xenophobic policies towards migrants and asylum seekers will no doubt be felt for generations to come. On My Way. A member of the migrant caravan carries a home-made US flag to show his enthusiasm to become an American citizen. The conditions in his homeland are so dangerous that he is willing to pick up a new flag and start a new life in a country he does not know and does not want him. This dynamic produces a mixture of desperation and hope that will not be dissuaded by teargas and riot shields. Almost There. Young Chelita clings to her mother amid the chaos of migrants waiting to be admitted into Mexico. After days of waiting at the border, Julio César Sánchez, the director general of special affairs for the Mexican foreign affairs secretariat, appeared as a representative of the federal government. He began allowing families to enter in small groups after making ambiguous promises that did not apply to all members of the caravan. He never said what would happen to the families or where they would be taken. Happiness. The migrants are very happy to have arrived in Mexico after several failed attempts. Trump’s biggest wall has become Mexico and the Guardia Nacional, who are preventing migrants from reaching the border.