The fallout from Harry’s Maguire’s calamitous holiday in Mykonos has been swift, brutal and revelatory, not least for the Manchester United captain. Yet for Ioannis Paradissis, the Greek prosecution lawyer at the centre of the case following the footballer’s arrest after a late-night brawl on the isle, the drama is far from over. Paradissis has received hate mail from furious fans and been blamed, increasingly, for Maguire’s brush with justice culminating in the 27-year-old’s shock conviction last week on four charges including aggravated and verbal assault. “When I got the first emails I couldn’t quite believe it,” says the soft-spoken lawyer, who spent several years as a lecturer at Surrey University before returning to Greece. “It caught me off guard.” At first the messages were short and expletive-ridden. But from two-word “fuck you” missives they have become ever more menacing, threatening to destroy the Greek economy and accusing Paradissis, and the police, of casting “shame on the reputation of all courts in Greece” and putting the nation’s tourist industry at risk. “We all know … you are a disgusting country full of disgusting people,” read one email that landed in his inbox on Friday. “It is clear to many observers that this was a staged effort to punish a well-known footballer from a foreign country just for the sake of bitterness, jealously or simply bigoted hatred,” read another. “Well done! There goes your economy. Your people are going to thank you BIG time,” read another still. “I’ve had messages saying I will soon be without a job and others accusing us all of corruption. It’s almost as if the entire justice system, and Greece itself, have been put on trial,” he told the Guardian from Syros, the Aegean isle where Maguire’s hearing in absentia was held on Tuesday. “It’s been taken out of all proportion. Honestly, I’m scared.” In an unprecedented step, the Syros Bar Association issued a statement condemning the “deluge” of hate mail. The £190,000-a-week player, in addition to assault, was found guilty of resisting arrest and attempted bribery of a policemen. The three-member misdemeanours court, which convened on Syros, the administrative centre of the Cyclades island group to which Mykonos belongs, sentenced the centre back to 21 months in prison suspended on account of his clean criminal record. His two co-defendants, who included his brother Joe, received 13-month sentences also suspended. The verdict was appealed on behalf of the trio by Maguire’s defence team the next day. “It’s quite rare in the Greek legal system for a court to find a defendant guilty on every count,” said Konstantinos Gogos, a prominent criminal lawyer in Athens. “If a celebrity is involved judges might be even more sensitive. I can only conclude that the evidence must have been indisputable.” Paradissis represented three policemen among the six key prosecution witnesses at the trial. All three alleged violence on the part of the two brothers and their friend, Christopher Sharman, when they attempted to break up the brawl in Mykonos town on 20 August. One officer described as a ranking lieutenant testified he had suffered injuries after being kicked by the footballer in both legs. Joe Maguire was accused of punching the same officer in the face, according to the charge sheet, with other violence allegedly also taking place at the police station where the trio were subsequently detained. Maguire’s lawyers are expected to be notified of the appeals hearing by December, although a trial is unlikely to take place for at least a year in a system that moves notoriously slowly at the appellate level. Under Greek law an appeals court, presided over by new judges, will essentially retry a case opening the prospect of a conviction being dropped altogether. Paradissis began receiving the hate mail after he suggested that an apology from the footballer might change “the prevailing sentiment” ahead of the case being brought before a higher court. Maguire, who spoke of being “scared for my life”, has resolutely refused to say sorry. Recounting the incident publicly for the first time, he told the BBC he believed he was being kidnapped when plain-clothes policemen surrounded the rented minibus his holiday group had boarded after the fracas thinking they were being driven back to their £21,000-a-night villa on the party isle. “I don’t feel I owe an apology to anybody,” he said. He claimed the commotion began after “two men approached my little sister” allegedly injecting her with a substance that resulted in her fainting and her “eyes rolling to the back of her head”. “An apology is something when you have done something wrong,” he told the interviewer. Much of the fury directed at Paradissis has been fuelled by the perception that Maguire did not receive a fair trial. Lodging the appeal, his lawyer argued the court had failed to give him adequate time to prepare the defence. But standing his ground, the lawyer explained in Greek criminal procedure, a trial can happen “very quickly” if a defendant is deemed to be “caught red-handed”, arrested within 48 hours of the alleged offence and indicted. “Maguire’s defence team asked for a 48-hour adjournment and they got it,” said Paradissis. “So, it’s just not true that his legal team wasn’t given enough time. Nor is it factually correct to say, as United now claims, that the conviction has been quashed because of the appeal. It has simply been suspended until the higher court hears the case. Maguire remains a convicted man in the eyes of Greek law.”