Japan will be forced to pull out of the eight-nations tournament that is being organised to replace the traditional autumn internationals in Europe unless the Japanese government relaxes the coronavirus policy of not allowing non-nationals into the country. The Japan head coach, Jamie Joseph, is among those who cannot enter the country and, with the tournament due to start in less than three months, the 2019 Rugby World Cup hosts and quarter-finalists face being not just undercooked for it but unprepared. It is understood Georgia would be invited to take their place. Japan have not been in action since the end of February when the Top League’s 2020 campaign was at first suspended because of the pandemic and then cancelled. The plan was to group the side with Scotland, France and Italy, but they would need to arrange two warm-up matches during the period when the Six Nations is being concluded. The presence of Japan in the tournament has never been officially confirmed, nor that of Fiji whose head coach, Vern Cotter, was unimpressed to learn his side would be in a group with England, Wales and Ireland. He felt the pools should have been structured to take the world rankings into account. The World Cup last year turned Japan into a commercial draw and with the tournament expected to be played before paying spectators, even if grounds are likely to be below 50% capacity, and negotiations with broadcasters being held they would add value. The Six Nations issued a statement that did not mention Japan. It read: “The Six Nations and its six unions are working hard to finalise plans for a proposed competition replacing the 2020 autumn internationals that have been impacted by the pandemic. “This work includes many operational elements such as match schedules and venues, required health and safety protocols following guidance from the unions’ respective governments, as well as finalising commercial arrangements with broadcast partners in each territory. We will issue an update in due course.” The tournament is a financial necessity for the six unions all counting their losses after all having to make cutbacks owing to lockdown. They are still in discussions with the private equity company CVC which has bid to take a 14% stake worth £300m in the group. Talks reached an impasse when CVC insisted on a pandemic clause being inserted into the contract which would allow it to withhold funding if matches were called off under government restrictions. Without one, it would halve its investment. Meanwhile, Edinburgh have apologised to fans whose applications for tickets to watch Friday’s match against Glasgow at Murrayfield were turned down. It will be the first rugby match in the UK to be played before a crowd – 700 have paid £20 for a ticket and will have to wear face coverings – since March and priority has been given to those who live near the ground to avoid fans travelling by public transport. “It is clear that some supporters are frustrated, but it is not a normal Edinburgh home match but a pilot event,” the Edinburgh Rugby managing director, Douglas Struth, said. “The key is to demonstrate to the Scottish government that it is safe for crowds to start to return to stadiums in due course.”