The Republican national convention continued Tuesday with speeches from multiple members of the president’s family, including the first lady, Melania Trump. Here are the key takeaways from the night: “My deepest sympathy goes out to everyone who has lost a loved one, and my prayers are with those who are ill or suffering,” Melania Trump said. The sentiment, which was frequently expressed during last week’s Democratic national convention, was noteworthy given Republicans have avoided acknowledging the country’s coronavirus death toll, which is nearing 180,000, far greater than any other country in the world. The first lady’s speech was overall less ominous and divisive than much of the Republican convention so far. While many speakers have used their remarks to spread fear about the alleged dangers of electing Joe Biden in November, the first lady said: “I don’t want to use this precious time attacking the other side.” Kudlow celebrated the pre-pandemic economy before acknowledging coronavirus has upended the country’s job market. “It was awful,” Kudlow said of the pandemic. “Hardship and heartbreak were everywhere, but presidential leadership came swiftly and effectively.” Kudlow’s use of the past tense to describe the pandemic was jarring to many commentators who noted that the country is still losing about 1,000 people a day to the virus. The US unemployment rate also remains above 10%. Over the course of the night, Trump signed a full pardon for Jon Ponder, a convicted bank robber who founded a prisoner re-entry program, and oversaw a naturalization ceremony at the White House. The president’s critics congratulated Ponder and the newly minted US citizens, but they accused Trump of misusing his power for political purposes. “These are not monarchs; this is not their property. This was not an episode of Cribs,” said the MSNBC anchor Joy Ann Reid of the Trump campaign’s use of the White House as back drop. “They have used the property of the American people – these sacred properties that are owned by the American people – for politics tonight in a way that I think is offensive.” “I was really struck tonight, I have to say not in the good way, by the use and, in my view, misuse of the White House … These are not monarchs, this is not their property. This was not an episode of Cribs.”@JoyAnnReid on Trump using the White House for the RNC. pic.twitter.com/3Dtuh0HbVJ Chad Wolf, the acting secretary of homeland security, delivered the oath of citizenship to the five people who participated in the naturalization ceremony at the White House. Wolf’s appearance sparked accusations that he had violated the Hatch Act, which prohibits federal employees from engaging in certain political activities. Earlier Tuesday, a senior Democrat on the House foreign affairs committee also announced an investigation into whether Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state, was breaking the law by delivering his Tuesday night convention speech from Jerusalem during an official visit there. The first lady specifically addressed American mothers, saying she understood their concerns about the “mean and manipulative” nature of social media. (That comment seemed ironic, considering the first lady’s husband has repeatedly attacked his critics in personal terms over Twitter.) Republicans also played a video celebrating the women who serve as senior advisers to the president, such as the press secretary, Kayleigh McEnany. The messaging appeared to be an effort to chip away at Biden’s double-digit lead among women voters, which could certainly complicate Trump’s path to victory in November’s presidential election. A number of speakers, including Covington Catholic student Nicholas Sandmann, condemned “cancel culture”. Sandmann, who gained national attention last year following his interaction with a Native American activist at the Lincoln Memorial, said: “I learned that what was happening to me had a name. It was called being cancelled.” Eric and Tiffany Trump delivered convention speeches a day after Donald Trump Jr gave his speech, and Ivanka Trump is expected to introduce the president before his Thursday remarks. Amid a convention with no party platform, the president’s children have become some of his most important endorsers.