Crime is a nasty business, and PD James makes sure we know it. A Taste for Death starts with one of the most foul descriptions of murder you are likely to find in fiction. James starts by carefully leading us to the bodies in the company of an innocent old woman and a child, who are walking along a canal path to a church and admiring the flowers. When they get to the church door, an unaccountable anxiety builds; they detect “a faint smell alien, yet horribly familiar” before throwing open the door and seeing “horror itself” in a blaze of light: There were two of them, and she knew instantly, and with absolute certainty, that they were dead. The room was a shambles. Their throats had been cut and they lay like butchered animals in a waste of blood. Instinctively she thrust Darren behind her. But she was too late. He, too, had seen. He didn’t scream but she felt him tremble and he made a small, pathetic groan, like an angry puppy. She pushed him back into the passage, closed the door, and leaned against it. She was aware of a desperate coldness, of the tumultuous thudding of her heart. It seemed to have swollen in her chest, huge and hot, and its painful drumming shook her frail body as if to burst it apart. And the smell, which at first had been tentative, elusive, no more than an alien tincture on the air, now seemed to seep into the passage with the strong effluvium of death. The physical detail is horrible, but the real dramatic impact comes seeing this waking nightmare through the eyes of poor old Emily Wharton. James forces her to keep looking at the mutilated bodies until: “It seemed to her that she was drowning in blood. Blood drummed in her ears, blood gurgled like vomit in her throat, blood splashed in bright globules against the retinas of her closed eyes.” It all feels right. Which is to say, it all feels wrong. These deaths are ugly, unwelcome, and disruptive. In Murder Most Foul, her entertaining 1982 essay about the craft of mystery writing, PD James approvingly quoted WH Auden’s dictum that “the corpse must shock not only because it is a corpse but also because, even for a corpse, it is shockingly out of place, as when a dog makes a mess on a drawing room carpet.” With suave understatement, James wrote: “I try to describe the murder realistically.” In A Taste for Death, that realism extends long past the initial description. There are repeated visits to the vestry where the unholy crime was committed. There’s the post-mortem, where the bodies’ organs are “drawn out, examined, bottled and labelled”. And then there are all the ongoing repercussions; it is the living people who must come to terms with death, who show its real impact. “Much as I admire those fine writers Raymond Chandler and Dashiell Hammett … I am not really an aficionado of the school of gun, guts, and gore,” James wrote in Murder Most Foul. “I prefer a more domestic murder; the contrast between an ordered society or environment and the shocking and contaminating irruption of violent death.” This contaminating irruption spreads far. One of the corpses is a homeless man who is thought to be friendless, so the criminal investigation focuses mainly on his companion in death, former Tory minister Sir Paul Berowne. His associates and family are an unappealing mix of ambitious, over-privileged, self-absorbed, ruthless and truthless. For Inspector Adam Dalgliesh, investigating them provokes a “sour taste of self-disgust”, but also – and this is the mark of James’s skill – sympathy. These people are not particularly likable, but they are all too human. We feel keenly the disruption they endure, the loss of privacy as Dalgliesh digs into their secrets. We also realise that there are plenty more genial and less compromised people who are also rocked by the waves that spread out from the crime, starting with the unfortunate Emily Wharton. So we cling to Dalgliesh and his fellow policemen and women like masts in a storm. It isn’t just a case of resolving the mystery, it’s about tidying up the mess and providing security. “I prefer order and hierarchy to muddle,” thinks Kate Miskin, one of Dalgliesh’s colleagues. “I can’t think of anything more basic than helping to make sure that people can walk safely in their own city.” In A Taste for Death, the return of order becomes a compulsion. Murder is most foul – but the aftermath makes for enthralling reading.