Hundreds of schools in England are preparing to allow or encourage pupils to wear face coverings in communal areas in defiance of UK government guidance on coronavirus. Boris Johnson is under growing pressure to review Public Health England advice that “does not recommend” the use of face masks in schools. As headteachers called for an urgent rethink of the official stance, Labour said there was a “growing body of evidence” to support the Scottish model in which all secondary school pupils will be told to wear face coverings in shared spaces from Monday. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, said he was taking advice from officials in Scotland, in a sign that he could unilaterally advise hundreds of the capital’s secondary schools to adopt the wearing of face masks. One of England’s biggest multi-academy chains, Oasis, which represents more than 28,000 pupils at 52 schools, said on Tuesday it would defy the official UK government advice and ask older students to wear masks in communal places. Steve Chalke, the founder of the Oasis Charitable Trust, said schools had a “moral responsibility” to make their environment as safe as possible. He said asking secondary schools pupils to cover their faces in corridors, communal spaces and on transport, as Scotland has done, was “the commonsense place” for the UK government to end up. “In the absence of clarity coming forward from government in time – we’re told that there might be more guidance in a few weeks’ time but schools are going back in a few days’ time – we believe we have a moral responsibility based on our values to make decisions to create safety,” he told BBC Radio 4’s World at One. The Academies Enterprise Trust, which represents more than 33,000 pupils at 58 schools, told the Guardian it was following the UK government advice but that it would allow staff and pupils to wear face masks if they wished. The educational charity Ark, which has 27,000 children enrolled at 37 schools, said it was not recommending staff or students wear masks – in line with UK government guidance – but would allow teachers to do so if they felt strongly about it. Laura Berman, an education lawyer and partner at the law firm Stone King, said she was being contacted by schools wanting to make the wearing of face coverings part of their policy. “There is great confusion amongst school leaders,” she said. “Schools are trying, as always, to do the right thing by their students. They want to keep their school community as safe as possible and at the same time continue to deliver effective teaching and learning. Clearer government guidance would help schools make the right decisions.” The Public Health England advice, first issued in July, is that it “does not recommend” the use of face coverings in schools as pupils and staff are mixing in consistent groups and because, it says, misuse “may inadvertently increase the risk of transmission”. The government’s advice states that wearing face masks in schools could cause “negative effects on communication and thus education”. However, the UK government has been under pressure to review its advice after the World Health Organization updated its guidance at the weekend to say that face coverings were useful where physical distancing between adults and pupils aged 12 and over was impossible, or in areas of high transmission. The Conservative chair of the education select committee, Robert Halfon, called for “more clarity” and “reassurance” from the chief medical officer for England, Chris Whitty, about the policy for the country’s schools. Headteachers also urged the government to explain its position by setting out the latest science before schools reopen in the next fortnight. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said parents, pupils and staff were anxious and needed reassurance from government “rather than it being left entirely to schools to explain the government’s rationale”. He added: “If there is going to be any U-turn by the government that it does this sooner rather than later because the start of the new term is imminent.” Pepe Di’lasio, the headteacher of Wales high school in Rotherham, said his school was following the UK government advice but that planning for the reopening of schools was made more difficult by uncertainty at Westminster. “The real concern at the moment is an anxiety around [the lack of] reassurance from the government,” he said. “We’ve had one or two U-turns over one or two different things and we worry whether there’s going to be yet another U-turn. He added: “Scotland coming out as they have done, and the World Health Organization advice being updated as well, doesn’t help the situation. What headteachers want is to be able to tell parents and students we’re following the scientists and doing what’s best based on what they say.”