The best courtroom dramas involve a defence lawyer who can work miracles of persuasion and, no matter how damning the evidence, convince the jury that their client is innocent. A week after Democratic prosecutors presented their “open and shut” case against Donald Trump, the virtual Republican national convention is not only attempting to get him off the hook but argue that he deserves a medal – and four more years in the White House. Take immigration. Trump has sought to cut legal immigration, slowed down the naturalisation process and overseen a zero-tolerance policy that separated thousands of parents from their children at the US-Mexico border. But on Tuesday night, his coup de théâtre was a naturalisation ceremony at the White House for five new citizens from different continents. The audacity of hope has nothing on the audacity of this guy. US marines opened wooden doors and saluted as Trump strode through to the fanfare of Hail to the Chief. He told the new Americans, who waved small Stars and Stripes flags: “You are now fellow citizens of the greatest nation on the face of God’s earth.” Critics said Trump had used both the immigrants and White House as political props, making this sacred ritual all about him. The ceremony, conducted by the acting Department of Homeland Security head, Chad Wolf, was a flagrant abuse of the line between governing and election campaigning and typical of a president who has turned television into politics and politics into television. The same could be said when Trump, whose reaction to a summer of Black Lives Matter protests has been to demand harsh punishment and jail, used the convention to announce a pardon for Jon Ponder, a convicted bank robber who founded a non-profit that helps former prison inmates reenter society. The reality TV-style stunt was reminiscent of Trump’s surprise award of the medal of freedom to the talkshow host Rush Limbaugh during this year’s State of the Union address. Then there is the compelling case against Trump over his treatment of women. He has been accused of sexual harassment by two dozen of them. Maureen Dowd, a columnist in the New York Times, observed: “President Trump represents the last primal shriek of retrograde white men afraid to lose their power. He’s a dinosaur who evokes a world of beauty pageants, ‘suburban housewives’, molestation, cheating on your wife when she’s pregnant, paying off porn stars, preferring women to be seen and not heard, dismissing women who challenge you as nasty, angry and crazy.” Yet on Tuesday night his kryptonite was portrayed as his superpower as a video montage about mothers working at the White House presented him as an arch-feminist. Trump was heard saying, “Women have played a very big role. The level of genius is unbelievable, frankly.” Kellyanne Conway, his White House counsel who happens to be on the way out, commented: “This president has been a champion for women.” Of the thrice-married president who allegedly paid hush money to an adult film star, the narrator said: “Throughout his career, Trump has always touted family first as a core value. He shows this especially with his choices of press secretaries – choosing Sarah Sanders, the first mother to become a press secretary.” The deadly toll of the coronavirus pandemic alone should be enough to convict the president in the court of opinion. But Republicans had a dodge for that too. Larry Kudlow, Trump’s top economic adviser, spoke of it in the past tense: “It was awful. Health and economic impacts were tragic. Hardship and heartbreak were everywhere. But presidential leadership came swiftly and effectively, with an extraordinary rescue for health and safety to successfully fight the Covid virus.” Most other speakers engaged in Trump-style virus denialism, as if the deaths of more than 175,000 Americans and counting could be forgotten. Zac Petkanas, a healthcare activist, tweeted: “They know Covid is still a thing, right? 1,200 people died TODAY.” It was left to first lady Melania Trump to break ranks by expressing condolences to grieving families – only in the Trumpiverse could this be regarded as a radical act of empathy. Perhaps the central charge from Democrats last week was about Trump’s character. The defence team has been working overtime to rehabilitate it this week. Curiously, Melania and children Don Jr, Eric and Tiffany have had few personal anecdotes to share about growing up in the president’s home or acts of kindness that stick in their memories. (Melania did, at least, praise him as “an authentic person who loves this country” and confirm that she will vote for him). Instead it has been left to other witnesses to humanise the president. There was his deputy, Mike Pence, in a golden haze at the childhood home of Abraham Lincoln in Indiana, ruffling the hair of a boy who said Trump is a hero to everyone. A host of ordinary citizens spoke about how Trump gets them and understands working people. Cris Peterson, a Wisconsin dairy farmer, described her family’s struggles and testified: “President Trump understands that farming is a complicated, capital-intensive and risky business.” Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky told how, years ago, Trump donated money to help his medical missions to Guatemala and Haiti. “We performed hundreds of surgeries in both countries. Nothing is more beautiful to me in this world than removing the bandages from a person’s eyes, and watching them as they see their loved ones again. Donald Trump helped me make that happen.” And the case for Trump’s defence came with a twist. Pam Bondi, the former attorney general of Florida, wheeled in a canon of false and spurious attacks on his election opponent Joe Biden and his son Hunter. Joe Lockhart, a former White House press secretary, tweeted: “If you replace the Trump family for the Biden family this is a pretty powerful speech.” And even as Bondi spoke about the perils of nepotism, CNN’s coverage showed upcoming speakers: Tiffany Trump, Eric Trump, Melania Trump. Her rage at corruption and reverence for the rule of law were also darkly comic given that Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state, broke with diplomatic protocol and the state department’s own recent directive by speaking at a party convention. Pompeo delivered a statement from Jerusalem, where he was on an official diplomatic mission at taxpayers’ expense. It was one more up-yours from an administration that more and more resembles a monarchy. A king who can pardon at a whim and bestow favours on loyal courtiers? A royal family full of misfits and psychodrama that treats the people’s house as their own? Guilty as charged.