You may have noticed that the Trump relatives who have been invited to speak this week at the Republican national convention are getting increasingly obscure. Perhaps the president is simply running out of family members who have not turned against him yet – because these days, it seems Trump family members don’t even require the Trump surname to justify them speaking at the event, let alone a formal title within the Republican administration. This was a speech against nepotism. pic.twitter.com/Kgdqwv2mTF The list includes Kimberly Guilfoyle (who was appointed as Trump adviser after she started dating Donald Trump Jr); Eric Trump (who has no role in the administration outside of being his father’s son) and even Tiffany Trump (who most of us had forgotten about until this week). If you are finding it hard to keep up, here’s a guide on who’s who in the Trump dynasty, and their most memorable RNC moments. It has been reported that Melania and Ivanka Trump have been warring for some time over the top spot in the Trump dynasty. But Melania Trump has so far come out on top at the RNC. Her speech has been commended on all sides for managing to acknowledge the US’s racist history while encouraging unity – and she didn’t even need to plagiarize this time. And people have also rallied around Melania Trump following a xenophobic low blow from Bette Middler, who laughed at Melania Trump’s accent on Twitter and called her an illegal alien. Kimberly Guilfoyle has managed to become one of the most easily recognizable speakers in the Trump clan. She represents the family on chatshows; has bagged herself a job as a Trump adviser while Trump’s own son Eric has yet to be given a job in the administration – and now has bagged herself a slot at the RNC. Mommy, I’m scared. pic.twitter.com/dJQUYLAO9r Guilfoyle – a former Fox News host and millionaire who has twice dated political royalty (she was previously married to California’s governor, Gavin Newsom, hence becoming San Francisco’s first lady), devoted her speech to routing out the “cosmopolitan elite” from telling you what to think. She did make a few missteps – like when she spoke about her mother being an immigrant from Puerto Rico, when Puerto Rico is, in fact, part of the United States – but she still gets top marks for effort. Why? Because if shouting “The best! Is yet! To come!” full blast during a speech that was pre-recorded in front of a crowd of exactly zero people does not count as good showmanship, then I don’t know what does. Eric Trump has been accused of having more lies in his speech than verbs (he repeated false claims that Joe Biden wants to defund the police, claimed Biden wants to take away the right to bear arms when he has never said such a thing, and that his father delivered the biggest tax cuts in US history – he didn’t). Nonetheless, we believe he should get a special mention for managing to break away from being under investigation in New York for fraud to speak at Daddy’s convention. You’ve got to feel good for Tiffany Trump. The much-forgotten Trump sibling, who was overlooked for a role at her father’s third wedding to Melania (Donald Trump Jr and Eric Trump were best men; Ivanka Trump did a Bible reading; Trump’s show producer’s son was a page boy, but Tiffany Trump got to hand out wedding programs), has finally taken her moment to shine. Tiffany Trump: “As a recent graduate, I can relate to so many of you who might be looking for a job. My father has built a thriving economy once and believe me, he will do it again.” https://t.co/QOOhCdjT98 #RNC2020 pic.twitter.com/lWUFe1f2Xf Her RNC gambit to be recognized as the most relatable Trump (that prize previously went to Donald Trump Jr, who once flew coach) has to be commended. Tiffany Trump wants you to know that she, the president’s daughter who has a net worth of $10m at 26, can relate to the ordinary American student, having graduated during a pandemic. Tiffany Trump can, at least, call herself one of the more self-made Trumps: instead of inheriting Donald Trump’s businesses as a young adult, Tiffany Trump wanted to make a name for herself, as, errr … a pop singer. And sure, the line in her speech where she celebrates the US being “the only country to have the word dream associated with it” sounds naive at best – but at least she has shown improvement in her writing. Her 2011 song included the lyrics “Diamonds are so shiny / Special things I got on me”.