Born in London, Akingbola, 42, studied at the Academy of Live & Recorded Arts. He went on to give an award-winning performance in Sheffield Crucible’s Blue/Orange in 2005. He also won awards for his roles in Holby City and Rev; his recent TV work includes Kate & Koji, and In The Long Run, with Idris Elba, the third series of which is currently on Sky One. Akingbola is single and lives in London. What is your earliest memory?Being in a care home, drinking orange squash and eating digestive biscuits. I must have been about two. I was in care because my mum wasn’t well; I was there for a bit until I was fostered. I have a big complex family. I am the youngest of four brothers and two sisters. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Self-doubt. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Spitefulness or being a bully. What was your most embarrassing moment?My first acting job was at Birmingham Rep in a play called Nativity. I played Herod’s guard; on press night, my sword got stuck in its scabbard and all the kids in the front row started laughing. I rushed my speech and ran off, mortified. What makes you unhappy?Racism, death, poverty, war. What do you most dislike about your appearance?My feet need plastic surgery. They are ugly, with a bit of a bunion. What is your most unappealing habit?Jumping in Ubers when I could walk. Which living person do you most despise, and why?Derek Chauvin [the police officer charged with the murder of George Floyd]. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?Unfortunately, I’ve been called the N-word. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Pancakes, and playing Fifa 2020 all day. What does love feel like?I am not sure I’ve really been in love. What was the best kiss of your life?I’ve had a lot of good kisses. Have you ever said ‘I love you’ and not meant it?Unfortunately, yes. What is the worst job you’ve done?Working in a warehouse, packing frozen meat. It was a nightmare: I hate the cold and it was very tough. What has been your biggest disappointment?Not being in Black Panther. When did you last cry, and why?Yesterday, talking about my brother, who passed away. How often do you have sex?Not enough, especially during the pandemic. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?An in-house chef. What has been your closest brush with the law?When I was a kid, I was arrested for using an out-of-date travel card; I never did it again. Over the years, I’ve enjoyed playing police roles. I upgraded from PC to DI! What is the most important lesson life has taught you?Nothing is guaranteed. Tell us a jokeWhat’s a horse’s favourite game? Stable tennis.