Masai Ujiri has filed a countersuit against a California sheriff’s deputy who contends the Toronto Raptors president of basketball operations shoved and injured him after the deciding game of last year’s NBA finals. As part of his lawsuit, filed on Tuesday in an Oakland court, Ujiri attached as evidence a video that shows Alameda county deputy Alan Strickland was the aggressor in the situation. Strickland twice shoved Ujiri, telling him to “back the fuck off” before the Raptors executive pushed him back. Masai Ujiri's legal team has released body camera footage of his encounter with a security worker at Oracle Arena after the Raptors won the NBA championship. pic.twitter.com/56XWMpZy0P Bay Area television station WTVU aired a clip of the incident on Tuesday that showed Ujiri trying to get to the court to celebrate with the Raptors, who defeated the Golden State Warriors on their home court to win the NBA championship last June. The video shows Strickland extending his arm to try to block Ujiri, who had his security credentials in his hand. He then pushes Ujiri and shoves him a second time as Ujiri approached again. Ujiri then pushed Strickland. In February, Strickland and his wife, Kelly, sued Ujiri, the Raptors and Maple Leaf Entertainment, contending Ujiri pushed him so hard that he sustained injuries to head, chin, jaw and teeth. The case is still pending. The Stricklands are seeking a jury trial and asking for damages greater than $75,000, along with medical and incidental expenses, loss of earnings, prejudgment interest, property damage and legal fees. No criminal charges were filed against Ujiri. The case comes at a time when police brutality against black people is at the forefront of debate in the US. Ujiri is black and Strickland is white. “To me it’s incredible that things play out like that,” Ujiri, 50, told the Canadian Press in February. “I think something incredible was taken away from me and I will never forget it. It is one of the things that drives me to win another championship because I want to be able to celebrate a championship the right way. This thing will be settled. The truth will come out. The truth will come out of this.”