Beckett double billTrevor Nunn’s sell-out productions of Krapp’s Last Tape, starring James Hayes, and The Old Tune, with Niall Buggy and David Threlfall, opened in January at London’s tiny Jermyn Street theatre. Plans for a West End transfer were curtailed by lockdown but an archive recording is now available from Digital Theatre until 31 December. Susannah Clapp Recovering MisogynistThis autobiographical, magical-realist, #MeToo story (with images and music) is written and read by Rachel Mariner, who wrote it to answer the question: “What the hell was wrong with me?” when she found herself feeling sorry for Harvey Weinstein. Available until 26 August on a pay-what-you-want basis. Clare Brennan Met stars live in concertThe tenor Roberto Alagna and soprano Aleksandra Kurzak perform live outdoors from the Château de la Chèvre d’Or, overlooking the Mediterranean, in Èze, France, the latest in the New York Met’s new pay-per-view recital series. Streamed live via the Met website today, 6.30pm BST and on demand until Thursday. AvaThe flashpoint in the life of Tehran teenager Ava is conflict with her overbearing mother. But her real problem is a society that restricts her options and doesn’t view harmless rebellion kindly. This impressive feature debut from Sadaf Foroughi, is reminiscent of Mustang by Deniz Gamze Ergüven. Streaming from Friday. Wendy Ide SocratesProduced by American indie stalwart Ramin Bahrani, this humane, quietly forceful debut from Brazilian director Alexandre Moratto follows a gay São Paulo teenager’s day-to-day survival in the wake of his mother’s death. Streaming from Friday. Guy Lodge Comedy on the TerraceGet your masks ready for this socially distanced live comedy gig at London’s biggest beer garden. Watch Andrew Maxwell, Helen Bauer, Michael Akadiri and Elf Lyons performing brand new material this Thursday at Alexandra Palace. Kadish Morris Simon Schama: The CourtauldThe latest in Simon Schama’s riveting journeys through the world’s great galleries, homing in on Cézanne, Gauguin and Manet. The best of radio: words that need no pictures from this most inspiring of broadcasters. BBC Radio 4, Saturday at 7.15pm/ BBC Sounds. Laura Cumming An Evening with Scottish BalletTo make up for its absence, the Edinburgh international festival is offering a chance to keep in touch with its terrific ballet company with this mixed programme, commissioned as part of My Light Shines On, and available on the EIF’s YouTube channel until the end of August. It includes a revival of Helen Pickett’s duet Trace and Sophie Laplane’s Oxymore (both seen at the 2013 festival), plus new work from Alexander Whitley and emerging dance-maker Nicholas Shoesmith, who has choreographed Catalyst, performed in masks on the empty stage of the festival theatre, next to its shining ghost light. Sarah Crompton Oscar JeromePart of the Kokoroko collective, Oscar Jerome has a solo album, Breathe Deep, just out, and on Tuesday at 8pm BST a full-band livestream launch playing cuts in aid of Fairbeats!, a charity working with young refugees, asylum seekers, newly arrived migrants and their families, Tickets £6-£26.95. Kitty Empire The Lemon TwigsThey may look like neo-glam disrupters, but the Lemon Twigs are really starry-eyed retro-maniacs. The US duo’s third album Songs for the General Public dispenses with concept in favour of sparkling melodics. Out Friday. KE