1) If you hadn’t heard, a certain Barcelona superstar has decided he fancies a change of scene. His destination is anyone’s guess: Turin? Paris? China? Charlton …? Laugh all you like, but the Addicks have signed a former Ballon d’Or winner from Barcelona before. Here’s Match of the Day’s feature on Allan Simonsen’s Charlton debut following his shock move in 1983. The Dane was some player in his day. Other shock moves from Dons of the Ballon: Johan Cruyff to the splendidly-named Washington Diplomats. Hristo Stoichkov to Kashiwa Reysol. Rivaldo to Angolan side Kabuscorp. Michael Owen to Stoke. Kaká to a seven-a-side team in east London. 2) With four days until racket meets ball in the US Open, here’s a recap of the five-set classic that took Rafa Nadal to his 19th grand slam singles title last time out. And Bianca Andreescu’s epic two-week journey to becoming the first ever slam winner born this century. Here’s the pick of Flushing Meadows showdowns from the last decade. And some fun: the tournament’s best ever trick shots. 3) It’s the Community Shield on Saturday. The last time Arsenal and Liverpool contested the fixtures was back in 2002 – peak Wenger-era – when Gilberto scored a lovely winner. Here’s some netbusters from the season’s curtain-raiser over the years. And an all-time classic: Leeds win a seven-goal thriller in 1992 thanks to an Eric Cantona hat-trick. (And of course, Kevin Keegan exchanging blows with Billy Bremner in 1974. Black eyes and red cards all round.) 4) Sports stars on holiday have been, er, in the news this week. More successful exotic escapades: NFL Linebacker Sam Barrington goes fishing … for sharks. Andrea Pirlo retreats to his winery. Kevin Durant checks out the Taj Mahal. World Cup winner and keen amateur surfer Bixente Lizerazu catching waves in Tahiti. Luis Enrique unwinds with a six-day, 251km ultramarathon through the Sahara desert. 5) On this day! 1960: Aussie swimmer John Devitt controversially wins the 100m freestyle gold at the Rome Olympics, recording same time as silver medallist Lance Larson. 1982: Rickey Henderson sets a new record with his 188th stolen base of the season. 1990: A swarm of gnats stops play between the Milwaukee Brewers and the Toronto Blue Jays. 2004: Kayak-machine Birgit Fischer becomes the first woman to win golds at six different Olympics. 6) And with the Belgian Grand Prix in a couple of days, here’s a few moments that may have slipped your mind from over the years. Highlights from an all-time classic, back in 1998. And, two years later, Hakkinen v Schumacher and arguably the best overtake in F1 history. 1) Splendidly old-school track and field footage of Harold Abrahams winning the 100m at the 1924 Olympics. 2) British Pathé memories of Celtic v Internazionale, 1967, the game that spawned the Lisbon Lions. 3) Come for Jim McLean bellowing instructions down a phone to the Dundee United bench – stay for his glorious retro Adidas track top. 4) Heart-stopping, but mercifully almost injury-free, tumbling bike action from MotoGP in Austria. Spotters’ badges: vsbain67, M_T_Wallet, germit, WorthReading. Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.