As many as 30 teenagers who took a holiday to the Greek island of Zante may have contracted coronavirus, health officials have said. At least 11 of a group of 18- and 19-year-olds in Plymouth have tested positive for Covid-19 and some had been for a night out in the Devon city since their return from their holiday. The council’s public health director, Ruth Harrell, said her team was working alongside the national systems to contact and trace the young people thought to have been affected. “We know that some of these young people had no symptoms, and so carried on as normal, including a night out in Plymouth’s bars and restaurants, until they became aware of the risk,” she said. “That means more people could be infected. “While young people might have fairly mild symptoms, and sometimes none that you would notice, our big concern is that we know it can be very serious for people who have existing health problems or are older. “While we are still below the point of triggering a lockdown, this incident just goes to show how easily life can change. We all need to remain vigilant, whatever age we are, and take proper precautions.” Many of the teenagers who tested positive showed no symptoms or very minor symptoms such as a sore throat after returning from the Greek island, which is not currently subject to UK quarantine rules. Plymouth city council said a further separate outbreak in a factory had been confirmed earlier this week. Harrell added: “We are in contact with all the pubs and bars across the city to remind them of their frontline role in stopping the spread of this virus. They need to help us to protect the city. But it also needs everyone to help too. “If you think you’ve been in contact with someone who has tested positive, you need to self-isolate. If you get any symptoms, get tested as well as isolate. There’s no two ways round it.” The council leader, Tudor Evans, added: “We cannot afford to be complacent. If you are going out you must follow the guidance. “This is our wake-up call. We have been fortunate so far in Plymouth that we have had a low number of cases, but coronavirus has not gone away. Wash your hands as often as possible, keep your distance and wear a mask or face covering when you are told to.”