Within minutes of my arrival at my biological father’s hospital bed, he exploded. He just went off, like a paint grenade. Blood everywhere. It had been pooling inside him for a while, then something gave way, and out it all came. Part of me suspected I had been the cause. Certain animals, when trapped, do the same – reflex bleeding, the last defence. A simulacrum of illness to put predators off their meal. It certainly got my old man off the hook. This deathbed reunion had threatened to be a moment of reckoning for a lifetime of absence. Instead, I found myself attempting to comfort the man who had silently vanished in the dead of night when I was a baby. “Just in case anything happens,” I told him, as he was wheeled away for an emergency operation that was likely to kill him, “I want you to know I love you.” I wasn’t sure if I even meant it. I just thought it might be a heartening thing for a dying man with a guilty conscience to hear. “Yes,” he replied with a puzzled grin. “I… ummm you too.” When, not long after that visit to the hospital in the summer of 2017, he pulled his final vanishing act – complications related to COPD and a lifetime of self-neglect – it was as if the pages had been plucked from a novel I was reading at a crucial point in the plot. I thought I would never solve the riddle of the man, never find out why he flew from fatherhood like a bird from a cardboard box. How can you get to know a person when they’re gone? The story of my early existence has always sounded like a fairytale. For my first six months, my parents and I lived like three little bears in an isolated cottage in the woods on the Port Eliot Estate, in Cornwall. There were walnut trees, a well that provided sweet water and pheasants aplenty from the local hunt, which my mum mashed into baby food for me. The man who gave me life and then took flight sounded like a figure from a fairytale, too. From a distance, Heathcote Williams – conjuror, poet, anarchist – seemed like a man possessed of powerful magic. He’s best known for his experimental plays and epic nature poems – but I knew him as a jumble of secondhand stories and images. There was the one about him using his conjuring abilities to steal Christmas from Harrods, turkey and all. The time he took control of several streets in west London, opened the houses to the homeless and then declared independence from the United Kingdom – although not, so the story goes, before having himself crowned mayor. And he was passionate about animals, so much so that he once shat into his own hand and threw his excrement at a Dutch performance artist who was about to have sex with a live goose – and then ran away with the goose. A dash of Merlin, a pinch of Fagin… I knew him as a character, but not as a man. Heathcote and my mum, Polly [Samson], first met in the late 1980s. Then 25, my mum was working in publishing and Heathcote, in his 40s, was one of her authors. He had a book coming out, Whale Nation, an epic poem which was to become an unexpected bestseller. Professional meetings soon became anything but – he made silver dollars appear from the sugar bowl, taught her sleight of hand and promised to teach her to juggle. The age difference didn’t seem to matter. He was charmingly childlike – mischievous, playful and funny. When, after a long and uncertain courtship, she became pregnant with me, he was resolute. “You can’t kill someone for bad timing,” he told my mum. “We would have ended up having a child anyway.” When Polly’s boss found out that she intended to keep the baby, he called her into his office. “I just wanted to congratulate you,” he said with spectacularly misplaced confidence. “Heathcote will be the most marvellous father.” In retrospect there were warning signs. He mentioned a past stay in a mental hospital, electro-convulsive therapy, alcohol problems – and he didn’t mention the fact that he had already loved and left one family. My mum only found out about his two daughters when they turned up with their mother at a reading of Whale Nation, and she was perplexed when Heathcote reacted by running out of the door and into a taxi. His lodgings in Cornwall weren’t quite as advertised either. Heathcote’s “garret” turned out to be an entire wing of his old schoolfriend, Lord Peregrine Eliot’s, 12th-century manor house. Heathcote slept in a rounded room overlooking the estuary of the Tamar in a nest of dirty bedding. Obsessive about his work, he was often too busy to go to the toilet, so there were pots and pans filled with piss. With a baby on the way, my parents-to-be began doing up an old pig farmer’s cottage in the woods. Heathcote didn’t behave like someone planning to do a runner. He appeared to be setting deep roots. It was he and my mum who planted those walnut trees and sunk the well. Once I arrived, in the winter of 1989, he was apparently a marvellous father, as predicted. When I woke up, he’d be the one to get out of bed and deal with me, leaving my mum to sleep in. He was obsessed, long before organic food became a thing, with making chemical-free baby food. And there are pictures – strange to look at now – of him grinning and cradling me. Everything seemed perfect. Until, suddenly, it wasn’t. One spring morning, my mum was woken early by my crying. Heathcote’s side of the bed was empty and cold, but he wasn’t with me. A nocturnal flight had taken place. He’d faded into the forest wordless as an owl, leaving as much trace as a bird from an open window. My mum eventually found him back in his crow’s nest in the big house, mad-eyed and gibbering. He kept mumbling the same thing over and over: “I’m ill. I’m ill. I’m ill.” My mum and I were ejected from the house. “You can’t expect him to play mummy bear, daddy bear and baby bear forever, you know,” said Lord Eliot. Was it a genuine breakdown? Or a sidestepping of responsibility? Ranting at my mum, he took to repeating a well-known Cyril Connolly quote: “There is no more sombre enemy of good art than the pram in the hall.” Beyond that, he never felt the need to explain himself to my mum, and I never got much of an explanation either. His breakdown appeared to have sprung from nowhere, something lurking invisibly in the blood. The mystery of my dad was like a maddening itch to me The year Heathcote died, I began writing a book of my own, a memoir about an abandoned magpie my partner brought home one spring day, and which refused to fly away. Magpies are, like all corvids, fantastically intelligent, roughly as bright as toddlers. They play, practise deception, are masters of imitation. This one, named Benzene after the petrochemical sheen of her feathers, even learned to talk: “Come on!” “Trump!” and, eventually, “Fuck off!” While caring for the magpie, I made an unexpected discovery. Heathcote, too, had an intense bond with a wild bird – a jackdaw that lived with him not long before he met my mum and had me. It roosted in his tangle of dark hair and retrieved lost sixpences from the soil. Magpies and jackdaws share family ties. They’re both members of the crow family. Carrion kin. My book was to be an interweaving of these narratives, a story of birds and of fathers. It was only really while writing it that I began to feel the edges of the hole in the plot – and a sense of what that hole had sucked in. The human mind hates an incomplete story. Faced with blank pages, it fills them. It had been hard not to take Heathcote’s abandonment personally. I was that pram in the hallway – the animus of his flight. Stories are powerful things and the ones we tell ourselves about ourselves are perhaps the most powerful of all. Even though the role of father was, after a couple of tough years, filled – my mum married a caring musician called David [Gilmour], who legally adopted me – the mystery of Heathcote and his unexplained absence was like a maddening itch in an impossible-to-reach spot. Over the years I sought to know him, longed for him to tell me a different story, but was met with smoke and mirrors. He distracted me with magic tricks and well-polished anecdotes, and then repeated his vanishing act all over again. Repetition became a theme. I eventually had a breakdown of my own and was, like him, briefly institutionalised. Jackdaw. Magpie. Mental hospital. Prison. What runs in the blood? The year Heathcote died was also the year I began thinking about fatherhood myself. Although thinking is perhaps the wrong word. My partner was thinking about it; I was thinking about repetition, and how to prevent it. To do so, I had to locate those missing pages. That spring I returned to Port Eliot for the first time since I was a baby. I visited the cottage, walked along the ruined corridors of the big house to the rounded room in which Heathcote had lived for the better part of a decade, staggered through the dark tunnels that ran beneath the building and, there, found the fatherload. In a dank chamber the size of a shipping container, cardboard boxes were stacked against the walls from floor to ceiling. Heathcote’s things: photographs, letters, journals, diaries, trousers. I dipped my hand into one and pulled out a photographic slide the size of a postage stamp: my mum juggling in front of the big house, just before her world came crashing down. I dipped my hand in again and came out with the juggling balls, leather cracked and empty of stuffing. A deluge of thoughts, images, dreams and memories sprung from those damp and mouldy boxes. Father unfiltered. There were obscene drawings. Designs for flying machines. Descriptions of suicide attempts. Ecstatic first-person accounts of gay sex. Used condoms. Ravings from a stay in a mental asylum that were more unpleasant than anything I have ever read. Scrawls of despair and anger from the breakdown he had after my birth. I spent days wading through it all alongside my half- sisters, who I had met for the first time while Heathcote was dying. Bolstered by their memories of the man, a different story began to form – those missing pages. I saw Heathcote as a little boy, beaten by his father, sent to boarding school at a tender age to be beaten some more, coping with it all by dreaming of flight. A letter to Dunlop Rubber enquiring about a balloon large enough to carry a boy away. Sketches of men with wings. A boyhood fantasy of having a jackdaw as a friend – something that would love and protect him. I began to understand why family might have felt like a trap, from which the only thing to do was fly. There was one letter I kept returning to, one drafted from the heart of the breakdown that begun that night in spring when he left my mum and me. Heathcote’s words spiralled around the edges of a square of Port Eliot Estate paper, overspilling the margins of legibility and sense. He wrote of his father’s brutality, his horror of family, his longing for escape, to become a monk, or a bird. His despair bleeds from the page: “Scrambled and fused brains. Thoughts of suicide. Pray without ceasing. Very hard.” The draft was addressed, oddly enough, to the then poet laureate, Ted Hughes – another man who had an intense bond with a member of the crow family, although his Crow was a purely literary creation. For all the absurdity of someone confessing their suicidal thoughts to Hughes – a man many accuse of having driven two of the women in his own life to suicide – that letter brought something like release. For whatever reason, Heathcote offered Hughes what he never managed to give me – a hint of honesty, and a sketch of an explanation; one that finally absolved me of blame. Now, with a baby of my own, I’ve felt first-hand the agony that accompanies parental love. It’s occasionally almost unbearable – something close to pain. Difficult emotions spring from deep down without warning; a sometimes bitter draught from the heart. Heathcote’s flight brought him no relief. There’s no escaping your emotions. Now that I know him – or, a version of him, preserved on paper and left to age in a cellar – I feel, for the first time, the sadness of his story. Luckily, one’s ability to love isn’t handed down. It doesn’t run in the blood. It’s something that’s passed from hand to hand – a gift one can give without losing a drop. Featherhood by Charlie Gilmour is published by Weidenfeld & Nicolson on 27 August at £16.99