Traders at the historic Greenwich Market in south-east London say they could be forced out of business after being hit with a massive rent increase in the wake of the coronavirus lockdown. Hot food stallholders in the cobbled square market, which has operated since 1737, were originally asked to pay 60% more per day, while some drinks sellers have had their rent doubled. Three weeks after their rents were hiked, prompting an outcry, they say increases for some are now being reduced to about 30%, however. Other stallholders, including cold food stands and arts and crafts sellers, say they fear their rents will also go up despite a drop in trade at the market, which is usually a tourist hotspot. One stallholder said: “Historically rent increases applied to one group have been followed by another group then another. I’ve been losing sleep over this. The way we’ve been treated is disgusting.” He said he and others were running at a loss despite having kept some staff on furlough after lockdown eased. Owners of shops around the edge of the market have had their rent deferred until October, but say they are also at risk of closure when payments are due. Property firm Knight Frank, which manages the market on behalf of the landlord, the Greenwich Hospital charity, has demanded they pay the full amount owed for the last six months – despite shops being forced to close for about half of that time. At least one shop owner said they would be forced to close as a result. One said: “I signed a contract [for the lease] but I would have thought there would be some discussion. I’ve sent emails but there’s been no response.” He said shop owners were dismayed that the market was demanding full rent when some landlords, including Transport for London and other market operators, have given rent-free periods or discounts. Stallholders are already under pressure because the market has been forced to cut the number of stalls to comply with social distancing requirements. Many of the stalls now trade only two days a week on a rota system and can only open Thursday to Sunday, compared to seven days a week before lockdown. The number of visitors has also fallen as the numbers of tourists, students at the nearby University of Greenwich, and local workers have all dwindled because of the pandemic. In a letter to stallholders, Knight Frank said it has been forced to put up rents because the market is “running at a considerable loss”, with fewer stalls operating and only four days of trading a week. It says the losses are “simply not sustainable” for the owner, Greenwich Hospital. In a letter to Knight Frank, seen by the Guardian, the hot food traders said that Knight Frank’s demands are “beyond reasonable and extremely unjust”. “We are living in the same broken and gloomy economic conditions as you, and we cannot afford to suffer more losses than we already have due to the pandemic,” they wrote. A spokesperson for Knight Frank said: “We have worked hard to support shopkeepers and stallholders throughout a difficult period, in line with government guidelines, including rent concessions and deferments, which have been balanced against Greenwich Hospital’s charitable obligations and the ongoing costs required for the safe running of the market and surrounding shops. We continue to work closely with tenants as the market reopens.” Greenwich Hospital did not respond to a request for comment.