Heartache for Manchester United and Shakhtar Donetsk in the semi-finals has set up an intriguing Europa League final between Sevilla and Inter. It’s almost standard procedure for the Spaniards to find themselves in this position. They have now reached the final of this competition in six of the last 14 seasons, winning all five of those finals – in 2006, 2007, 2014, 2015 and 2016. Despite Sevilla’s status as the most successful team in Europa League history, Inter are slight favourites, at least with the bookmakers. This is perhaps surprising given that they have only played in one European final – the Champions League final 10 years ago, which they won – since they beat Lazio 3-0 in the Uefa Cup final in 1998. All-Italian finals were commonplace in the competition at the time. In fact, in the 11 seasons before the turn of the millennium, 14 of the 22 finalists came from Serie A. Italian clubs have certainly not dominated the competition in recent years; Inter are the first Serie A club to reach the final since Parma won it in 1999. Antonio Conte will not be happy to just make an appearance in the final, though, having never won a European trophy in a managerial career that boasts five domestic league titles. He’s pitting his wits against Julen Lopetegui, who is on the hunt for the first silverware of his club coaching career. The two semi-finals painted a pretty good picture of how this final may play out. While many thought Manchester United were unlucky to lose in the last four, Sevilla came out on top in terms of possession and do enjoy dictating play, particularly through Éver Banega in the middle of the park. Lopetegui’s side have averaged 65.1% possession in their Europa League matches this season, which is the highest in the competition by a distance. It would not be a surprise if that figure rises come Friday night, but that will suit Conte and Inter just fine. Inter had just 37.2% of possession in their meeting with Shakhtar as they sat back and stifled the Ukrainian champions. It was not pretty, especially in the first half, but this Inter side are clinical. They only had 12 shots in their semi-final yet still won 5-0. Despite conceding much of the ball, Inter rarely let Shakhtar get close to their goal. Shakhtar had just six shots in the game – and half of them were from outside the box. Inter’s potent front two of Lautaro Martínez and Romelu Lukaku ran riot in the second half, ending the match with two goals apiece. Sevilla may see much of the ball on Friday night but the real battle in this game will be between Inter’s attack and Sevilla’s defence. Lukaku is now on a 10-game scoring streak in the Europa League – albeit with half of those matches coming way back in 2014 when he was playing for Everton – and will come up against the in-demand centre-back Diego Carlos. The Brazilian loves a physical tussle and they don’t come tougher than Lukaku. Having made a few rash challenges en route to the final, he will be in for a true test against Lukaku, who has scored 33 goals this season. The battle between Martínez and Jules Koundé promises to be just as crucial, with both considered to be among the best youngsters in Europe in their positions. Martínez is a real livewire in attack, while Koundé’s composure at the back is pivotal to how Sevilla build play. He has made 77.8 passes per game in the Europa League this season, completing 93.1% of them. As such, Martínez’s defensive work in closing down the Sevilla defender will be almost as important as the threat he carries in attack. There are fascinating battles all over the pitch in this final, with former Inter man Banega up against Nicolò Barella in the middle of the park. Ashley Young will face former Liverpool player Suso and former Manchester City player Jesús Navas down one flank, while Danilo D’Ambrosio will be up against Lucas Ocampos – fitness permitting – on the other side of the pitch. Ocampos is a huge threat and D’Ambrosio will also have to be wary of overlapping runs from left-back Sergio Reguilón, who has attracted widespread interest in the transfer market already this summer. If it is to be his last game for Sevilla, the Real Madrid loanee will be keen to leave on a high. Nevertheless, with Sevilla conceding just one goal in their last six matches and Inter just one in their last seven, it’s tough to foresee a high-scoring final. In truth this match is likely to suit Conte down to the ground, so don’t be surprised if Inter suck the life and drama out of the game early on, or if Sevilla’s remarkable winning run in Europa League finals comes to an end. Prediction: Sevilla 0-1 Inter PSG v Bayern Munich is the final most observers expected before the semi-finals were played, but they were certainly not the favourites this time last year. PSG were fifth favourites with the bookmakers last August, with Bayern Munich as far out as eighth favourite with odds more than twice as high as Barcelona. Things can change quickly in football. Bayern have steamrolled all before them in the Champions League this season, becoming the first team to win 10 successive matches in the competition. A faultless Champions League campaign would be a remarkable achievement, but Bayern face a significant obstacle on Sunday night. PSG silenced a lot of critics by coming back to beat Borussia Dortmund in the last-16 stage and then seeing off Atalanta with some late heroics in the quarters, but the manner of their 3-0 win over RB Leipzig was the most impressive yet. It’s little surprise that they put on their most convincing victory when their three best forwards were on the pitch. It was only the second Champions League game this season in which Thomas Tuchel could call upon Neymar, Kylian Mbappé and Ángel Di María on the same night and that trio will be available for selection once more in the final. Given the quality of chances Bayern have conceded to opponents of late, there is a case to be made for an upset. Bayern kept a clean sheet in their semi-final but Lyon’s finishing was disappointingly poor. With Jérôme Boateng now a doubt for the final, having been forced off at half time on Wednesday against Lyon, PSG’s forwards will be looking forward to facing Bayern’s high line – even if Neymar’s composure in front of goal of late would suggest otherwise. Bayern undoubtedly see attack as their best form of defence. Their tally of 42 goals in the competition is now the second most in a single campaign, and they have only played 10 games. It will take some doing to match Barcelona’s tally of 45 from the 1999-2000 season – when they played 16 matches – but if any team can put three past PSG, it’s this Bayern side. They will have a man on a mission up front in Robert Lewandowski, who is just two goals shy of Cristiano Ronaldo’s record of 17 goals in a single Champions League campaign despite playing just nine times so far. A hat-trick would take him level with Raúl as the third highest scorer in the competition’s history behind Ronaldo and Lionel Messi. Standing in his way, however, is a defence that has not been given the credit it deserves. Their clean sheet against RB Leipzig was their seventh in just 10 matches in the competition this season. Thiago Silva will be aiming to go out on a high in what will be his final game for the club. The veteran PSG skipper will be tasked with halting the seemingly unstoppable Lewandowski, but Marquinhos – who has been outstanding in defence and midfield for PSG this season – will have an equally important job in nullifying the influence of Thomas Müller. The absence of Keylor Navas between the posts is the biggest blow to either side, with Sergio Rico likely to come under considerably more pressure than he did in the semi-final. Unlike the Europa League final, this match promises goalmouth action galore. Prediction: PSG 2-3 Bayern • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and analysis• Follow WhoScored and Martin Laurence on Twitter