Speculation around the future of Chelsea midfielder Jorginho is heating up like an August Friday morning in London, after his representative provided an absolute classic in the time-honoured tradition of attempted-transfer-stoking-agent-quotes. “Everyone knows there is a very strong rapport between [Juventus manager Maurizio] Sarri and Jorginho after five years working together, I’d be a hypocrite to deny that,” João Santos told The Telegraph. “But I also want to remind you that Jorginho has three years left on his Chelsea contract.” Thank you for the reminder. Opinion is still split over Jorginho’s suitability to playing in the Premier League, and with Sarri having snaffled the Serie A title with Juve while struggling with his options in midfield, a Jorginho reunion with his former Naples mentor might just suit all parties. Chelsea head coach Frank Lampard is dead keen to sign young midfield general Declan Rice from West Ham, but they say he would need £65million in the coffers to do it, so off-loading Jorginho to Serie A, where they literally have players called ‘Immobile’, could be the perfect solution. Elsewhere in Italy, Lazio are trying to convince David Silva to swap Manchester for Rome. The 34-year-old’s plan to depart from Manchester City was confirmed last summer and the Serie A club have apparently offered Silva ‘£50,000 a week, plus a private plane and elegant house’. Sounds OK to us, although Silva apparently wants closer to 100 large a week in wages. Back on these shores, champions Liverpool want to sign the left-back Jamal Lewis from relegated Norwich City. Jürgen Klopp’s men have already had a £10m offer rebuffed because the Canaries value Lewis at closer to £20m. Saïd Benrahma’s name seems to be popping up on more shopping lists since Brentford lost to Fulham in the Championship play-off final. Marcelo Bielsa’s Leeds, who won the Championship, are the latest side to be linked with the tricky Algerian winger. Leeds are also keen to sign Stuttgart’s Argentinian forward Nicolás González. The 22-year-old has three caps for his country and his 15 league goals helped fire Stuttgart back into the Bundesliga after a one-year absence. González was on a serious hot streak after the restart with eight goals in nine matches. It’s being reported that Willian – strongly linked with a move to Arsenal after Chelsea’s refusal to agree a three-year contract extension with the Brazilian international – has agreed a deal with the Gunners worth £100,000 a week. Arsenal fans will probably be even happier to hear that Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, whose two goals secured the FA Cup last weekend, is about to sign a new three-year deal. On the other hand Arsenal are willing to listen to offers for midfielder Ashley Maitland-Niles – despite the fact that head coach Mikel Arteta would like to keep him. After his team exited the Europa League against Bayer Leverkusen, Rangers manager Steven Gerrard said that striker Alfredo Morelos has ‘had his head turned’ by speculation over a move to Lille in Ligue 1. “We all have to improve – but Alfredo needs to remain focused. Everyone knows he’s had his head turned, for sure. There’s no denying that,” said Gerrard. Staying in Scotland, Neil Lennon has said Celtic are in talks with striker Steven Fletcher over a potential deal. The former Burnley, Wolves and Sunderland forward is a free agent after leaving Sheffield Wednesday. And that is that for this Friday’s Rumour Mill, in which we did not mention Jadon Sancho’s long-running potential switch from Borussia Dortmund to Manchester United even once. Apart from just then.