Ronnie O’Sullivan holds an overnight lead in the 2020 World Snooker Championship final, but both he and Kyren Wilson know that snooker’s showpiece event is there for the taking on Sunday following a remarkable fightback from Wilson. O’Sullivan leads 10-7 after 17 frames of dramatic, but fairly low-quality snooker given what both these players are capable of. Leading 6-2 after an opening session in which there was just one century break and a litany of missed opportunities from both men, a strong showing from the five-time world champion in Saturday’s evening session would have put him in complete control of the final, with Wilson struggling to cope in his first final at one stage. But as the evening session rolled on, O’Sullivan’s form - already sketchy by his own high standards - collapsed, and Wilson eventually settled and managed to take advantage. He won five of the final seven frames to haul himself back into contention in a final which, midway through Saturday’s double session, he looked to be some way adrift in. Just as Wilson’s form improved in the evening session, had O’Sullivan discovered his very best, the prospect of taking a commanding lead into Sunday was well on the cards. But as O’Sullivan gesticulated over his lack of cue action with each frustrating miss, the five-time champion began playing more and more erratically, affording Wilson an opening. Breaks of 75, 80 and a century clearance of 106 - a rare moment of quality in an otherwise stop-start opening day’s play - helped O’Sullivan win six of the eight frames in the afternoon session, with Wilson struggling just hours on from his dramatic semi-final victory over Anthony McGill, on a day spectators returned to the Crucible for the first time since the opening day. The trend looked set to continue into the evening, as O’Sullivan ground his way to the first two frames to lead 8-2, but a break of 92 from Wilson in the following frame swung the momentum. As O’Sullivan continued to toil, Wilson steadied himself, winning four frames in succession to haul himself back into contention. O’Sullivan stopped the rot with a break of 82, before a century from Wilson made it 9-7. O’Sullivan’s day was summed up best when, looking well-placed to claim the final frame in one visit and make it 10-7, he got a horrendous kick on a simple red. However, he regathered himself to close the frame out and take a three-frame lead into Sunday’s finely-poised finale.