The dangerous waters of the Channel have seen a rise in the number of people trying to cross to the UK in desperately unsuitable and overcrowded dinghies. The British government has called for the use of defence forces to stop them. Fears of “outsiders” bringing danger are exacerbated in the strange times of the coronavirus pandemic, when most of us face unprecedented restrictions on movement, making it a fertile climate to propagate anti-migrant messaging. With the Conservative government securing Brexit with vows to tighten border controls, it is hardly surprising to see emotions getting heated over “record numbers” of people crossing the Channel without the requisite paperwork. But the bellicose language is worrying and dangerous. The home secretary’s creation of the post of “clandestine Channel threat commander” to deal with those making the crossing is utterly dehumanising and instigates racism. A significant number of those arriving are children, many alone. One wonders what kind of politicians are so threatened by children who have fled famine and conflict that it considers them “clandestine threats”. Those in the boats have already crossed deserts, mountains and dangerous seas before reaching the Channel. Their determination is driven by dreams we can all relate to: to study, to be able to live where human rights are recognised, without the constant dangers of conflict. It has been alleged that the UK government is deliberately stirring up concern over the illicit Channel crossings to distract from criticism over its handling of Covid-19. From my base in Malta I cannot comment on that. But speaking as a founding director of Migrant Offshore Aid Station (MOAS), an organisation that has helped rescue more than 40,000 people attempting to escape across the Mediterranean and Aegean, the number of migrants reaching the UK is a fraction of those sheltering in many European countries. Through my work with MOAS in Bangladesh, I witnessed how a developing country has taken in close to 1 million Rohingya refugees fleeing violence in Myanmar, most of whom arrived in a period of just a few weeks. It does put Britain’s “crisis” in some perspective. That is not to say that the people of the UK do not have the right to maintain secure borders – only that they must not forget their humanity in finding a solution to those making perilous journeys here in search of safety. Treating migrants with compassion does not make a country weak, or its borders more vulnerable. Dialogue is the first step to understanding what drives people to make these dangerous crossings – and through that understanding, reach long-term solutions. People smuggling is a vastly lucrative, transnational crime that exploits the world’s most vulnerable. You do not climb into an inflatable dinghy unless where you are has become intolerable. You do not send your children to make such a journey unless you are truly desperate. When one smuggling route is closed, criminal networks will find another one, often more dangerous, and desperate people will still risk travel. The British and French governments are to be lauded when they say they want to work together to tackle the smuggling syndicates who care so little for the lives of those they transport. When people demand to know why migrants and asylum seekers are leaving the apparently safe country of France to reach the UK, they are posing an important question. Unfortunately, it is too often asked from the position that migrants are the problem, rather than to identify the policies and systemic failings that keeps driving people to take such risks. There are global protocols on the rights of migrants, asylum seekers and refugees. If people in Europe are falling through the gaps to such an extent that they need to get into dinghies, then that needs to be addressed urgently. Treating migrants as a “mass” rather than individuals stirs up racism and fear, and leads to failures in finding effective solutions, such as implementing safe, legal routes. Where people have legitimate reasons to travel – such as for family reunification, education or health services – then the barriers currently in place should be lifted so they are not reduced to desperation. Proposals to reduce family reunification in the UK are more likely to drive up irregular migration than lessen it. Rather than spending money to patrol waters and send back boatloads of people who will try again, investment should be made in ensuring migrants in Europe are able to live with dignity. I have met hundreds of people in their flight from horrific conditions. One was eight-year-old David, who, with his mother, was fleeing Eritrea. As I comforted him after his rescue from the sea, I asked him what he wanted to be when he grew up and he said “a superhero”. This, he reasoned, would allow him to “save his mother from bad people”. In those days before PPE shortages, we shared surgical gloves and converted an apron into a cape to allow him to dress up as a superhero. I feel safe in saying David and his mother were not a “clandestine threat”. When we look at people in tiny boats in dangerous waters we can make it our mission to save them, or we can send in troops to turn them away. If we choose the latter, we risk not just seeing people drown, but washing away our own humanity in a sea of indifference. • Regina Catrambone is co-founder of the Migrant Offshore Aid Station