Chelsea are closing in on the signing of Kai Havertz after holding further talks with Bayer Leverkusen over a fee for the Germany winger. Havertz is intent on joining the Stamford Bridge club this summer and belief is growing that Chelsea will be able to reach an agreement with Leverkusen. It is understood negotiations between the two clubs are moving at an encouraging pace. Chelsea’s initial offer of €65m (£58.6m) plus €15m in add-ons earlier this week was not enough to satisfy Leverkusen, who are holding out for as much as €100m. However, it is understood that the Stamford Bridge club, who are hoping to sweeten the deal with lucrative add-ons and bonuses, moved closer to the Bundesliga side’s valuation during a productive meeting on Wednesday. Havertz is one of the best young talents in Europe and signing the 21-year-old would represent a coup for Chelsea, who have already strengthened their attack with the signings of Timo Werner and Hakim Ziyech. Bayern Munich and Real Madrid have courted the Germany international but are unable to afford him this summer. Havertz, who has two years left on his current deal, is keen for a fresh challenge following Leverkusen’s failure to qualify for the Champions League. Alongside champions Liverpool, Chelsea are also monitoring developments with the Brighton defender Ben White. Leeds United have already had two bids for White rejected and although they have made a third offer of £25m, Brighton are determined not to sell the 22-year-old. Lampard admires White, who helped Leeds win promotion to the Premier League during an impressive spell on loan at Elland Road last season, but it remains to be seen if anyone can come up with enough money to alter Brighton’s stance this summer. White, who has two years left on his contract with the option of an extra year, is yet to agree a new deal with Brighton and has rejected the club’s latest offer. Chelsea are hunting for defensive reinforcements, with Lampard keen to strengthen at left-back by signing Leicester’s Ben Chilwell. However Chelsea, who want West Ham’s Declan Rice, are likely to need to raise funds through sales before bringing in new defenders. Emerson Palmieri, out of favour at left-back, is a target for Internazionale and Lampard has been told that he will need to sell one of his four centre-backs before buying one. Fikayo Tomori was the subject of a loan bid from Rennes earlier this month but no decision has been made on the 22-year-olds’ short-term future. Chelsea could also boost their budget by allowing Jorginho to return to Serie A. Roma are interested in the Italy midfielder, who joined Chelsea from Napoli two years ago, however it is unlikely they will be able to meet Chelsea’s asking price for him.