A restaurant isn’t so much a vendor of food as a series of understood behaviours and expectations. It is as granular as how fast you walk in (not like a bull entering your own house, but slowly, like a welcome acquaintance, entering someone else’s); where you stand once you’re in and what face to make; how to read a menu; how to talk to the waiter; how loud your voice should be. I’ve forgotten it all. Or it’s all been capsized. Or some combination of those two things has happened. I’m doing it all wrong. I’ve forgotten how to choose food, which is the worst of it. In all the sumptuous home cooking that’s defined the year so far, two critical groups have been forgotten – people who live alone and people who live with children. It is paralysingly difficult to justify fancy-pantsing around with interesting ingredients, just for yourself. It’s like trying to fashion yourself a really exquisite pun. I mean, you could. But why would you? And it is morale-drainingly pointless making – to pick an example at random – a beautiful early summer pie of broad beans, only for someone to say: “Why are these peas the wrong shape?” And for someone else to say: “I would like it, except for the pastry.” And for yet another diner to say: “It would be OK if it was made of ham.” So, really, only households of adults have been eating well. The rest of us have had mince every evening for five months. Last night, I went to the pub and ordered the surf ’n’ turf sharing platter with a 10-year-old. I mean, who knows what it was even made of? It didn’t even look like reconstituted protein, more like the feast of a street whose freezers had all gone down on the same night. The week before, I ordered frankfurters. I’m eating like a baby. If there’s a bar, I wander up to it to order like it’s 2019 and have to be told off, then make a huge fandango of my apology, roaring “I’M SO SORRY”, in case someone thinks I’m one of those jerk libertarian rule-refuseniks. I need some kind of physio, hospitality baby-steps. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnist