Advertising spend across the UK media fell by more than £1bn year on year during the coronavirus lockdown, according to figures that reveal the government has become the UK’s biggest advertiser during the pandemic. UK advertising spend on traditional media – TV, newspapers and magazines, radio and cinema as well as on poster sites and billboards across the country – almost halved from the start of lockdown on 23 March to the end of June. With the public told to stay at home, high streets shut and travel halted, many companies froze marketing budgets, resulting in a 48% fall in ad spend from £2.3bn to £1.2bn year on year. “There was no guidebook on how to navigate advertising during the lockdown period, with customers restricted to home environments and an unclear exit strategy,” said Barney Farmer, the UK commercial director at Nielsen, which compiled the figures. McDonald’s, which shut its 1,000 restaurants in the UK and Ireland from late March and did not reopen for eat-in meals until last month, cut its budget by 97% from £43.5m to £1.3m. Sky, which suffered a £575m revenue fall during the pandemic, with sports such as Premier League football suspended, slashed its budget by 60% from £47m to £19m. Even the online retail juggernaut Amazon, which last week reported stellar results during the pandemic, cut UK ad spend on traditional media by more than three-quarters to £6.5m. TV bore the brunt of the slashing of marketing budgets, with total spend down by almost £500m (37%) year on year to £822m. Spend on newspapers and magazines fell by £155m (42%); radio marketing dropped by more than a third (£79m). However, the media worst affected proportionately have been cinemas, with zero spend compared with £80m during the same period last year, and outdoor advertising, which fell by about £345m, or more than 80%. It has not been all doom and gloom, though, with a limited number of advertisers, led by the government, significantly upping their spend. “We have seen varying approaches to advertising during the lockdown period,” Farmer said. “Some have increased spend but the majority have cut back.” The need for national health and safety messaging during the pandemic resulted in Public Health England (PHE) spending £44m, a 5,000% year-on-year increase. PHE has become the UK’s biggest advertiser during the coronavirus period and spent almost 50% more than the next largest, Unilever, the maker of household products from Dove and Persil to Marmite and Flora. “Public Health England ran an effective campaign to encourage lockdown compliance and raise awareness of best health practices, and its incredible increase in spend reflects the importance of advertising as a communication platform for any public or private body,” Farmer said. Separately, the government also spent a further £15m on other ad campaigns, enough to make it the sixth biggest advertiser excluding PHE, while the Scottish government increased spend by more than 500% to £6.3m. Other notable brands to significantly increase their spend during the lockdown include Walt Disney. The media group spent heavily to promote its Disney+ streaming service, which launched in the UK and Europe just as national lockdowns were being introduced. Disney boosted spend by almost 1,000% year on year to £10.2m. Nielsen said the advertising categories receiving the biggest cut in spend were entertainment and leisure (down £207m year on year) and travel and transport (down £138m). However, as lockdown restrictions ease, localised rises in new case numbers notwithstanding, advertisers are expected to return. “As we transition into a less-restricted environment, we expect spend to pick up significantly as brands once again vie to be front of mind with consumers,” Farmer said.