The subject of the Liberal Democrats came up at a socially distanced lunch with my partner’s parents recently. “They’re extinct now, aren’t they?” my boyfriend’s stepmother said, matter-of-factly. “They’re totally irrelevant.” It is a view shared by many, as I know all too well after several months of covering the party’s leadership election. When writing a piece about the Lib Dems, I have come to expect the familiar rush of internet replies all making the same joke: “Who?” We know why the Lib Dems are easy fodder for internet jokes. The party faced humiliation at the last election, dropping to 11 MPs and losing their leader, Jo Swinson, after a personalised campaign in which she had been styled as a future prime minister and her party as the one that could stop Brexit. The general election result was a cruel disappointment that came just months after the party had enjoyed its best ever European election performance, as well as a string of high-profile defections from Labour and the Conservatives. Internet jokers are tapping into an even deeper fear than they might imagine: 2019 was not just a bad election night but, some worry, indicative of a rut that could become permanent. The party has hovered between eight and 12 MPs in three successive general elections, a performance not dissimilar to that of the historic Liberal party, which floated around the same mark for almost four decades before the creation of the SDP. As a report from the UK in a Changing Europe thinktank warned recently: “While they may escape extinction, long-term paralysis looks like a distinct possibility.” This is the challenge that the party’s new leader, Ed Davey, chose to take on in his acceptance speech. Speaking at a closed event in central London where the results were announced, the new leader said they need “to wake up and smell the coffee”. “We have to face the facts of three disappointing general election results,” he said. “Nationally, voters have been sending us a message. But we have not been listening. It is time for us to start listening. As leader I am telling you: I have got that message. I am listening now.” It was not the most elated of acceptance speeches, nor did Davey necessarily have to own that assessment of the party’s chances. The headline figures are bleak, to be sure – not least the party’s current polling, which is at a measly 6%. But beneath those top numbers there’s a different story: the Lib Dems’ 2019 general election performance represented something of a recovery for the party, even if Swinson’s face on election night indicated otherwise. Across the country, there are now 91 seats where the Lib Dems are in second place, up from 38 in 2017. In 80 of those seats, the party is second to the Conservatives; in 23 of the 29 seats where they stand the highest chance of winning, they are the main challengers to the Conservatives, and the next closest party is a distant third. This puts them in a vital strategic position, with the potential to take seats off the Tories that Labour could never possibly win. Labour has a mountain to climb if it hopes to win back power (and if the SNP’s success in Scotland continues, the party has no clear route to a majority). But there is still a possibility of denying the Conservatives one, and that depends on the Lib Dems. During the leadership contest, party members bickered over how exactly the Lib Dems should position themselves relative to Labour. In practice, however, there was a near-consensus between Davey and his opponent, Layla Moran, over what their strategy should be. Whoever won, the target seats were the same, and both were in agreement: the party needs to establish itself as the main progressive challenger in those Conservative-facing areas, thereby scooping up tactical votes from Labour, Green, the SNP and others. They then need to win over moderate Conservatives – and they believe that, thanks to Keir Starmer, they are now in a stronger position to do so. As any Lib Dem will tell you, the party’s success is highly dependent on the popularity of the Labour leader. If Starmer’s high approval ratings continue, Davey will also reap the reward, finding it easier to convince disillusioned Conservative voters to make the leap to Lib Dem than at the last election, when some prospective voters worried about “letting Jeremy Corbyn in”. You won’t see Davey making any public overtures to the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, in the next few weeks. There is nothing in his political career that Davey looks back on more proudly than his early days in parliament working closely with Paddy Ashdown, the former Lib Dem leader who famously forged an unspoken understanding with Tony Blair during the last election in which the Conservatives lost power. Following Ashdown’s example, there’ll be nothing public from Davey, no pact, no progressive alliance. But be in no doubt: there will be an understanding behind the scenes that both Labour and the Liberal Democrats’s opponents are the Conservatives, not each other. Davey struck a tone yesterday that convinced party members and colleagues he grasps the severity of the challenge to come. But, privately, he has cause for quiet optimism. If he plays his cards right, his party could regain its relevance sooner than the internet jokers think. Ailbhe Rea is the New Statesman’s political correspondent.