The UK government is reported to be exploring a range of measures to stop infections rising and keep Covid-19 in check in England – some of them for use in the event of regional spikes, such as those in Leicester and Oldham, and others that would affect the entire country in the event that case numbers surge more generally. Here are some possible options that may be on the table, according to the reports, which Downing Street sources said were merely “speculative”. This is the nuclear option for the whole of England and likely to be highly unpopular, although this time, shielding would be individually targeted and not uniquely based on age. It has been pointed out that some over-70s are very fit without underlying health conditions. The idea is to give people over 50 an assessment of their particular risk, which is possible now because of greater information on survival. People at lower risk would be free to go out and live life relatively normally, which could cause resentment. People shielding might be offered specific times when they could go to the shops without meeting those who are mixing freely. Until now, the shielding list has been limited to people with certain conditions, such as some cancers where the immune system is affected by treatment and severe lung conditions such as cystic fibrosis. Those people were told that they could return to work and go outside as much as they like from 1 August, while maintaining social distancing. The housing secretary, Robert Jenrick, said reports that expanded shielding for over-50s was being considered were “just speculation”. To stop a major surge in London spreading across the country, ministers could advise no travel for Londoners past the M25, effectively isolating the capital city. In practice this would be almost impossible to police and highly disruptive for the 9 million people living in the city. It would have to take the form of guidance rather than an edict and could lead to anger against any Londoners found elsewhere in the country. Jenrick also dismissed reports about this measure being on the table as speculation. Households have been told not to meet up with other people in the towns affected by the rise in cases in the north of England. The government’s test-and-trace programme has provided data suggesting it is family get-togethers that are responsible, rather than people going back to work or going shopping. A national rise in cases could see that ban extended across the country. In the event of another surge of infections in London, a blanket quarantine policy could be imposed for anyone flying in to the country. The rationale is that the major airports are in London and that the transport system, including trains, the tube and buses, allows the virus to move swiftly between people. At the moment, everyone returning from Spain and Luxembourg must quarantine for 14 days and it is thought Belgium may join that list.