The chief executive of the Rugby Football League, Ralph Rimmer, says rugby league needs to take a “good, hard look at itself” to ensure it thrives in the years ahead, as the sport commemorates its 125th anniversary on Saturday. The RFL will put on a series of events – including one at the sport’s birthplace, the George Hotel in Huddersfield – to celebrate, but the man in charge of the sport is keen to look ahead. After securing a vital £16m emergency loan from the government to ensure the sport survives the coronavirus pandemic, Rimmer points to a crucial 18-month period where the sport must “reshape”. The multimillion pound broadcast deal with Sky is due for renewal next year, while there is also a World Cup in England next autumn. Rimmer said: “We have to look at what we want to be like in 2022. I think it does need to [adjust] to some degree. The government loan came with many things attached to it, but a good review of how we look in the future was a part of that. As welcome as that was, it needs to be used prudently and that will only happen if we have a good, hard look at ourselves. There is some reshaping for the clubs and the RFL ahead. Ideally, this would be the biggest summer sport in the UK.” Rimmer, who admitted he is worried about the ramifications for the sport if the domestic season is not completed, also hinted at an imminent decision on the future of Toronto Wolfpack. The Canadian club are expected to be readmitted to Super League in 2021 after withdrawing from the competition this year due to “overwhelming financial challenges”. “We’re working closely with Super League on it,” he said. “There’s interest in taking the club on and I think they have proved themselves to a degree. Some of the terms they came in with, I would soften them. What they’ve had to deal with would be overwhelming for any club.” Rimmer also confirmed that discussions are continuing about Super League hosting a full round of fixtures on 30 September with crowds in attendance. The sport missed out on an official pilot event when the full list was disclosed by the government this week, but they remain confident the fixtures on the final day of next month, which include the Wigan-St Helens derby, will get the green light.