New Zealand has reported 13 new cases of coronavirus, with two cases emerging far from Auckland where the country’s outbreak began. The two cases occurred in the Waikato town of Tokoroa, 200km (125 miles) south of New Zealand’s biggest city, and were linked to the Auckland outbreak, bringing the number of cases in the cluster to 29. One person is being treated in hospital. The prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said Auckland would remain in lockdown for an additional 12 days as health workers try to contain the “perimeter” of the outbreak, the source of which remains a mystery. She said a North Island-wide lockdown was not being considered. The rest of the country remains at alert level 2, and the cabinet is due to make a further lockdown decision on 21 August. Ardern stressed that the situation was not serious enough to qualify for a level 4 total shutdown. “As we have said from the start, our overall Covid-19 strategy remains elimination. That means stamping out the virus whenever it comes back,” she said. “We know the incubation period for Covid-19, and our experience of the previous cluster means we can expect to see more cases as part of this cluster – it will grow before it slows. We have been world-leading in our Covid response – we can do all of that again.” Multiple clusters would have to be circulating for the country to rise to level 4 restrictions, and so far there is no evidence of that, with all of the cases so far able to be traced back to a single south Auckland family who began displaying symptoms on 31 July and tested positive on 11 August. Genome testing has ruled out the possibility that the outbreak is an overlooked “burning ember” from New Zealand’s March and April outbreaks, and has also ruled out that it was related to strains of the virus brought in by returnees in quarantine. Ardern described the elimination strategy as “precautionary” and “evidence-based” and said unruly outbreaks such as those seen in nearby Victoria were a warning to others who did not act “hard and fast” in stamping out the virus. A government wage-subsidy scheme will be extended nationwide while the level 3 restrictions are in place. Investigations will continue at a cool store facility in west Auckland where a number of employees have become infected, but it is regarded as unlikely though not impossible that the virus was imported on international freight. New Zealand’s director general of health, Dr Ashley Bloomfield, said that as fear and anxiety began to grow, people had begun stockpiling medicines and verbally and physically abusing frontline healthcare workers, behaviour that he said was “completely unacceptable”. He said he would be looking for case numbers to stabilise over the coming days, and he was encouraged that 83% of contacts of infected people had been traced within 48 hours. Garry Nixon, an associate professor at the department of general practice and rural health at the University of Otago, said the emergence of cases in rural communities was concerning. “New Zealand’s rural towns are vulnerable from a health perspective,” he said. “The different alert levels being applied to different regions makes sense, but managing movement between regions is now critical. Every effort needs to be made to avoid the virus travelling from Auckland to regional and rural New Zealand.” Epidemiological experts widely agreed with the extension of the lockdown, with a number telling the Guardian they saw increasing evidence that the latest outbreak must have originated at a quarantine or border facility. Sir David Skegg, a University of Otago medical school epidemiologist, told local radio he was shocked that 60% of staff working at the border had not taken a test for the virus, calling it an “extraordinary” oversight as those people were at the frontline of managing new cases of the virus brought in by overseas arrivals. “In my view [a weekly test] should have been compulsory,” Skegg said. “I think it is absolutely vital for our elimination status that we have the most stringent protections at the border.” The health minister, Chris Hipkins, said he regretted that testing at the border had not been more rigorous, though he stressed the majority of workers did not come into close contact with new arrivals. “Compulsory testing is quite a big lever to pull, and the government exercises a great deal of caution when making it compulsory for someone to undergo a medical procedure,” he said. Skegg said he found it unlikely that the virus had not spread further afield. “I must say I think we will be extremely lucky if it has not spread to other parts of the country by now,” he said. “Because clearly this outbreak has been going for some time. We celebrated 100 days of no community spread but it was spreading the whole time – so we didn’t go 100 days.”