The last time Tim Davie was director general of the BBC, he found himself dealing with a crisis over the corporation’s news output, divisions over its internal culture, and a hostile government. Eight years on from that stint as caretaker boss in the aftermath of the Jimmy Savile sexual abuse scandal, little has changed. Davie will face many of the same issues when he takes control of the corporation on a permanent basis next week. Staff will be told his priorities and initial plans in an announcement on Thursday, and BBC insiders have identified three key battlegrounds. Davie has to secure a new funding deal with the government, which is threatening to decriminalise non-payment of the licence fee. He has to win over younger audiences. And if that isn’t enough, there is a culture war to contend with too. The BBC’s push for greater diversity will inevitably collide with the views of Conservative MPs and rightwing media outlets, who relentlessly complain about “wokeness” in the output. The publication of the BBC’s annual report, delayed from the summer due to the coronavirus pandemic, is due shortly and may set out the enormity of all three tasks. It is expected to contain unpleasant home truths about the corporation’s diversity, its income, and the pay of stars such as Gary Lineker – who endeared himself to BBC bosses in January by proposing making the licence fee voluntary. So, is Davie up to the job? In some respects he was an unusual choice. Davie, 53, has no hands-on experience of journalism or programme-making. He started at the BBC 15 years ago running the marketing department, and he has spent the last 10 years increasing revenues at the BBC’s commercial arm. He has been a loyal servant, recently turning down the chance to run the Premier League. Insiders describe him as friendly and a compulsive networker. In 2008 he received a shock promotion to run the BBC’s radio output, earning a reputation for excitedly popping into radio studios to talk to presenters, sometimes oblivious to the fact they were about to go on air. He also unsuccessfully attempted to shut down Radio 6 Music as a cost-saving measure. At Cambridge University in the late 1980s, Davie helped promote a dance music night, Bliss, at a club called Route 66, and he later said he was a fan of Underworld and Orbital. A competitive marathon runner, he has been known to invite BBC colleagues to take part in long-distance races near his home. He had a brief dalliance with Tory politics, becoming deputy chairman of Hammersmith and Fulham Conservative party in the mid-1990s. This could come in useful as many of those involved in the local party at the same time are now government ministers or MPs. Andy Slaughter, the Labour MP for Hammersmith, was the leader of the local council at the time. “The people who’d run it before were not-unpleasant Tories who’d been there for a long time. Then these people turned up and were the equivalent of bedsit Trots. They were all mates from Cambridge and they came and took the party over. It was a particularly rightwing, very aggressive agenda that they pursued,” he recalled. “Can leopards change their spots? I personally would be quite wary about Davie because of the company he kept then, but that may be unfair.” Others who have worked with him say Davie is not known for his politics. “I genuinely don’t know what Tim’s view is on anything, other than decency,” said one. “He’s not a moral crusader – although on diversity he was driving that forward, saying we needed to broaden the talent. He’s a dealmaker, not a crusader. He will realise that going to war with the government is not a smart move.” Davie had hoped to take the director general job full-time in 2012, only to find Tony Hall parachuted in to sort out the mess left by the Savilerevelations. “It was a big disappointment to him when Tony came in,” said a BBC colleague from that era. “Most people around thought he would get it.” BBC revenues have been hit hard during the pandemic, while Ofcom research recently found that more than half of 16- to 34-year-olds expect to no longer be watching any of the major traditional TV channels by 2023. “I don’t think you can carry on salami-slicing budgets across the BBC. You might have to start making more fundamental decisions about what they prioritise,” said Damian Collins, the Conservative MP who used to chair the culture select committee. He said the BBC would struggle to increase revenue through the licence fee, but it retained more parliamentary support that might be assumed. “I don’t think there is enough support in the house for an assault on the BBC. Nor do I think there is support for a big rise in the licence fee,” he said. Greg Dyke, who served as director general between 2000 and 2004, said it was a job where “if you’re prepared to be brave, you can do big things”. “Oddly, I think he’s coming in at quite a good time,” Dyke said. “Six months ago he had a new government that were after the BBC. Covid has changed all that a bit.”