In 2016, Elizabeth Price curated an ethereal, elusive exhibition called In a Dream You Found a Way to Survive and You Were Full of Joy. She chose work that was particular to her, close to her heart. On one level, it was about the idea of the horizontal. It was full of recumbent sculptures, queues, processions, dances, snowdrifts, ribbons, and flags. At the same time, it was infused with thoughts of sleep, dreams and death. “I was drawing on connections I’d been putting together over years and years, things that had been formative,” says the artist. “It was a view of what art can be, or what my relationship with art is.” Her latest exhibition, by contrast, has at its heart the idea of the vertical. For Slow Dans, a trilogy of multiscreen video works, she flipped the projector. Visitors to the large 19th-century assembly hall in which the show unfolds will see works on long, thin screens, 3 metres tall by 1.5 metres wide. “It was a simple reorganisation, the coordinates changing,” she says of Slow Dans, which was first seen in Manchester last year and now comes to London. But this flipping allowed her to “express the idea of depth, and shafts, and wells”. In these short but dense works – whose complex editing process she likens to lace-making (“holding 17, or 117, threads in place”) – she plays with objects and artefacts that are also long, thin and vertical: ties, pens, stiletto heels, gowns. Out of this melee emerges a trio of stories that have a funny, haunting tale to tell about labour and the world of work, about women’s place in that world, about the way society and technology have changed in Price’s own lifetime. (She is now 53.) It is a signature Price combination: formal ideas mingled with painstaking research, all transmuted into poetry by means of a fierce and rigorous imagination. We are speaking – at a judicious distance – in Price’s studio, a glassy flat in south London. For five weeks in the spring, she was ill with suspected Covid-19: one week properly ill, four weeks of “boring and exasperating” recuperation. Since recovering, she’s been working here in isolation. Without her studio assistant, “it all got a bit feral”. She’s done some tidying up, but the place is still littered with intriguing objects. On a table is a selection of mannequin legs – shop props for hosiery – that, en masse, have a dismembered creepiness. She doesn’t know how she’ll use them yet, maybe in some future artwork, but she has an eye for collecting “things of low value for which there is little recorded history”, things that speak of their time in some eloquent but unremarked way. This paraphernalia seems more reminiscent of a sculptor’s studio than a film-maker’s. But it is a reminder that Price worked in sculpture before starting to make video in her 40s, and still considers it her “disciplinary home – where all the best jokes are, the place in art school where all the shifting, awkward stuff goes”. She also had a brief but brilliant career in the late-1980s as the vocalist of indie-pop band Talulah Gosh, and worked in various administrative roles for London councils. In 2012, six years after she’d made her first video, Price won the Turner prize. When I interviewed her the day after, she said she had felt “very grave and unelated, and serious, and focused” receiving the award, which I think is a state of being for Price, who speaks with precision and a kind of detachment about her work that does not quite express its emotional force. She does, however, also have a well-chiselled sense of the ridiculous, and her videos can hum with humour. The only way to achieve anything in academia is to use this loathsome terminology There are no jokes in the first of the trilogy, though. Kohl, which unfolds over four screens, takes as its material an extraordinary archive of photographs of coal-mining headgear, shot by a former pit worker in the 80s and 90s. While the surface-level signs of these structures have all but disappeared, the mines – “complex webs of subterranean architecture” – are still there. On a research trip to Wakefield’s National Coal Mining Museum, one former miner told her that the tunnels were so extensive you could walk all the way from Newcastle to Nottingham underground. Then another former miner told her, of course you couldn’t: mines would have been full of groundwater unless it was constantly pumped out, and “if you connected up all the coal mines, you would make this massive, surging, terrifying place of tides”. That gave her the nub of her ghostly little story, in which there’s a sense of a suppressed memory threatening to inundate us, “the rising-up of this liquid, like a symptom of a trauma from an injury long forgotten”. She relates it to how “inky spit”, as it was known, was the first “tell” of miners’ lung disease, another symptom rising up unbidden. Inkiness pervades the trilogy. The second video work, Felt Tip, weaves a subversive and hilarious fiction about the wearing of ties (items that are arranged into a nib-like V-shape) and the use of pens in offices. It is seen on two stacked vertical screens, reaching a height of nearly 6 metres – the perfect skinny format for its material. We see many ties in the video: Price has amassed, over 15 years, quite the collection. Dating from the mid-70s to the mid-80s, hers all have in common the imagery of computer technology – little squares or stripes or dotted lines that recall computer chips, or circuit boards. She remembers the first one she spotted, in a charity shop, with its chip-like design “in the place usually reserved for a crest. So that an image associated with the capacity of computers to store data had supplanted a memory of social provenance.” Felt Tip is narrated by a sometimes sardonic voice, one that seems to be confiding the secrets of a bored but intelligent female administrative cadre. An inspiration for the video was a book Price found in a charity shop, Sexuality and Class Struggle by Reimut Reiche, from 1968. It wasn’t the book itself – “well-researched, of its time” – that was intriguing. It was the annotations by a previous reader in purple felt-tip, “which seemed the most vulgar addition to this discourse, deliberately belligerent, and using the most trivial or feminised pen, big and fat and fleshy”. These sarcastic marginalia, full of exclamation marks and underlinings, were, she was certain, the work of a woman. “I’m interested in the radical impact of the postscript or addendum changing everything after the fact,” she says. “The interventions in that book altered it, rewrote it, and also resuscitated it, putting it to different use.” The voice of Price’s video is like that insistent wielder of the purple felt-tip – undermining an official view of patriarchal history with subversive and creative footnotes. In one sense, Price says, the story of her three videos is that “one is about manual work, one is about administrative work and one is about executive work”. These days, Price is a professor at Kingston University in London, and the third narrative of the trilogy, The Teachers, is a kind of science fiction tale: we hear various theories as to why a contagion of silence has crept through the professions, starting with university teachers. The idea is that at a certain point these executives have simply declined to speak, refusing – perhaps – to continue to use the ungainly language that corporate culture expects them employ. Instead, they begin to communicate through their bodies – through a series of gestures and wordless noises, through eloquent flicks of their dresses and gowns, which are beautifully evoked on the screen. Price is exasperated at this corporatisation of the language of academia. “The way it describes its processes and objectives is so horrible, and the only way to achieve anything in academia is to attempt to speak the language, so you talk about ‘outcomes’ and so on. You use this loathsome terminology. It’s the only way you can get resources for your students, so you parlay.” It feels like there's a letter in the post to all of us. And it hasn't arrived yet Slow Dans should have opened in May. A lot has happened since then, and I wonder how she feels its concerns will be read in the era of Covid-19. “We’ll have to see,” she says. “I guess all kinds of political consequences have come home in the crisis: impacts of austerity, the privatisation of the NHS. Others have become more visible, but are longstanding, deeper, like the impacts of structural racism, meaning the epidemic is more dangerous to some of us than others.” Some artists and writers have found lockdown freeing – with plans cancelled, time has been opened up for concentrated work. Others have found it paralysing: what does the world mean now? In terms of her own work, she has been busily improvising with what’s at hand in the studio to make a series of short videos to sit with Slow Dans. These Foot Notes, as they are called, will appear on the website of the London-based arts organisation Artangel. But this is not a new body of work, it’s “a holding move intellectually,” she says. It will take time for what’s going on now to make any kind of sense at all. “It feels like there’s a letter in the post to all of us,” she says. “But it hasn’t arrived yet.” • Slow Dans is at 82 Borough Road, London, 4 September-25 October.