Dalia Stasevska, the Finnish conductor who has found herself at the centre of a culture war debate over the Last Night of the Proms programme, says her family have received threats and she has been wrongly portrayed as politically motivated by the British media. Stasevska released a statement via her management company saying she received abuse and threats after it was suggested she wanted to remove the patriotic songs Land of Hope and Glory and Rule Britannia! from the running order due to her support for Black Lives Matter. The Sunday Times reported that Stasevska wanted to “modernise the evening’s repertoire and reduce the patriotic elements”, with an unnamed source saying the conductor was a supporter of the anti-racism movement. Stasevska, who joined the BBC Symphony Orchestra as principal guest conductor in January 2019, said she was incredibly excited “to be part of an event with such longstanding tradition” but that “inaccurate speculation” about her role had led to thousands of abusive messages. One, on Twitter, said: “The Finnish-born Dalia Stasevska … has absolutely no right as a foreigner to dictate what we can and can’t sing. She can go back to Finland and practise BLM as much as she likes and good riddance, but she can’t inflict her woke attitudes on us.” Stasevska said: “This false speculation has led to abuse and threats towards me and my family which is why I am speaking out. For the record, I have played no role in deciding the traditional elements of the programme, I recognise these are an important part of the event. “I’ve been wrongly portrayed as a person who tries to influence political debates – this is not true. I am an artist, I want to be able to speak through my work to bring people together and build solidarity.” The BBC released a statement saying that although it was fine to debate the artistic decisions it made during a pandemic, personal attacks on one of its artists - who, it clarified, did not make the decisions about the Proms – were unacceptable. A BBC spokesperson said: “We are very lucky to have a Proms at all this year and that is down to the artists that have made it possible. They should be praised. As we have always made clear, it is the BBC that is the decision maker. No one else. Hopefully we can all start focusing on the music which is about bringing us all together.” The BBC had earlier confirmed that both songs were to be performed as instrumentals, clarifying that the decision to exclude the lyrics was driven by physical distancing restrictions limiting the number of musicians in the Royal Albert Hall. The suggestion that the Proms’ running order could be changed, as it was in 2001 after the terrorist attacks on 11 September, quickly turned into a political storm. The culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, said Rule Britannia! and Land of Hope and Glory were highlights of the Last Night of the Proms and he had shared his concern about their possible removal with the BBC. Boris Johnson then called for an end to “cringing embarrassment” and “wetness” over the UK’s history after some suggested the songs were offensive because of their links to colonialism and empire. Stasevska, 35, became a lightning rod for much of the outcry but in her statement she said she still found the UK “an inspiring place to work”, praising the BBC and saying she remembered having fallen in love with London when she first visited the city. In an apparent attempt to draw a line under the matter, she said she did not intend to enter the public debate. “I am a professional musician with a fondness and respect for the UK,” she said. “I am very much looking forward to performing again with the fabulous musicians of the BBC Symphony Orchestra in what is sure to be a memorable event in September.”