The lawyer who represented two police officers in the Harry Maguire assault case says it is “shocking” there has been no apology from the Manchester United captain and his co-defendants. Maguire, along with his brother Joe and their friend Christopher Sharman, were found guilty of assaulting a police officer, swearing, resisting arrest and attempted bribery at a court on the Greek island of Syros on Tuesday. The England player was handed a suspended 21-month prison sentence. The 27-year-old quickly indicated his intention to appeal, releasing a statement saying he and his family and friends were the victims in this case. Dr Ioannis Paradissis says an apology would, in Greek law, make a big difference in any appeals process but insisted none had been offered. “[The police officers] told me they are still waiting for an apology and they haven’t had any,” Paradissis told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “This is what I find quite shocking and quite unsporting. Fair play means when I’ve done something wrong I apologise or at least I say I am sorry for what happened to the other person.” Paradissis said an appeal would start the trial afresh but that in Greek law some of the accusations could be withdrawn if an apology was given and that “the outcome might be different”. Asked about Maguire’s claim that he was the victim, Paradissis said: “We don’t have the same definition of what a victim is then, because how can you be a victim and the policemen have been assaulted, hit, that were just doing their jobs? They went home on the day with injuries. How can they not be a victim?” Part of Maguire’s defence centred on the fact that his sister Daisy had been injected with an unknown substance before the incident. Paradissis said this was “irrelevant” in respect of the assault on the officers. Asked whether Maguire and his co-defendants would have known the officers were police, Paradissis said: “Of course, because that’s the first thing they said. The police officers were there for other duties and they heard a brawl. “So they heard some people fighting and went there to break up a fight. They said: ‘We’re police, stop fighting’. They were not in uniform but they showed their professional IDs.” Maguire, who was withdrawn from the England squad after the verdict, signed a boot deal with Puma worth a reported £700,000 a year last year. The sportswear manufacturer declined to comment on whether Maguire’s conviction would have any impact on the deal when contacted by the PA news agency on Wednesday. Maguire’s sister Daisy posted on Instagram on Tuesday evening: “Three things cannot be long hidden: the sun; the moon, and the truth - Buddha.”