More than a thousand people showed up in downtown Portland early on Saturday to peacefully protest, about three days after the announcement that the presence of US agents there would be reduced – a deal that Oregon officials hope will continue to ease tensions as the city tries to move on from months of chaotic nightly protests. Friday’s overnight protest mimicked Thursday’s, which was the first time in weeks that demonstrations ended without any major confrontations, violence or arrests. The change in tone outside a federal courthouse that has become ground zero in clashes between demonstrators and federal agents came after the US government began drawing down its forces in the liberal city under a deal between the Democratic governor, Kate Brown, and the Trump administration. The fence that has separated protesters and US agents stationed at the courthouse was decorated with balloons and upside-down American flags sewn together with “BLM” painted across. At one point in the night a small firework was shot over the fence. As it sizzled out on its own, protesters pleaded with others to remain peaceful. Later, a few small fires were occasionally started outside the courthouse, with at least one put out by other protesters. Unlike previous weeks, protesters were not centered mainly outside the courthouse, but scattered throughout downtown. Under the deal announced by the governor, the agents will withdraw in phases. The US government had arrested 94 people as of Wednesday, the most recent accounting. Since the protests began, Portland police chief Chuck Lovell said local police had made more than 400 arrests. As agents from US Customs and Border Protection, the US marshals service and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) pulled back, troopers with the Oregon state police took over. Since then, there have been no visible signs of any federal law enforcement presence outside the Mark O Hatfield federal courthouse. In a tweet on Friday night, Donald Trump reiterated that the Department of Homeland Security “is not leaving Portland until local police complete cleanup of Anarchists and Agitators!” “Last night, the world was watching Portland,” Brown said in a tweet Friday. “Here’s what they saw: Federal troops left downtown. Local officials protected free speech. And Oregonians spoke out for Black Lives Matter, racial justice, and police accountability.” Leaders in Oregon are pushing for a raft of measures that would address systemic racism in everything from policing to housing. Those proposals could be fast-tracked for consideration in a special legislative session this summer. The governor also announced the creation of a Racial Justice Council to advise her on criminal justice reform and police accountability, health equity, economic opportunity, housing and homelessness, and environmental justice. Portland’s city council also voted this week to refer a ballot measure to voters in November that would create a police review board independent of any elected official or city department. The scene outside the federal courthouse stood in sharp contrast to the violent clashes between protesters and the agents that Trump sent to Oregon’s largest city in early July. Protests have roiled Portland for more than two months following the police killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. 