Documentary film-maker Vanessa Engle takes on the shocking story of Carl Beech in this incisive feature. When Beech went public in 2014 with allegations of being the victim of a VIP paedophile ring in the 1970s, the media latched on to his story, which came in the wake of the revelations about Jimmy Savile. Five years later, Beech was sentenced to 18 years in prison for perverting the course of justice and for his own child sexual abuse offences. Engle provides a frank investigation. Ammar Kalia The average person spends a third of their life asleep – but, other than the catatonia that would surely engulf us if we didn’t, why do we do it? The ever-enthusiastic PBS America explores the “secrets and power” of sleep in this documentary, exploring its disease-fighting, memory-building magic. Hannah J Davies The lavish adaptation of Vikram Seth’s novel concludes with the run-up to India’s first post-independence election, as the bad press around Maan threatens to derail Mahesh’s campaign. Most importantly, it is decision time for Lata, who is finally ready to break free from her family’s meddling and pick her man. Hannah Verdier On the second stop of her tour of African history and culture, Afua Hirsch heads to Senegal and discovers a country growing beyond its colonial history. With the help of local artists, she examines the legacy of poet Léopold Sédar Senghor, the father of Senegalese independence. Graeme Virtue Filmed before lockdown, this film takes on a topic of enduring fascination: swinging. There are a reported 1.5 million people now taking part in the swinging scene in Britain, and film-makers attend one of the nation’s biggest parties – a Valentine’s Day bash at Liberty Elite, an upmarket club founded in 1999. AK The sketch show returns for a third run (all episodes are now up on BBC Three), with our E19 crew exploring everything from winning the Golden Ticket to adventures with the African aunties. Tonight’s opener cooks up White People Chicken and analyses the consequences of sharing TV spoilers. AK Mistress America (Noah Baumbach, 2015), 2.10am, Film4 Noah Baumbach’s hyperactive comedy lets a brilliantly odd couple loose in New York: Lola Kirke is lonely aspiring writer and first-year college student Tracy; Greta Gerwig (who co-wrote) is Brooke, her stepsister-to-be, more mature, and surfing the city on a wave of limited creativity and huge self-belief. Paul Howlett Australian Rules Football: Collingwood v North Melbourne 10am, BT Sport 1. The head-to-head from Brisbane Cricket Ground. Cycling: European Road Championship 3.10pm, Eurosport 1. Coverage of the men’s time trial from Plouay, France. NBA: Play-Offs 9pm, Sky Sports Main Event. A yet-to-be-determined game.