Britain’s top women’s gymnastics coach Amanda Reddin, who helped to steer Team GB gymnasts to their most successful Olympics in history at the Rio Games in 2016, has temporarily stepped down after being placed under investigation following allegations about her conduct. The news came just hours after Reddin’s methods were criticised by the British gymnast Ruby Harrold, who claimed she presided over a “culture of fear” at training camps in Lilleshall, and described food portions that left her and her fellow gymnasts hungry. Harrold said: “How would you feel if you were 21 years old being given ultimately a baby plate to eat off? It’s demeaning … it’s unhealthy.” A British Gymnastics spokesman confirmed that several other allegations against Reddin were being looked at and that Reddin had agreed to temporarily step aside from her role as head national coach “to allow an investigation to proceed into claims about her conduct as a coach”. A statement from British Gymnastics added: “The investigation will be completed by an external independent expert and any outcome actioned immediately.” In a separate development the Rio 2016 Olympic bronze medallist Amy Tinkler used social media on Tuesday to launch an attack on British Gymnastics after the governing body dismissed her formal complaint against Reddin, saying she felt “sick” at the outcome – and warning it would discourage other gymnasts from speaking out. Tinkler, who had been awaiting the outcome of a dual complaint about bullying at her former club South Durham as well as Reddin’s coaching methods for the past eight months, said she had been told via email that the part of her case involving Reddin had been closed. “The way I received this information made me sick,” claimed Tinkler, the youngest member of Team GB in Rio when, aged 16, she finished third in the floor exercise behind the American gymnasts Simone Biles and Aly Raisman. “It reinforced mine and every gymnasts’ fear, which is that their complaints aren’t dealt with fairly and independently,” Tinkler wrote. “This is why we don’t speak up. This is why we suffer in silence. We know that to speak up is a pointless, career-ending task.” British Gymnastics confirmed that an investigation into Tinkler’s complaint about South Durham Gymnastics Club is ongoing. Team GB gymnasts finished the Rio Olympic Games with seven medals across all three gymnastics disciplines, making it their most successful Games to date – with Reddin, who had been national coach since 2012, taking a large share of the credit. However since then a number of the team have spoken out about physical and mental abuse in the British system, including the world championship medallists Becky and Ellie Downie who said “cruel” behaviour was “so ingrained in our daily lives that it became completely normalised” – although they did not mention any coaches by name. Meanwhile the British Olympian Francesca Fox said she was constantly told she “looked like a hippo” while the four-time Olympic medallist Louis Smith accused British Gymnastics of not wanting to taint its image by alerting the public to complaints made against coaches. On Tuesday UK Sport and Sport England announced that an independent review into abuse in gymnastics at all levels of the sport in Britain between 2008 and 2020 would be led by the QC Anne Whyte. It added the review would look into: • Whether gymnasts’ wellbeing and welfare is (and has been) at the centre of the culture of British Gymnastics, its registered clubs and member coaches and if not, why not. • Whether safeguarding concerns and complaints have been dealt with appropriately in the sport of gymnastics and if not, why not. • Whether gymnasts, or their parents, carers or guardians, have felt unable to raise complaints with appropriate authorities and if so, why. On Monday it was also reported that a historical charge against Reddin, who is due to lead the women’s gymnastics team to next year’s Games in Tokyo, had not been substantiated. The BBC said a gymnast called Jenny, who had been coached by Reddin at the Bright School of Gymnastics in the 1980s, told BBC Sport that she had been slapped and verbally abused by the coach. In its written response seen by the Guardian, British Gymnastics said Reddin had categorically denied slapping gymnasts, saying she would only give “little taps and nibbles” to show gymnasts how they should be working. It also said she denied using “excessive force” on a gymnast to stretch them. “In considering this, the Case Management Team determined that it was not possible to substantiate the allegations based on the time passed,” it added. ”They noted that this does not mean the allegation is considered proven or not proven, but that it is not possible to make a determination either way.” Speaking before the investigation against her was launched, Reddin said: “I completely refute the historical claim, and the investigation by British Gymnastics did not uphold the complaint. I completely refute these claims, it is wrong that my reputation within the sport that I love is now subject to a trial by media rather than through the proper processes. “I would welcome the allegations be submitted to the independent review into alleged abuse in gymnastics to ensure the integrity of the process is protected for both athletes and coaches.” The Guardian understands that GB Gymnastics’ performance director, James Thomas, will take over Reddin’s role while the investigation is carried out.