Leeds and Brighton have expressed an interest in signing Nicolás González from Stuttgart, with the Argentina forward expected to cost at least £15m. The 22-year-old, who has three senior caps, scored 14 times in the second tier for Stuttgart last season as they were promoted back to the Bundesliga at the first attempt. Milan, Borussia Dortmund and Internazionale are among the long list of clubs who have also been linked with González but it is understood that Brighton have already made contact with Stuttgart to discuss a potential fee for a player the German club signed from the Buenos Aires club Argentinos Juniors in 2018 for £7.65m. Leeds are also believed to have held discussions over a potential move for González, who suffered a minor injury in training this week, having missed out with a last-ditch bid to sign Jonathan David from Gent last week after the Canada forward opted to join Lille for £27m instead. Around £50m in transfer funds has reportedly been made available for Marcelo Bielsa by owner Andrea Radrizzani as Leeds prepare for their first season in the Premier League since 2004, although Stuttgart’s sporting director, Thomas Hitzlsperger, said last week that González will not come cheap given his contract expires in 2023. “With him you can imagine that clubs are willing to spend a lot and they have to,” Hitzlsperger said. “If we decide to hand him over, then it really has to be expensive.” González is believed to be interested in a move to either Elland Road or the Amex Stadium, although it is understood that reports he has already visited the Leeds training ground at Thorp Arch are wide of the mark. Brentford’s Ollie Watkins also remains a target for Bielsa as he seeks to provide more firepower to his squad. Leeds and Brighton have also been in negotiations over centre-back Ben White, who excelled last season on loan at Elland Road. Brighton have rejected two bids of around £20m for the 22-year-old, who has attracted the attention of several other Premier League sides.