Every four years in the US, political parties convene to nominate their respective candidates for November’s presidential election. The conventions are historically grandiose affairs with a circus-like atmosphere. Speeches are given, balloons are dropped and the party message of uniting behind their candidate is beamed to the nation. At least that’s the usual plan. This summer’s conventions are unfolding against the backdrop of a raging pandemic, economic collapse and widespread civil unrest around anti-racism protests. In an unprecedented move, both parties’ conventions are now set to be almost wholly virtual affairs, driven online by health fears. But it is not the first time conventions have had to cope with social turmoil. This year’s pandemic and racial justice protests bear similarities to half a century ago when a series of crises were racking the country. In 1968, US cities burned in protest of racial intolerance, thousands of American soldiers and countless Vietnamese died in war, civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr and senator Robert F Kennedy were assassinated, North Korea captured an American surveillance ship, and a flu pandemic sparked into existence that would eventually kill over a million people. As the country was torn apart by anti-war protests, poverty and racial prejudice, 1968’s Democratic Convention unfolded in Chicago, Illinois. For a week at the end of August the city filled with party delegates and thousands of protesters. I arrived that week – as a 16-year-old photographer – to find the dichotomy of “Welcome to Chicago” signs on every lamppost and a massive police presence on almost every block. The Conrad Hilton hotel wound up being the sites of violent clashes. Hours before the convention’s opening on Monday, supporters of various candidates packed the Hilton’s lobby and main stairway, screaming and waving signs. Mid-afternoon the anti-war candidate, Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota, arrived to confer with his delegates. McCarthy, a soft-spoken, poetry-writing midwesterner, was the candidate that millions had pinned their hopes on for months to win the election and finally end the war. Days later his campaign would be crushed by the machine politicians. As night fell, the first of many street battles outside the hotel sent teargas cascading and people running to avoid being beaten. Ducking into the hotel gasping for breath and rubbing my eyes, a voice asked if I was OK. The concerned passerby was the noted folk singer Phil Ochs, the voice of the protest generation who would participate in many impromptu performances at rallies that week. On Tuesday, candidate Hubert H Humphrey, then vice-president, strode across the hotel lobby to meet with delegates. Humphrey was the party’s hopeful because President Lyndon Johnson, mired in the years-long Vietnam war, chose not to run for re-election after a critical editorial by the CBS newsman Walter Cronkite, the man then dubbed “the most trusted man in America”. Losing Cronkite’s confidence, Johnson believed he had lost Middle America as well. It fell to Humphrey to be labeled the pro-war candidate of the Democratic party. Humphrey approached the hotel elevator when one man reached out to shake his hand; as Humphrey turned, the man gave a thumbs-down inches from the candidate’s face. Onlookers and even his police escort laughed. On Tuesday night, hundreds of army troops with rifles slung over their shoulders lined the street across from the hotel. Military police jeeps sat idling with barbed wire mounted on frames on the front that would be used to disperse protesters. Machine guns threatened more serious consequences. Large crowds cheered as hotel guests flashed their room lights on and off in a show of support. The Beat poet Allen Ginsberg held up the two-fingered peace salute while standing near a sign reading “Happy Humphrey Hog-Butcher To The World”. At dawn Wednesday, remnants of teargas mixed with the morning mist as an elderly delegate crossed Michigan Avenue, placed himself between a line of protesters and military police and began playing a violin. Throughout the day despair and frustration descended on the anti-war crowd as an inevitable sense of failure loomed. Later that night, the convention delegates would choose Humphrey while in the streets the police riot ran full frenzy. That night blue-helmeted police invaded the hotel’s 15th floor, the McCarthy staff headquarters, under the pretense that objects were being thrown out of windows, and proceeded to beat the young volunteers. As the vote tallies were displayed on television screens, the hopes of those who had come to Chicago seeking change dissipated, replaced by feelings of gloom. Inside the convention hall McCarthy delegates claimed harassment as officials frequently required examination of their credentials. Reporters were shoved and, in one case, punched. When delegates tried to criticize the street violence, their microphones were turned off. Behind the main stage were giant photos of candidate Humphrey. Along one wall, in giant letters was the slogan “Promises Made …Promises Kept”, a catchphrase used recently by Donald Trump. That final night, the convention nominated the Maine senator Edmund Muskie as the vice-presidential candidate. Humphrey’s victory address briefly paid lip service to the street clashes. “Majority rule has prevailed while minority rights are preserved,” he said with a straight face in a speech that wouldn’t heal the rifts tearing the party, and the country, apart. In November the Republican Richard M Nixon would be elected president.