An enthusiasm for storytelling marked out the work of Paul Knight, a television producer who made fondly remembered adventure series – such as Dick Turpin, Robin of Sherwood and The Adventures of Black Beauty – that were aimed at a family audiences. He then went on to establish London’s Burning as one of Britain’s most hard-hitting dramas. For two decades Knight, who has died aged 76, collaborated with the writer Richard Carpenter, creator of the fantasy series Catweazle, and another producer, Sidney Cole, who had made The Adventures of Robin Hood and other 1950s ITV swashbucklers. The three of them teamed up to make The Adventures of Black Beauty (1972-74), with Carpenter as the lead writer of scripts that were a continuation of Anna Sewell’s 19th-century children’s classic. Cole produced, Ted Willis, the creator of Dixon of Dock Green, invented new characters – a widowed GP, played by William Lucas, and his daughters – and Knight held all the elements together as executive producer. To find the theme music he gave a brief to more than a dozen composers: “Think The Virginian, only not a western.” His choice, Denis King’s triumphal Galloping Home, not only became a classic, but also won an Ivor Novello award in 1974. Remarkably, for a programme screened at teatime on a Sunday, The Adventures of Black Beauty was watched by up to 15 million viewers. Almost as popular was Dick Turpin (1979-82), starring Richard O’Sullivan as the 18th-century highway robber, Knight’s next project with Carpenter and Cole after they had formed Gatetarn Productions. He also negotiated a deal with the American company RKO for a 1981 film version, Dick Turpin’s Greatest Adventure, screened in Britain as that year’s five-part series, with the Dallas soap star Mary Crosby joining the cast. The trio’s own creation, Smuggler (1981), featured Oliver Tobias as the swashbuckling Jack Vincent, a former naval officer eluding customs officials in the early 1800s. Like their previous dramas, the production values were high, with location filming along the Somerset coast. A TV sequel, Adventurer, set in New Zealand, followed in 1987. In the meantime Knight revived Cole’s earlier success by producing Robin of Sherwood (1984-86), Carpenter’s innovative reimagining of the legend, with mystical elements and new characters, included a bad-guy assassin, Nasir, who was originally scheduled to be killed off. However, Mark Ryan gave such a good performance in the role during filming at Alnwick castle, Northumberland – doubling for Nottingham castle – that Knight asked Carpenter for a script rewrite to make Nasir a goodie and keep him on as one of Robin’s band. “This boy is terrific,” he said. “The girls love him, he looks wonderful in his leather jacket – we can’t kill him.” Knight again showed enterprise in commissioning music, this time Robin (The Hooded Man), a haunting theme by the Irish band Clannad. But he was presented with a more serious problem when Michael Praed, starring as Robin of Loxley, serving his supernatural mentor Herne the Hunter, left after the second series to take a stage role on Broadway. Instead of recasting the part, he and Carpenter came up with the winning idea of killing off Robin in battle and switching to an alternative version of the myth, with the hero being a nobleman, Robert of Huntingdon. Knight considered Jason Connery, Paul McGann and Neil Morrissey for the part before deciding that Connery fitted the new character best. However, the resulting third series left Carpenter’s script plans – including the wedding of Robin and Marian – unresolved when Goldcrest, the company funding it, pulled out before a final fourth run after suffering financial difficulties. In 1986 Knight switched to a more conventional drama, London’s Burning, producing Jack Rosenthal’s pilot about firefighters putting their lives in danger. When the writer declined to script episodes for a series starting two years later, Knight assigned Tony Hoare and Anita Bronson to most of the early episodes. He also took the brave decision to kill off a regular character, Vaseline (Mark Arden), during the second run. “I thought it was important that we showed that, because of the amount of danger these men were involved in on a weekly basis, things can go wrong,” said Knight, who produced nine series, attracting up to almost 20 million viewers per episode, before leaving in 1997 to produce the third and fourth runs of the customs drama The Knock (1997-99). Knight was born in Hendon, Middlesex, to Mary (nee Barnett), a dancer, and Albert, a theatre producer and director who went on to stage pantomimes and variety shows at the London Palladium. On leaving John Lyon school, Harrow-on-the-Hill, at 16, Knight joined the ITV company ATV as a call boy (messenger) and graduated to assistant floor manager. In 1967, the producer Stella Richman became his mentor when she took him on as an associate producer at another of the commercial television franchise holders, Rediffusion, working on the director Alan Clarke’s early plays (1967-68) and The Ronnie Barker Playhouse (1968). In the same manner he later gave his regular casting director, Esta Charkham – who remembered him for his laidback manner, wit and humour in testing times – her first producing experience on Robin of Sherwood. His other work as a producer included the BBC dramas Pulaski (1987) and Murder in Mind (2001-03), and he was back with Carpenter for the ITV children’s fantasy series Stanley’s Dragon (1994). He also made two miniseries for Sky – The Stretch (2002), a crime drama reuniting the former EastEnders stars Leslie Grantham and Anita Dobson, and The Bombmaker (2001), starring Dervla Kirwan as an IRA terrorist. In 1977, Knight married Maureen Lambert (nee Scholnick), who died of cancer in 1996. He is survived by his second wife, the jazz singer Pepi Lemer (nee Stephanie Bloomstein), whom he married in 2003, and by Alexander, the son of his first marriage, and two granddaughters. • Paul Alexander Knight, television producer, born 3 January 1944; died 16 August 2020.