Libya’s UN-supported government has announced a ceasefire across the oil-rich country and called for the demilitarisation of the strategic city of Sirte, which is controlled by rival forces. In a separate statement Aguila Saleh, the speaker of the rival House of Representatives in the east, also called for a ceasefire. The announcements came amid fears of an escalation in the more than nine-year-old conflict. Fayez al-Sarraj, the head of the Government of National Accord in the capital, Tripoli, also announced parliamentary and presidential elections would be held in March. Both administrations said they wanted an end to an oil blockade imposed by the camp of the renegade military commander Khalifa Haftar since earlier this year. Haftar is an ally of the speaker. They also called for oil revenues, the country’s main source of income, to flow into the bank account of the National Oil Corporation outside Libya. Powerful tribes in eastern Libya loyal to Haftar closed oil export terminals and choked off major pipelines at the start of the year in an effort to pressure the Tripoli-based government. The developments come amid international pressure on both sides and fears of a new escalation in the chaotic proxy war, as the rivals mobilise for a battle over Sirte, the gateway to the country’s major oil export terminals. Both statements called for demilitarising Sirte and the Jufra area in central Libya, and for a joint police force to be responsible for security there. There was no immediate comment from Haftar’s army. The general had agreed on an Egyptian initiative in June that included a ceasefire. The UN support mission in Libya welcomed both statements and called for the expulsion of all foreign forces and mercenaries in Libya. Both sides in the conflict are supported by thousands of mercenaries. “The two initiatives have created hope for forging a peaceful political solution to the longstanding Libyan crisis, a solution that will affirm the desire of the Libyan people to live in peace and dignity,” said Stephanie Williams, the acting head of the UN mission. Libya was plunged into chaos when a Nato-backed uprising in 2011 toppled the longtime dictator Muammar Gaddafi, who was later killed. The country has since split between rival east- and west-based administrations, each backed by armed groups and foreign governments. Haftar’s forces launched an offensive in April 2019 to try to capture Tripoli. But the campaign collapsed in June when the Tripoli-allied militias, with Turkish support, gained the upper hand, driving his forces from the outskirts of the capital and other western towns. The chaos in the oil-rich country has worsened in recent months as foreign backers intervene, despite pledges to the contrary at a high-profile peace summit in Berlin this year. Haftar is supported by Egypt, the United Arab Emirates and Russia. Turkey, a bitter rival of Egypt and the UAE in a broader regional struggle over political Islam, is the main patron of the Tripoli forces, which are also backed by Qatar. Haftar’s offensive on Tripoli polarised the already divided country and led to the aborting of the UN’s efforts to hold a peace conference more than a year ago. The Egyptian president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, welcomed both statements on Twitter as “an important step on the path of achieving the political settlement”.