Prolific and versatile, the potato is one of the most consumed vegetables on planet Earth and a staple in our diets. They’re also easy to grow. Doing so is an activity best suited to a purpose-built unit – known as a spud tower. Building a spud tower means your other veggies go undisturbed while you’re harvesting and creates a treasure hunt harvesting process that is easy and fun for kids. Spud towers are simple to construct and require only a few materials – wooden stakes, chicken wire, straw and compost. The idea is that as the potatoes grow and send up leaf growth, this growth is then covered with compost, which forces the plant to send out more roots and therefore more potatoes. As you keep repeating this process, your spud tower grows and grows, filling up with new tubers and more bounty. The process comes to a head when it is ultimately time to destroy and harvest your tower – and seek out the potato treasure inside it. Potatoes are best suited to cooler and temperate climates, so the propagation times depend on where you live. If you live in cool climates like Canberra or Hobart, it’s best to plant potatoes between September and January. In temperate or subtropical climates like Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane and Perth, they can be planted between August and October. In tropical climates like Darwin and Cairns, it’s best to plant between April and May, September and October, or December and January. Potatoes will tolerate part shade. They prefer mild conditions – soil that’s between 16 and 22C is an ideal temperature. It is common to grow potatoes directly into a mix of fresh compost, well-rotted animal manure and straw. Sow the sprouting tubers directly into the mix. When building a spud tower, allow the first shoots to mature to a height of 20–30 cm before covering them with a fresh mix of well-wetted compost and straw. Repeat this process to create three levels in your spud tower. Water prior to planting and also water in well afterwards. Once they’ve been planted, water once or twice a week, over the lifetime of the plants. When the plants start to die back, about four months after planting, the spuds are mature and ready for picking. Small, sweet and crisp potatoes can be harvested any time after two to three months. If you have created a spud tower, the harvesting process is easy and fun. Carefully dismantle your tower, thus allowing the contents to spill out. Forage through the contents for your spuds. Potatoes store well in the ground except when conditions are wet or overly warm. Spud towers are easy to assemble and can be created anywhere in your garden – even on a patch of grass. What you’ll need:2 × 1.2 m wooden stakes2m chicken mesh wireTwine or thin wireA bale of straw2 × 40-litre bags of compost3 sprouting potatoes 1. Once you’ve found a suitable location for the tower, drive two wooden stakes into the earth about 50 cm apart. Using the stakes as a frame, construct a circular enclosure of chicken mesh wire, strengthening your structure with twine or thin wire. 2. Leaving the centre hollow, line your inner walls with straw to a height of 30 cm. 3. Fill the centre with compost. 4. Place your sprouting potatoes in the compost to a depth of 3–5 cm. 5. Water in the potatoes. 6. When the spud growth is about 30 cm high, line walls with another layer of straw, 30 cm deep, and cover the plant growth with compost. Repeat the process once more (or until your tower is full). 7. When the top plant growth of your final level starts to die back, it is time to hunt for spud treasure. This is an edited extract from the 2020 revised edition of The Little Veggie Patch Co: An A-Z Guide to Growing Food in Small Spaces by Mat Pember and Fabian Capomolla. Published by Plum, RRP $26.99, Photography by John Laurie.