Lionel Messi’s decision to desert the sinking ship FC Barcelona will have a number of knock-on effects. The first is that, over the next few weeks, any forward capable of putting one foot in front of the other with vague regularity will be linked with a move to the Camp Nou. Barcelona will want at least one and possibly 472 high-profile signings to replace Messi, and according to reports in Spain they are aiming high by targeting Liverpool’s Sadio Mané. Barcelona have reportedly noticed that Mané, the best player in arguably the world’s best team, is really, really good at association football. And while it would not be entirely without precedent for a transfer rumour to be pulled from the human fundament, there is a link here: Mané worked with Ronald Koeman during the forward’s brilliant two-year spell at Southampton. And more worryingly for Liverpool fans, reports in Spain claim he would not be averse to getting the band back together. Apparently Shane Long is also keen on the idea. Manchester City are now favourites to sign Messi, with reports suggesting he called Pep Guardiola before telling Barcelona that he wanted to do one. City are making plans in case he is not available on a free transfer. They will offer £89.5m plus Eric García, Bernardo Silva and Gabriel Jesus, although frankly Barcelona can take anything they like from the Etihad, including the furniture, but not that picture of Nicky Weaver doing a silly dance at Wembley in 1999. Real Madrid bullet train Sergio Reguilón, who starred on loan at Sevilla during their Europa League triumph, is wanted by Manchester United, Tottenham, Juventus and Internazionale. Juve’s new manager Andrea Pirlo is also mad keen on Arsenal’s Héctor Bellerin, and not only because they have a shared taste in taste. With full-back being football’s new most important position, there are a few property chains in progress. Wolves want to sign Ainsley Maitland-Niles from Arsenal; should that happen, Spurs will happily take Matt Doherty off their payroll, which in turn would allow Serge Aurier to do one, possibly to Milan or Bayer Leverkusen. Meanwhile, Leicester want to replace Ben Chilwell with either Ajax’s Nicolás Tagliafico or Atalanta’s Robin Gosens. Manchester United are busy building the world’s best under-23 team. They are keen on Brescia midfielder Sandro Tonali, 20, and Monaco defender Benoît Badiashile, 19, while Marc Jurado, 16, and Álvaro Fernández, 17, have all but joined from Barcelona and Real Madrid respectively. And United still really, really want Jadon Sancho, 20. Celtic’s Champions League fiasco has increased speculation that Odsonne Édouard will decide it’s time to score goals elsewhere. Leeds, Leicester, Everton, Crystal Palace, Newcastle and Aston Villa are all interested. Last and least, Newcastle fancy Liverpool’s Rhian Brewster, Leeds manager Marcelo Bielsa would like to infuse Lazio centre-back Luiz Felipe with positive energy and tactical awareness, and Troy Deeney could be speaking frankly and belabouring penalties in a West Brom shirt next season.