What were you hoping for?To meet someone like-minded to hopefully grow a relationship with. First impressions?He was a little late and seemed distracted, but soon became relaxed and friendly. What did you talk about?We started with the obvious corona questions, which led into work and family and life. Any awkward moments?Conversation flowed easily. Good table manners?Very good, very polite to the waiting staff, too, which I liked. Best thing about Jeremy?He seems kind and has a lot of the same interests and priorities as me. Would you introduce him to your friends?If it were to go any further then yes, but my friends are really important to me and I’ve only introduced a couple of people to them. Describe Jeremy in three wordsEasygoing, funny, smart. What do you think he made of you?I didn’t think there was much chemistry. He didn’t make great eye contact during the meal, which I always assume is due to either nervousness or disinterest. Did you go on somewhere?To a pub round the corner, for a couple more glasses of wine. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed?I wouldn’t have made the first move, but I think if he had gone in I’d have kissed him back. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Of course, if Covid didn’t exist... and also, we should have pretended it was one of our birthdays so we could get the amazing dessert with a flare. Marks out of 10?7. I had a good time, I’m just not certain there was that sexual energy between us. Would you meet again?We swapped numbers, intending to go for a drink soon, but agreed we didn’t have that connection we were both looking for. What were you hoping for?Whenever you go on a first date, you’re sort of hoping that it might be your last first date. I wanted the conversation to flow naturally and for it to be equal. First impressions?That her handbag had its own seat! That’s when I knew we were in a fancy place. She had a nice smile and was very fashionably dressed. What did you talk about?Families, what we wanted for the future, hobbies and interests. She had some really funny stories. Any awkward moments?Olivia’s really easy to talk to, and that was a massive factor in avoiding anything awkward. Good table manners?She did. I’ll let her say whether she spilt anything on the table, I couldn’t possibly comment. Best thing about Olivia?Interesting, engaging and a great sense of humour. Would you introduce her to your friends?Yes. Describe Olivia in three wordsHonest, fun, engaging. What do you think she made of you?I hope she thought I was fun and interesting. Did you go on somewhere?To a pub around the corner. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed?No. I think this date had everything but a physical connection. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I don’t think I would have changed anything. Good food, good company. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?Not romantically, so probably not. There wasn’t the spark I was looking for; I’m sure she feels the same. • Jeremy and Olivia ate at Novikov, London W1. They were photographed separately for this image. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com