Ben Stokes will miss the remainder of the Pakistan Test series and may not return to the England team this summer, with the all-rounder now heading to New Zealand to be with his ill father, Ged, and family. The 29-year-old was part of the England team that completed a famous turnaround to seal a three-wicket victory in Manchester on Saturday but told teammates afterwards that he would now be leaving the biosecure bubble and would fly to Christchurch at the end of the week. Ged Stokes, the former New Zealand rugby league player who brought Ben to the UK in 2003 when appointed coach of Workington Town, suffered a serious illness last December after arriving in South Africa to watch England’s winter Test tour. Stokes spent much of his time away from England’s 3-1 series win over the Proteas by his father’s bedside in hospital in Johannesburg before he was eventually cleared to return home to New Zealand with Deborah, his wife, and continue his recovery. The pair have an incredibly strong bond – Stokes celebrates every century by mimicking the middle finger that his father had amputated during his rugby years - and both England and the family have requested privacy during the coming weeks. Much like Jos Buttler performing on the final day against Pakistan with a vital 75 despite his father being taken to hospital the previous evening, it is clear Stokes also spent the duration of the first Test with issues away from cricket on his mind. Stokes had a low-key match with the bat, registering his first duck in 50 Test innings and scoring nine in the run chase before gloving behind off Yasir Shah, but still found a way to have an impact; playing as a batsman due to a thigh injury, Stokes grabbed the ball on the third evening and claimed two late wickets that help set up the victory charge. Needless to say the loss of England’s talisman leaves a huge void to be filled as, from 1-0 up, they look to wrap up the series in Southampton from Thursday before the third Test, on the same ground, that begins on 21 August. It is not known when Stokes will return. England play a Twenty20 series against Pakistan at the end of the month, before six white-ball matches against Australia in September. He would likely have rested for some or all of this schedule but is down to play in the delayed Indian Premier League that takes place in the United Arab Emirates from 19 September. Buttler, whose father is reportedly on the mend, is now expected to step up to the Test vice-captaincy in the interim, a role he performed when Stokes led England during the first Test against West Indies with Joe Root away to attend the birth of his second child. Stokes helped England bounce back from that defeat with scores of 176 and 78 not out during the second Test of what became a 2-1 series win. He also picked up nine wickets across the first two matches before injury necessitated time off from bowling. Zak Crawley was the batsman to make way in Manchester and will likely return to the side following the departure of Stokes, allowing Root to return to No 4. But the make-up of the XI overall will now hinge on whether England continue with five bowlers and Chris Woakes batting at No7. Either way the form of Woakes is timely here, the all-rounder having come off the back of a lean period with the bat and delivered an unbeaten 84 that saw England chase down a target of 277 on a capricious pitch from a perilous position of 117 for five. Ollie Robinson, the uncapped Sussex seamer, was drafted into the squad on Saturday but will likely sit behind Sam Curran and Mark Wood, unused in the first Test, should England decide to freshen up their attack amid a gruelling summer of six Tests in seven weeks.