Yes, I know shimmery golden eyes (as seen at Tom Ford AW20) are usually for festive occasions. But seeing as we’re now a mask-wearing nation, let’s step up our eye game. Dab eyelids with Vaseline and brush on a mix of gold and bronze eyeshadow and highlighter. Line your eyes – kohl not liquid – for that slightly worn finish, coat lashes with black mascara, add a clearish lip gloss and consider this a trial run for Christmas. Because right now, we need something fun to look forward to… 1. Tom Ford Eye Quad Palette in Golden Mink £68, tomford.co.uk 2. Origins Blooming Shine Nourishing Lip Glaze in Bare Petal £18, johnlewis.co.uk 3. Code8 Contour Eyepencil £20, codeeight.com 4. Teyana Taylor x Mac Mineralize Skin Finish £27, maccosmetics.co.uk 5. Pat McGrath Labs Dark Star Mascara £26, selfridges.com Advanced Night Repair has been reformulated. For those who have no idea why this is news, let me explain. Pretty much every beauty editor I know has a bottle of ANR (as it’s known) lurking in their cabinet. Almost 40 years old, this globally bestselling anti-ageing serum is more than a cult classic, it’s a skincare giant. This has a lot to do with its patented technology, which repairs your skin – lines , wrinkles, dehydration and uneven skin tone – while you sleep. I’ve found it also works brilliantly during the day. I mix the gel-like serum into my foundation for an even dewier finish. Day or night, it is a remarkable product. Which is why, for die-hard fans, the word ‘reformulation’ sparks alarm bells. But everyone can breathe a sigh of relief. The new ANR now does a myriad of things, critical to youthful-looking skin, that it never did before. It helps to increase your collagen production (this is the stuff that keeps your skin firmer and sag-free for longer), it helps to generate fresh skin cells, reduces the look of large pores and provides 72-hour hydration and antioxidant protection. Continue using it and watch your skin transform into a bouncier, less-lined version of its former self. Come to think of it, this isn’t actually a reformulation – it’s a serious upgrade. A very good one. Estée Lauder Advanced Night Repair Synchronised Multi Recovery Complex II, £82 esteelauder.co.uk A hint of summer This crisp citrus body cleanser with petitgrain, jasmine, lemon and grapefruit rind is perfect for getting a subtle summer scent without actually wearing scent. Aesop Citrus Melange Body Cleanser, £33, aesop.com Flower power Rosewater and rosehip oils have been cleverly infused in this serum to provide intense in-depth hydration, combat redness and repair skin barriers. Fresh Rose Deep Hydration Oil-Infused Serum, £52, spacenk.com Desert blooms Inspired by the Arizona desert, this vegan and sustainable scent has combined Balinese coconut, Madagascan black pepper and oak moss to mimic salty, musky skin. Floral Street Arizona Bloom Parfum, £60, floralstreet.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.