Russia has approved a controversial Covid-19 vaccine for widespread use after less than two months of human testing, including a dose administered to one of Vladimir Putin’s daughters. The announcement that Russia was pushing ahead with large-scale manufacture and mass immunisation before so-called “phase 3” testing was greeted with criticism from experts who described the Russian approach as reckless and unethical, saying it risked exacerbating rather than helping manage the pandemic. The WHO said the vaccine should not be produced until it had completed phase 3 trials. Kirill Dmitriev, the head of the country’s RDIF sovereign wealth fund, said the vaccine would be marketed abroad under the brand name Sputnik V with international agreements to produce 500m doses and requests for 1bn doses from 20 countries. The vaccine’s name evokes the world’s first satellite to be launched into orbit, Sputnik, during the cold war space race, which was also seen as a competition for international prestige. The development was hailed by President Putin as evidence of Russia’s scientific prowess, but the truncated testing regime has raised eyebrows elsewhere for skipping phase 3 large-scale safety trials, which usually take months. Instead, phase 3 trials will be conducted in parallel with mass production of the vaccine, including in Brazil. While the approval paves the way for inoculations in Russia, which has been hit hard by the coronavirus pandemic, it is unlikely to accelerate the pace of efforts to produce a vaccine for use in the west, where licensing requirements are more stringent. Russia has registered 897,599 coronavirus cases, the fourth highest number in the world, and 15,131 deaths. Mass production of the vaccine was likely to begin soon, Putin said. Doctors and teachers would be offered immunisation first, with the vaccine made available for medics from late August or September, and the drug would go into general use from January 2021. Vaccination would be voluntary, Putin said. However, some public sector workers expressed scepticism over the vaccine’s safety and pointed out that Russia’s healthcare system was badly underfunded and run down. “I don’t trust the government. There’s no way I’m taking the vaccine,” said one Moscow teacher, who declined to be named. Speaking at a government meeting on state television, Putin said the vaccine, developed by Moscow’s Gamaleya Institute, was safe and that it had been administered to one of his daughters, appearing to confirm a report by Bloomberg that the families of some members of Russia’s elite had been given preferential access to the vaccine, perhaps as early as April. “I know that it works quite effectively, forms strong immunity, and I repeat, it has passed all the needed checks,” Putin said. He said his daughter had a temperature of 38C on the day of the first vaccine injection, and it dropped to just over 37C the following day. After the second shot she again had a slight increase in temperature, but then it was all over. “She’s feeling well and has a high number of antibodies,” Putin added. He didn’t specify which of his two daughters, Maria or Katerina, had received the vaccine. Phase 3 trials are used to detect side effects and also to measure how effective a vaccine is in the broadest sample of a population. The lack of proper phase 3 testing drew criticism from a number of experts. In a statement to the science media centre, Danny Altmann, professor of immunology at Imperial College, said: “The collateral damage from release of any vaccine that was less than safe and effective would exacerbate our current problems insurmountably. I hope these criteria have been followed. We are all in this together.” Altmann was also critical of the lack of transparency around the Russian vaccine. “I have spent a long time trying to track all the candidate vaccines through the evidence that’s been published and preprints,” he said. “What has been noticeably unusual is that there’s been almost no information, and none that’s been peer reviewed, on this Russian vaccine apart from on the clinical test website. “There have been so many debacles in the handling of this pandemic. This is not another occasion to blunder in. If this is a vaccine to save humanity, you want to line up the candidates side by side because the devil is in the detail. Some may last six months; some six years.” Francois Balloux, professor of computational systems biology at University College London, described it as “a reckless and foolish decision”. “Mass vaccination with an improperly tested vaccine is unethical. Any problem with the Russian vaccination campaign would be disastrous, both through its negative effects on health, but also because it would further set back the acceptance of vaccines in the population.” The human studies that were carried out started on 17 June among 76 volunteers. Half were injected with a vaccine in liquid form and the other half with a vaccine that came as soluble powder. Some in the first half were recruited from the military, which raised concerns that service personnel may have been pressed to participate. Experts have been suggesting that any vaccines may be only partially effective, and may not give equal protection to all, given how little is known about genetic and other susceptibilities to the virus. The World Health Organization has said all vaccine candidates should go through full stages of testing before being rolled out. Experts have said vaccines that are not properly tested can cause harm in many ways, from a negative impact on health to creating a false sense of security or undermining trust in vaccinations. Underlining anxiety over the Russian testing regime, the US health and human services secretary, Alex Azar, said during a visit to Taiwan: “The point is not to be first with a vaccine. The point is to have a vaccine that is safe and effective for the American people and the people of the world.” He said he expected a US vaccine by December.