The appointment of former Australian prime minister Tony Abbott as a British trade envoy is not quite treason but certainly a further sign he has London written on his heart. That is where Abbott was born in 1957. He went from Australia to Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar and remains a royalist who as prime minister gave the Duke of Edinburgh an Australian knighthood. The bestowal baffled many Australians who couldn’t see what services to them warranted a tribute to a prince already overloaded with gongs. But Abbott was keen to do what British PMs could and dispense royal rewards. And he probably wouldn’t reject a display of royal approval himself, should his services rendered to trade negotiation be worthy of honour. Perhaps he has been chatting to Sir Lynton Crosby. Abbott’s hero is Sir Winston Churchill. Like Churchill he has striven to be a journalist, a prime minister and a soldier. Well, he has had to be content with two out of three as the military career is a no-show. This British trade job would set a new mark of Australian politicians signing on to British employment. Australia’s fourth prime minister, George Reid, served also in the House of Commons, and subsequent prime ministers Stanley Bruce and Robert Menzies were in Churchill’s war cabinet. But there has been nothing like the hired-gun status of Abbott’s proposed job – part government member, part consultant – and the obvious way it could damage Australia’s trade aspirations. The particularly baffling element of this Boris Johnson proposal stems from the public record showing Abbott is not a negotiator or salesman. His lack of sales craft is exposed by the fact he was sacked by his own party as prime minister in 2015, and by his local constituents as an MP in 2019. Certainly he won the prime ministership, but it was from a Labor party which had changed leaders three times in six years. The ALP was begging to be defeated. Abbott is the hairy-chested variety of deal maker, preferring bulldozer tactics to finesse. And he’s not very good at that either, as one notorious episode underlines. In July 2014 a missile supplied to Ukraine rebels by Russia brought down Malaysia Airlines flight MH17, killing all 298 on board, including 38 Australians. Abbott was quite rightly outraged and in October that year promised a confrontation with Russian president Vladimir Putin on the atrocity. He told reporters in a state of such excitement he mangled his wording: “Look, I’m going to shirtfront Mr Putin, you bet you are ... you bet I am.” A shirtfront is an Australian rules football tackle in which the attacker’s shoulder is driven into the chest of the defender. Despite the bluster, the Putin shirtfront remained undefined, and the Russian leader – himself a practiced hand at bulldozer diplomacy – even seemed amused. Australia’s former foreign minister Julie Bishop revealed in October 2018 that a few years after the Abbott threat she cornered Putin on another matter at a summit. Tony Abbott clearly believes he, and his personal history, will fit in nicely in Boris Johnson’s Britain She reported: “His eyes never left my face, and they are piercing blue eyes, and then he said, ‘So this is what you call a shirtfront?’” Abbott is not a student of global affairs outside a pining for the return of the British empire and a grateful commonwealth of nations. A highly articulate and well-read man, these qualities sometime fail him when it comes to international matters. In one interview as leader of his Liberal party, he suggested Canadians came from “Canadia”, a country only he knew of. His defenders note that during his two years as PM Australia secured free trade agreements with China, Japan and South Korea. However, it can be argued that had more to do with good timing than any substantial contribution from him. But an even bigger problem for Johnson is that Abbott almost invariably picks the wrong side, even when he wins. In 1999 he was prominent in the referendum ‘no’ campaign for a move to a republic, and it was knocked back by close to 55% of voters. However, close to the same proportion of voters in his electorate of Warringah, a plush part of Sydney, voted yes. In 2017 Abbott again was at the front of the no campaign at a plebiscite asking voters to back legislation allowing same-sex marriage. This time the national vote rejected the Abbott position, as did 75% of the voters in Warringah. Abbott has long declined to accept the science of human-created climate change, and was behind a small but effective group of rebels who hobbled attempts by conservative governments to deal effectively with the issue. In the May 2019 election he was defeated in Warringah by an independent candidate who backed greater action on climate change. One of Abbott’s many attempts to discredit Labor’s climate policies highlighted his other problem area – women. “What the housewives of Australia need to understand as they do the ironing is that if they get it done commercially it’s going to go up in price, and their own power bills, when they switch the iron on, are going to go up,” he told reporters. The notion only wives ironed led to some rushed picture opportunities of Abbott flattening creases in his own shirts. He barely survived that but would not spin his way out of a confrontation, while he was opposition leader, with Labor prime minister Julia Gillard, who fiercely challenged his claims she played “the gender card”. In a speech to parliament in October 2012 – subsequently applauded globally – Gillard took him on. “And in doing so I say to the leader of the opposition I will not be lectured about sexism and misogyny by this man,” she said. “And the government will not be lectured about sexism and misogyny by this man. Not now, not ever.” Tony Abbott clearly believes he, and his personal history, will fit in nicely in Boris Johnson’s Britain. • Malcolm Farr is an Australian political journalist