My first trip to the US was a food pilgrimage to California. While in San Francisco, I visited Zuni Cafe, a restaurant famed for its roast chicken bread salad. I wanted to make a vegetarian version, and this is the result: crisp and juicy croutons; sweet, sticky onions; roast, garlicky mushrooms … it is a total feast and a nifty way to use up stale bread. This salad is a meal in itself, but it also goes very well with sausages, a burger or a chop. Prep 15 minCook 40 minServes 4-6 2 large sweet potatoes (about 500g)3 garlic cloves, peeled2 tsp smoked paprika (I use 1 tsp each of sweet and spicy), or ancho chilli flakesFlaky salt1 handful thyme, leaves only150ml extra-virgin olive oil400g mixed mushrooms, cut into bite-sized pieces2 large handfuls mixed salad leaves (I like baby gem and rocket), to serveJuice of ½ lemon80g goat’s cheese For the balsamic onions200g stale, rustic bread or sourdough, crusts removed2 large red onions, peeled and sliced2 tbsp balsamic vinegar1 tbsp soft brown sugar Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Cut the sweet potatoes in quarters lengthways, and then cut each wedge into three or four large, bite-sized chunks (they will shrink in the oven). Bash the garlic to a puree with the smoked paprika, a teaspoon of flaky salt, half the thyme and five tablespoons of olive oil. Spread the sweet potatoes out on a baking tray, toss in the oil and put in the oven. After 20 minutes, add the mushrooms and roast until everything is tender and caramelised. In the meantime, tear the bread into rough chunks and put on a second roasting tray. Add the sliced onions, the rest of the thyme, balsamic and sugar along with two tablespoons of the oil and four tablespoons of water. Season generously. Roast on the shelf below the mushrooms and potatoes until the onions are sweet and the bread is crisp and golden in places – 30-35 minutes. When you’re ready to eat, empty the two trays of vegetables on to a large platter or bowl, and toss with the salad leaves. Squeeze over the lemon juice, taste and check for seasoning. If the salad is at all dry, add another glug of olive oil. Crumble over the goat’s cheese and serve at once. Blitz leftover goat’s cheese with garlic, thyme and olive oil for a mouthwatering spread for bruschetta (a great way to use up stale bread). Pair that bruschetta with tapenade, sunblushed tomatoes or grilled summer vegetables.