The Melbourne set of The Masked Singer has been shut down after several crew members tested positive for the coronavirus. “The entire production team, including the masked singers, the host and panellists are now in self-isolation,” the Network 10 program posted on Twitter late on Saturday night. “They are all being monitored closely and are in constant contact with medical authorities.” The reality show hosted by Osher Günsberg involves masked celebrities competing against each other in a singing competition. The panellists include Dannii Minogue and comedian Dave Hughes. Meanwhile, Melburnians have been told they will be wearing face masks in public beyond the easing of strict lockdowns rules in Victoria. Victoria’s chief health officer said people must expect to continue wearing protective masks long after stage four restrictions ease in metropolitan Melbourne. The state on Sunday recorded 208 new cases of coronavirus. The state’s death toll continued to climb, with 17 more deaths bringing the total to 415 and national count to 502. Premier Daniel Andrews, who has long talked of Victorians needing to adjust to a new “Covid normal”, said masks would remain part of life for a long time, along with careful hand-washing and physical distancing. On Saturday the Victorian chief health officer Brett Sutton said there were coronavirus cases at 129 aged care facilities. Sutton said dozens of these facilities had only a single case so swift control measures should stop infections spreading. The 10 most infected aged care sites have between 100 and 200 active cases each. There are new cases linked to known outbreaks at Royal Melbourne Hospital’s Royal Park campus and AusFresh Broadmeadows. Elsewhere, investigations are under way into cases linked to Dandenong hospital, Warringa Park Specialist School in Hoppers Crossing and Cabrini hospital in Malvern. Melbourne residents still have about another three weeks of stage four restrictions, including an overnight curfew, ahead of them before they are revised on 13 September. Regional Victorians are under slightly less onerous level three restrictions for the same period. Hearings for the state’s inquiry into the failed hotel quarantine program resume on Monday, with more testimony from hotel security staff. The inquiry last week heard poor-performing security guards were moved between the quarantine hotels, while returned travellers feared catching the coronavirus during their stay.