Were his natural talent not formidable enough already, Lewis Hamilton it seems has now charmed Lady Fortuna herself. As fate struck debilitating blows on both the leading Mercedes cars at the British Grand Prix in its final moments, Hamilton’s fell on the final lap. It was close enough to the flag for him to nurse his crippled, three-wheeled car over the line to what was in its finale at least perhaps the most dramatic finish of his career. The bones had fallen Hamilton’s way, his win at Silverstone – lucky number seven here – one he will never forget. A race which had delivered a dominant if unspectacular run at the front from Mercedes enjoyed a denouement far beyond what the staid fare had promised. With Hamilton leading his Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas from the off the pair had opened up a comfortable lead and were unchallenged out front. Bottas had not really threatened Hamilton, indeed it had appeared to be business as usual at the well-oiled Mercedes machine. Then, with two laps remaining, Bottas’s left front tyre delaminated – a structural collapse due to wear – and the Finn was forced to pit. He went from second to 11th. With Hamilton being told to ease off going for the fastest lap to take pressure off his worn rubber, the lightning struck twice. Going into Brooklands on his final circuit, Hamilton’s front left suffered the same failure. Were proof needed, however, that what is perceived as pure luck is often enhanced by skill, Hamilton held his cool. He had nine further corners, two thirds of the circuit to manage but controlled the car as the tyre delaminated completely, keeping it together and on track to drag it the flag. “It was definitely heart in the mouth,” he said. “You could see the tyre was falling off the rim. I was just praying to get it round. I nearly didn’t do it, but thank God we did. I had never experienced anything like that on the last lap. My heart almost stopped.” It was no small feat and indicative of why the world champion has enjoyed such sustained success. It ensures yet another record has fallen to the British driver. He has one more victory in his home race than the previous best of six held by Alain Prost. Few milestones remain and none seem beyond Hamilton now. He is only four behind Michael Schumacher’s record of 91 race wins, a tally which will surely fall to him this season. Certainly those seconds of dramatic incident have made a potentially decisive swing in his favour in his attempt to equal Schumacher’s record seven world championships. With Bottas failing to score, Hamilton has a 30-point lead over his teammate in a season that may run to just 15 races. However just as the dice rolled favourably for Hamilton, Red Bull’s Max Verstappen was left smiling at fate’s fickle perversity. He had been in a race of his own in third for the entire afternoon until the team pitted him at the end to take the soft rubber in an attempt to go for the fastest lap. He duly went for it just as the two cars he was behind began shedding rubber. As Hamilton crawled toward the line, Verstappen flew up to him but ended just five seconds adrift. Without that final stop the win would have been the Dutchman’s. Christian Horner, the Red Bull team principal, wryly pronounced Hamilton was a “lucky boy”. Verstappen, who did take the fastest lap point, was philosophical, more than aware that in a sport that pushes man and machines to extremes, fate can both smile and frown on any participant at any time. “I don’t regret anything, we made the right decision,” he said. “You don’t often get punctures, they were deserved winners. I am not upset or disappointed and it is better to be second than third.” Up until these extraordinary gripping seconds Silverstone, scene of some of Hamilton’s most gloriously received triumphs had presented lacklustre fare. Mercedes’ clear advantage left them alone in a race of their own and within that Hamilton had the measure of Bottas such that the pair were barely vying even with one another. Hamilton’s march to the flag would, in ordinary circumstances, have at least been greeted by the fans’ euphoric passion. Instead a barren Silverstone, its beating heart absent, was singularly flat. It was a precision piece, displaying engineering superiority and driving skill but ultimately a piece performed to technical perfection that failed to stir the soul until it deviated from the script. The coronavirus outbreak left F1 with no choice but to race behind closed doors and that they have managed to put together a season is impressive. But this was an object lesson in just how important a part fans play in the sport, in any sport. The social bubbles within and the vacuum around allow racing to continue under the spectre of Covid-19. It has given the sport the oxygen to survive but the atmosphere was striking in its absence. It’s 70 years since the old airfield hosted the very first F1 world championship race in 1950, won by Giuseppe Farina for Alfa Romeo in front of 200,000 people. Their crucial place since has never felt more vital for the sport. The majority of the race, however, had been an almost textbook demonstration of Mercedes’ superiority this season. The duo put four seconds on Verstappen by lap eight, while for Ferrari the chasm they face this season was starkly illustrated. Charles Leclerc, who finished third, was 12 seconds off the lead with just 10 laps completed. By half distance Hamilton had two seconds on his teammate and was entirely serene leading. Their run to the flag looked untroubled until the those final moments. The sparks that flew from the floor of Hamilton’s car as he dragged it to the line were spectacular, but Mercedes’ dominance until then was every bit as ominously eye-catching.