Wigan continue to set the pace at the top of Super League after maintaining their impressive post-lockdown form with a hard-earned victory against Castleford. Games between these two sides have become renowned for their intensity and aggression in recent seasons, and this meeting was certainly no exception. There was no shortage of ferocity from both sides here as Super League relocated to Warrington for the latest round of fixtures but the crucial moments here belonged to the Warriors, who have now won eight of their first 10 games in 2020. They recorded their latest win here after overturning a 12-0 deficit midway through the first half to lead 16-12 at half-time. From there, they never fell behind, and they were grateful for a number of key individual displays to help see off a Castleford side still searching for the form that placed them among the early pacesetters prior to the competition’s suspension in March. From the brilliance of their full-back, Bevan French – who is an undoubted Man of Steel candidate – to the endeavours of key forwards such as Liam Farrell, this was another solid display from Adrian Lam’s side, who you still suspect have plenty of improvement in them as the season rolls on. That is a worrying thought for the rest of the competition. Castleford, who were called to play Wigan on Tuesday after Catalans stood down due to a series of positive Covid-19 tests, were impressive in the opening quarter. A well-worked try from Gareth O’Brien and an instinctive finish from Nathan Massey put them into a deserved 12-0 lead, but Wigan would soon hit back. An error from the Tigers afforded the Warriors attacking position, and Sam Powell burrowed his way over the line before one of several superb breaks from Farrell enabled Joe Burgess to cross in the corner. Wigan then took the lead when Ben Flower forced his way over the line, and having toiled for so long in the opening quarter, the way they fought back was impressive to say the least. “They’re turning up for each other,” Lam said. “We were behind by 12 and it could have been easy to turn it in, but they’re a tough bunch.” In contrast, Castleford have lost three successive games now, and will rue a number of crucial errors here which led to their downfall. “I thought we were disappointing,” their coach, Daryl Powell, said. “It took until the game had gone to get the energy we needed to win.” However, there may be ramifications for Wigan’s young forward Morgan Smithies, who was involved in two clashes either side of half-time. Smithies appeared to butt Castleford’s Grant Millington on two occasions in the final seconds of the half, before performing an ugly-looking crusher tackle which led to a spell in the sin-bin and Castleford’s James Clare being carried off. “It’s a terrible tackle,” Powell lamented. “That was really bad.” Within seconds of Smithies’ offence, the Tigers were level when O’Brien’s pinpoint pass sent Derrell Olpherts over, but Wigan soon restored their lead courtesy of a penalty from Zak Hardaker. Then, with Smithies back on the field, Wigan underlined their superiority with points at crucial junctures. They opened up a two-score lead when Farrell crossed courtesy of a superbly timed pass from Jackson Hastings, before putting the result beyond any doubt when Hastings again provided the killer ball, this time for Joe Bullock, to make it 30-16. An error from Hardaker in the final minutes allowed Michael Shenton to touch down, but it was mere consolation. As Powell pointed out, by the time the Tigers woke up, the game was gone.