The plan first called for a 17 March public debut in Austin, Texas, of A Most Beautiful Thing, a documentary about America’s first all-Black high school rowing team. Like so many other activities, though, the SXSW Film Festival was cancelled, an early victim of the coronavirus pandemic, and the debut was pushed back four and a half months.It was not exactly the worst thing that could have happened. A lot unfolded in America in those four and a half months, certainly not the least of which was the police killing of George Floyd in May. Floyd’s death sparked widespread public protests nationally and heightened interest in the Black Lives Matter movement. “The message is even stronger,” Arshay Cooper, 38, a member of the rowing team, who hailed from Chicago’s tough West Side, and a focal point of the documentary, tells the Guardian. “Now, people will watch it with a bigger sense of awareness – to watch it with a sense of openness.” Rather than appearing nationwide across the US in cinemas at the end of July, the film was made available for streaming. So the documentary has been pushed a bit off-course, so to speak. But, hey: Cooper and his Manley High School teammates overcame much bigger setbacks over a 22-year period that begins with the founding of the rowing program and ends with a reunion – and a race that includes four unlikely teammates as members of their eight-man crew: Chicago police officers.“All of these people kind of knew we’d done this when we were younger,” Cooper says of the reunion, “but we wanted to give our families and our kids a chance to see us doing it. We thought it was powerful for them to see it with their own eyes.”You need to watch the film to see how they fared at the Chicago Sprints in July 2019, but the results actually don’t matter that much. It was an astonishing feat just to assemble a rowing team from a neighborhood besieged by rival gangs and comprised of kids from families torn apart by poverty and drug and sexual abuse.Cooper, a chef who now lives in Brooklyn, became the catalyst for the story when he decided five years ago to write a self-published book about his experience, Suga Water: A Memoir. He remembers looking on YouTube for videos with the search words, “how to write a memoir”. He knew he had a good story to tell. “Everybody kept saying, ‘This should be a novel some day,’” he says.The book, which has been reissued under the title of the film, was well received, and one of the readers was an award-winning documentary film writer and director named Mary Mazzio – who also happened to be a former US Olympic rower. “How did I not know this?” Mazzio says. She tweeted a compliment to Cooper, who tweeted right back.The Manley High School rowing team was started in 1998 by Ken Alpart, an options trader in Chicago who wanted to disprove the widespread stereotype that rowing was for rich white kids and happened only at the Olympics. The Manley team had some success, but only after some hard lessons – for instance, why it is not so smart to row wearing baggy shorts. Alpart said he thought the program, which was discontinued because of a lack of funding, was a failure. But those who had participated realized that the experience had provided them with lasting values as they became adults: teamwork and responsibility being just two of them. Rowing also provided an invaluable escape, if temporary, from the harsh neighborhood.“There was something about the water that gave us peace that we had never felt before,” Cooper says in the film.Several teammates attended the funeral of one of the coaches of the team in 2018, which led to a reunion at a Chicago barbershop owned by an alumnus. They decided to assemble the old team again, even though they faced larger challenges, quite literally. One rower says in the film, drawing laughs, “I ain’t seen you guys since 80lb ago.”Cooper wanted to take it one more step – a significant step – by inviting Chicago police officers to join them. Cooper understood that would be a challenge, because he had his head pressed against police cars as a youth. Malcolm Hawkins, a Manley alum, says in the film, “Every time a caucasian person came into the neighborhood, we thought it was the police.”“I nearly cried behind the camera at the extraordinary kindness that Arshay and the guys showed these officers, patiently teaching them how to row, hands on hands, working together shoulder to shoulder,” Mazzio says. “It was as if time and space stood still for two hours.”Former NBA stars Grant Hill and Dwyane Wade joined with Chicago rapper Common as executive producers. Common also is the film’s narrator, and 9th Wonder, another executive producer, is its music composer. “People think I’m making this stuff up,” Cooper says of the rugged realities of the neighborhood. “This is real life. People don’t want to be poor or lazy. There’s history behind this.”Because the pandemic has closed theaters, the film has not gained the exposure that it might have, but A Most Beautiful Thing has achieved a 100% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes. “We can feel our hearts hurting and soaring at the same time,” Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times wrote.The protagonist in the documentary, Arshay Cooper, simply says of the film, “It’s everything I wanted.” A Most Beautiful Thing will be available to audiences in the US from 1 September on NBCUniversal’s Peacock platform and in mid-October on Amazon.