This week’s heatwave is set to cause further disruption as temperatures above 30C continue in parts of central and southern England, accompanied by storms and torrential rain across the UK. The Met Office has issued a yellow storm warning for the whole of England, Wales and parts of Scotland, with warnings of thunderstorms, flooding, power cuts and landslides from Wednesday afternoon until the end of the week. Temperatures reached 34.6C in St James’s park in central London on Wednesday, marking the first time since at least 1961 that there have been six consecutive days of 34C and above. It was also the third day in a row of the mercury hitting 35C or above across the UK, with Wednesday’s highest temperature of 35.4C recorded at Heathrow, according to the Met Office. Three people died in a train derailment near Stonehaven in Aberdeenshire after a ScotRail service crashed on Wednesday amid heavy rain and flooding. Heavy rainfall has also caused flooding in Lancashire, where 10 properties were affected. The Environment Agency said rainfall caused the Burrow Beck waterway in Scotforth, south Lancaster, to rise by nearly 1 metre in less than three hours. “Parts of the UK will see some very heavy thunderstorms with torrential rainfall and a chance of flash flooding from Wednesday, this could result in landslides and problems with travel,” said Met Office forecaster Bonnie Diamond. She added: “Yellow thunderstorm warnings will remain in place until Sunday, affecting most of the UK.” It comes after torrential rain and lightning caused flooding and travel disruption in parts of Scotland on Tuesday evening. Perth and Kinross, the Lothians, Forth Valley and the north-east of England were among the most affected by overnight lightning strikes and heavy downpours. Vehicles were recovered from busy roads after they were abandoned and there were reports of internet services being disrupted. Similar conditions were expected to be seen in parts of Northern Ireland, England and Wales from Wednesday afternoon, with drivers warned of delays on the roads caused by standing water. Ben Sheridan, an AA spokesman, said: “Rain, thunder and lightning combined with the hot weather will make for some challenging driving conditions. “Don’t be misled by the sunshine – if you ignore flood warning signs, there’s a real risk of aquaplaning or causing serious damage to your car.” Meanwhile, Alton Towers resort told visitors to stay away on Wednesday following an overnight electrical storm which interrupted the park’s water supply. Police forces and the RNLI have warned about the dangers of entering water after the heatwave led to a number of weather-related accidents across the country over the past week. On Sunday, a woman died after going into the sea to save her youngest son who had got into difficulty in a kayak in Norfolk. The woman, named locally as Danielle Chilvers, 37, of Swaffham, died after she got caught in a suspected riptide and was later pronounced dead in hospital. Across Monday and Tuesday, the bodies of two friends were recovered from the sea off Brighton after a small, unoccupied dinghy was found. In Kent, the RNLI said that lifeguards carried out an “unprecedented number” of rescues, with 24 people rescued in a single day at Ramsgate main beach. Devon and Cornwall police said it was also experiencing “unprecedented demand” due to an influx of tourists. The force said it received more than 2,300 emergency calls at the weekend, with antisocial behaviour accounting for many of the calls. Assistant chief constable Jim Colwell said the weekend’s events, spurred on by the hot weather, had resulted in the area “largely full to current capacity” and visitors were urged to book ahead before travelling. “We want to welcome tourists safely back into our communities and support a restart to our essential tourism economy,” Colwell said. “But that needs to be done respectfully by everyone and the levels of anti-social behaviour recorded over the weekend are unacceptably high. We understand people want to enjoy what our region has to offer, but please do this safely and within the law, otherwise police will take proactive enforcement action to protect others.”