Hollie Doyle continued her record-breaking progress on Saturday, becoming the first woman in the history of British racing to ride five winners in a day. The feat, verified by the Racing Post’s historian John Randall, was achieved at Windsor where the 23-year-old jockey scored on five of her seven mounts at cumulative odds of 899-1. “I thought it’d go one way or the other,” said a delighted Doyle, whose 116 winners in 2019 smashed the previous record for a woman in a calendar year. “I thought, this could be a good day or a really bad day. “I’m just really blessed at the moment to be getting a leg-up on these good horses. The last few years have been awesome.” The highlight of Doyle’s day came aboard Extra Elusive, on whom she won the Winter Hill Stakes. Now five, this horse had become a frustrating underachiever but is unbeaten in two runs since Doyle was given the ride. “I really like him and I trust him,” she explained. “I understand how to ride him and keep him happy. We seem to get on all right. He’s got bags of ability and physically he’s beautiful. Jammy, aren’t I?” It so happens the Sky TV cameras are due at Doyle’s home on Monday, but not for her; her boyfriend and fellow jockey Tom Marquand is to give an interview. Told of this, Doyle smiled wryly and said: “I’d better get the cleaning done, then...” Someone else should be making the headlines on Sunday, as Doyle is going to Yarmouth, the one track where ITV3’s cameras will not be present. Instead, the spotlight may fall on Andrea Atzeni, who has a fine chance in Goodwood’s Supreme Stakes aboard Cloak Of Spirits (3.35). This filly is sailing under the radar for most punters, judging by odds of 7-1, but she was beaten only by Love in the 1,000 Guineas and was flying high again when fifth in the Coronation Stakes. Dropped to this level, she has continued to run well and was a fine third in what looked a good-quality race at Deauville last time. The step back to seven furlongs is a smart move and Richard Hannon’s runner should make a bold bid. 1.50 Goodwood The obvious choice is Ice Sprite, seeking a three-timer and helped by the weight concession from her older rivals. From the William Haggas yard, she proved her ability to cope with this kind of surface at Windsor last time. 2.05 Perth The switch to handicaps was very much indicated for Scardura after he made a fine chasing debut at Stratford. Headed on the run-in, he finished between two higher-rated rivals, both of which have won since. He is not the only unexposed runner but should prove way ahead of his rating. Goodwood 12.45 This Ones For Fred 1.15 Elham Valley 1.50 Ice Sprite 2.25 Chairmanoftheboard 3.00 Native Tribe 3.35 Cloak Of Spirits (nb) 4.10 Modmin 4.45 Uther Pendragon 5.20 Luna MagicPerth 1.00 Fern Owl 1.30 Stoner's Choice 2.05 Scardura (nap) 2.40 Imperial Elysian 3.15 Fortunes Hiding 3.50 At First Glance 4.25 Princess T 5.00 Write It Down 5.30 Big Jim DwyerYarmouth 2.15 Final Thought 2.50 Robert Guiscard 3.25 Global Esteem 4.00 Aramis Grey 4.35 Line Of Departure 5.10 Case Key 5.40 Beverage 2.25 Goodwood Course and distance form points to Chairmanoftheboard, who ran a stormer to be fifth in the Stewards’ Cup. His only previous visit was for his debut, when he beat Sir Busker by eight lengths on soft ground. 2.40 Perth There is no getting away from Imperial Elysian, who has won three handicaps on the bounce and still looked under-rated when coming home clear at Southwell for the in-form Fergal O’Brien yard. 3.00 Goodwood This is a first attempt on a testing surface for Native Tribe but, as a son of Farhh, he ought to like it a lot better than the fast ground on which he looked a difficult ride at Sandown. The blinkers are fitted in response but he may not need them, as an unexposed youngster who can take another step forward in a winnable contest. 3.15 Perth This is a hotter race than the one Fortunes Hiding won here six weeks ago but there was a lot to like about the way the seven-year-old travelled and jumped that day on his return from a spell in point to points. He started brightly for his former trainer and perhaps a change of scenery has helped him get back on track.