I loved the way the light from the river reflected on the ceilings,” says Susan Deliss of the moment she first saw her rural French home. Positioned by the Serein river, which flows through the wine-growing region of Chablis, the 18th-century house has a laid-back French charm about it. Stone steps in the garden lead down to the water, where a small blue boat belonging to Deliss’s sons, Al, 16, and Gus, 14, gently bobs. Bessie the lurcher hides from the hot sun underneath a nearby fig tree. I made a deliberate choice to fill this house with things that are old Beyond the front door, which is crowned with wisteria, a cool, dark hall awaits. Susan kept the original 19th-century tiles of orange, cream and grey, but had the kitchen floor, which was formerly a bathroom with broken concrete underfoot, replaced with tomettes – local, antique terracotta tiles. Kitchen units, sympathetic to the historical regional style, which is unfitted and freestanding, were added alongside a traditional Burgundy stone sink: wide and shallow. Copper pans, antique pots, plates and hand-painted dishes from all over Europe and Morocco hang on the walls. Deliss’s husband, Max, a conservator, made the well-worn pine kitchen table and, after experimenting with a wide range of paint colours, eventually settled on a soft orange for the kitchen walls. “I had 80 pots for the whole house,” says Deliss. “The kitchen can be very dark, and I like to be cosy. Orange just worked.” Deliss is a textile dealer and designer with a passion for antique fabrics. This dedication has led her deep into the souks of Egypt, Morocco, Turkey and Syria, searching for one-off materials. She’ll haggle for antique suzanis – highly decorative embroidered cloths, usually from Central Asia – ikats, hand-embroidered Persian textiles, and the richly coloured throws of Uzbekistan where, today, she has her own designs embroidered. “I sometimes meet a Hungarian waiter in west London to buy fabrics,” she adds. This interest in materials led her to design her own pieces, some of which are woven in the UK, while others are screen-printed by hand. Uzbeki coats hang on the walls as decoration in the dining room and hall. Suzanis, the word derives from the Persian for needle, hang in the sitting room and are used to cover headboards and as ornate bedspreads in the bedrooms. As a child, Deliss would sew her own clothes and redecorate her doll’s house. Some of her earliest memories are of specific materials – the red floral cotton of a trouser suit that her aunt made for her and, on a French exchange aged 11, linen-covered walls and a cherry-wood dining table. “I love beautiful things, like Islamic architecture and textiles. I appreciate the structure. They are to textiles what Bach is to music. There is a mathematical structure that creates order, and the beauty in that order is very appealing.” The windows in her Burgundy home still have their original glass and wooden shutters. “Antique glass is uneven, which I love. The shutters protect the house from the heat in summer and the cold in winter. When we first arrived in the village, nothing looked as if it had been changed for a century and I wanted this house to have that feel,” she adds. This directive inspired the rest of the house, which she refers to as dans son jus – literally, “cooked in its own juice”. “The design evolved gradually and gracefully,” she explains. “I did not want it to look as if it had been jarred out of the condition it was in. I did a huge amount to re-patinate. I did not want it to appear new or overdone, but to have a gentle, benign beauty.” Upstairs, she and Max added new bathrooms. Each piece of furniture was chosen carefully from auction houses and local brocantes. The couple, who were married in the local town hall, love to cook together. “This is an old house in a medieval village,” says Deliss. “When I first bought it, 20 years ago, nobody living locally had anything new. Things are changing – fitted kitchens are popping up – but I made a deliberate choice to fill this house with things that are old. It gives it a lovely feel. It is a step removed from the modern world, which is why I bought it in the first place.” susandeliss.com