In the sample clues below, the links take you to little explainers from our For Beginners series. The Covid clues are back; per our usual protocol, if you want this to be a virus-free place, skip to the next section. Still with us? Here’s Redshank (known locally as Crucible) with an FT clue: 3d Old poet’s current disease beginning to disappear (4)[ wordplay: name of current disease minus initial letter (‘beginning to disappear’) ][ definition: old poet ] No setter, having seen a spot for OVID in his or her grid, is going to miss spotting the connection to the disease that’s one letter away; thank you to Redshank for using the opportunity to present an image of healing. But thank you also to the less sanguine Vlad for this pair of adjacent clues … 21/28ac That man’s failing, mate – but he’s still in office (4,7)[ wordplay: anagram (‘failing’) of THATMAN + synonym for ‘mate’ ][ MATTHAN + COCK ][ definition: at least the ‘he’s still in office’ part, or the whole clue ] 18ac Big deal, right? Won’t work – like government’s contact-tracing app (5-7) [ wordplay: anagram (‘… work’) of BIG, DEAL, abbrev. for ‘right’, WONT ][ anagram of BIDDEALRWONT ][ definition: like government’s contact-tracing app ] … for MATT HANCOCK and WORLD-BEATING. Picaroon misleads us into thinking about a reddish element in this clue … 1d Corrosive substance in laminate and some coppers (6,4)[ wordplay: type of laminate & abbrev. for police branch (‘some coppers’) ][ FORMICA & CID ][ definition: corrosive substance ] … for FORMIC ACID. Of the many nicknames for policemen, “coppers” is not one that hides its origins: those who cop are coppers. But the connection between Formica and formic acid? Well, I use that “F” not because I’ve adopted a Trumpian approach (“I capitalise certain words only for emphasis, not b/c they should be capitalised!”) but because Formica is one of those words that many of us took a long time to realise might be proprietary. In other words, someone had to choose a name to trade with, and opted for “Formica”. But why? It’s surely not because anyone thought it would be a good idea to create an association in the mind of someone planning a kitchen with formaldehyde. But wait: isn’t Formica also the ant genus? That’s it: we used to get our formic acid by boiling ants. So is Formica … made of ants? Actually, it’s “for mica”: the Cincinnati engineers who invented it used the ant name as a kind of pun, because the plastic could be used as a substitute for mica. Hang on: were the tables in greasy spoons topped with mica before Formica came along? No; as the Guardian’s architecture and design blog explained on the 100th anniversary of the invention of wipe-clean stuff, Formica was originally used as an electrical insulator before anyone spotted that it would be very easy to remove ketchup from. That brings us to our next instalment of healing music to solve with or even listen to … … and to our next challenge, via another word that ants have given us. Some call it formication, but reader, how would you clue PINS AND NEEDLES? Many thanks for your clues for CHIT. Lizard keeps things about as simple as possible with “Naughty tich?” and the audacity award goes to Wellywearer2 for ... A sassy mademoisellepronouncing this word herewould sound quite rudeto a British ear ... although 10FootClaudicant puts up some strong competition with “Start to cry with joy when one place left for testimonial” (explained here). Meanwhile, we return to a recent subject of discussion in Dimsworthy’s “Chick lit from Lewis Carroll? Alice, perhaps”. The runners-up are Faiton77’s plausible “Hundred pound note” and Schroduck’s sneaky “Cash it out as it’s worth money”; the winner is Montano’s terse and evocative “Batter caught at first slip”. The world has been divided in 2020 into those with more time than they could imagine wanting and those without enough of the stuff. Sadly, the latter applies to reader Dimsworthy, who is stepping back from making this crosswordy place an even more pleasant place to come. See you again, I hope, kludos to Montano and please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition – and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics – below. Sometimes, a clue with an intriguing surface provides extra delight in the simple business of breaking it down: as with Nutmeg’s recipe … 24d More artful hosts aren’t com­monly of better character (9)[ wordplay: synonym of ‘more artful’ containing (‘hosts’) slang for (‘commonly’) ‘aren’t’ ][ SLIER containing AINT ][ definition: of better character ] … for SAINTLIER. Stay safe.