What were you hoping for? Something for my mates to mock me about, and a free meal. First impressions?Colourful and confident. My monochrome ensemble was a bit underwhelming in comparison. What did you talk about? The photoshoot, our preparations for this date (mine were a bit more extensive), politics, work, our online dating profiles, festivals, coronavirus, the couple next to us (sorry, guys) and Annie’s ability to run a lot further than I will ever be able to. Any awkward moments? When we realised that we’d been on the same train and had gone up the escalators together before meeting. And goodbyes with face masks on. Good table manners? In the context of a burger restaurant, I’m going to say yes. It really put us under pressure, though! There was a mutual affection for our teenage waiter, so shout outs to him. Best thing about Annie? Her openness, humour, and willingness to take advantage of the number of free drinks on offer. Would you introduce her to your friends? For sure. I think we were both a bit shocked that we didn’t have more mutuals. Describe Annie in three words? Funny, blunt and charismatic. What do you think she made of you? In the process of a minor existential crisis, but with passable chat. Did you go on somewhere? A gentleman never clucks and tells (the pub). If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed? The rule is 1m distance + snogs, right? If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? For it to be on a Friday or a Saturday. Marks out of 10? A strong 8. Would you meet again? I reckon so, albeit at a less chicken-themed location. Annie wouldn’t tell me what she would say to this answer, so the anxiety is growing. What were you hoping for?A good night and a good story. Someone who could hold a conversation, and can have a laugh. First impressions?Super easy to get along with. As I walked past the restaurant, there was a guy at a table alone and I thought “I bet that’s him!” – but I couldn’t see what he looked like. What did you talk about?How we’d prepped (or not) for the date, his short stand-up career, living in the island of Réunion. We guessed each other’s ages (I was bang on). Any awkward moments?Saying goodbye with a face mask on was a new experience... Good table manners?I was happy that he was down for sharing a pudding. Best thing about Patrick?Up for a good time and for making the most of the date. We laughed a lot. Would you introduce him to your friends?Sure. Describe Patrick in three words?Can I say four? Comfortable to be around (and I don’t think it was the beer goggles). Or: Not a Tory! What do you think he made of you?I think he thought I was fun, if not a bit blunt and a bit of an oversharer. Did you go on somewhere?Maybe... a lady never tells. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed?We might have broken the 1m rule… but we stayed alert throughout. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Not going to a place with only one veggie option. Marks out of 10?8.5 Would you meet again?I think so. We’ve swapped numbers. • Annie and Patrick ate at Around The Cluck at Restaurant 12:51, London N1. They were photographed separately for this image. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com