It felt appropriate to settle in for The Great Heist (Netflix) as much of England and Wales sweltered in a heatwave, and not just because of its sunny Colombian setting. The high-stakes bank job thriller is a heady watch that does an expert job of cranking the tension up and up until it leaves you sweating with anticipation. Much of this drama series treads familiar territory, though it’s done so well that it brings to mind classic 90s blockbuster films, and has a Soderbergh-ish energy to it. Andrés Parra, who resembles a young David Threlfall spliced with a Hollywood Jason – Sudeikis or Bateman, whichever suits – is Chayo, a bent jeweller with a history of extremely successful robberies. Extremely successful, that is, until the fateful night that kicks off this whole affair, when an attempt to make off with a gorgeous and intricate museum artefact ends in bloodshed, and marks the end of his heist days. Still, you can’t keep a good criminal down. The action proper begins two years later when Chayo – now going by his real name, Roberto – is running his own jewellery store, with as healthy a disdain for legality as he seems to have for paying his bills. There are dodgy deals he can’t pass up, and repossession is imminent; his family are accustomed to living in a luxury he can’t afford, and unless he can come up with two million pesos by the following morning, he’ll be left with nothing. “I’ll make sure even your toilet is taken from your house,” promises the charming, menacing bailiff Jorge. The stage is very much set for one last job, and what a job it is: “the greatest heist in the history of this country”, promises a breathless Chayo. An acquaintance tips Chayo off, just when he needs it most. The heavily guarded Bank of the Republic might have a chink in its armour. It’s time to get the old gang back together. Despite a hefty legal disclaimer at the end pointing out that it is “not a faithful reproduction” of events, The Great Heist is loosely based on the extraordinary and daring true-life robbery of that very institution in 1994, when thieves made off with 24bn Colombian pesos (equivalent to $30m at the time). The trouble is that, for Chayo, the old gang is no longer much to speak of. Crucially, it needs Molina, “the Lawyer”, who ended up on kidney dialysis after the last botched robbery, and is less than keen to get involved again. However, with expert soapiness, the stakes are high for him, too: without an operation, kidney failure will kill him, and his wife is nudging him towards getting the cash for the op by whatever means necessary. Add to this the immaculate Mrs K, a criminal boss straight out of something by Lynda La Plante, whose methods of negotiating a deal seem to involve an unholy combination of daggers and nostrils. She’s got the money and she’s got the common sense to ground Chayo’s wildest daydreams. They’re all in it, up to their necks. “Either we rob that fucking bank or we’ll end up chopped up in landfill,” she hisses. While there is nothing too out of the ordinary here – a job that many have tried, but none have conquered; the old gang giving it one last go; the underdogs v the big machine – it’s all pulled off with such style that it’s impossible to resist. Even the soapier elements – like Chayo’s family dynamics, with a stroppy teenage daughter and secret son, or Mrs K’s campy regality – work well. Nothing outstays its welcome. After all, speed is, as we soon discover, the key to a successful heist.