The instinct to try to boost morale during a time of hardship and suffering resonates today as we face the pandemic and economic recession. Almost 90 years ago during the Great Depression, with the unemployment rate hovering between 20 and 30%, the United States government sought ways to lift up its citizens. Modeled on the 1933 Public Works Art Project, the federal government created the Treasury Section of Painting and Sculpture a year later (the name was subsequently changed to the Section of Fine Arts). These programs were designed to employ artists. Under the program, 1% of each federal building’s construction budget was designated to the creation of public art. The result was more than 1,200 murals being painted in post offices throughout the United States. The mission of the post office murals was multifaceted – to boost morale in communities, employ artists by the thousands and create world-class art that was accessible to everyone. The murals revolved around local folklore, landscapes, industry and, unsurprisingly, mail delivery. They told the story of life across the United States. The first mural I photographed occurred by happenstance – I stumbled upon a mural depicting the 1932 Winter Olympics in Lake Placid, New York. From there the project slowly grew, as I traveled around the country seeking out the unique art of the post office mural. I’ve now photographed about 325 individual murals though I don’t have an actual tally. From the magnificent depiction of steam engines being built in the post office in Willard, Ohio, to a serene pondside landscape hanging in the sheriff’s office in Dale county, Alabama, or covered wagons crossing a stream in Crawford, Nebraska, each new mural I discovered offered an engaging view into the local histories of the world around us. In small towns everywhere, history was painted by people who arrived in America seeking a better life. Many of the artists employed by the Section were immigrants. José Aceves, a Mexican-American artist, painted the classic western scene Big City News in Borger, Texas. New and Old Methods of Transportation, showing how the rapid pace at which technology was changing rural towns, was painted by the Polish-American Bernard Zakheim in Mineola, Texas. In a Virginia post office lobby, you’ll find a factory valley landscape entitled Appalachia by Lucienne Bloch, a Swiss-born immigrant. As today’s national discussion in the US has shifted towards institutional racism and the place of art and statues commemorating the United States’ racist history, many post office murals are coming under scrutiny for the way they portray the colonization and slavery. Hollis Holbrook’s John Elliot Speaks to the Natick Indians depicts Native Americans enslaved by Puritans while John Elliot preaches Christianity to them. The city of Natick was founded as the first of many “praying towns” by the Massachusetts Bay Colony, where Native Americans would be forced to learn Christianity. However, the controversy surrounding post office murals is arguably nothing new. In the 1950s, a handful of artists were made to testify under the House committee on un-American activities for their celebration of labor and political undertones. Victor Arnautoff’s historic 10-panel The Life of Washington mural at the George Washington high school in San Francisco is in the midst of a fierce fight to be preserved, hidden or destroyed due to its depictions of George Washington as a slave owner and the dead Native Americans the country was founded upon. Hundreds of murals created under the Section of Fine Arts and the broader Works Progress Administration have been lost or purposely destroyed over the years. The Section of Fine Arts created roughly 1,400 murals and sculptures in federal buildings, not entirely post offices. The PWAP, Treasury Relief Art and Federal Art Project commissioned thousands of other paintings, posters, general art classes, etc, including post office murals. All wrapped into one, it is undoubtedly the largest public art project in the US. The most recent politicization of the post office has brought renewed focus to the ways the postal service is crucial to everyday life. Perhaps an unexpected consequence, scaling back hours and funding will also put this unparalleled collection of public art at risk. • Justin Hamel is a documentary and editorial photographer in El Paso, Texas, working at the intersections of climate, labor and migration.