Matches at the Western & Southern Open, which is being played in New York as a tune-up to the US Open grand slam, will be suspended on Thursday in protest against racial injustice. “As a sport, tennis is collectively taking a stance against racial inequality and social injustice that once again has been thrust to the forefront in the United States,” organisers said in a statement. The tournament was scheduled to hold semi-final matches in both the men’s and women’s draws on Thursday but they will now resume on Friday. Naomi Osaka, the Japanese star and last top 10 seed in the women’s bracket, had earlier joined professional athletes in basketball, baseball and football in demanding change after Jacob Blake was shot by police. Osaka tweeted that as a Black woman, she feels compelled to pull out of the tournament to put a focus on police shooting Black people. Her move quickly got support from others players on the tour. Sloane Stephens retweeted the message and added: “Say it louder! Proud of you” and in a separate tweet added, “#Proud of all the sports teams and athletes taking a stand tonight #BLM”. Osaka on Thursday said she would play in her semi-final after the postponement of matches. “After my announcement and lengthy consultation with the WTA and USTA, I have agreed at their request to play on Friday,” she said. “They offered to postpone all matches until Friday and in my mind that brings more attention to the movement. I want to thank the WTA and the Tournament for their support.” After reaching the semi-finals late on Wednesday, Milos Raonic said the ATP and WTA should consider a joint action that goes beyond a small group of players. “I think real disruption, that’s what makes change, and I think a lot of real disruption is caused by affecting people in a monetary way and can force some kind of change,” he said. “I’m hoping at least we on the men’s tour as well as the women’s, we band together and we show support.” All NBA and WNBA games, three Major League Baseball games and five of six Major League Soccer games were called off on Wednesday as athletes demanded racial justice.