A minister has refused to confirm whether the government’s chief whip was told about claims against a Conservative MP by his alleged victim four months before he was arrested on suspicion of rape. It is understood that the woman in her 20s, a former parliamentary staffer, spoke to the chief whip, Mark Spencer, in April. Last week, the woman told the Times that Spencer had taken no action. She has since contacted the police, alleging rape, violent sexual assault and coercive control by the MP, who has not been named. She reported four incidents, alleged to have taken place between July 2019 and January 2020, in Westminster, Lambeth and Hackney. She alleged that the MP assaulted her, forced her to have sex and left her so traumatised that she had to go to hospital. He was taken into custody in east London early on Saturday, and released on bail to a date later this month. Spencer has denied the woman made any allegations of a sexual nature in his conversation with her. But he acknowledges that she reported “abusive behaviour and threats”. He also advised her to go to the independent complaints and grievance scheme (ICGS). A fellow Conservative MP also raised the woman’s allegation with Spencer and Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the House of Commons, after speaking to the alleged victim a month ago. Rees-Mogg did not speak to the alleged victim, but encouraged the fellow MP to advise the alleged victim to go to the police, sources said. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, the business minister, Nadhim Zahawi, was asked why Spencer had not acted. Zahawi said people would be “hearing from the chief whip” only after the police investigation was over. Zahawi said: “I think it’s only right that we wait for the police to complete their investigation. As has sometimes happened in these cases – and they are very, very serious cases – when the information is finally in the public domain people realise why people have behaved in a particular way.” He declined to give any more information, or to say whether he knew about Spencer’s conversation with the woman. He also declined to say why the Conservative whip had not been withdrawn from the MP. Party officials said they would consider removing the whip at the conclusion of a police inquiry. Labour’s shadow domestic violence minister, Jess Phillips, said on Sunday that she found it “shocking” that whip had not yet been removed. “In any other organisation, were this investigation to be going on, this police investigation, somebody would be suspended while the investigation was taking place,” she told Times Radio. In an interview with the Times a week ago, the former parliamentary aide who made the allegations said she had told Spencer she had been sexually assaulted and then threatened by the MP. She told the paper: “Our conversation was brief. He didn’t seem interested in the details of the allegations but spent most of the time saying how I shouldn’t worry about the threats. His response was: ‘Well, don’t worry, because the MP won’t actually carry out those threats.’” The Metropolitan police said detectives had launched an investigation following the allegations, which it received on 31 July.