Polish Nobel laureate Olga Tokarczuk, Margaret Atwood, JM Coetzee, Ian McEwan, Slavoj Žižek and Judith Butler are among more than 70 signatories to an open letter by authors, actors and directors condemning the rise of homophobia and transphobia in Poland under president Andrzej Duda. In a letter addressed to the president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, the signatories write to “voice our grave concern about the future of democracy in Poland, a country with an admirable history of resistance to totalitarianism and struggle for freedom” and express their outrage at “repressions directed against the LGBT+ community in Poland”. Other signatories include film directors Pedro Almodóvar, Yorgos Lanthimos, Mike Leigh, Luca Guadagnino and Paweł Pawlikowski, who is Polish; actors Ed Harris, Isabelle Huppert and Stellan Skarsgaard; and writers John Banville and Sebastian Barry, Deborah Levy, Édouard Louis and Valeria Luiselli. The letter, started by Tokarczuk, film director Agnieszka Holland and sociologist Agnieszka Graff, comes amid intensifying anti-LGBTQ+ rhetoric by government officials and state media, and a crackdown on LGBTQ+ equality protests after the recent re-election of Duda, leading the populist Law and Justice (PiS) party, for a second five-year term. Since taking power in 2015, Duda has railed against LGBTQ+ rights as an “ideology” and foreign import that threatens Poland’s Christian values. With more than 86% of the population identifying as Roman Catholic, Duda has proposed the establishment of a “Family Charter”, which would ban “the propogation of LGBTQ+ ideology in schools and public institutions” and stop LGBTQ+ people getting married or having children. Anti-LGBTQ+ attacks are currently not considered a hate crime under Polish law. Authorities in one-third of municipalities across Poland have declared themselves “LGBT-free zones” since 2019, a non-binding, but menacing resolution calling for the end of tolerance of LGBTQ+ individuals. Last month, the European Union announced that it would cut funding to six Polish towns that made this declaration, while one Dutch town, Nieuwegein, voted to sever longstanding ties with its twin town, Puławy in eastern Poland, over the issue. The letter calls attention to the case of Margot, a non-binary activist who was placed in pre-trial detention for two months on 7 August. In June, she was accused of assaulting a van driver who was broadcasting homophobic slurs from a loudspeaker. In July, along with three others, she was arrested again for “insulting religious feelings and insulting Warsaw monuments” by putting rainbow flags on statues throughout the city. On 7 August, after her detention, hundreds of protesters took to the streets of Warsaw with signs reading “Give us back Margot” and “We are behind Margot”. Some 48 people were arrested on charges of taking part in an illegal gathering. In a nod to the 1969 Stonewall Uprising in New York, a landmark protest in LGBTQ+ rights, Polish Twitter users documented the protests using #PolishStonewall. The letter calls Margot’s actions “neither ‘hooliganism’ nor ‘provocations’, as Poland’s government-run media insist, but rather desperate acts of resistance against degrading homophobic hate speech.” The letter goes on: “The van is one of many similar vehicles parading outrageous claims around the cities of Poland: equating homosexuality with paedophilia, and asserting that gays are the source of diseases and a threat to children. Efforts to stop this well-funded hate campaign by legal means had led to nothing. “Homophobic aggression in Poland is growing because it is condoned by the ruling party, which has chosen sexual minorities as a scapegoat with no regard for the safety and well-being of citizens. Margot is, in fact, a political prisoner, held captive for her refusal to accept indignity.” The signatories call upon the Polish government to “stop targeting sexual minorities” and on the European Commission to “take immediate steps to defend core European values – equality, non-discrimination, respect for minorities – which are being blatantly violated in Poland. LGBT+ rights are human rights and must be defended as such.”