The UK transport secretary, Grant Shapps has said it is safe to go back to work in England, as the government prepares to launch a publicity drive to persuade the public to return to the office. Ministers are concerned about the prospects for city centre businesses if more office workers fail to return to their workplaces. The Cabinet Office will take out ads in regional newspapers after schoolchildren in England return to the classroom next week, advising employers about how to make their offices Covid-secure, and encouraging the public to feel safe to go back. Speaking on Sky News from his home, Shapps said: “What we’re saying to people is it is now safe to go back to work and your employer should have made arrangements which are appropriate to make sure that it is coronavirus-safe to work and you will see some changes if you haven’t been in for a bit as a result.” He said there was a limit, “in human terms”, to remote working. “The vast majority of employers just want to get their businesses back up and running, they want to do the right thing, and many will have found that actually home working can work for some of their employees.” But he added: “I think there’s a limit, just in human terms, to remote working. And there are things where you just need to spark off each other and get together in order to make progress. So I think common sense will prevail between employers and employees.” Marks & Spencer – 7,000 jobs18 August: Food, clothing and homewares retailer cuts jobs in central support centre, regional management and stores. M&Co – 400 jobs5 August: M&Co, the Renfrewshire-based clothing retailer, formerly known as Mackays, will close 47 of 215 stores. WH Smith – 1,500 jobs5 August: The chain, which sells products ranging from sandwiches to stationery, will cut jobs mainly in UK railway stations and airports. Pizza Express – 1,100 jobs4 August: The restaurant chain plans the closure of 70 restaurants as part of a rescue restructure deal. Dixons Carphone – 800 jobs4 August: Electronics retailer Dixons Carphone is cutting 800 managers in its stores as it continues to reduce costs. DW Sports – 1,700 jobs at risk3 August: DW Sports fell into administration, closing its retail website immediately and risking the closure of its 150 gyms and shops. Marks & Spencer – 950 jobs20 July: The high street stalwart cuts management jobs in stores as well as head office roles related to property and store operations. Ted Baker – 500 jobs19 July: About 200 roles to go at the fashion retailer’s London headquarters, the Ugly Brown Building, and the remainder at stores. Azzurri – 1,200 jobs17 July: The owner of the Ask Italian and Zizzi pizza chains closes 75 restaurants and makes its Pod lunch business delivery only Burberry – 500 jobs worldwide15 July: Total includes 150 posts in UK head offices as luxury brand tries to slash costs by £55m after a slump in sales during the pandemic. Boots – 4,000 jobs9 July: Boots is cutting 4,000 jobs – or 7% of its workforce – by closing 48 opticians outlets and reducing staff at its head office in Nottingham as well as some management and customer service roles in stores. John Lewis – 1,300 jobs9 July: John Lewis announced that it is planning to permanently close eight of its 50 stores, including full department stores in Birmingham and Watford, with the likely loss of 1,300 jobs. Celtic Manor – 450 jobs9 July: Bosses at the Celtic Collection in Newport, which staged golf's Ryder Cup in 2010 and the 2014 Nato Conference, said 450 of its 995 workers will lose their jobs. Pret a Manger – 1,000 jobs6 July: Pret a Manger is to permanently close 30 branches and could cut at least 1,000 jobs after suffering “significant operating losses” as a result of the Covid-19 lockdown Casual Dining Group – 1,900 jobs2 July: The owner of the Bella Italia, Café Rouge and Las Iguanas restaurant chains collapsed into administration, with the immediate loss of 1,900 jobs. The company said multiple offers were on the table for parts of the business but buyers did not want to acquire all the existing sites and 91 of its 250 outlets would remain permanently closed. Arcadia – 500 jobs1 July: Arcadia, Sir Philip Green’s troubled fashion group – which owns Topshop, Miss Selfridge, Dorothy Perkins, Burton, Evans and Wallis – said in July 500 head office jobs out of 2,500 would go in the coming weeks. SSP Group – 5,000 jobs1 July: The owner of Upper Crust and Caffè Ritazza is to axe 5,000 jobs, about half of its workforce, with cuts at its head office and across its UK operations after the pandemic stalled domestic and international travel. Harrods – 700 jobs1 July: The department store group is cutting one in seven of its 4,800 employees because of the “ongoing impacts” of the pandemic. Harveys – 240 jobs30 June: Administrators made 240 redundancies at the furniture chain Harveys, with more than 1,300 jobs at risk if a buyer cannot be found. TM Lewin – 600 jobs30 June: Shirtmaker TM Lewin closed all 66 of its outlets permanently, with the loss of about 600 jobs. Monsoon Accessorize – 545 jobs11 June: The fashion brands were bought out of administration by their founder, Peter Simon, in June, in a deal in which 35 stores closed permanently and 545 jobs were lost. Mulberry – 470 jobs8 June: The luxury fashion and accessories brand is to cut 25% of its global workforce and has started a consultation with the 470 staff at risk. The Restaurant Group – 3,000 jobs3 June: The owner of dining chains such as Wagamama and Frankie & Benny’s has closed most branches of Chiquito and all 11 of its Food & Fuel pubs, with another 120 restaurants to close permanently. Total job losses could reach 3,000. Clarks – 900 jobs21 May: Clarks plans to cut 900 office jobs worldwide as it grapples with the growth of online shoe shopping as well as the pandemic. Oasis and Warehouse – 1,800 jobs30 April: The fashion brands were bought out of administration by the restructuring firm Hilco in April, with all of their stores permanently closed and 1,800 jobs lost. Cath Kidston – 900 jobs21 April: More than 900 jobs were cut immediately at the retro retail label Cath Kidston after the company said it was permanently closing all 60 of its UK stores. Debenhams – 4,000 jobs9 April: At least 4,000 jobs will be lost at Debenhams in its head office and closed stores after its collapse into administration in April, for the second time in a year. Laura Ashley – 2,700 jobs17 March: Laura Ashley collapsed into administration, with 2,700 job losses, and said rescue talks had been thwarted by the pandemic. The sandwich chain Pret a Manger announced on Thursday it would cut nearly 2,900 jobs after the desertion of high streets due to the coronavirus pandemic sent its sales plummeting, underlining the potential impact of changing work habits. The CBI’s director general, Carolyn Fairbairn, has warned that city centres could become “ghost towns” unless more is done to help. Labour has urged the government to provide more support for high street businesses – in particular those that are still seeing a sharp decline in trade due to government restrictions. The shadow business and consumer minister, Lucy Powell, said: “It’s no wonder businesses and workers don’t feel confident about going to the office given the government’s confusing and inconsistent messaging. “Ministers must come forward with a clear plan to reassure businesses they can safely return, supported by a working test and trace system.” Downing Street sources distanced the government from reports that ministers would argue that working from home could put employees more at risk of being fired. Responding to a Daily Telegraph headline that said, “Go back to work or risk losing your job,” a government source said: “This is a deeply irresponsible headline with no truth behind it. Our priority has always and will always be protecting people’s jobs.” In a separate interview on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Shapps cited the impact on workers’ mental health of staying at home – pointing to the experience of young workers, in flat-shares, on video-conference calls all day “from a corner of their bedroom”. “For a lot of people, it will be the right time to return,” he said. Asked whether the dramatic changes in work habits kicked off by the lockdown could become permanent, with a knock-on effect on many city centre firms, Shapps said: “I don’t agree with this apocalyptic view of the workplace, but I do agree that we’re going to be in a period of quite tremendous change at the moment.”