The Morrison government says it has reached an agreement with the British pharmaceutical giant AstraZeneca to supply Australians with the University of Oxford Covid-19 vaccine for free – assuming it clears clinical trials. The vaccine agreement also includes a $24.7m contract with medical technology company Becton Dickinson for the supply of needles and syringes to make sure there is sufficient supply on hand to roll out the vaccine nationally. Scott Morrison says Australia has pursued the Oxford vaccine because it is “one of the most advanced and promising in the world”. But the prime minister says Australia will continue negotiations with other parties. “There is no guarantee that this, or any other, vaccine will be successful, which is why we are continuing our discussions with many parties around the world while backing our own researches at the same time to find a vaccine,” Morrison said in a statement. The government proposes to sign a letter of intent with AstraZeneca and enter a consumables contract with Becton Dickinson for the supply of needles and syringes. The total cost of the program is likely to be in the billions of dollars. The government says the initial agreements will cover vaccine development, production and distribution, and it will contain a commitment to produce the vaccine locally. Subsequent agreements will include distribution, timing and the price of the vaccine. Australia’s largest biotechnology company, CSL, has confirmed it is in discussions with AstraZeneca and the government concerning local production of the Oxford vaccine, as well as continuing work on another candidate under development at the University of Queensland. A statement from CSL said: “Development of the UQ vaccine candidate remains CSL’s priority, however, we are currently in discussions with AstraZeneca and the Australian government to assess whether it is possible to provide local manufacturing support for the Oxford University/AstraZeneca vaccine, should it prove successful, while protecting our commitment to the UQ vaccine. “We are assessing the viability of options ranging from the fill and finish of bulk product imported to Australia through to manufacture of the vaccine candidate under licence. There are a number of technical issues to work through and discussions are ongoing.” With the government signalling over the weekend that a deal on a vaccine was close, Labor said Morrison should increase the funding available to Australian researchers. “There absolutely should be more commonwealth funding, and $5m to the University of Queensland is not enough when you consider that the government of Queensland is putting [in] $10m,” the shadow health minister, Chris Bowen, said. “The state government is putting in double what the national government has done and there are other vaccines under development in Australia with zero government support and funding for Covid-19. Some of those may work.” Morrison has been stepping up public warnings in recent weeks that countries need to share any vaccine against the coronavirus that is found to be successful and safe through clinical trials. While declining to nominate which country or countries he might be referring to, the prime minister has said: “Any country that were to find this vaccine and not make it available around the world, without restraint, I think would be judged terribly by history and that’s certainly Australia’s view.” As well as working to secure supply for Australia, the government says it will work to ensure the Pacific and countries in south-east Asia have early access to a Covid vaccine. Australia has submitted a non-binding expression of interest to join the World Health Organisation’s “Covax” program, which is an international collaboration to combat so-called “vaccine nationalism”. The program has the aim of securing two billion doses of a Covid vaccine by the end of next year. More than 160 candidate vaccines are currently under development. Trials of the Oxford vaccine are expected to run through 2020 into 2021.