This week the June quarter GDP figures will show the economy shrank by about 6% in the three months after the pandemic hit our shores. But while the economic carnage of the present will deservedly get the attention, we should not let it blind us to the reality that even before the virus, the economy was barely limping along. For my many sins, this week I spent time watching the Republican national convention. It was of course a smorgasbord of turgid hucksters praising their lord Donald Trump with large helping of lies and delusion. Speaker after speaker would have you believe that things are great. Vice-President Mike Pence boasted of how in the past three months the US has “gained back 9.3 million jobs”. Pity, I guess, that there were 25m jobs lost in the two months before that. It was in essence an attempt to erase the impact of the virus – to erase the present. This is somewhat ironic because one thing the pandemic has been very effective at doing is erasing the past. When everything is going downhill at record speed it is easy to pretend that beforehand everything was going well. It provides the government the opportunity to suggest that if it wasn’t for this pesky virus our economy would have been booming along. What has mostly been forgotten is that before coronavirus the economy was struggling. A good indicator of this is the level of private-sector business investment. This week the latest investment figures were released (ahead of this week’s June GDP figures) showing that in the second quarter of this year, new private investment fell 5.9% – the worst fall for four years. But that disguises just how bad things are because it includes mining investment which back in 2016 was plunging after the end of the biggest boom in our history. If we just look at the non-mining sectors, we see investment fell 8% in the June quarter – the biggest one quarter drop on record, going back to 1987. And as with plunges in employment, hours worked, overall GDP and any other economic measure, it is easy to think, “Oh well, that’s the pandemic for you.” Certainly the pandemic has massively hit investment but it bears remembering that non-mining investment has now been falling since the first quarter of last year. Similarly, this week businesses provided their third estimate for investment throughout 2020-21. Non-mining businesses expect to invest about 20% less than they did last financial year – that is the worst fall in expectations since the 1990s recession. But again, let us not think that expectations were good before the virus. So poor was the outlook before the pandemic hit that in January and February when businesses were asked to provide their first estimate for investment in 2020-21, for the first time in four years their estimate was below that given 12 months earlier. Essentially at the start of this year, non-mining firms were already expecting to reduce their investment. That is not what occurs in a strong economy. This week will see a horror GDP figure and, yes, we’ll even get silly articles saying that we are now “officially” in a recession. But amid the disastrous set of numbers, the loss of production and output and income, do not let history be erased. Of course the magnitude of the fall is due to the virus, but do not forget that six months ago there was little reason to think that the government would be boasting about a great set of numbers.