It doesn’t take much to discombobulate the Fiver. Usually just saying the word “discombobulate” is enough to get the job done. So imagine the state of our noggin with all the confusion and upheaval caused by Covid. We’re used to not knowing what day it is; now we don’t even know what season it is. 2019-20? 2020-21? 2314/97? And when we looked at the fixtures for this weekend and saw Chelsea v Manchester City and Arsenal v Liverpool, we didn’t know whether it was men’s football, women’s football or another televised festival of esports. Turns out it’s a combination of the first two: a Community Shield double header to signal the start of the 2020-21 English season. The reason it’s being played tomorrow, two weeks ahead of the start of the Premier League, is that there are men’s international fixtures next weekend. The Nations League waits for no pandemic! First up at Wembley is Chelsea, WSL champions, against Manchester City. Usually Chelsea would play the FA Cup winners but that tournament is still ongoing, to be completed during the 2023-24 season, so instead they will meet the runners-up in the league. To compound the sense of calendrical (is that a word? It is now!) confusion, the 2019-20 Champions League final between Wolfsburg and serial winners Lyon takes place in San Sebastián on Sunday night. Lyon’s team will include Lucy Bronze but not Nikita Parris, who was sent off in the semi-final. Alex Greenwood and Jodie Taylor are likely to be among the subs. Wolfsburg don’t have any England players, so we don’t care about their team news. As for the men’s game, it’s Arsenal v Liverpool, who will take part in the Community Shield as champions for the first time since it was still called the Charity Shield, and the trophy was shared if the match ended in a draw. That’s what happened when Liverpool drew 1-1 with Manchester United on 18 August 1990, though this time it will go to penalties if necessary. The Community Shield is largely irrelevant at the best of times, which these emphatically are not, so the Fiver isn’t yet bouncing off the walls. But we are quite interested to see whether Mikel Arteta chooses the fit-again Bernd Leno or Emiliano Martínez, who had such an impressive end to the season, in goal. He could just bottle it and give them a half each; that’s what your friendly neighbourhood confrontation-averse Fiver would probably do. The match is also an important sharpener for both teams, given the reduced pre-season. And it’s a chance to see various (sort of) new signings – Willian, William Saliba and Kostas Tsimikas – in action. The 2019-20 season is almost dead, long live 2020-21! “We had been warming up for 10 minutes when Barcelona walked out onto the field. They seemed very relaxed. The match could have ended differently, but I think it turned out that we were very hungry” – Bayern Munich’s Thomas Müller on that 8-2 thrashing [perhaps Frenkie said Relax? – Fiver Ed]. Catch up with Football Weekly Extra as Melissa Rudd is joined by Barry Glendenning, John Nicholson and Kevin Miles from the Football Supporters’ Association to discuss how smaller clubs can survive amid financial turmoil. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/08/27-57107-gnl.fw.20200827.ic.sustain2.mp3 “Re Paul Jordan’s request for football sayings in songs (Thursday’s Fiver). The ultimate example of this has to be 0-0 AET by Thousand Yard Stare. Not only does it use a desperately bad game as a metaphor for a failing relationship, but the band have taken to introducing it with the line ‘25 years and still no one’s scored’ – perfectly describing life at Fiver Towers” – Richard O’Hagan. “South African group TKZee recorded a song with former Blackeye Rovers striker Benni McCarthy in the run-up to the 1998 World Cup called Shibobo. It featured a sample of Europe’s The Final Countdown and lyrics like “Benni’s in the 18 area”. Shibobo is the South African term for a nutmeg. Now try and get the song out of your head” – Leon-Ben Lamprecht. “The Marias (and 1,056 others) have a song called Over The Moon. Then there’s the dreadful Two Halves by Richard Dawson, who does win points for this prescient line: ‘An empty stadium yells man on’” – John Myles. “How about Billy Bragg’s Goalhanger and REM’s “Get Up?” – Peter Oh. “Perhaps more clubs should take a leaf out of Adelaide United’s approach to attracting Lionel Messi. No money, just a bottle of Grange Hermitage. I bet City’s package won’t include that” – Jason Steger. “My team Bohemians have just been knocked out of Europe on penalties and I am gutted. More than ever, I just want to say STOP FOOTBALL!!!!!” – Tom Duignan [there’s better news down the page – Fiver Ed]. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Leon-Ben Lambrecht. Harry Maguire has said he was “scared for his life” and thought he was being kidnapped during the incident outside a bar in Mykonos that led to his arrest. In a sit-down with the BBC, Maguire also voiced his disappointment at being dropped from the England squad by Gareth Southgate after being convicted of assault, resisting arrest and attempted bribery. Mikel Arteta, the first high-profile person in football to test positive for coronavirus, has warned there will be ‘many more’ cases throughout the Premier League as football tries to return to normality. Thiago Silva will bring a fresh touch of Brazilian flair to Chelsea’s back line next season after signing from PSG on a one-year deal, with an option for a further year. Like Weird Uncle Fiver, Eberechi Eze once applied to work in Tesco. Unlike Weird Uncle Fiver, Eze was not politely told to never come back, and is now a Premier League footballer after joining Crystal Palace from QPR. Some guys have all the luck. Lionel Messi won’t be taking his talents to Anfield. “The numbers are not for us. We don’t have to start thinking about it. No chance, but, good player to be honest!” chortled Jürgen Klopp. The England captain, Steph Houghton, has said that she and her Manchester City teammates will take a knee before the Community Shield against Chelsea on Saturday. Jeff Hendrick is happy to have landed at Newcastle, but still enjoyed some unexpected interest from Milan. “It was a really nice feeling. Everyone knows that club, it’s massive, so it gave me a bit of a confidence boost,” Hendrick trilled. Tottenham are close to signing Matt Doherty from Wolves for an initial £12m fee – and his former club Bohemians will take a 10% cut. Doherty moved to Molineux a decade ago for just £75,000. Feel better yet, Tom? What does Jack Grealish need to do to earn an England call-up? Pull his socks up, for a start. Martin Laurence takes a deeper look. Lionel Messi signing for Manchester City would raise revenues across the Premier League, writes Eni Aluko. Football was fine in its protective bubble, but now the challenges brought by Covid-19 are becoming ever more apparent, says Paul Wilson. Is a home defeat by Ferencvaros really such a surprise? With standards falling in Scotland, Ewan Murray isn’t convinced. Sadio Mané to join Ronnie Koeman’s ill-fated Barcelona revolution? Sevilla speedster Sergio Reguilón to Spurs or United? It’s all in Friday’s Mill. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! Check out the latest summer deals in our men’s and women’s summer transfer interactives.