The eerie, tepid games of football played without crowds have been one of the pandemic’s stranger sights. Accompanied by the AI noise engine that provides the soundtrack for football video games, they have been disquieting. Why should watching Liverpool or Norwich, otherwise unchanged from before lockdown, feel so one-dimensional? What is a football club? The players and coaches come and go, owners and shareholders buy, sell up and move on, and they endure. Stadiums seem to embody them, until they are knocked down and relocated, but the club’s existence is unbroken. Even the legal entity that constitutes a club can be expunged and liquidated, only for the same club to rise again in a new form. They can perform such alchemy because, in fact, football clubs are their supporters and the collective web of stories, memories and identities woven between themselves and the team over time: the stuff that makes football matter. Without the real energies of real people, the digital spectacle has proved hollow, however good the play. Were it to continue in this form, its commercial appeal would dim. Yet English and Scottish football clubs have, since the 19th century, been in private hands. In the past two decades, consortia of local businesspeople and regional magnates have given way to multimillionaires and then billionaires; foreign states and their agencies; oligarchs and former prime ministers. Some are reasonable custodians, some are asset-strippers, some are chancers and most are disingenuous egotists. Either way, none of them should be able to profit from or control these deep, shared, cultural entities. Taking our cue from Sweden’s mid-1970s Meidner plan, which sought to transfer the country’s industrial conglomerates into the hands of the socially owned pension funds of their workers and consumers, we could legislate for a similar programme. Some 10% of a club’s annual turnover would be ringfenced for the purchase of shares, at a negotiated price, and then transferred to the club’s supporters’ trust. No club would be worse off relative to its competitors; no owner would go uncompensated. The pool for players’ wages and agents’ fees would be smaller, but no one would be going hungry. Supporters’ trusts, whose presidents and boards would be elected by the club membership, could choose to own 100%, or stop at 51% and allow non-controlling private investment. Social ownership is no guarantee of good governance or sporting success but, as many clubs can attest, nor is private ownership. At the very least it would put the people who actually make football matter, who make it a commercial success, in charge of their own rituals and money. • David Goldblatt is the author of The Age Of Football: The Global Game In The Twenty-first Century (Macmillan)