There is a photograph of me, aged four or five, pushing a lawnmower, wearing smart, red, leather shoes. It was taken at our home in Durham, about a year before my father died. Although it’s clearly a posed shot, I like to think it shows an early interest in gardening. My parents had emigrated from India in 1955. Following my father’s death in 1967, it was assumed my mother would return with me and my brother. Instead, she immersed herself in her work as a doctor and in gardening. By 1972, we were living in Huddersfield, West Yorkshire, with half an acre of land. I enjoyed mowing, mulching and tending the vegetable patch: scraping back the soil to reveal a clutch of golden potatoes remains a vivid memory. We even managed to grow peaches (well, two) and grapes (small and hard, but we savoured them nonetheless). I remember one summer evening, sitting under a cloud of midges, weeding out couch grass until it was too dark to see. An entry in my teenage diary reveals that I was contemplating gardening full-time. However, a career in gardening was not what was expected of me. Instead, I read law at university, and worked as a litigator in London and Hong Kong for more than 20 years. By 2006, I was married with two children and living in London, and finally recognised that law was no longer for me. I retired early, keeping on some part-time work, and hatched a plan to buy a place in the country. It would be a project to pursue when the children left home. One bright June day in 2010, I found a small, thatched labourer’s cottage in Suffolk. The lawn that surrounded the house was crying out to be a cottage garden. Beyond, a large field wrapped round the cottage, filled with coarse grass, thistles, docks and a copse. It had potential. While researching the history, I found that an attempt had been made in 1903 to remove the hamlet from the Ordnance Survey maps on the basis that “it was not of sufficient importance”. That appealed to me. That first summer, in 2011, my visits were short and infrequent. I dug broad beds to create blousy herbaceous borders filled with shrubs and perennials: viburnum, persicaria, knautia and Cephalaria gigantea. Just beyond the cottage garden, I created a wildflower meadow. Inspired by Fergus Garrett at Great Dixter, I mowed it down to the ground, removing any grass clippings to reduce fertility, then raking it to create patches of bare earth that could be seeded. The yellow rattle seed I planted has strangled the grasses that would otherwise prevent wildflowers coming through. Seven years on, it is starting to look respectable, filled with fritillaries, oxeye daisies, devil’s-bit scabious, and bird’s-foot trefoil. Orchids appear from time to time; and hundreds of narcissus and camassia add early-season interest. Inspired by a talk on Hogarth I have mown a path, or “line of beauty”, which snakes through the middle. The sodden (or sodding, as I came to regard it) field was more of a challenge. At the bottom, I created a huge bed of grasses in four quadrants: Calamagrostis × acutiflora ‘Karl Foerster’ provides the backbone to two, interspersed with Deschampsia cespitosa ‘Goldtau’ and ‘Bronzeschleier’. The third is filled with tall Molinia ‘Windspiel’, peppered with a few Stipa gigantea grasses. The fourth is a work in progress, as I try to coax Molinia caerulea ‘Poul Petersen’ into producing the sort of effect created by Piet Oudolf at Scampston Hall. Eupatorium, Helenium ‘Lemon Queen’, Sanguisorba (‘Red Thunder’, ‘Rock and Roll’ and ‘Pink Elephant’), cornus and Filipendula purpurea break up the grasses along with Cirsium rivulare ‘Atropurpureum’, Monarda ‘Blaustrumpf’ and gunnera. I decided to place a formal garden in the middle of the field. A parterre filled with echinacea, echinops, persicaria and campanula, inspired by Sissinghurst, was supposed to be all white; I am now rather pleased it is not. Random-mown grass paths, led by the mower, link the various elements. I put up a barn-owl box on an ancient oak, which sits at the edge of the field. I often hide by the gate and see the owls swooping over the meadow. They have bred successfully for the last few seasons. Behind the cottage, an area I jokingly call the arboretum, has half a dozen specimen trees including liquidambar, Acer palmatum ‘Autumn Glory’, Amelanchier x grandiflora ‘Robin Hill’ and, recently, a wall of willow and a screen of Molinia caerulea ‘Heidebraut’, all of which provide wonderful autumn colours. Finally I have raised beds for vegetables and fruit bushes. Each year I vow not to start new projects, but each year I succumb to temptation. Last year, I dug a pond at the edge of the copse; within days water beetles had found their way into it; dragonflies zip across it. Having introduced frogspawn from a neighbour, I am hopeful frogs will return to breed. Should the long border be deeper and is there too much lawn? The list is endless. Following my divorce, I now live alone full-time in Suffolk. I love the space, the quiet, and the creative and physical work that goes into the garden. Each morning, no matter the weather, I’m out working in it, and in the evenings I prepare lists of jobs to do. It has taken 40 years, but I have finally fulfilled the vision outlined in my teenage diary. For more images, go to Jindal’s Instagram account, indian in the garden