The U-turn on A-level grades was the best solution in a chaotic situation. It has addressed some of the injustice of an algorithm that favoured private school students over those from large state schools and colleges, and had led to huge distress for those who found their grades adjusted. Much of the debate, however, has focused on high-flying applicants denied places at Oxbridge or the 24 universities that make up the Russell Group. These account for just 22% of UK-domiciled undergraduates. The other 78% of students must not be forgotten. While some applicants will now be happy to get their first choice, the shambolic decision-making has left higher education in a bind. The most popular universities, which typically over-offer to make sure they fill their places, are now obliged to take students who’ve achieved their grades. But they’re restricted by physical capacity – all the more so with current requirements for social distancing – and while staff will do their best, higher education is not a commodity you can quickly scale up. Labs and studios have limited space, as do halls of residence. Moreover, the risk of invidious consequences for the sector as a whole is high. Packing in students to some universities will leave others with empty places. A collapse in recruitment means a serious threat of courses and departments being forced to close. There were already fears for humanities at Gloucester and English literature at Portsmouth among many others, and these are now growing. The impact on students is not negligible. Those who cannot relocate will suffer most. Some will want or need to study near home to keep a job or because of caring responsibilities. They will often be working-class students with lower grades at A-level, or a BTec. University policy should not be decided on the basis of what works for 22% of undergraduates, still less the 1.4% who get into Oxford or Cambridge. The Russell Group does a sterling job of promoting a “prestige” brand, but it’s a marketing device, a club that its 24 members pay a substantial fee to join. If there is anything objective that distinguishes them from other universities (and some academic research suggests there is not) it is their large research portfolios, not their education side. As the Royal Historical Society has pointed out to applicants, excellent teaching is “found across the sector”. Staff in newer universities are recruited from the same competitive pool as those in the higher-tariff institutions. In fact, those universities that don’t start with the star A-level students are often more creative when it comes to pedagogy: it’s more challenging to get a student with three Cs through a good degree than a student who arrives feeling practised and confident about how to perform in exams. Many students benefit from being in small departments where they know the rest of their cohort and their tutors recognise all the faces. It’s these departments that are most vulnerable to closures and cuts. In the past 24 hours I have heard from numerous colleagues across the sector concerned either that their workload will expand exponentially with an increased intake or that their job will disappear as departments are closed or slimmed down. “We have just been through a redundancy process because our recruitment is already not very buoyant,” writes one colleague at a post-92 university. Their applicants are under pressure from parents to accept more “prestigious” offers. “I am very concerned that in a couple of years my department may not exist.” Another says they are “terrified about the implications of all this. I’ve only had four years of permanent contracts and can’t go through precarity again.” There is a wider issue for the economy here too. Universities are major employers. Research commissioned by UCU estimates that in smaller towns and cities such as Plymouth, Middlesbrough, Stoke and Swansea, 5% of jobs are linked to the local institution, including roles in hospitality – already under pressure from the pandemic – and construction. If these universities now lose students to higher-tariff competitors, that’s a loss for everyone whose job relies on that campus community. And yet, dominated by people who are the products of private schools and Oxbridge, the government has a universities policy that is focused on one narrow segment of the sector. It is clear from the rhetoric about “low-value” courses that ministers have little appreciation for the transformative effect of higher education beyond a small elite. There is a real risk that their half-baked solution to the problems of high-flying state-school students will make things worse for the 78%. With the UK already in recession, the potential consequences for student choice and regional economies are too serious to ignore. If it takes more central funding to sustain a mix of universities, covering the whole of the UK, the government must step up and provide it. Catherine Fletcher is professor of history at Manchester Metropolitan University