There’s a trope of the British Asian identity narrative, once captured with such originality and brilliance in Hanif Kureishi’s Buddha of Suburbia and much replicated – in Monica Ali’s Brick Lane, for example, or Ayub Khan-Din’s East Is East – that now fills most British Asians of my generation (I’m 40) with dread. It’s the one about the second-generation immigrant held back by the ignorance of parents or a community that’s either comically absurd or violently fundamentalist. Against this backdrop, the second-generation hero or heroine emerges once they find the strength to stand apart from this reactionary past and assimilate into the mainstream of British life. This narrative certainly had its time, but we have come to dread it, because through it we dehumanise ourselves and demean the journeys that have made us who we are. It’s also a lie, since no degree of immigrant assimilation can overturn the racism that is systemic in British life, and that our mainstream culture has the habit of perpetuating. For me, the potted biography on the dust jacket of Mohsin Zaidi’s book (subtitled A Memoir of a Gay Muslim’s Journey to Acceptance) was enough to provoke the first stirrings of that familiar sense of foreboding. Here we learn that the author, raised in a “devout Muslim community”, was the “first person from his school to go to Oxford University” before going on to become, an accomplished criminal barrister, a board member of Stonewall, the UK’s biggest LGBT rights charity, and a governor of his former school in east London. It’s only a blurb, but there is a subtly Islamophobic framing here that opposes Zaidi’s “devout Muslim” background with the progressive attainment of his life and career. The first pages of the book continued to put me on guard, anchoring us in the perspective of a young child, horrified or enthralled by the world of his native Shia religion – a world of “self-flagellation” and the terrors of djinn possession – creating a sense that, throughout this memoir, “home” might be a world that has been othered by this author from the outset. Thankfully, what emerges is, to the contrary, anything but a tired reworking of racist tropes. As Zaidi’s story unfolds, and its young protagonist is forced to reconcile the elements of his life – his sense of community, the opportunities brought to him by his extraordinary intelligence, the painful secret of his homosexuality – what we have is a profound meditation on the power of the human heart to transcend the contradictions of diverse cultures and create something new. As the basis of an identity narrative for the 21st century, I found this utterly compelling. I couldn’t put the book down, and at times I laughed out loud. I also cried. In one delightful passage Zaidi, an Oxford graduate, demolishes a witch doctor brought to 'cure' him of his sexuality It’s true that this memoir will, and should, be read as a challenge to the homophobia that prevails in Britain’s Muslim, as in so many other, communities, and it contains few passages more delightful than the one where Zaidi, by now an Oxford graduate on his way to a lucrative job at a “magic circle” law firm, demolishes a witch doctor who has been brought to the family home to “cure” him of his sexuality. The strength of the narrative is located not in its rage but in its balance. For his family, Zaidi writes, “the revelation of my sexuality was like an earthquake that had ripped apart the ground we stood on, them on one side and me on the other”, and this initially hostile response to his coming out prompts him to consider “a life without them that was free of judgment and free from guilt”. In the face of this feeling, though, Zaidi emerges as a champion, not only of the desire to assimilate into the mainstream but also of love and commitment: “I knew I couldn’t let them go,” he says, “even if that’s what they wanted.” This capability, to use a phrase from Keats, “of being in uncertainties” locks us into all the complexity of Zaidi’s journey and puts us on to a road where only real resolution will suffice. Later, seeking liberation and a new community on London’s gay scene, he is confronted by explicit racism, as dating sites abound with profiles openly declaring: “No Asians”; even “No Pakis”. Discrimination thwarts identity from many sides, we come to see, but Zaidi’s “journey to acceptance” is revealed here as a journey towards love in every corner of his life; and it is this that proves to be the transformative power that will shift, with time, even the hardest of hearts. This book’s great achievement is to expound and explain this love, which is built out of patience, respect and acceptance of one’s self in all its complexity. Love like this, Zaidi shows, is an act of defiance in the face of opposing worlds that stubbornly refuse to acknowledge one another. It becomes a catalyst for change. It provides a lesson of acceptance for us all, and for the future of our multicultural society. • A Dutiful Boy by Mohsin Zaidi is published by Square Peg (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15