Life as an English flanker can be precarious. Just last week Jack Clifford – the first player to turn the head of Eddie Jones – announced his retirement at the age of 27, the countless injuries too much to bear. Sam Jones is another whose career was ended in his prime and there were undoubtedly occasions during Jack Willis’ 18 months of injury hell when he pondered whether his time was up. Willis – who was captained by Sam Jones at Wasps – was part of what he calls “the knee gang” after suffering a hideous injury in the 2018 Premiership semi-final against Saracens, just days after being first named in an England squad for the summer tour of South Africa. The other gang members were Jimmy Gopperth, Marcus Garratt and Alex Reider; the latter two have also since retired. Willis even enrolled in a plumbing course with his brother and club-mate Tom, such was the brutal realisation that those who call time on their own terms are the fortunate ones. The 23-year-old not only suffered knee and ankle injuries that kept him out for 10 months, but another ankle problem after just a couple of matches back sidelined him for a further eight. It is to his immense credit then, that after slowly returning to action around the turn of the year, he has emerged as one of the form players since the Premiership restart. Talk a player up enough and Jones will seemingly find a reason not to pick them, but it is unlikely to be coincidence that the England head coach has watched both of Willis’s appearances this month – the latter involving a back-and-forth tussle with Ben Curry, another who is hopeful of Test recognition this autumn. Willis has dreamed of representing England since he was a young lad and it is easy to wonder how many caps he may have accrued had those debilitating injuries not occurred. His head coach at Wasps, Lee Blackett, sees it as a matter of if, not when, and Jones often takes a liking to players who have overcome adversity. “At the beginning of my rehab I started to put a bit of pressure on myself to make sure I came back at the same level,” Willis says. “It’s a hard one to put that pressure on yourself – you may not be coming back as the same player, you’re coming back and remodelling your body, you move in a different way. “It was looking at my wider game and the closer I got to coming back I thought I didn’t want to come back as the same player, I wanted to improve on the areas I wasn’t good enough in, anything I was doing well try and do it even better,” he adds. “There’s always a constant improvement to become a better player, whether that’s coming back from injury or on a day-to-day basis reviewing a game. Constant improvement is something I strive for.” Blackett agrees, describing Willis as the one member of his squad most likely to be picking the brains of his coaches after training, always looking for an extra edge. A menace at the breakdown, the new interpretations – designed to protect players such as Willis as much as they have been to speed the game up – play to his strengths. Blackett believes he could well be the best ‘jackaller’ in the Premiership and he has already reached double figures in the try-scoring charts. “Let’s not forget Jack was getting turnovers before [the new interpretations]. He just found a way beforehand. So it’s only going to help him,” says Blackett. “He is really aggressive in his mindset, breakdown-wise he is proving himself to be one of the best in the Premiership – if not the best.” Despite his return to the field, the plumbing has not dried up for Willis either – he fitted a tap in his parents’ kitchen recently – and both brothers will learn the results of their diploma course next month. He has also started a property business, RockCap, with Alex Lundberg, another former Wasps teammate who was forced into early retirement through injury. “It probably did hit home a bit when I had the injury that rugby is not going to last forever and to have something outside of it is going to be crucial,” adds Willis. “It’s always good to have that other focus, I put everything into my training when I’m here, put my work in, my analysis after training – but once that is done it’s nice to get home, put the business hat on and have that other focus.”