Mikel Arteta said Pierre‑Emerick Aubameyang is close to signing a new contract at Arsenal after the striker demonstrated his value once again in the Community Shield victory over Liverpool. The Arsenal striker, who has entered the final year of his existing deal, struck a superb opening goal plus the match-winning penalty in the shoot-out at Wembley as Arteta delivered the second trophy of his brief managerial career. Aubameyang was noncommittal on his Arsenal future afterwards but his manager was confident the problem will be resolved soon and will not overshadow the start of the new Premier League season. “We are close,” a smiling Arsenal manager told BT Sport. Later, Arteta added: “We are trying to convince him he’s in the right place and the right environment to produce what he did here and four weeks ago [when scoring twice in the FA Cup final win against Chelsea]. “I’m very positive he’s going to sign but there are a lot of things involved in a contract deal and we are trying to solve them. I’m not worried [the saga will detract from preparations for the season]. We have built a good relationship between us. I’m confident. I see him smiling in training every day and that is a really good sign.” Emiliano Martínez and Ainsley Maitland-Niles, two other Arsenal players with uncertain futures, were also instrumental in a victory that came after only three pre-season training sessions. David Luiz had trained only once and was singled out for praise from Arteta who hailed a display of “courage and ambition”. On goalkeeper Martínez, selected rather than the fit-again Bernd Leno, the Arsenal manager said: “Emiliano has shown in the last few months what he’s able to do for this football club. I am convinced he’s able to play for us consistently at this level but I cannot stop the speculation.” Maitland-Niles, wanted by Wolves, produced a man-of-the-match display that Arteta suggested was down to improvements off the pitch. “He has to be able to convince me every day in training, not once every three months or three days,” the manager said. “He’s showing me at the moment he can do it and the way he is preparing for every game is much better than it was before. He has changed a lot of things around him to be the player he can be.” For Liverpool, the Community Shield brought a penalty shootout defeat for the second successive season. Young striker Rhian Brewster was the only player to miss having been brought on in stoppage time for his ability from the penalty spot, although Jürgen Klopp took responsibility for the setback. “If anyone is to blame it’s me because I wanted him to be in that position,” the Liverpool manager said. “With his technique I don’t think a goalie will ever get close to one of his penalties and I had never seen him miss one until today, but these things can happen. Dealing with defeat is an important lesson and he’ll learn from it. He has nothing to apologise for. If we wanted to win the game we should have scored more in the 90 minutes. We had two or three big moments which we didn’t finish off.”