British culture has been guilty of “hoodwinking” black people into thinking they are “invaders”, the artistic director of London’s Young Vic theatre, Kwame Kwei-Armah, has told the Observer. In his strongest comments yet on race, the British actor, playwright and director said the Black Lives Matter protests had prompted him to speak out. “This is no longer the time for shadow-boxing on these issues,” said Kwei-Armah, urging his contemporaries to stop being so diplomatic in their demands for more diversity. “That is no longer my preferred method of persuasion,” he said, suggesting that the enforced period of lockdown should be used to “accelerate representation” rather than plan for a return to the old ways when theatres eventually reopen. “We have to create an environment that does not make people feel like a theatre is not a place for them. There were Egyptian mystery plays 2,000 years before the Greek dramas we know, so I am not an invader, as I used to feel,” said Kwei-Armah, 53, who grew up in Hillingdon, west London. “I was welcomed as a foreigner, but there is a flow through to stage culture from African work too. But we’ve been hoodwinked.” Kwei-Armah, whose award-winning 2003 play Elmina’s Kitchen was only the second by a black playwright to run in London’s West End, said he knew the word “quota” still upsets some people, but that the time to do more than just talk had now come. “I am loathe to be ‘tick box’ about it, but I believe it has finally become common sense,” he said. “I still like the word ‘target’, although it sounds as if you are just being politically sensitive again. “The truth is, I no longer really care what people call it, I just want action. With quotas there is a feeling that getting to a particular number can be the overriding concern. And then you stop. But my target is now to make sure the Young Vic represents the makeup of London.” Kwei-Armah explained that he has reversed an earlier plan to drop a financially risky season of black work at the Young Vic. “We will all be in a different world when we go back,” he said. “But I believe BLM has deepened the listening of our white peers. It is true we have to get bums back on seats, but we also have to serve our community. That is now the priority.” It is true we have to get bums back on seats, but we also have to serve our community. That is now the priority The director said “first nights” and season launches at the Young Vic will no longer be formal occasions with a glass of wine. They will be DJ sessions that will mean more to Londoners. He added that he wants to see “more people who look like my mother inside the organisation”. And he suggested that the way meetings are held inside his theatre will also change, so it is not just about putting black people on stage. “Most people in the theatrical world have an understanding that this is now a “must”, if we want to feel just. I know that sounds like a slogan, but there is a clear mandate now.” Kwei-Armah said that while many in the black community are wondering if the attention given to the issue of diversity is just “a moment” rather than the birth of a movement, he believes it can be both. “The majority of us are working very hard because of the fear that it will just be a moment. But the dam has broken.”