Television writers are getting more control over projects thanks to the success of programmes such as Fleabag and I May Destroy You, the playwright Lucy Prebble has said. Prebble is the co-creator with Billie Piper of a new Sky Atlantic show called I Hate Suzie, which tells the story of a celebrity who falls victim to phone hacking. In an interview with the Radio Times, Prebble, who made her name in theatre, says there has been a discernible change in attitudes towards female artists working in television. She said: “There have been shows in the past where, as the writer, I was barely allowed to come to set.” In contrast, there is not a moment on I Hate Suzie, or the hit HBO series Succession, for which Prebble writes and executive produces, where the writer is not on set. Prebble said Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s Fleabag and Michaela Coel’s I May Destroy You were programmes that came “from putting artists in positions of power that maybe they wouldn’t have done before. The proof is in the pudding: they are very good.” The #MeToo movement had also prodded TV drama commissioners into finding more work by women, Piper said. “This probably wouldn’t have been made five years ago. Things have changed dramatically, although in some ways we’re only scratching the surface.” Prebble made her name in theatre with successful plays such as Enron at the Royal Court, The Effect at the National Theatre, and last year’s A Very Expensive Poison at the Old Vic, an adaptation of the Guardian journalist Luke Harding’s book about the Litvinenko poisoning. Piper was a teenage pop star and married the presenter Chris Evans at 18. She later went on to marry the actor Laurence Fox, with whom she has two children. She was first cast on TV as the companion to Doctor Who and is now, particularly after her remarkable performance in Yerma at the Young Vic, one of Britain’s leading actors. I Hate Suzie tells the story of a woman who shot to fame as a 15-year-old pop star before becoming an actor, moving to the country, having a baby, but never quite giving up her partying ways. After marital problems, she reinvents herself as a stage actor. Any similarities to Piper, who was the youngest artist to enter the singles chart at No 1 with the hit Because We Want To when she was 15 in 1998, are clearly the point. But Piper said she would be horrified if people took the show too literally. “There are lots of moments I really wouldn’t want people to think are autobiographical,” she said. Piper is only now coming to terms with her early stardom, she said. “In my 20s, a lot of my stress from that period was buried and I still struggle to remember a lot of it.” Prebble and Piper became friends when they worked together on the first series of the 2007 ITV show Secret Diary of a Call Girl. One joy of the new show is that it features a lead character who is unashamedly flawed and messy, said Piper. “She’s not always likeable or a great mother. She’s quite often monstrous and hysterical and tightly wound. But that’s in all of us. I find it incredibly frustrating when I watch anything and I’m not getting that from the female character. It pisses me off.” • This article was amended on 18 June 2020. I Hate Suzie is from Sky Atlantic, not Sky One as an earlier version said. In addition, with Because We Want To, Billie Piper was not the youngest artist to reach No 1, but the youngest artist to enter the singles chart at No 1. This has been corrected.