It’s one of the things that – along with much of our previously normal lives – has seemingly vanished in the times of Covid-19: the black-tie fundraising dinner. That staple of many charities’ balance sheet has all but gone – along with chuggers, fun runs, workplace fundraiser morning teas and mufti days. All but gone. But not gone completely. As it turns out, the charity fundraising dinner is not dead. It just looks very different. For a start, your alcohol arrives the afternoon of the event via courier, along with a box of raw ingredients. For a black-tie event to be truly Covidsafe, guests are expected to cook their own dinners. On 14 August the Melbourne event organiser Space threw a $125-a-ticket video chat dinner party for 300 guests, with money going to Lifeline. It was always going to be chaotic and weird but what was surprising was how fun it was. On the afternoon, guests around the country were couriered ingredients including capsicums, spring onions and uncooked rice, a small bottle of sparkling wine, and four cans of vodka soda alongside a placemat, a flower and a candle. At 6pm we sat at our laptops and fired up HopIn – a video conferencing website similar to Zoom. There was a welcome to country (Bruce Shillingsworth on the digital main stage, but performing from home), some live music (Chang Po Ching performing from his bedroom), a panel discussion about resilience, then a cooking demonstration with our chef, Charlie Carrington of the Melbourne restaurant Atlas. All 300 of us were cooking the same meal – following Carrington who was preparing our kung pao chicken live from his kitchen at home. Guests, including Will “Egg Boy” Connolly and Magda Szubanski, then joined tables of up to 30 people and could chat via HopIn to those on their table. “It’s a dinner party within a dinner party, like Shakespeare’s play within a play,” said Adam Ferrier of Space. You could “move” between tables, striking up conversation with interesting guests, just as you would in real life. On my table, everyone wanted to talk to Connolly. It was hard to tell if anyone had dressed up for the event. Unlike normal social functions, it wasn’t awkward if you just wanted to leave and join another table. No pretending you needed to go to the bar or the bathroom to get away. You could also mingle by a digital fire, and later go to the main stage to listen to talks from celebrity speakers including Craig Reucassel and Layne Beachley. There was also a networking function that operated like Chatroulette, where you were matched with another guest and had 90 seconds to talk before the encounter was suddenly cut off. And just like a black-tie dinner in normal times, by 10pm some of the guests seemed a bit worse for wear. Covid has left a $5m fundraising hole for Lifeline, as special events designed to raise money for the service have been cancelled due to restrictions on gatherings. Sitting with strangers on Zoom eating dinner – is this a dream or your worst nightmare? “Lifeline not only relies on fundraising events but retailers and op shops,” says Lisa Cheng, executive director of marketing and fundraising at Lifeline Victoria. “And when we had to stop those events it had a massive impact on our fundraising effects.” This comes at a time when demand for Lifeline’s services has never been higher. “March was our peak with 90,000 calls. It’s really been 3,000 calls a day. On Good Friday we received 3,197 calls – that’s the largest number of calls we had ever received. “Loneliness is a big issue generally in the community and it was around that time that the government started to put us into more severe lockdown and the reality of what was happening really started to kick in. People were isolated and alone.” One-third of the calls are from Victoria, and Cheng expects Lifeline will receive a million calls this year. For Ferrier, Covid-19 presented a challenge for Space’s business model. The main theme of the event was connection. And with about 60% of the guests in lockdown in Melbourne, many of the speakers on the main “stage” spoke about keeping connected and maintaining social ties during the pandemic. “If there’s one thing we can do to prevent mental illness and suicide in Australia – it’s just connection, even if you force connections,” he says. “Sitting with strangers on Zoom eating dinner – is this a dream or your worst nightmare? I was thinking, ‘The thought of it is so painful – but I know I’ll get a lot out of it if I push out of my comfort zone and meet new people.’” In normal times, the group  organises an annual gathering – part-festival, part-conference – in Byron Bay. Designed for serendipitous encounters, mobile phones are banned, and there is no social media. “We try to create events where people who have ideas meet people who have influence,” Ferrier says. “Those kinds of things work off each other. We were completely analogue. We rejected everything online.” Now everything is online. The dinner event, organised in a couple of days, was posted on LinkedIn 10 days before the night. “We had to close bookings a week ahead because we had to organise food,” Ferrier says. “It proved to be instantly very popular.” But how to create an atmosphere that fostered the connection and serendipitous encounters of a real-life event? Ferrier believes the shared experience of cooking was “the central connection point, something to talk about”. “Everyone sat with the same placemat … and ate the same meal.” He says the fact that guests joined “across the world” is something “that’s not possible without a mix of analogue and digital”. It was a pleasant surprise. “We definitely think there are far richer experiences that people have online than we thought they’d have before. Is it a one-off or does it happen again? I’m not sure.” For Cheng, there’s one thing about the future that is certain: “Anyone who works in the charity sector and relied on fundraising has had to now think creatively.” • You can contact Lifeline in Australia on 13 11 14. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.