The jet engine maker Rolls-Royce made a record loss of £5.4bn in the first half of the year, after the collapse in international travel during the pandemic led to to a slump in demand. The Derby-based company said it had originally expected to manufacture 450 engines during 2020 but now planned to deliver only 250. The firm is undertaking the largest restructuring in its history and, as a result, will close several production sites, including Barnoldswick in Lancashire and Annesley in Nottinghamshire, as it consolidates its manufacturing operations. Rolls-Royce previously reported plans to cut 9,000 jobs globally because of the pandemic, with UK staff making up two-thirds of the total. The company said 2,500 of its workers in Britain had applied for voluntary redundancy or agreed to take early retirement, substantially reducing the need for compulsory redundancies. To date, 4,000 people in its civil aerospace business have left the firm and a further 5,000 are due to leave before the end of the year. Rolls-Royce predicts pre-tax savings of at least £1.3bn by the end of 2022 from its restructuring programme. As part of the attempts to shore up its balance sheet for the longer term, the firm is looking at disposing £2bn of its assets, including the Spanish engine maker ITP Aero. The company said it had taken decisive action when the pandemic began to have an impact its business, including its restructuring, but it only expected its deliveries of large engines to increase from 2022. It predicted that demand for its products would remain below 2019 levels until 2025. The firm said its defence business had remained resilient during 2020 and demand from its key government customers was unchanged. Covid-19 has had an “unprecedented impact on the civil aviation sector”, said the Rolls-Royce chief executive, Warren East. “This restructuring has caused us to take difficult decisions, resulting in an unfortunate but necessary reduction in roles. These actions will significantly reduce our cost base, which, combined with recovery in power systems and continued resilience in defence, will help us to deliver significantly improved returns as the world recovers from the pandemic,” he said. The company said it would scrap its dividend while the economic outlook remained uncertain.