Airlines and holiday firms have said the sudden change to UK quarantine rules on travel to France is a “devastating blow” and will lead to job losses, as holidaymakers scrambled to return home. France was removed from the government’s list of travel corridor destinations late on Thursday night along with the Netherlands, Malta and others. The move takes effect from 4am on Saturday. At least 100,000 British holidaymakers are thought to be in France, and many more will have planned to travel out later this summer. Eurotunnel advised people not to arrive at the Calais shuttle terminal without a booking, as it was already at capacity for the weekend and queues and disruption would result. Ports warned of “logistical challenges” as people scrambled to return by ferry. Airlines UK, which represents the biggest carriers, said the decision was “another devastating blow to the travel industry already reeling from the worst crisis in its history”. It urged the government to bring in a new testing regime and change its approach to quarantine to end its “broad-brush, weekly stop-and-go changes to travel corridors at a national level, which have proven so disruptive to airlines and passengers alike.” The travel association Abta said the news would result in livelihoods being lost unless the government could help the industry. A spokesman said: “The announcements relating to Spain and now France impact the two biggest destinations for British holidaymakers at the height of the summer season. At this time of recession, a plan is urgently needed to protect the 221,000 jobs the travel industry sustains.” The British Ports Association said it was “extremely disappointing news” that would cause much disruption and hit passenger operators hard. Foreign Office travel advice now also warns against non-essential travel to France, which has reported a 66% rise in new coronavirus cases, and the Netherlands. The consumer association Which? said thousands of customers following that advice were likely to be left significantly out of pocket, with some airlines refusing to issue refunds if outbound flights continue operating. The transport secretary Grant Shapps, who himself was forced into quarantine when Spain was taken off the travel corridor list at the start of his holiday almost three weeks ago, defended the system and sudden change to the rules on France. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “With a 66% increase in the last week, we must act. There is no perfect way to do this. People will have gone away knowing there is a significant risk, with their eyes open. A lot of people will have amended their holidays or already come home.” He said temperature checks on asymptomatic travellers would pick up only 7% of cases. “There isn’t such a clear-cut solution as people would imagine.” Labour said it backed evidence-based measures, but Nick Thomas-Symonds, the shadow home secretary, added: “It’s vital that the government has a joined-up strategy and recognises the impact of this on travel-related businesses. It is vital that a sector-specific deal is put in place urgently.”