Cricket offers photographers a sporting canvas unlike any other. The distinct shapes made by those on the pitch and the angles they tend to inhabit; the colouring and character of different grounds in different countries; the proximity of players to crowds, and the room therein for visual interplay; the evocative backdrops and improvised plots of amateur cricket, which tell their own stories; and perhaps most uniquely, the value of time, or what Neville Cardus called cricket’s “occasional static quality”, opening up the space to capture the gaps between the action, when cricket people are often at their most revealing. The game’s iconography stretches back through the centuries, infusing us with images that bind the generations to cricket’s broader narrative arc. In Issue 34 of Wisden Cricket Monthly, a cohort of cricket lovers consider the value and power of cricket photography, and select the pictures that mean the most to them. Adrian Dennis, the Oval, 4 September 2000 Moments earlier Courtney Walsh has been bowled by Dominic Cork in his final Test match on English soil, confirming England’s first series victory over West Indies for 31 years. The veteran fast bowler has been relentlessly magnificent throughout the summer but with the last rites complete he is suddenly just another face in the crowd, swamped by the jubilant home supporters. The image reminds me of a commuter on a packed railway platform, trying to navigate his way home. Jo Harman, WCM magazine editor Adrian Murrell, Headingley, 20 July 1981 This was taken by my first boss, Adrian Murrell. It’s iconic, it’s Botham, you just know instantly what Test match that was and what had happened. And it’s so quintessentially cricket, with the dressing room set-up, with the whites and the sweater, and with everything hanging up behind him. It’s got a nostalgic feel to it, of an era when photographers could just wander in and start taking pictures. It wasn’t staged, it’s a totally natural image, though it’s been subsequently recreated – when Flintoff won in ’05 Tom Shaw got him with the cigar, and then after Ben Stokes’ innings after Headingley, Stu Forster asked if he could go in the dressing room to take the same picture. That one didn’t have a cigar but it had the same feel, of Stokes looking shattered and staring into space, thinking about what he’d just done. Gareth Copley, Getty Images photographer Cameron Spencer, Melbourne Cricket Ground, 8 March 2020 The night women’s cricket reached unprecedented heights, with over 80,000 at the MCG and a record TV audience across the world. This joyful image of Australia’s T20 World Cup champions on stage with a global pop culture icon encapsulates the reach and appeal that the women’s game can achieve. It is a coming together of women’s sport and girl power. The selfie being taken at the front of the photo places it perfectly in the modern day, where social media has played a huge role in the accessibility and visibility of women’s cricket and its international stars. Alison Mitchell, broadcaster Patrick Eagar, Sabina Park, Jamaica, 26 February 1994 Mike Atherton looks like he’s playing this ball from Courtney Walsh comfortably enough but the shine of the ball and the sheen of Jamaica’s Sabina Park pitch speaks of the monumental challenges England batsmen faced in the Caribbean. This is from an ODI on England’s ’94 tour. John Stern, WCM editor-at-large George Beldam, The Oval, London, 11 August 1902 If and when time travel is developed, cricket fans will be queuing up to pop back to the Golden Age and watch Victor Trumper, whose magical skills and style prompted unequalled adoration, but whose batting is almost impossible to imagine. This rare, genuine action photo of the Australian legend (by George Beldam, the photographer who took the iconic shot of Trumper that inspired a book by Gideon Haigh over a century later), batting in his defining summer, in one of cricket’s most dramatic matches, offers a precious visual record of one of the sport’s defining geniuses. But it also hints at what cricket, its players, tactics and techniques, and its crowds, might have been in the early 20th century. It makes you wonder what happened to the invisible ball – did Trumper unfurl a moment of his trademark majesty, to be imprinted on the souls of the thousands present? Maybe he just patted it to the curiously upright extra-cover. This photograph cannot show us what it was like to see Trumper bat, but it can make us imagine what it would have been like to be a cricket fan watching him bat, to be seeing for ourselves a man who transported batsmanship on to a different aesthetic plane. Andy Zaltzman, comedian and TMS scorer Tom Shaw, Lord’s, London, 22 July 2011 I was a massive KP fan and still am. As an England supporter, the 1990s were such hard work and then suddenly, in 2005, KP arrived: brash, flamboyant, exciting and playing in a way that seemed scarcely credible. I was lucky enough to watch him score four Test hundreds live and had amazing seats for two days in a row at Lord’s when he scored his double-ton against India. This picture is full of joy, and a time before his tragic fall, and is a reminder of a great era of England cricket, of happy times although it makes me feel a little wistful too. Some incredible and dazzlingly exciting cricketers for England have followed but there was a dynamic freshness and uniqueness to Kevin Pietersen that I doubt will be seen again. James Holland, historian The Oval, London, 1905 This photo of the Kennington Oval was taken from a hot air balloon in 1905. Back when I first used to go there, the spectacle of cameramen perched on cranes high above the action always used to fill me with vicarious dread – but they had nothing on the man who took this snap. The camera was so heavy that he had to have someone cling onto him as he leaned out from the basket holding it. I am glad he made it back down safely to terra firma, and that he brought this photograph with him. I find it oddly moving. The distinctive curve of the stadium, the contours of the pavilion, the gas holders: a century and more may have passed, but so much stays the same. Tom Holland, historian Harry Engels, Wormsley Cricket Ground, High Wycombe, 13 August 2013 Photographs are significant because, when we look at them, they evoke particular memories and emotions. Heather Knight’s incredible innings at Wormsley against Australia in 2013 to save the Test is one that I am privileged to have seen in person; it was also the first match which I reported on from the press tent. But I must admit that my main reason for choosing this photograph is a bit of a silly romantic one: my future fiancé Syd Egan is just about visible in the background, in a high vis motorcycle jacket. We hadn’t met even met at this point – but I love the thought that our paths might well have crossed at this match, without us even knowing it. Raf Nicholson, WCM’s women’s cricket correspondent Patrick Eagar, Edgbaston, Birmingham, 17 June 1999 It was a scene that never should have happened after Lance Klusener struck Damien Fleming for two of the most gloriously timed clubs through cover as the World Cup semi-final reached its dramatic conclusion. It left four balls, one run to get for South Africa. Allan Donald’s error of judgment which followed prompted this defining moment, captured by the great Patrick Eagar. Adam Collins, WCM Australia correspondent Tom Shaw, M Chinnaswamy Stadium, Bangalore, 2 March 2011 Cricket, more than perhaps any other sport, is a game of family ties. We play because our dads play, our little brothers play because we do. As kids, my brother and I bowled thousands of balls at each other – in the garden on a rough strip of concrete that covered the old septic tank; in the attic bedroom of our house, where the main aim was to take the other’s head off with the heavy rubber ball; on the boundary edge of our local club; and other forgotten places too numerous to list. So on that famous evening in 2011, with older brother Niall watching on, Kevin O’Brien’s 50-ball century, the fastest ever at a World Cup, must have felt like the culmination of all those years of throwdowns, tantrums and lost balls. As cricketing brothers you guide each other through the many ups and downs of the game and are more invested in the other’s success than you’d ever want them to know. This is my favourite cricket photograph because it perfectly captures that feeling. Joe Provis, WCM chief designer Tanya Aldred, Manchester, 2011 It was impossible to choose just one of all the amazing cricket photographs out there, so I’ve cheated. This photo is nine years old now but I still love everything about it: the miniature pads that my mother-in-law made, the policeman’s helmet headgear, the inexplicable choice of a pair of gardening gloves behind the stumps and, above all, the complete concentration on the boys’ faces. Lovely memories. Tanya Aldred, writer Tom Shaw, Headingley, Leeds, 13 February 2017 I had finished up from shooting the England team for the previous 13 years, covering almost every tour since 2000, and this marked a new beginning for me. I shot this as an editorial feature for All Out Cricket magazine and it was one of the first shoots I had done with Joe Root. A year previously, Michael Vaughan had told me that Joe would be the next England captain, so I knew he was destined to be a star. He was very relaxed and comfortable during the shoot, and there was a calm about him, like he knew he was on course to be one of the greatest batsmen England had produced. It was shot in the indoor school at Headingley and with the curtain behind him it feels like he is backstage, about to go out and perform. Tom Shaw, photographer Patrick Eagar, Trent Bridge, Nottingham, 27 August 2005 My dad, a land agent, had three things stuck to the wall behind his desk. One was a paragraph from an interview in which Tom Stoppard said that if he hadn’t been a playwright he’d have liked to be a land agent; one was Yeats’ poem He Wishes For the Cloths of Heaven; and one was Patrick Eagar’s photograph of Andrew Strauss catching Adam Gilchrist at Trent Bridge in 2005. It’s not just that it epitomises the exultation of that series. I love the way you can see Strauss’ shadow on the grass like an aircraft’s, and the way his mouth hangs open in his own astonishment at what’s happening, and the way the sightlines of umpire, bowler, batsmen and slip all converge on the ball – every vector of attention concentrated on that magical point in space. And there’s the wonderful feeling not just of looking at but participating in the picture, because Strauss’ dive has left a gap where second slip should be, and that’s exactly where we find ourselves, sixth in the curve of onlookers, about to go up in celebration with Freddie and Tresco. Perfect moment and perfect composition – it’s got everything. William Fiennes, novelist Patrick Eagar, Fenner’s, Cambridge, 14 July 1973 It’s an Eagar at Fenner’s but it’s the administrative-building backdrop that makes it and the administrative building makes me think of Gerhard Richter’s Administrative Building which he was painting and blurring, blurring and painting, nine years earlier. Here it’s 1973 already, the crowd of one sees Cambridge, I see Dresden, wonder what Jane Joseph sees. Beyond the ball, which she’s lashed. Incredible figures earlier, 10-7-7-3, now her game-high 23 not out is guaranteeing Trinidad beat Young England in a languid cliffhanger one-dayer. This was Joseph’s fourth game, she’d play two more only, still it’s six more than her namesake, Harold Joseph, same island, said to spin a ball both ways, both modes, wrist, finger, plus have six variations. The uniforms, their non-uniformity, are interesting. Big backstory there. And South Africans were supposed to be in this World Cup. The Trinidadians and Jamaicans said no, in brilliant defiance of the administrators who are likely seated, eating triangulated sandwiches, gasbagging, sucking up to whoever’s passing, not watching, eyelids three quarters of the way to shutting, within that administrative building. Christian Ryan, author Patrick Eagar, Lord’s, London, 3 July 1984 I was a cricket-obsessed 13-year-old when the mighty West Indies toured England in 1984. Although I’d read all about the players, I’d never seen them play in real life or even on the television. What I saw that summer was simply astonishing. Each of the West Indies players was magnificent to watch; but as a team, they were just mind-blowing. I used to try to find a radio or a TV at every break to catch as much as I could before I headed back to the classroom. I remember thinking I didn’t need to bother on the last day of the second Test at Lord’s, as the match was obviously heading for a dull draw. I didn’t believe it when, mid-afternoon, I was told by my science master that the Windies were about to win the match. England had been seven down at the start of play and 300-odd ahead. David Gower had declared, setting an impossible target of 341. I saw the last hour of Gordon Greenidge and Larry Gomes in action. Greenidge made it look impossibly easy and completely controlled, even when ball after ball seemed to disappear to the boundary. Ever since I’ve batted in a short-sleeved jumper and a cap. I can confidently say that those are not the magic ingredients that make a good batsman. But it’s worth a try. I still dream of playing as good a shot as Greenidge in this photo. It might just happen, one day. Peter Frankopan, historian Patrick Eagar, Lord’s, London, 25 August 1973 The trouble is, I don’t really have a favourite photo. It depends on my mood. Should it be a peak action photo, one that shows cricket at its most athletic? Should it carry atmosphere, a special lighting effect perhaps? Should it portray a special moment? Should it feature a very famous player? I am going for a bit of nostalgia. This photo was taken at Lord’s during the final England v West Indies Test in 1973 and shows the scene as Geoff Boycott made his way back to the pavilion having been caught by Alvin Kallicharran on the boundary after hooking Keith Boyce in the evening session of the third day. It has a few period notes. Firstly there is no wild celebration amongst the West Indian fielders in spite of the fact that England, following on, were now three wickets down. However, the crowd are showing their appreciation in a way that is seldom seen today. For a start the spectators were allowed to sit on the grass at Lord’s (thereby increasing the capacity by a few thousand) and enthusiastic celebration was tolerated (up to a point). Look carefully and you can just see a policeman amongst the celebrations. By selecting a slightly shorter lens than usual (there were no zoom lenses in those days), I was able to include the players and the crowd in the same photo. What else is different? There were no advertising boards. Boycott was wearing a cap. In those days you faced fast bowlers without a helmet and with a minimum of padding. It was Garfield Sobers’ final Test in England, which he celebrated with an undefeated 150, as well as taking six catches in the match. He is my favourite cricketer and is seen with Rohan Kanhai in the centre foreground. In 1973 most photographs were taken in black and white. Mainly because that was what the market required. Newspapers, magazines and books were nearly always printed in black and white. Besides, colour was difficult to use for action photos with long lenses, simply because the film required lots and lots of light. To use the fast shutter speeds necessary for action photography in those days required really bright sunshine. Patrick Eagar, photographer Atul Kamble, Wankhede Stadium, Mumbai, 14 November 2013 I’d seen the wildness before, the place swaying and screeching to a human being’s breath as the game went on over there somewhere, a sideshow warm-up for the moment when a wicket falls and they swim to the steps for the door to open and the man to emerge, adjusting his eyes to his own light, a lifetime adjusting and adapting to weather the glare, and here now, for this last walk down those spattered steps as this version of himself, moving in to touch but just beyond reach, partitioned from the masses, their handheld reflectors held up to the sun. Phil Walker, Wisden Cricket Monthly editor-in-chief Get £1 off the latest issue of Wisden Cricket Monthly, available as a print edition (use coupon code GSN35) and all major digital formats (discount automatically applied).