Germany’s plans to airlift the Russian opposition activist Alexei Navalny to Berlin for treatment are being orchestrated by a charitable foundation acting with the explicit blessing of the federal government. Jaka Bizilj, the Slovenian-born promoter and producer who founded Cinema for Peace in 2002, said his organisation was financing the flight and medical aid through private donors. The foundation is supported by a group of philanthropists who give aid to humanitarian projects, in particular filmmakers who highlight global social challenges. It hosts an annual awards ceremony for films focusing on political and societal causes, which runs parallel to the Berlin film festival. Previous speakers at its awards gala have included Elton John, George Clooney, Angelina Jolie and Mikhail Gorbachev, the former Russian president. Navalny, Russia’s most prominent opposition activist, is in a coma in the Siberian city of Omsk after collapsing during a flight to Moscow on Thursday, allegedly from poisoning. Bizilj’s involvement in the proposed airlift to Germany came about after Pyotr Verzilov, a member of the Russian political punk group Pussy Riot, intervened. Verzilov was himself flown from Moscow to Berlin by Cinema for Peace two years ago, after another suspected poisoning. Verzilov, who had been treated at Berlin’s Charité university hospital, approached Bizilj on behalf of Navalny’s family this week. Bizilj told the newspaper Bild: “On the request of Pyotr Verzilov, for humanitarian reasons, we organised an aeroplane equipped with necessary medical supplies, so that Navalny can be brought to Germany.” The Charité has a longstanding reputation for treating foreign patients, including prominent political ones from the Arabic and Russian-speaking worlds, as well as from Africa. In 2012 it sent a team of medical staff to treat the Ukrainian opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko for back pain in prison, and in 2014 she was flown to Berlin for treatment at the hospital. Paul Ziemiak, general secretary of the ruling CDU, indicated on Thursday that Germany was ready to treat Navalny, saying: “If it’s desired, we have the possibility to help with the treatment.” Angela Merkel, speaking at a meeting on Thursday with president Emmanuel Macron of France, added her support, saying: “What is now very, very important is that this is urgently resolved.” The Charité’s reputation as a hub for foreign VIP patients was already strong during the cold war when, as the leading hospital in the communist German Democratic Republic, it treated international figureheads such as the Palestinian political leader Yasser Arafat. Its international patients department, which advertises for patients, says on its website that it will “ensure that international patients benefit optimally from the excellence of the Charité”, and that it has translators in English, Arabic and Russian. It adds: “The consideration of cultural and confessional customs is just as much a part of our philosophy as the personal care before, during and after your stay.” While Russian doctors refused to release Navalny on Friday morning, Bizilj told German media he was optimistic that it would still be possible to airlift the activist to Berlin. “Two years ago, when we transported [Verzilov], there were delays, but in the end everything worked,” he said.