House prices in Britain leaped to a new high in July, in a “surprising spike” after the market was put on pause earlier this year, according to Halifax. The bank said property values jumped by 1.6%, or £3,770, month-on-month on average in July, and across the UK the average property value was £241,604 in July, up from £237,834 in June. House prices increased by 3.8% annually. The housing market has gradually been reopened after restrictions were imposed earlier this year as part of the coronavirus lockdown. Russell Galley, the managing director at Halifax, said: “Following four months of decline, average house prices in July experienced their greatest month-on-month increase this year, up 1.6% from June and comfortably offsetting losses in 2020. “The average house price in July is the highest it has ever been since the Halifax house price index began, and 3.8% higher than a year ago. “The latest data adds to the emerging view that the market is experiencing a surprising spike post-lockdown.” “Supported by the government’s initiative of a significant cut in stamp duty, and evidence from households and agents suggesting that confidence is currently growing, the immediate future for the housing market looks brighter than many might have expected three months ago.” Galley cautioned: “However, looking further ahead, there is still a great deal of uncertainty around the lasting impact of the pandemic. “As government support measures come to an end, the resulting impact on the macroeconomic environment, and in turn the housing market, will start to become more apparent. “In particular, a weakening in labour market conditions would lead us to expect greater downward pressure on prices in the medium term.” Jeremy Leaf, a north London estate agent and a former residential chairman of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (Rics), said strong pent-up demand for most types of property, especially small houses, much of it brought forward by the stamp duty holiday, was supporting the market. He added: “Looking forward, we are being told the housing market revival will be tested by rising unemployment and the imminent end of the furlough scheme, but there’s not much evidence of a slowdown at the moment.”