Lebanon’s information minister, Manal Abdel Samad, has quit in the first government resignation since an explosion in the port of Beirut killed more than 150 people and destroyed swathes of the capital. “After the enormous Beirut catastrophe, I announce my resignation from government,” she said in a statement on Sunday, apologising to the Lebanese public for failing them. The head of Lebanon’s Maronite church called on the entire government to step down over the explosion, widely seen as proof of the rot at the core of the state. Lebanese protesters enraged by the blast vowed to rally again after a night of street clashes in which they stormed several ministries. The Maronite patriarch, Bechara Boutros al-Rahi, joined the chorus of people pressing Prime Minister Hassan Diab’s cabinet to step down over the explosion, which he said could be “described as a crime against humanity”. “It is not enough for a lawmaker to resign here, or a minister to resign there,” Rai said in a Sunday sermon. “It is necessary, out of sensitivity to the feelings of the Lebanese and the immense responsibility required, for the entire government to resign, because it is incapable of moving the country forward.” He echoed calls by Diab for early parliamentary polls – a long-standing demand of a protest movement that began in October, asking for the removal of a political class deemed inept and corrupt. At least six lawmakers have quit since the explosion. The Maronite patriarch also joined world leaders, international organisations and the Lebanese public in pressing for an international inquiry into the explosion, which, authorities say, was triggered by a fire in a port warehouse where a huge shipment of hazardous ammonium nitrate had languished for years. Ammonium nitrate is a common industrial chemical used mainly for fertiliser because it is a good source of nitrogen for plants. It is also one of the main components in mining explosives. It is not explosive on its own, rather it is an oxidiser, drawing oxygen to a fire – and therefore making it much more intense. However, it ignites only under the right circumstances, and these are difficult to achieve. While ammonium nitrate can in fact put out a fire, if the chemical itself is contaminated, for example with oil, it becomes highly explosive. Helen Sullivan and Tom Phillips The Lebanese president, Michel Aoun, rejected calls on Friday for an international investigation, which he said would “dilute the truth”. Under pressure from the public and foreign partners who are exasperated by the Lebanese leadership’s inability to enact reforms, Diab’s government is looking increasingly unstable. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, called for speedy international backing for Lebanon and urged its leaders to prevent “chaos” as he opened an emergency aid conference. Macron hosted the US president, Donald Trump, and other world leaders for the virtual conference to drum up aid for Lebanon, as the UN said $117m (£90) would be needed over the next three months for the emergency response. The UK pledged to “stand by the Lebanese people” and promised another £20m in aid. The new package of support is in addition to £5m already given by the UK government.