The number of adults in Great Britain experiencing depression has doubled during the coronavirus pandemic, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). Almost one in five (19.2%) of the 3,500 participants in the survey experienced depression in June, almost double the 9.7% of the group who had symptoms of depression in the nine months to March. Younger adults, women and disabled people were among those most likely to experience depression during the pandemic, as were those living in households unable to afford an unexpected expense. One in eight adults (13%) developed moderate to severe depressive symptoms during the pandemic, while a further 6.2% continued to experience this level of depressive symptoms from previously. A much smaller proportion, 3.5%, experienced an improvement in the same period. Those living in households unable to afford an unexpected expense (defined as an “unexpected but necessary expense of £850”) were also considerably more likely to have been depressed in June (34.9%) , up from 21.1% before the pandemic reached the UK. Although people across all age brackets were more likely to have experienced depression post-Covid, the greatest proportional increase was among those aged 16 to 39. Between July 2019 and March 2020, 11% of this age group reported experiencing depression, but this rose to 31% in June. Women were more likely than men to have experienced depression during the pandemic, with almost one in four (23.3%) reporting moderate to severe depressive symptoms, compared with one in eight beforehand. There was an increase in the number of working people experiencing some form of depression during the pandemic, with similar increases experienced among key workers. The survey did not cover people who had been furloughed or whose working hours changed as a result of the pandemic. About one in three (35%) disabled adults experienced moderate to severe depressive symptoms during the pandemic, up from 27.5% beforehand. Those living in cities, towns, and suburbs were no more likely to have experienced symptoms than people in rural areas, nor was there any statistically significant difference between residents in England, Wales and Scotland. The head of the Rethink Mental Illness charity, Mark Winstanley, said the figures underlined the impact of the pandemic on the mental health of the population at large, and highlighted those most vulnerable to developing such problems. “We anticipate a significant increase in demand for services and support due to the pandemic, but it’s crucial to recognise that the responsibility for mental health goes beyond the NHS and demands a cross-government approach,” he said. “Support with employment, housing and financial problems, for example, must all be prioritised now the country is in recession, and recognised for their role in supporting people’s mental health during a time of great uncertainty and strain.” The principal research officer for the ONS, Tim Vizard, said the survey provided an insight into the mental health of adults during the pandemic. “Revisiting this same group of adults before and during the pandemic provides a unique insight into how their symptoms of depression have changed over time.” Charities and health professionals have reported increased demand due to the psychological toll that lockdown has had on people’s mental health. Experts have warned of potentially tens of thousands of people who may experience post-traumatic stress disorder having fallen seriously ill because of Covid-19; the impact on children with pre-existing conditions; and pupils newly affected by the closure of schools, youth clubs and a lack of outdoor activities. Dr Billy Boland of the Royal College of Psychiatrists said: “The doubling in the numbers of people experiencing depressive symptoms is another warning of the looming mental health crisis and the tsunami of referrals we are expecting over the coming months.“Isolation, bereavement and financial insecurity are some of the reasons why the nation’s mental health has deteriorated since the start of the pandemic.“The government must speed up the investment to mental health services if we are to treat the growing numbers of people living with depression and other mental illnesses.”