Three people have died after a passenger train derailed near Stonehaven in Aberdeenshire following a night of thunderstorms and torrential rainfall. The three dead were the driver, conductor and a passenger. Six other people were taken to hospital for treatment. Their injuries are not believed to be serious. Emergency services were called to the scene at 9.43am after four passenger carriages came off the track at Carmont, just west of Stonehaven. About 30 emergency vehicles including an air ambulance were reported to have attended the scene. It is the first time a passenger has died in a train accident on the British railway network since the Grayrigg derailment in Cumbria in 2007. The driver was based in ScotRail’s Aberdeen depot and was married with three children. He and the other two victims have yet to be named. The ScotRail high-speed train had left Aberdeen at 6.38am and was travelling to Glasgow Queen Street. The TSSA union said there was no indication as yet as to what may have caused the derailment. North-east Scotland was badly affected by heavy rain overnight. Minutes after the derailment is believed to have taken place, Network Rail Scotland tweeted a video of flooding alongside warnings of a landslip at Carmont. At Carmont, we’ve had reports of a landslip, which means services can’t operate between Dundee & Aberdeen. /2 pic.twitter.com/1E29tKHFhy Rail industry sources suggested the train had stopped ahead of a landslide around Carmont and planned to return north, but then hit a second landslip as it headed back to Stonehaven. It is understood that 12 people were onboard at the time – six passengers and six staff. Ch Supt Eddie Wylie, of British Transport Police, said: “This is a tragic incident and first and foremost our thoughts are with the families and friends of those who have very sadly died this morning. “We remain on scene alongside our emergency service colleagues, and a major incident operation has been under way. I would like to reassure the public that this was not a busy service, and from CCTV enquiries and witness statements we believe all passengers have been accounted for. However, once the area has been made safe then a full and thorough search will be conducted, which is likely to take some time.” Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, thanked the emergency services for their work throughout the day and said: “My deepest condolences are with the loved ones of those who lost their lives in this tragic incident.” Boris Johnson said he was “saddened to learn of the very serious incident in Aberdeenshire and my thoughts are with all of those affected. My thanks to the emergency services at the scene.” The UK transport secretary, Grant Shapps, tweeted: “British Transport Police & Network Rail are on location, along with rail workers who were nearby. The UK government will provide every support. My thoughts are with those involved and their families.” Rainstorms across east and central Scotland on Tuesday night caused flooding, travel disruption and school closures on Wednesday morning. The Scottish Environmental Protection Agency issued a flood warning for Stonehaven, and water was flowing through the town centre. NHS Grampian opened a welcome centre in Aberdeen for family and friends affected by the incident. The health board’s chaplains will staff the centre and provide a direct link with A&E at Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, where visitors are not currently allowed owing to Covid-19 restrictions. Alex Hynes, the managing director of Scotland’s Railway, said: “Our thoughts are with those who have been affected by this tragic event, particularly the families of those who have lost their lives. The railway in Scotland is often referred to as a family, and it’s one that is hurting today. “We have teams on site and we will do all we can to support everyone affected. We are working closely with all the relevant authorities to establish the cause of this incident.” Mick Lynch, the assistant general secretary of the transport union RMT, said: “The facts behind this incident will need to be established in due course but at this stage we are focused on support and assistance and our thoughts are with all those impacted by this tragedy.” HM chief inspector of railways, Ian Prosser, said inspectors were on site at Stonehaven assisting in the preliminary investigation. “We will work with other agencies, including the emergency services, to find out exactly what happened and identify the causes of this tragic incident,” he said. Last month an annual health and safety report by the Office of Rail and Road (ORR) warned Network Rail of the growing danger from extreme weather. It said there were six times more flooding events on Britain’s railways in 2019-20 than in the previous 12 months. The report also noted a rise in landslips, and found that Network Rail’s plans to address the climate crisis and extreme weather were “not keeping up with the frequency and severity of these events”.