A cat that went missing on a family holiday on the shores of Loch Lomond has been found 12 years later. Tortoiseshell-and-white Georgie spent October half term in 2008 with her owners at the Rowardennan campsite but vanished as they were due to return home to Greater Manchester. After a search of the site the Davies family departed without Georgie, hoping the three-year-old microchipped feline would be located by someone. Over the intervening 12 years, she remained close to the Queen Elizabeth Forest Park site, being fed and cared for by campsite staff and holidaymakers. After the coronavirus pandemic hit and lockdown restrictions were imposed in the area, a concerned member of staff at the campsite came across Georgie and discovered her Rochdale origin after the microchip was scanned by an animal charity. Amy Davies, the cat’s owner, said: “We were heartbroken when Georgie didn’t come back on our last day at Loch Lomond. It was such a lovely surprise to hear that she was not only well but had seemingly been having a great time meeting campers.” However, despite her delight, she said changes in her family’s circumstances meant that there would be no reunion. Georgie will remain at the Cats Protection Glasgow adoption centre until a new home can be found for her. “My instinct was to jump in the car and collect Georgie straight away but we have another nine-year-old cat now,” said Davies. “When I spoke to the centre I knew our life now just wouldn’t suit Georgie as she doesn’t like other pets and needs space to come and go. It’s really sad that after all this time we won’t be reunited but I have to do what’s best for Georgie.” Lynsey Anderson, who works at Cats Protection Glasgow, said: “I could hear how much she wanted to come and see her but her concerns for Georgie’s happiness really shone through. “We’re looking for a quiet home for Georgie where she can be the only cat, enjoy her space and have plenty of garden to explore. She’s very loving and enjoys human company so will make a brilliant companion.” The senior cat care assistant said the case highlighted the importance of keeping chip details up to date. Although the phone number in the chip was no longer active, an email and letter were sent to contact the owners. “We were amazed when we saw the Rochdale address on Georgie’s microchip,” said Anderson.