Paul Pogba has tested positive for coronavirus and faces at least 10 days of quarantine that means he will be absent when pre-season training starts on Wednesday. Pogba’s positive test was revealed by Didier Deschamps when the France manager named his squad on Thursday and United swiftly said on their website: “Everybody at United wishes Paul a speedy recovery ahead of the new season.” Deschamps told a press conference: “I’ve completed at the very last minute a change in the list, because Paul Pogba, who was previously on the list, unfortunately for him he carried out a test yesterday which was returned as positive this morning. So at the last moment he had to be replaced by Eduardo Camavinga.” Another France international, Tottenham’s Tanguy Ndombele, is also believed to have tested positive for coronavirus. Among the other absentees with Pogba at the start of United’s pre-season preparations will be Aaron Wan-Bissaka, who faces a 14-day quarantine after a holiday in Dubai. The Guardian has contacted the club to clarify whether Wan-Bissaka had permission to travel to Dubai and whether, even though the bulk of the squad are expected back on Wednesday, the defender was among those given extra time to recuperate after last season. Wan-Bissaka has posted pictures of himself undergoing fitness sessions in Dubai, which is on the list of places from which people returning to the UK have to self-isolate for 14 days. Dubai was on that list before United’s final match, the Europa League semi-final defeat by Sevilla on 16 August. Ole Gunnar Solskjær has encouraged his players to take as refreshing a break as possible given United’s 2019-20 season was a year and a week long because of coronavirus. United open the new campaign at home to Crystal Palace on 19 September. This week United’s captain, Harry Maguire, was convicted in a Greek court of aggravated assault, verbal assault, resisting arrest and attempted bribery after a brawl on the island of Mykonos. He strongly denies wrongdoing and has appealed, which will lead to a retrial before a higher court. Under Greek law a conviction remains pending once an appeal process is launched. Marcus Rashford is expected to pull out of the matches against Iceland and Denmark in early September when he reports to Gareth Southgate’s England squad next week due to an ankle problem. The striker’s injury is thought to be minor and the hope is that after some rest he will be available to start the season for United.