Nathan Aké has become Manchester City’s second signing in two days, the centre-back joining from Bournemouth on a five-year deal for a fee of around £41m. The 25-year-old Dutch international follows Ferran Torres, who joined the club on Monday for £24.5m, as Pep Guardiola’s investment in the squad who relinquished the Premier League title continues. The manager will be particularly pleased to have acquired Aké as central defence was a problem area of the team throughout last season, with the holding midfielder Fernandinho often preferred to John Stones to partner Aymeric Laporte due to the Englishman’s shaky form. When Laporte suffered a serious knee injury in September that ruled him out for half the campaign this further exposed the lack of depth in Guardiola’s defensive resources. Aké said: “City have been the best side in England over the course of the last decade,. Coming here is a dream for me. This is a top side full of world-class players. Everywhere you look in this squad there are big names with international pedigree. “Pep is a manager admired across the world – what he’s done in the game speaks for itself. The success he’s had is unbelievable and the style of football he plays really appeals to me. I know I’m going to have to work hard to get into the side, but that’s what I’m here to do. I’ll do whatever I can to make an impact and help the team win silverware.” Txiki Begiristain, City’s director of football, said: “Nathan is a quality defender. He was a leader during his time at Bournemouth, and I am so pleased we’ve managed to bring him here. He’s strong and quick, and we feel he has the technical and intellectual attributes needed to excel in Pep’s setup. “Working with this squad, which is full of world-class players, will raise his level, and we are looking forward to seeing what he can achieve here in the coming years.” City may move for another defender in the summer window – Bayern Munich’s David Alaba remains a prime target as the 28-year-old can operate at left-back and centre-back. Aké’s arrival calls into question the future of Stones, with Nicolás Otamendi’s career at the club also under threat. The 32-year-old Argentinian came close to departing last summer and there would be some surprise if he were not to leave in the current window.