I was scheduled to run the Paris marathon on 5 April. It was cancelled in March, just before lockdown, and moved to October. The organisers informed me of the date change and automatic change of entry – with no refund on the entry fee. I reorganised my hotel with Booking.com without any problems. I had arranged to go by Eurostar and emailed it only to receive an automated reply.I continued to try and make contact but there was no reply. Then, in May, Eurostar said it would give me vouchers for my travel for use until December 2020. I received them 14 days later but then another email cancelled them due to an “internal problem”. To my despair, I got an email to say the marathon had been switched again – to November – but I still could not get hold of Eurostar. I even went to St Pancras station but staff couldn’t help. MS, London Eurostar says: “Unfortunately, after your reader contacted us in March, the case was marked as ‘closed’ in error, which is why he didn’t receive a response. An email, sent a few days ago, is back in the queue and would have received a response. However, it is taking us longer than normal to reply due to the volume of inquiries.” Eurostar says it will process a refund or change your travel date and that all new bookings until the end of the year are now flexible. It apologised and offered a refund, which you have received. Following our letter about Easylife and the difficulties receiving face masks, reader DL from Swadlingcote, Derbyshire, broke through the logjam. He wrote: “I emailed chief executive Greg Caplan on a Friday evening. He responded on Sunday, copying in customer services. The next day I was offered a refund. By coincidence, the masks arrived that very day.” We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions: http://gu.com/letters-terms  This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.