Alexander Lukashenko has given awards to 300 members of his riot police force and KGB for “impeccable service” as the Belarusian president attempts to maintain the loyalty of security services in the gravest crisis of his 26 years in power. The awards recognised senior officials and lower-ranking officers believed to have taken part in last week’s bloody crackdown against protesters. The awards were dated 13 August and followed four days of protests during which more than 7,000 people were detained. Police deployed rubber bullets and stun grenades as they broke up peaceful demonstrations. Many of those detained said they were viciously beaten and tortured in jails. The Belarusian leader has sought to shore up support among his core constituencies, especially the security services, as he seeks to outlast a protest movement that has brought him face-to-face with former supporters calling on him to resign. The violence following this month’s rigged elections has sparked the country’s largest protests in its history, as well as threats of sanctions and pressure from Europe on Lukashenko to begin negotiations with the opposition. Vladimir Putin, the president of Belarus’s close ally Russia, spoke with the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and the French president, Emmanuel Macron, on Tuesday. A spokesman for Merkel said she told Putin that Belarus should release political prisoners and hold a “national dialogue with the opposition and society”. A Kremlin readout of the Merkel call said Putin had “accented the unacceptability of any attempts of outside interference on the internal affairs of the republic, leading to a further escalation of the crisis”. The Kremlin has been hesitant to provide a public endorsement of Lukashenko in his standoff with his own people, but has appeared to have drawn a line at further EU pressure on him. Members of the European council will hold an emergency summit on Wednesday, during which they may call on Lukashenko to step down or consider other efforts to punish him for the recent crackdown. There are also signs of growing support among EU leaders for Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, the Belarusian opposition candidate, who is currently in Lithuania. The Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, said on Monday evening he had spoken by phone with Tikhanovskaya and “assured her that Belarusians had Poland’s full support – both in their pursuit of freedom of their homeland and in everyday life in Poland”. The Lithuanian foreign minister, who has also spoken with Tikhanovskaya, calls Lukashenko the “former head of state.” Tikhanovskaya, who left Belarus last week under government pressure, has called for an end to police violence and said she was ready to serve as a “national leader” until new free and fair elections are called. On Tuesday, a Tikhanovskaya aide told the Russian state news agency, Tass, that they would form a 70-person coordination council that would include representatives of political parties and prominent cultural figures, including the Nobel prize-winning author Svetlana Alexievich. Maria Kolesnikova, the only one of the all-female trio behind Tikhanovskaya’s campaign still remaining in Belarus, said her team was in touch with ambassadors from Russia and EU countries in Minsk. “With the president threatening some kind of Russian intervention, it was important to let them know our position. We sent documents to the Russian ambassador and we are talking to Russian media to make sure our view gets across,” Kolesnikova told the Guardian outside a theatre in Minsk, where she had come to show support to striking actors. In Belarus, Lukashenko has appeared defiant, even while being confronted by striking workers at a state-run factory in Minsk on Monday. “We held the elections and until you kill me, there won’t be any new elections,” he said amid a chorus of boos and calls for him to resign.