The strict new stage 4 lockdown announced by the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, along with the shutdown of certain industries to be unveiled on Monday, represents a hammer blow to the Australian economy. They immediately invalidate federal Treasury forecasts released less than a fortnight ago and will require the prime minister, Scott Morrison, to tip buckets of money into Victoria if Australia is to avoid prolonging and deepening what is already an economic disaster. Australia’s second-biggest state, by both population and economic output, has been in a harsher state of lockdown than the rest of the country for almost a month and will now go into a state of near hibernation for at least six weeks. The economic effects will be felt across the country, exposing the idea that emergency jobkeeper and jobseeker support can be safely tapered away at the end of September – less than 60 days away – as a dangerous fantasy. Andrews said there would be three categories of industry. In the first, it will be (coronavirus) business as usual – “the butcher, the baker, food, beverage, groceries, those types of settings”. A second group is to reduce its output. “That will mean there are less people working less shifts,” Andrews said. “There is less contact. There is less seeding of this virus from workplaces back into families and from family to family and right throughout the Victorian community.” A third group will have to temporarily, but entirely, shut down. Andrews was shy about which industries will fall into which category. But coronavirus has spread through some – such as meatworks – that have heavily casualised workforces where people work cheek by jowl. Andrews has repeatedly said it is a huge problem that casual workers keep turning up to work when they feel sick because they fear they will never get another shift. The Victorian government offers people $300 to stay home between getting tested and getting a result – enough to cover a few shifts, but if you’re thrown off the books what are you supposed to do after that? There’s also a $1,500 payment for people who test positive, but take-up has been poor. Forcibly shutting high-risk industries should stem infections at work, but the cost to workers will be enormous. The hit they take will also be felt through the rest of the economy, both in Victoria and across Australia, as their spending vanishes and the goods and services they supply disappear. And that’s before we think about the remaining workers in the already devastated Victorian hospitality sector, who might have been thinking they would be able to get back to work before last month’s restrictions hit, and now have no chance at all. Workers smashed by this new wave of economic mayhem will need money from the government to be able to eat and pay their bills. The question is: which government? The Victorian government’s finances must be nearing their limits. On the other hand, the commonwealth has oodles of spare capacity to borrow at the lowest interest rates in history. So if support is to flow, it will probably have to come from Morrison and the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg. Over to you. Victorians will want to hear something sooner rather than later.