Almost a million people waited at least half an hour for an ambulance after having a medical emergency such as a heart attack or stroke last year, NHS figures show. Ambulance crews responding to 999 calls in England took more than 30 minutes to reach patients needing urgent care a total of 905,086 times during 2019-20. Of those, 253,277 had to wait at least an hour, and 35,960 – the equivalent of almost 100 patients a day – waited for more than two hours. In addition to heart attacks and strokes, the figures cover patients who had sustained a serious injury or trauma or major burns, or had developed the potentially lethal blood-borne infection sepsis. Under NHS guidelines, ambulances are meant to arrive at incidents involving a medical emergency – known as category 2 calls – within 18 minutes. The Liberal Democrat MP Layla Moran, who obtained the figures using freedom of information laws, said: “It’s deeply shocking that such huge numbers of seriously ill patients have had to wait so long for an ambulance crew to arrive after a 999 call. It shows the incredible pressure our ambulance services were under even before this pandemic struck. “Patients suffering emergencies like a heart attack, stroke or serious injury need urgent medical attention, not to be left waiting for up to two hours for an ambulance to arrive. These worryingly long delays in an ambulance reaching a seriously ill or injured patient could have a major long-term impact on their health.” NHS England overhauled ambulance response times in 2017 and 2018. Under the new system, category 1 calls – involving immediate threats to patients’ lives – had to be answered in an average of seven minutes and category 2 calls in 18 minutes. The change meant ambulance service call handlers had more time to decide which vehicles to send to which incidents and how quickly, which health experts agreed would benefit patients. At the time the NHS pledged that the new waiting times would help it ensure “that by 2021 all ambulance services will meet all targets and deliver all patient outcomes”. But in a report published in May, the Nuffield Trust health thinktank found that category 2 response targets were being missed. “Since the category 2 targets were introduced in April 2018, both the average and 90th-centile response time targets have never been met. Response times have fluctuated, but worsened overall,” it said. “In March 2020 the mean response time was 32 minutes [and] six seconds, and the 90th-centile response time was one hour [and] nine minutes.” After the switch to new targets, category 1 response times initially fell from an average of seven minutes and 37 seconds to six minutes and 54 seconds, but by March this year they had slipped back to eight minutes and seven seconds. Nine per cent of all 999 calls are classed as category 1. Moran added: “These figures show the NHS has far too few ambulances and crews to cope with the growing demand for care. The government must urgently tackle staff and funding shortages in our ambulance services ahead of a potential second wave.” An NHS spokesperson said: “Ambulance trusts continue to work tirelessly to respond to Covid-19 while also delivering urgent care for other conditions, handling 389,043 incidents last month where a patient was transported to an emergency department, up 10% since the peak of the pandemic and close to July 2019 levels. “Importantly, for the third month in a row, frontline ambulance staff met all six response time targets, including for the most serious and life-threatening conditions, and we are working with trusts on putting in place measures to increase further their call handling capacity and support on-the-road crews.”