Keylor Navas 6 The Costa Rican returned from a hamstring injury but could not stop Coman’s header. Thilo Kehrer 4The German right-back struggled to contain Coman and was lucky not to concede a penalty. Thiago Silva 7The 35-year-old did not let himself down before his likely exit from PSG. Solid defending. Presnel Kimpembe 7The youngster had a composed game alongside Silva. Mopped up and made vital clearances. Juan Bernat 6The former Bayern defender stood up to Gnabry and also managed to get forward. Ander Herrera 6The former Manchester United midfielder did the dirty work and was creative in possession. Marquinhos 7An intelligent player. He shielded his back four well and his positioning was astute. Leandro Paredes 6Produced some stunning passes at times. Spiky when he saw Bayern targeting Neymar’s ankles. Angel Di María 6The winger was inventive but he will regret missing an excellent chance at 0-0. Neymar 5The Brazilian failed to rise to the occasion. Wasted an early chance and was ineffective. Kylian Mbappé 5Missed a huge opportunity to punish a Bayern error just before half-time. Surprisingly lacked conviction. Subs Verratti (for Paredes 65) 6, Draxler (for Herrera 72) 6, Kurzawa (for Bernat 80) 6, Choupo-Moting (for Di María 80) 6 Manuel Neuer 8Made two big saves, denying Neymar the opener and Marquinhos an equaliser. Joshua Kimmich 7 Produced a lovely cross for the winner but was lucky not to concede a penalty. Jérôme Boateng 5The veteran struggled to cope with PSG’s speedy attack before departing injured early on. David Alaba 6Lucky not to be punished by Mbappé after an error. But he kept Neymar quiet. Alphonso Davies 7PSG tried to get behind the teenager but he produced a strong, disciplined performance. Thiago Alcântara 7Started the move for Bayern’s opening goal with a piercing pass down the right. Dictated play. Leon Goretzka 6The 25-year-old has matured this season and had a commanding game in midfield. Serge Gnabry 5The winger had a quiet game by his standards and was booked for fouling Neymar. Thomas Müller 6The master of space gave the ball away at times but never hid. Mature display. Kingsley Coman 8Justified Hansi Flick’s decision to drop Ivan Perisic. His fine header gave Bayern the edge. Robert Lewandowski 6 Hit a post with his first chance and linked play. Deserved a goal. Subs Sule (for Boateng 25) 7, Perisic (for Coman 68) 6, Coutinho (for Gnabry 68) 6, Tolisso (for Thiago 86) 6