Whether it’s colourful baby carrots or crisp local asparagus, spring in Australia means a bounty of fresh local produce, and recipes that enhance what nature supplies. Preparing this recipe will leave you useful leftovers. “Make more croutons than you need,” Yotam Ottolenghi suggests. “They keep well in a sealed container for up to five days and are lovely for sprinkling on any soup or salad that can handle a bit of a crunchy kick.” The berbere spice mix the recipe calls for is available online and from specialty grocers in Australia, though it hasn’t quite made it to supermarkets yet. The banana shallots the recipe calls for could be referred to as “onion shallots”, “French onion shallots” or “eschallots” at your grocer. Not to be confused with long, green spring onions, they should be oblong bulbs with an onion-like, papery skin. Ideal for a picnic (even if it’s on the floor of your flat), these are an instant-gratification bake, with no fiddly starter and no time spent waiting for the dough to rise. Not to be confused with the packaged, cut-down and peeled “baby carrots” available at supermarkets, this recipe calls for long, thin carrots that are wildly available as “Dutch carrots” in Australia. “Homemade pizza dough seems much more daunting than it really is,” Ottolenghi writes. “This version needs no fancy kit, plus it takes only five minutes to make and 30 minutes to rise.” The baharat spice mix the recipe calls for is widely available, including at major supermarkets. Barbecues do not have to be the domain of carnivores alone. Cooking beetroot over coals will leave the root vegetables “soft and lightly smoked”. Spring is peak season for Australian wild-caught spanner crab, a sustainable choice that’s usually a bit more affordable than other large crustaceans. In this recipe, it is served with pickled samphire, which is native to Australia and available online via Indigenous-owned native ingredient supplier Mayi Harvests. Australian-grown asparagus starts becoming available around September. “Roasting is a great way to cook spring and summer vegetables,” Ottolenghi writes. “It gets a similar result to blanching and grilling, but with much less effort.” While it is possible to find sorrel at some supermarkets and many green grocers, you can also use spinach as a substitute. “Don’t be put off by the long ingredient list,” Ottolenghi writes of this street food-inspired potato dish. “The whole thing comes together fairly easily, and you’ll use the time the potatoes spend in the oven to make the chutney and the tamarind sauce.” Somewhere between a cheesecake and a blueberry pie, this dish isn’t quite as decadent as it might look on first glance as it “isn’t overly sweet”. Blueberries are quite affordable in Australia at the moment, but if the thought of using fresh ones makes you flinch, this recipe also works with frozen. “This pudding is sure to make an impact at the dinner table, but in fact couldn’t be easier to put together,” Ottolenghi writes. The black rice it calls for is available in supermarkets, and fresh, locally grown papayas are becoming widely available at a reasonable price this month. These recipes have been selected from the Guardian’s recipe archive, based on produce that is currently in season in Australia. Some dish titles may have been modified to reflect Australian cooking terminology.