My friend Molly Maher, who has died aged 83, worked tirelessly to campaign for changes to European safety legislation on carbon monoxide poisoning. She began her 35 years of lobbying after fumes from a faulty gas water heater in a Tenerife apartment killed her 26-year-old son, Gary, and paralysed her 21-year-old daughter, Sheree, while the two of them were on holiday together in 1985. After the tragedy, which the authorities had initially tried to cover up, Molly soon discovered there were dozens of others who had lost family members in similar circumstances, and she set about trying to prevent further deaths. With the help of the Labour MP Nigel Griffiths she co-founded two charities, Consumer Safety International and CO-Gas Safety, and with other relatives of poisoning victims she dedicated a large part of her life to raising awareness of the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning in hotels, apartments and other tourist destinations on the European continent – as well as in ordinary homes in the UK. Her chief aims were to ensure that all gas appliances are serviced and fitted properly, and to raise the standard of carbon monoxide alarms. Today many of the changes she campaigned for are standard practice in the travel and fuel industries. As a direct result of Molly’s lobbying, all the major UK tour operators introduced a worldwide boycott of holiday accommodation where there were individual gas water heaters. In Tenerife all such heaters were banned by the island’s government. The tour operators also included warnings about carbon monoxide poisoning as part of the travel advice they gave to their customers. All disposable barbecues sold within the European Union must now include a carbon monoxide warning, and it is now standard practice for landlords to fit monitors in their premises and all gas engineers must be properly trained and accredited. Before Gary’s death, Molly was just an ordinary woman who had no previous campaigning or political experience. Born in Isleworth, west London, to Isabelle (nee Howe), a cashier, and her husband, Stan Tupper, a butcher, she attended Marlborough School for Girls in Isleworth before going to a Pitman’s college to learn shorthand and typing. In 1957 she married Peter Maher, a builder, with whom she had three children, Gary, Sheree and Lindy. For some time Molly ran her own nursing home, although she eventually had to give up the venture to be a full-time carer for Sheree, who needed intensive medical treatment after the poisoning in Tenerife. I first met Molly shortly after that event, when I was working on the story as a reporter for Television South. She was kind, considerate and supportive to victims’ families but also fearless, and would never back down when faced with obstacles deliberately placed in her path, particularly when she felt there were cover-ups. Even when Molly was seriously ill and had to use a wheelchair she insisted on attending a gas safety committee meeting in the House of Lords. Today many people owe their health and their lives to her work. Peter died in 1991. She is survived by Sheree and Lindy, four grandchildren, Jay, Chantel, Connor and Lily, and her brother Doug.