One of the great and enduring thrills of New Zealand life is when someone notices that we exist. We cling to Rudyard Kipling’s 1891 observation of our far-fetched archipelago as “last and loveliest”, a remote southern star, two vague, misty islands on the edge of the world – but every now and then, distance looks our way, and says our name out loud. “New Zealand, you see what’s going on in New Zealand,” Donald Trump said today. The whole country has sat up and noticed. There is talk of coming up with a whole new set of public holidays to encourage Kiwis to get out and about, and spend tourism dollars while the borders remain closed. The Auckland author Anne Kennedy has suggested that National Poetry Day (23 August) should be a public holiday. Trump saying New Zealand not once but twice in the same sentence is equally good cause to give everyone the day off. Of all the crazy, random, unlikely things that come out of the mouth of the president of the United States, the last thing anyone in New Zealand ever expected to hear was New Zealand. But there we were, running along the edge of his tongue as he sought to establish the notion that there is nothing extraordinary in the US battling the highest recorded coronavirus case numbers in the world, because things are also quite bad in New Zealand. Trump was addressing a crowd in Mankato, Minnesota. He said: “The problem is there’s a big surge in New Zealand. “They beat it, they beat, it was like front page [news] they beat it. But all of a sudden a lot of the places … are having a big surge … and now they’re saying ‘whoops’.” He’s not the only president to realise our existence. New Zealand’s former prime minister, Sir John Key, used to play golf in Hawaii with the then president Barack Obama. They got close. Key invited him to New Zealand. Obama duly arrived for a few days in 2018; he played golf with Key and gave a speech at a private event, which was reportedly pretty underwhelming. It cost three sponsors $500,000 to bring Obama here. Money well spent, Key said at the time, because Obama would tweet about New Zealand to his 100 million followers. The problem is that Obama did not tweet about New Zealand to his 100 million followers. We got nothing out of his lousy visit. We got more in four or five seconds from Trump. His repeated mentions of New Zealand have ranked right up there with the most famous times that someone has made mention of New Zealand. Like the final scene in The Wolf of Wall Street, where Leonardo DiCaprio as Jordan Belfort asks an audience at the Auckland Events Centre to sell him a pen, and people without New Zealand accents unsuccessfully give it a go. Like the scene in Oliver Stone’s JFK (so many connections between US presidents and New Zealand!), when Donald Sutherland finds out the news about Kennedy’s assassination by reading the Christchurch Star. Like the scene in Point Break, when Patrick Swayze says, reasonably, “Hell, I’m not going to paddle to New Zealand.” Like the line in Anton Chekhov’s novel The Shooting Party where a character says, unreasonably, “This is barbaric! This is like New Zealand!” Trump said much the same thing as Chekhov’s character. The coronavirus is a plague, and almost impossible to contain; New Zealand had no new cases of community transmission for 102 days, but it returned last week, and now Auckland is in a strict level of lockdown. It’s not entirely accurate or sane, though, to describe it as “a big surge”. New Zealand now has 90 active cases of Covid-19. The US has recorded over 5,400,000 active cases, and more than 170,000 people have died. But still. It was good of him to point us out before the eyes of the world. We’re always happy to have any kind of attention. The idea of holding a National Trump Day public holiday every 18 August could really take off. • Steve Braunias is a journalist and author who lives in Auckland, New Zealand