Hari Kunzru is the prizewinning author whose novels include The Impressionist and White Tears. His latest, Red Pill, is the unsettling tale of an American at a Berlin writer’s retreat. It uses the totalitarian past to shine a light on contemporary technologies of control, all wrapped within a sophisticated, fast-paced thriller. Kunzru lives in New York with his wife, the novelist Katie Kitamura, and their two young children. The seemingly benevolent Deuter Centre denies your protagonist the one thing he needs in order to work – a private space. How important is privacy to art?I had gone to Germany in the first half of 2016 with a set of questions around privacy and the self. Privacy is under attack in a whole host of ways and surveillance is one of them. I’m really interested in the ways you behave when you think it’s possible you’re being observed. There’s this idea in Hannah Arendt that you need privacy and a space that’s hidden away from the public in order to have the choice when to give yourself to the public space. If you have no ability to withdraw then there’s something essential to being a person that is lost. Why did you choose to end the book with the election of Trump?We have to reckon with the history of totalitarianism and authoritarianism in a way that we weren’t equipped to do a few years ago. We have rather lazily thought that with the end of 20th-century totalitarianisms a certain kind of freedom was guaranteed. Now we’re discovering that there’s a totalitarianism of control as well as coercion. There are many mechanisms by which our behaviour is routed in certain directions. The technology of surveillance and control is beyond the wildest dreams of any of the old dictators. You only have to look at China to see what dystopian possibilities there are within the new technology, where your social-credit score and your DNA and your movements are all held by one central system. There’s another story within the novel, that of Monika, a former punk whose life was destroyed by the Stasi. Why did you decide to tell her tale?I was really interested in the Stasi and in this idea of Zersetzung, or corrosion. One of the things I ended up doing in Berlin was spending a lot of time in the Stasi archive and speaking with the archivists. There was a Stasi university in Potsdam where you could go and get a postgraduate qualification in the demolition of other people’s personalities. They would arrange small disappointments. You send a package at the post office and it goes astray, nothing ever quite goes right for you. Because that state structure isn’t there any more, we think that it all went away, but so many of those ways of manipulating and upsetting people are still practised. There's the notion that you torture suspects and that works. It gives primacy to violence and primacy to transgression Your novel White Tears dealt with race and identity in the US. In this novel, you feature a brutal cop show, Blue Lives. It feels prescient, given that you would have written it well before the current wave of protests.There’s a genre of American cop show from Dirty Harry on, where beating the suspect was just part of police work. There’s this notion that if you follow the rules you’re not going to get the job done. That has been a strong part of the presentation of American policing throughout its cultural history. And then we’ve also had shows like 24. Again, there’s the notion that the real truth is that you torture the suspects and that works. It gives primacy to violence and primacy to transgression. In America, we have a patchwork of thousands of small police agencies all with a right to kill. You can have a small town and yet there’s a heavily armed police force with its weapons distributed from Iraq and Afghanistan. To a man with a hammer, everything looks like a nail. The war has come home. The horrors that were visited on people in the Middle East during the 2000s are now happening on the streets here. How has lockdown been for you?We’re in Bed-Stuy in Brooklyn and we’ve had several distinct phases. The first was March and April, very tense, sirens all day and night, trying not to see any other people at all. We were very worried about surfaces, no one had any idea about transmission, we were bleaching packages. Then things died down a bit until the protests came and people were firebombing the local police station and suddenly everyone was on the streets again. I’m not a citizen and so can’t be arrested without being deported, but I did join in and walked across Brooklyn Bridge with thousands of people. It was such a strange thing having been alone for so long and then suddenly to be surrounded. Now we’re got a low virus caseload but there are explosions in the south and we’re bracing ourselves for a grim fall. There’s no contact tracing at all and the depth of the failure of the government response is becoming apparent. It’s very unnerving to think about where we could be by the end of the year. What books are on your bedside table? I’ve almost finished a massive history book called Albion’s Seed by David Hackett Fischer. Which novelists and nonfiction writers working today do you admire the most? Obviously the novelist working next door, Katie Kitamura. Another writer I admire very much is Anne Boyer. She’s a poet and nonfiction writer and wrote an extraordinary book called The Undying, about her experience with breast cancer. What do you read for sheer pleasure? Anything that isn’t work. Anything I don’t have to take notes on. I’m about to read Hurricane Season by Fernanda Melchor. I know nothing about it other than that Katie was very excited about it. Which classic novel did you read recently for the first time? It would have been a Balzac – Cousin Bette. Which book would you give to a young person? Maybe The Earthsea Trilogy by Ursula K Le Guin. • Red Pill by Hari Kunzru is published by Simon & Schuster (£14.99) on 3 September. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15