The Russian opposition activist Alexei Navalny is in a coma and on a ventilator in a hospital intensive care unit after a suspected poisoning. “We assume that Alexei was poisoned with something mixed into his tea,” his press secretary, Kira Yarmysh, tweeted. “That was the only thing he drank this morning. The doctors say that the toxin was absorbed more quickly because of the hot liquid. Right now Alexei is unconscious.” An outspoken critic of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, Navalny was returning to Moscow by plane from Tomsk in Siberia when he began to feel ill. The plane made an emergency landing in Omsk and he was taken to hospital. A mobile video shot on the plane showed medical personnel rushing onboard as a man screamed in agony. Doctors “are currently engaged in the process of saving his life”, said Anatoly Kalinichenko, the deputy head of the hospital where the 44-year-old is being treated. Navalny was unconscious and on a ventilator, Kalinichenko told journalists. He described the opposition leader’s condition as “stable”, declining to give further details. Even as he lay in a coma in hospital, there were signs of pressure on the opposition leader’s family members and political allies. Navalny’s civil wife and a personal doctor had been barred from visiting him by hospital officials because Navalny, though unconscious, had not given them permission, Yarmysh said. Hospital staff had also refused to show them the results of tests that would indicate a poisoning, she said. Meanwhile, investigators who said they wanted to check for medicines or other potential toxins had also seized his belongings, she said. Pavel Lebedev, a passenger on the flight, wrote on Instagram that Navalny went to the toilet at the beginning of the flight and did not come back. “He started feeling very poorly. They could barely revive him and he’s still crying out in pain,” said Lebedev, who also published a photo of Navalny drinking from a paper cup at the airport cafe before the flight. Other video published by several Russian news sites showed the opposition leader being wheeled on a stretcher from the plane to an ambulance waiting on the tarmac in Omsk. Yarmysh drew a parallel with an incident last year in which Navalny had an acute allergic reaction that one doctor said could have resulted from poisoning with an unknown chemical. “One year ago, Alexei was poisoned when he was in jail,” she wrote. “Clearly the same thing has happened again.” Doctors have not confirmed that Navalny was poisoned, although Kalinichenko said they had received test results and made a diagnosis. The Tass state news ,citing a police source, said investigators were not considering poisoning as a possible cause. Supporters have indicated that they want to move Navalny abroad for treatment. Ivan Zhdanov, the head of Navalny’s Anti-Corruption Foundation, said that they could only plan that if his civil wife, Yulia, with whom he has two children, were given their medical documents by the hospital. Russian opposition leaders have been targeted with violence in the past. In 2015, the opposition leader and former deputy prime minister Boris Nemtsov was shot four times and killed within sight of the Kremlin. Five men from Chechnya were jailed for the attack, although his family believes those who ordered the killing were never caught. Born in 1976 just outside Moscow, Alexei Navalny is a lawyer-turned-campaigner whose Anti-Corruption Foundation investigates the wealth of Vladimir Putin’s inner circle. He started out as a Russian nationalist, but emerged as the main leader of Russia's democratic opposition during the wave of protests that led up to the 2012 presidential election, and has since been a thorn in the Kremlin’s side. Navalny is barred from appearing on state television, but has used social media to his advantage. A 2017 documentary accusing the prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, of corruption received more than 30m views on YouTube within two months. He has been repeatedly arrested and jailed. The European court of human rights ruled that Russia violated Navalny's rights by holding him under house arrest in 2014. Election officials barred him from running for president in 2018 due to an embezzlement conviction that he claims was politically motivated. Navalny told the commission its decision would be a vote 'not against me, but against 16,000 people who have nominated me; against 200,000 volunteers who have been canvassing for me'. There has also been a physical price to pay. In April 2017, he was attacked with green dye that nearly blinded him in one eye, and in July 2019 he was taken from jail to hospital with symptoms that one of his doctors said could indicate poisoning. Navalny, who has campaigned against Putin’s rule for years, was travelling through several cities in Siberia to back candidates he supports in local elections involving 40 million voters next month. He posed with supporters for a photograph from Tomsk posted on Wednesday, calling for more volunteers: “These crooks won’t kick themselves out of office,” he wrote. He may also have been gathering information for an investigation into local United Russia politicians, the local news site Tayga.Info reported. Revelations of corruption in his investigations into senior members of the Russian government have fuelled street protests and provoked angry threats from powerful officials. “There is no doubt that Navalny was poisoned for his political position and activity,” said Vyacheslav Gimadi, the head of the legal department of Navalny’s Anti-Corruption Foundation. Navalny was also attacked in 2017 with a green dye that left him with partial blindness in one eye. Several opposition figures have been targeted with poison since Putin came to power in 2000. Alexander Litvinenko, a former FSB officer who defected to the UK, died in 2006 of radiation sickness after ingesting a lethal dose of polonium-210 slipped into his tea. One of the men accused in his poisoning is now an MP in Russia’s parliament. The opposition activist Petr Verzilov recently revealed a poisoning attempt against his life in Moscow in 2018. Navalny has used the protests in Belarus against its president, Alexander Lukashenko, to try to persuade Russians to back candidates he supports. In a recent appearance on his YouTube channel, Navalny spoke of how successful strikes by key workers in Belarus had forced authorities to start engaging with protesters. Activists believe they may face a Belarusian scenario when Putin comes up for re-election in 2024 after he successfully got the constitution changed to potentially allow him to run again for president twice. Boris Yeltsin sacks his cabinet and appoints Putin, a political neophyte who headed the main successor to the KGB, as his acting prime minister and heir apparent. Yeltsin stuns Russia and the world by using his traditional new year message to announce his resignation and hand his sweeping powers, including the nuclear suitcase, to Putin. Putin wins a surprisingly narrow majority in his first presidential election, taking 53% of the vote and avoiding a second round run-off. Putin consolidates his centralised control of power by cruising to a second term as president with 71% of the vote, having limited press access to his opponents and harassing their campaigns. Putin is prevented by the constitution from running for a third term as president. The First deputy prime minister Dmitry Medvedev is elected in his stead. One of his earliest moves is to appoint Putin as prime minister, leaving little doubt that the two men plan, at the very least, to run Russia in tandem. Amid widespread allegations of vote-rigging, Putin returns to the role of president, taking 63.6%. Medvedev becomes his prime minister. "Putin has named himself the emperor of Russia for the next 12 years," says  protest leader Alexei Navalny. Putin is re-elected until 2024 with 77% of the vote, amid high tensions between London and Moscow over the Salisbury nerve agent attack. Opposition activists highlight a number of cases of vote-rigging and statistical anomalies. Russia holds a yes/no referendum on various topics including a proposal to amend the constitution to allow Putin to seek another two terms in the Kremlin. The resolution passes, potentially allowing him to rule as president until 2036. “In today’s Belarus we can see ourselves in the near future,” said the opposition politician Dmitry Gudkov. “The opposition candidate gets 80% and the dictator is struggling to get 10%, but the election commission simply swaps the results.”