Half an hour from the centre of Kraków, out past the ring road, is the Soviet-era suburb of Nowa Huta, a model city that was never finished. It has roads wide enough for tanks, trees planted with the absorption of a nuclear blast in mind, and it is shaped so that the city can lock down into a fortress in the event of an attack. It is also the location of a vast post-industrial hangar-like theatre space called Łaźnia Nowa, where, one cold Saturday night in early October 2011, a crack in time opened, and the future arrived from Chicago. With DJ Spinn and DJ Rashad at the controls, this set was one of the first times footwork – the fast ghetto-house dance music from Chicago’s South Side – had been played in Europe. Playing as part of Kraków’s experimental music festival Unsound, they took the roof off the low-ceilinged basement. Spinn and Rashad’s sound had been developing in and around Chicago for years, but most people in the UK and Europe hadn’t heard footwork (or its variant, juke) at all until the previous year, when Mike Paradinas’s Planet Mu label released the first in a series of compilations called Bangs & Works, containing this hyper-fast, ultra-precise, relentlessly inventive, body-oriented dance music. It included tracks by Spinn, Rashad, RP Boo, DJ Clent and Traxman, many of whom came to dominate the footwork scene when it went global. Footwork’s bass rolls relentlessly forward, heavy and rippling. Its snap and clack drum machines flit and wiggle like shoals of fish, and samples rush by like flotsam plucked from anywhere and everywhere. On the dancefloor, its 160bpm flow completely submerged me – I could not keep up with its thinking. Footwork felt so far ahead of what I knew from UK dancefloors: it moved at warp speed, but it had at its heart a joyful, giddy energy that begged you to join in, and didn’t leave naive dancers like me behind. Its pillowy bass, whip-snap hi-hats and looped micro-samples were completely irresistible – on the first Bangs & Works there is footwork that samples soul and R&B, spoken word from horror movies, Star Wars and (I’m 90% sure) some Enya. Footwork was uniquely tied to the bodies that danced and clashed to it – it had developed symbiotically with the movement of dancers’ feet – and as the dancers changed, so did the sound. Under the theatre floor in Kraków, ours melted into its styles, too, although nobody there could reach the speed and precision of a proper footwork dancer. Nobody really knew how to footwork at all, but everybody moved anyway, because the immediate, inescapable truth of footwork is that you cannot stand still in the face of its surging, billowing bass and joyful barrage. There is nothing else to do but hop, skitter, bounce and sweat. So the ceiling dripped, the floor shook, faces were flushed with a cardio glow. The late DJ Rashad remembered this show in an interview a few years later: “It went off,” he said. “They loved it ... We go out of town, and we like to present it new to people, and try to lure them in so they can get to jukin’ with us.” Footwork in part set the dancefloor on fire because, otherwise, the trend around that time was towards dark and moody electronic music: what came later to be sneeringly described as deconstructed. The sound palette was dominated by synthesisers and slowed-down drum machines made to sound as if they were playing inside a cave. It was not conducive to communal exaltations on a dancefloor, and its dourness was more mentally than physically agitating. Footwork on the other hand, was fun – really fun. The theme of that year’s Unsound festival was Future Shock, and to the mainly white European audience, the fully formed sound of footwork was the most futuristic blast we had ever heard. I emailed festival organiser Mat Schulz to check the date of the show, and he remembers that he left that basement with his brain “for ever rewired … I can remember thinking, this is what the future sounds like,” he said. From that basement, footwork acts began to tour internationally, and the style expanded beyond its hyper-local origins. There are now footwork scenes across the globe – in Japan and Poland, particularly – legacies left by the hyperactive touring of DJ Spinn, DJ Rashad, RP Boo and others. New forms of footwork emerged, sometimes made in bedrooms instead of bouncing off the dancer’s feet, in music such as Gary, Indiana producer Jlin’s balletic and brutalist composed productions. But for Europe, the first full encounter with footwork was under the floor in that Kraków suburb, where we were baptised in our own sweat by Spinn and Rashad.