“This is it – no U-turn, no change.” These were the words Gavin Williamson used over the weekend to insist that, despite a growing backlash over A-level grades, he would not give in to pressure to change the system. Instead, the Ofqual algorithm – which put disadvantaged students among those more likely to receive lower grades – was here to stay. Department for Education ministers even used private Q&As with disgruntled Tory MPs to make clear that they would not adopt the approach of Scotland and move to predicted grades, as this would lead to massive grade inflation. A little over 48 hours later and the government’s actions tell a different story. Faced with a growing Tory rebellion, protesting students and a Labour party on the attack, Williamson has been forced to do exactly what he promised not to: A-level and GCSE students in England will now receive their results based on teacher-assessed grades. While this is in one way a personal humiliation for Williamson, it’s ultimately a damaging incident for the Conservative party as a whole. For many Tory MPs, the question is not why the U-turn took so long but how the government got to a position from which it had to retract in the first place? The anger among MPs was so great that ministers were among those taking to social media to voice their concern. While members of parliament received many constituent complaints – particularly in northern seats with big sixth form colleges – several report that it hasn’t been on the scale of the backlash over Dominic Cummings’ trip to Durham during lockdown or even the decision to end free school meals over the holidays. The reason it cut so deep in the party is that in many MPs’ eyes the results debacle goes against their party’s raison d’etre. It’s not just Boris Johnson’s “levelling-up” agenda; the Conservative party has long aimed to run on the idea that theirs is the party that will support hard work and potential – no matter where you are from or your background. Just think back to the Conservative campaign posters emblazoned with John Major’s face, which read: “What does the Conservative party offer a working-class kid from Brixton? They made him prime minister.” Inside government, the view was that once pupils were unable to return to school before the summer holidays they were left with a situation to which there was no easy solution. The idea was that the Ofqual algorithm provided a model that, although not perfect, was broadly fair. But as more cases came to light of students having received grades far off what they had been hoping for, there was a sense in Downing Street that a new approach was required. Not that MPs are particularly sympathetic. Many are looking for a scalp, even if they don’t hold out much hope of anything happening. “No one ever seems to resign or get fired any more,” laments one senior Tory. “A lot of people are gunning for Gavin,” says a Conservative MP, fresh from a weekend of scrolling through WhatsApp. “I think it’s fair to say not many of us would be distraught if he went. It’s one thing after another.” There is a frustration among former ministers that Williamson was promoted into the role with little in the way of education credentials compared with his predecessors – a decision that they believe is now having repercussions. “Red wall” MPs from the 2019 intake have been complaining over WhatsApp that the government has “walked straight into a Labour trap”.  Williamson appears to have won himself a little breathing space at least by keeping a relatively low profile. It’s also the case that Downing Street is unlikely to want to axe him any time soon, with one member of the government suggesting he would cause more problems outside the tent. “Put it this way: he’s not someone you want to get on the wrong side of if it can be avoided.” Others think blame ought to be levelled higher up at No 10 given the control it likes to exercise over government. The problem is that despite any mitigating circumstances, all criticism comes back to a previous government failure: not getting pupils back in the classroom before the summer holidays. It’s an issue many usually loyal MPs are still sore about. While there is no easy way of awarding exam grades without exams, senior Tories believe that had the right steps been taken earlier the entire scenario could have been avoided. And few MPs have much faith in the government on education. “The past few months have been a shitshow,” says a minister. “The only way to stop a repeat is getting pupils back.” It’s on students’ return to the classroom that any hope of restoring confidence in both Williamson and the government now rests. Katy Balls is the Spectator’s deputy political editor