The housing secretary, Robert Jenrick, pledged in March that no renter who had lost income due to coronavirus would be forced out of their home and introduced a ban on evictions in England and Wales. On Friday, after growing pressure from housing charities, MPs, legal experts and local authorities, the government extended  the ban for four weeks. Postponing eviction proceedings will keep renters in their homes for now, but it’s just a sticking plaster. The number of private renters in arrears in England is double what it was this time last year, and for some the rent debt will keep racking up. The furlough scheme is coming to an end, unemployment continues to rise and benefit payments are insufficient to cover average rents. Without extra protections thousands of renters are at serious risk of losing their homes when the ban ends. New research from Generation Rent this week found that just 12% of those who applied for benefits after lockdown have been able to cover their rent – meaning hundreds of thousands of renters have been forced to rely solely on their landlord’s goodwill. We hear daily from renters who are terrified about what will happen in the next few months. Their stories are heartbreaking. Many have lived in their properties for years. They have children at local schools but now find themselves priced out of the area they call home. Some are behind with rent and others haven’t even been given a reason; their landlord has simply issued a “no fault” eviction notice and asked them to leave. To give renters security throughout the pandemic and subsequent recession, we must end these section 21 evictions. As things stand, one of the most common routes to evict a tenant is through a section 21 notice. Landlords do not have to give a reason to issue a notice, and if the landlord has completed the process correctly, evictions under section 21 are automatic and cannot be stopped. Even before this crisis, section 21 was a leading cause of homelessness, which is one of the reasons why the government promised to ban it. But, more than a year later, section 21 remains in frequent use. To make matters worse, some renters have reported that the government’s stamp duty changes have encouraged many landlords to sell up, forcing them to find a new home. Section 21 is already banned in Scotland, where tenants and landlords both report high levels of satisfaction. Because protections are so minimal, already nearly half of tenants who are struggling with rent are looking to move (more than those who aren’t struggling), and of those, most are struggling to find a suitable home or a landlord who will take them. With a shortage of suitable properties and an inadequate safety net, many will have nowhere to turn. The government must pass emergency legislation to restrict “no fault” evictions, and those for rent arrears, to ensure renters who have been hit by the pandemic do not lose their homes through no fault of their own. A safe home provides the infrastructure necessary for people who have been affected by coronavirus to get back on their feet. We know that the eviction ban isn’t a long-term solution, which is why the government must deliver on its pledge to end unfair evictions under section 21 for good, increase benefits to cover average rents, and provide a fund to cover the most financially vulnerable renters. Alicia Kennedy is director of the campaign group Generation Rent