On the north-western edges of Britain, in a handful of churches, one of the world’s most unusual song forms can be heard. It begins with a precentor, a leader singing the opening lines of a psalm to a church congregation, who then drift in. Each person decorates the tune individually, driven by their own tempo and rhythm, before everyone returns, together, to the same note. Imagine the sonic equivalent of a murmuration of starlings. This is the art of Gaelic psalm singing, once practised in Free Presbyterian churches across Scotland, but now largely confined to the Outer Hebridean island of Lewis and Harris. It has attracted fresh interest from experimental music fans after BBC Radio 3 presenter Jennifer Lucy Allan reissued two albums of psalm songs in 2018; she had been introduced to it by a friend whose grandmother sang in one of the congregations. “You can’t do anything else when you listen to this music,” Allan says, describing it as “strangely haunted”, but also “very euphoric, hearing those voices lifting together in Gaelic”. The original recordings were released in 2003 to raise money for a care home and hospice on Lewis (the northern part of the island). Royalties from the reissues still go there. At the time, many of its singers were over 60, and singing in a minority language. In July this year, a report from the University of the Highlands and Islands laid out fears that Gaelic could die out within a decade. A new album, The Edge of the Sea, similarly aims to preserve this music. This is a collaborative project uniting Golden Globe and Grammy-winning Scottish composer Craig Armstrong with Calum Martin, the precentor on Allan’s reissues. Both had grandparents who sang these songs; Armstrong has powerful memories of hearing them when he was nine with his grandfather in a church in Balintore, in Easter Ross in the far north-east of mainland Scotland. “To be in a middle of a congregation singing like that: it was all-encompassing. It was clear that everyone had known these songs from childhood. It was just part of their culture,” he says. Armstrong returned to Scotland, after studying for a degree at the Royal College of Music in London, to investigate the technicalities of Gaelic psalmody. By this point, they also reminded him of Slavic prayers and “the impressionistic clouds of sound” of Debussy and Ravel, as well as the sliding notes of piobaireachd (Highland bagpipe-playing). He had to sideline these interests as his career took off, but they were reignited years later by meeting Martin, a musician brought up in Callanish on the Isle of Lewis, which remains the chief centre of Hebridean culture. Martin had participated in Gaelic psalm singing from the age of four, both in church, as well as in daily worship at home with his family. “Whether you were Christian or not, everyone did it,” he explains. “Psalm singing was like another language you learned.” This tradition went back to 1659, when psalms were first translated into Gaelic by Presbyterian ministers, in defiance of the Scottish episcopal church. A 1616 act of the Scottish privy council had stated that the speaking of Gaelic was the “chief cause of the barbaritie and incivilitie of the people”; it set up English-language, church-supervised schools to try to drive Gaelic out. Despite Gaelic education being increased in recent years, it is still in decline. The melodies used for the Gaelic psalms came from the 16th-century English psalter, but an ancient Scottish and Irish Gaelic tradition, Sean-nós singing, seeped into the mix: a highly decorated a capella style that allows solo performers free expression. This influence is what makes Gaelic psalm singing unique in British religious music. In every other style, from liturgical singing in high church to hymn-singing in Welsh chapels, individuals aim for their voices to move together as blocks of sound: for sopranos, altos, tenors and basses to blend perfectly with each other. Gaelic psalm singing allows less polish, and more individuality. This was another thing that attracted Allan. “I’d been vaguely brought up in the Catholic church, and found that music so drab,” she says. To her, psalm singing sounded more like experimental composers such as Pauline Oliveros or Meredith Monk. “It allowed freedom. It felt very human.” This feeling suffuses Gaelic psalm singers’ worship, Martin adds. “Every individual singer is allowed their own vertical connection to God, their own individual act of worship, even though they eventually come back together with others in a horizontal way. That combination, to me, makes it more spiritual.” Gaelic psalm singing also has parallels with other musical styles globally. The varying of a melody line by different instruments – known as free heterophony – is present in Coptic choral music and Persian art music. Then there are its similarities to gospel. Yale professor and jazz musician Willie Ruff even argued in 2003 that a Gaelic precentor’s “lining out” of a psalm might have influenced gospel directly, given the presence of Gaelic slavers in both North and South Carolina (he was also friends with Dizzy Gillespie, whose grandparents spoke Gaelic, their slave ancestors having learned it from their Gaelic-speaking Scottish masters). Other scholars, such as Terry Miller, have discounted Ruff’s theory, however, noting that lining out has connections to other African and older English folk traditions. Martin has encouraged any musical connections to Gaelic psalm singing nevertheless, be they actual or coincidental. He hosted a concert, Salm and Soul, in 2005, which united Hebridean singers with an Alabama gospel choir, simply “to praise God in music”. He met Armstrong that night, and when Armstrong’s father died in 2015, the composer knew instantly how he wanted to pay tribute. “‘Why don’t we do a piece for my dad?’ he said. “And I started thinking about the very different world that he came from: how traditions can disappear so quickly, how psalm singing is probably the most indigenous music from Scotland, and how it should be preserved. You don’t have to be religious to feel it. To me, it’s part of the geography, like waves that slowly shift and phase.” The Edge of the Sea has two movements: The Martyrdom Variations, based on an old psalm tune, and Ballantyne, using psalm-inspired melodies by Armstrong and Martin. Ten singers, including members of Martin’s congregation, were recorded with separate, close microphones in Dundee’s Caird Hall in 2018; the Scottish Ensemble string orchestra responded to their melody lines. The overall result is a listening experience that is different from hearing psalm singing, but it is a respectful, affecting, strangely cosmic complement to the form. Armstrong describes the process as “one of the most moving things I’ve done”. Martin agrees: “Collaborations like this are important so the music doesn’t die – this will help it survive.” During lockdown, Martin has been doing his own work on this front, running Gaelic psalm singing workshops online, with unexpected results: 13,600 people watched them in their first three days. “Psalm singing still connects far away from the Highlands,” he says. “This singing still gets to people, and can get to more people. It still has a future.” • The Edge of the Sea is out on BMG on 28 August. Two volumes of Salm are available on vinyl from Arc Light Editions