The richer you are, the more free stuff you seem to get. I’m not sure what the technical term for this phenomenon is. Capitalism, perhaps? Trickle-up economics? Whatever it is called, Harry and Meghan are prime examples of it in action: the Sussexes have reportedly received more than £3.5m in gifts since they got together. According to Finding Freedom, a headline-grabbing biography of the couple, billionaire buddies have loaned them private jets and palatial homes while publicity-hungry brands have thrown merchandise at them. Diptyque, the purveyor of posh candles, apparently gave the couple several pricey diffusers for their wedding – because St George’s Chapel can get a little musty. I’m not here to give Harry and Meghan a hard time: I couldn’t care less how many complimentary candles the couple have managed to wangle. Far better to be known as the “prince of handouts” than the “handsy prince”, after all. Being cheap isn’t necessarily problematic; being friends with a sex offender most certainly is. Indeed, a cynic might wonder whether one of the reasons Harry and Meghan are constantly in the news is to keep the spotlight off Prince Andrew. That said, the Sussexes’ swag serves as an infuriating reminder that handouts and discounts are par for the course when you’re wealthy: it’s cheap to be rich and it’s expensive to be poor. The less money you have, the more everyday life tends to cost; a 2016 University of Bristol study found the average annual “poverty premium” on essential goods and services for a low-income household is £490. Poor or erratic earnings can prevent you paying bills by monthly direct debit so you are forced to pay extra for prepay; you are cut off from the best borrowing rates; you have to pay higher insurance rates because you live in a low-income area; you can’t afford to buy in bulk so you pay more for things like toilet paper. The poverty premium is everywhere, and it adds up quickly. The well-off, on the other hand, routinely reap the benefits of a privilege premium. A healthier bank account means better interest rates; credit card companies woo you with sign-up bonuses and perks. Not many of us have been loaned a private jet by a high-flying pal, but quite a few of us have cashed in credit card points for a free flight. Except that flight isn’t really free, is it? It has been subsidised by all the people paying the bank’s exorbitant overdraft fees, all the people who don’t qualify for that fancy credit card. A 2010 study from the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston found that credit cards, in general, increase inequality because merchants essentially pass on the cost of fees and rewards to cash-using customers. “On average, each cash-using household pays $149 [£118] to card-using households and each card-using household receives $1,133 from cash users every year,” the report notes. I don’t know what kind of credit cards the Sussexes have and something tells me they probably don’t need the perks. Nevertheless, I wish the golden couple the best of luck as they work to become “financially independent”. So much easier to cut yourself off from your rich parents when you’ve got rich friends to cushion the blow. • Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnist.