On the WhatsApp group I used as a life-support system during lockdown, a recurring fantasy kept us going in the days when online Scrabble and swapping tips on sourcing hand gel could not: a dream of doughballs. When all this blows over, my friends and I agreed, we’ll go to Pizza Express. Midweek, table for four, Sloppy Giuseppes, numerous warm bottles of Gavi di Gavi. We’ll laugh about this one day, we said, weakly, as the chat flickered between closed schools, locked-down care homes, skipped chemo and the loneliness of isolation. It was never really about the doughballs; they represented a former carefree life. When every restaurant in Britain closed, from high street to haute cuisine, many of us suddenly saw what eating together gives us. This was true even for me, someone who eats out for a living, and who in the first few weeks enjoyed the break. But there’s a joy and a rhythm in sitting with others, sipping, nibbling and laughing – one you’ll never get from an ever-flickering chat app. Eating together is where actual life happens. Miles away from my family, I missed desperately the way my brother David side-orders jalapeños on everything and refuses to share pudding. I missed stabbing away at his sticky toffee pudding with a spoon, quacking, “You’re worse now than when you were a child!” because we’ve done this for more than 40 years. I longed to sit in peaceable silence with my teenage niece, Lola, as she ogles TikTok from behind a McNugget box. If restaurants could just reopen, I thought, the world would feel sane again. But then they did, and for the first few meals I felt worse. Six weeks later, here’s what I’ve learned. Obviously, the problem with the doughballs dream was that it was exactly that: a snapshot of a former life, one that no longer exists. My first trips out felt more like fact-finding missions with added yaki udon. Perhaps yours will, too. Perhaps you’ll puzzle at the roped-off doors at Wagamama and sigh as the hand sanitation units squirt foam on your shoes. Or feel slightly blue when the Pret a Manger staff need a QR code and your details before selling you a falafel salad from the limited menu rather than the chia porridge you wanted. “Nothing,” I heard myself cry, melodramatically, “Nothing in this godforsaken country seems to be working properly.” Yes, I was still talking about porridge. It took Covid-19 for me to notice how very spoiled I was by these big, slick always-open chains. On an excited trip to my local Rosa’s Thai Cafe last week, which Google claimed brightly was definitely serving, the lights were off and the kitchen was shut. Reliable brands behaving weirdly is oddly unsettling. It wasn’t just about tofu massaman; it simply felt like Britain was malfunctioning. Even eating with close friends will feel strangely awry at first attempt; depressing, even. Those dreams I had back in April of a big reunion – which eventually took place at a French brasserie – did not include being scanned with temperature guns, downloading apps to order or one-way systems around floors. They did not feature the ever-present under-table rustle of hand sanitiser bottles as first one person, then the next, succumbs, until a domino effect of germophobia takes over. Or how jarring it is saying farewell to very old friends, after wine, with your arms clamped flatly to your sides and a stilted, old-school British “Cheerio, then”, before going home in a cab where the driver has clingfilmed himself into a safety pod. I returned home stuffed with celeriac remoulade and pithivier, draped in a light cloak of disquiet, and didn’t feel like getting out of bed the next day. Not ideal for a restaurant critic. Ten dinners later, I’m more into the groove. I’ve stopped squirting anti-bac foam on my ballet pumps and I can emote happy, sad and “can I get the bill” in a face mask. I have a reliable QR app to access menus and using it feels breezy. In Tonkotsu, a ramen chain, for example, the staff seat you and bring food, but you use your phone to order and pay. Wagamama is the same. Before setting off anywhere now, I telephone to hear a human voice saying they will be open. Kitchens are working on a skeleton staff, and anything can happen. When the owner tweeted tomorrow’s opening hours at 11pm, he didn’t plan for his entire staff self-isolating. Eating with other people, I find even less predictable. It’s tricky. How do people feel about sharing a plate of calamari nowadays? My fork touching your plate? How about tapas in general? Or any communal picking? With friends, you can bash these things out. But I’ve also found that fellow diners’ firmly held views can shift at random when faced with something delicious. I’ve seen the most terrified companions order their own kari and paratha, to keep sagely at their end of the table, before finishing off everyone else’s lentils and bhuna with a spoon. Be kind with each other’s contradictions. We’re all scared in different ways. We’re all still learning. Gratitude. I finally saw why Oprah swears it will change your life. After London, I did Bristol, then Sussex, staying in eerie half-open hotels, wasting whole weekends on wild goose chases to shuttered-up restaurants. Sundays and Mondays are a write-off: almost nowhere is cooking. Tuesdays and Wednesdays are tricky, too. Hopefully the Eat Out To Help Out scheme will give owners more impetus to switch on the stoves, if further lockdowns don’t frighten people away. In the current state we’re in, I’ve begun to see every open sign and welcoming smile as a minor miracle. Every dish plated up in Britain this weekend is hewn from the chef’s heroism and sheer bloody-mindedness. Four months ago, these businesses were forced to close overnight; their tight units of chefs, front-of-house folk and porters were sent home; their regular supply chains broken; their profits and savings demolished. While landlords across the UK demanded payments, the government stumbled over plans to permit reopening. As the cheery-sounding “Super Saturday” was finally announced, potential customers were squabbling day and night on social media about the morality of eating out at all. Any restaurateur who fought to decipher Whitehall’s voluminous tome of non-specific guidelines and began serving pancakes again deserves credit. By removing tables to be safe, they have removed further profits. So, yes, there’s a good chance they might not have the bavette steak on the trimmed menu, and service is slow as the manager is also now washing dishes, but be grateful. We are all having a slightly rubbish time. These people work in hospitality, so it’s literally their job to hide it. Have you been asked for a sum upfront for dinner? Stop sulking and pay. Restaurants, once upon a time, used to trust us. But too many people behaved badly and this is why we can’t have nice things. One small positive about dining after Covid-19 might be a new tendency to stick to plans, and stop being flaky. The old restaurant landscape instilled in us all a sense of abundance filled with new openings, uncharted cuisines and novel concepts. The rise of faceless reservation apps allowed people to double-book, hedge their bets and, if it was raining, not bother leaving the house at all. After all, it wasn’t as if you were letting down an actual human being. Except we were, every single time. Now the hospitality world is punch-drunk and cannot afford to let staff twiddle their thumbs because you and your gang decided last minute against spaghetti. Don’t be the person who takes to TripAdvisor to give a one-star review when you lose your deposit. Satan has a special private dining room in hell for you. Once you have learned the ropes of eating out in a pandemic, there’s an odd sense of freedom. Saturday night tables are gloriously available, restaurants feel roomy and welcomes are extra warm. Nothing is predictable, though. I arrived at an intimate bistro in Bristol and ended up being escorted to a small church forecourt to eat under a tarpaulin. I checked into a fancy hotel in Kent that boasts of an exquisite wine list to find the bar shut due to restrictions; we were sheepishly ushered to the local pub, which was more like a Wetherspoons (we had a terrific night). In one place, the kitchen was only serving from 6-8pm, so their remaining chef could pop home and put her kids to bed. We’d eaten pudding and were back in time for Emmerdale. In an extra-chic cocktail bar the other day, the staff wore designer peach silk face masks that coordinated gorgeously with their uniforms, but unfortunately fitted terribly, so they blew about every time they spoke, making their faces look like the Gatwick airport windsock. Nothing works normally any more, but many of us can meet some of the people we love, see the whites of their eyes and bond in a very British way: by ordering pizza and taking the mickey out of each other. I have tasted freedom and after at least 15 attempts, I give it five stars.