“As Meghan continued her morning yoga practice by the green riverbanks of the Zambezi River, it was difficult not to lose focus. She had never imagined she would be laying out her mat as wild Cape buffalo grazed across the water…” “As she walked the lonely sands, Diana realised that any hopes she may have harboured over a reconciliation with her husband were over… Now was the moment to start believing in herself.” Despite being exhaustively scraped, pre-publication, for the not already obvious, Finding Freedom: Harry and Meghan and the Making of a Modern Royal Family can still spring one surprise. As above, it turns out to be a sublime revival of the free indirect style in the royal manner most memorably deployed by Andrew Morton in 1992, when he needed to pretend Diana: Her True Story hadn’t been dictated by the princess. “A sense of injustice burned deeply inside her. Every time she was spotted with an unattached man, however innocently, it made banner headlines, while her husband’s friendship with Camilla barely raised an eyebrow.” Finding Freedom's low-grade revelations are a reminder that the biggest danger to the royals is the royals Once Prince Charles decided, in 1994, to describe his burning injustices directly, there was a risk that Private Eye’s Sylvie Krin would become a stylistic outlier. The Sussexes’ coyness has, however, extracted an ambitious revival from authors Omid Scobie and Carolyn Durand, who are currently maintaining that their book, with its undeviating pro-Sussex perspective and telltale phrasing, isn’t essentially the work of a couple whose passion for privacy has clearly diminished. “Meghan was protective of herself. She preferred to play it cool and get to know a guy before committing.” And Harry? “He wanted to protect Meghan, to wrap her up and shield her from all the negativity, but he knew that was impossible. He worried about her turning to him one day to say, ‘I love you, but I can’t live like this.’” Accompanying the couple’s US relaunch, Finding Freedom dwells, again following the template for royal confessions, on how let down Meghan and Harry were by their own side, how exceptional they are and what inspiring things they are impelled to do in a way that is “modern and relevant” but also, if you know anything at all about his parents, painfully familiar. A belief that they have healing powers, which afflicted both Diana and Charles, seems, judging from this regrettable publication, to be only a matter of time. As it is, these are not the first royals to fantasise that instead of visiting things for money it is their special destiny to bring light where there is darkness. Diana had a vision for the royal family, Charles had a vision for Britain; now the Sussexes reveal, via a chief of staff formerly of the Gates Foundation, that they too have a vision, albeit still on the vague side, “as they embark on this journey of learning, listening and inspiring all of us to act”. But first they want understandably to detail their achievements, second, set the record straight and, third, get one over on their persecutors. Had they left it at that, with a catalogue of the racist and malicious attacks to which Meghan has been subjected, and an account of what it feels like to be repeatedly insulted, including by the family that still protects Prince Andrew, their admirers would have sympathised while their media persecutors could hardly have disputed events preceding the escape to Santa Barbara. What is the excuse for relentlessly denouncing a pregnant woman, with assistance from her own father? The Mail on Sunday’s extracts from Meghan’s private letter remain the subject of legal action. Like trooping the colour, the invasion of the privacy has, over years of repetition, become hallowed ritual It’s also useful to have on record, when the couple’s disenchantment is represented as petulant, that Princess Michael of Kent chose an eye-catching “blackamoor” brooch” for her first meeting with Meghan. Only marginally more subtle, a Mail writer speculated on infusing the Windsor line with “some rich and exotic DNA”. As for the rest of the book, the kindest explanation is that the authors hoped, with their unintentionally hilarious Zambezi-style digressions, to dispel any impression of never-ending grievance. Like most people, I try to ration any mention of Walter Bagehot to around once a decade, max, but Finding Freedom is a provocation too far. Above all, its low-grade revelations are a reminder that the biggest danger to the royals is the royals. It’s their repeated urge to “let in daylight upon magic”, not organised republicanism, which has most threatened royal job security, whether demystification comes in the shape of Charles’s political interference, Prince Andrew’s interview, It’s a Royal Knockout or, in the Sussexes’ case, tone-deaf details about celebrity baby showers. “There were also Ladurée macaron towers, key lime and cherry tarts, red velvet and carrot cakes, cotton candy pompoms and a jar of multicoloured gluten-free doughnut holes.” Admittedly, like the trooping of the colour and the state opening of parliament, the invasion of the privacy has, over years of repetition, become hallowed ritual. Out of respect for Harry’s predecessors, the Sussexes may have felt a duty likewise to fuel public derision with, for instance, this revelation about infant care: “After a few weeks, they decided to take on the nights themselves and went without a night nurse entirely.” But not long ago this couple dismissed the notion that baptism details were a reasonable expectation from the paying public. “‘The same people who have been abusing me want me to serve my child on a silver platter,’ she told a friend.” In the next paragraph, we learn, maybe from a different friend, that the child’s nicknames are “Bubba” and “Arch”. Over to the Sussex team of skilled advisers and publicists to explain their clients’ involvement with a book that, at a stroke, exposes the embryonic visionaries to ridicule, dismays their supporters and, as demonstrated last week, delights their enemies. Of all the royal traditions to hang on to, why this one? • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnist