It has almost become a running joke in rugby league to suggest Catalans Dragons lack the necessary credentials to establish a place among the sport’s elite. But whether it is lockdown, the change of culture Steve McNamara has tried to instil in Perpignan or something else, you sense the tide is perhaps starting to turn. Days like these, where conditions are utterly miserable and simple, methodical rugby is the way to victory, are not ones you historically match up with Catalans. Yet while they were far from flawless here, the Challenge Cup is about one thing, as the Dragons know all too well: winning at all costs and booking your place in the next round. Arguably no side – perhaps with the exception of St Helens – have returned from lockdown in as impressive form as Catalans. Their incredible run of going three hours without conceding a single point may well have come to an end here, but Jay Pitts’ two tries never felt enough to seriously worry the Dragons. By the time Wakefield scored again, the game was as good as done. Last week, Catalans were magnificent, cruising to a 58-0 victory against Wakefield in the sunshine. The opponents were the same here, but the conditions and everything else were different. The fact Catalans found a different way to win, grinding their way over the line thanks to a kicking masterclass from Josh Drinkwater, is the hallmark of a side to be reckoned with. “I thought we had to work really hard,” McNamara said. “It’s completely different in the cup, and conditions were difficult, but it’s about getting through. We fought our way through and while it wasn’t a great performance, to come here again and get the job done shows we’re doing something right.” Drinkwater was the difference at crucial junctures. He provided four kick assists in total, three in the first half, enabling David Mead to cross twice and Fouad Yaha to exploit a wonderful chip to the corner. That pushed Catalans into a 20-6 lead at half-time, before Pitts followed up his first-half effort with another try shortly after the restart. However, an almighty brawl which left Pitts not only a bloodied mess, but alongside Catalans’ Michael McIlorum in the sin bin, swung the momentum the Dragons’ way. Within three tackles, Ben Garcia had scooted over, and in the minutes that followed, Mead’s hat-trick try and another assist from Drinkwater, this time for Matt Whitley, made it 36-12 in the blink of an eye. Wakefield were humiliated last week, and late tries from Tinirau Arona and Jacob Miller were the least their improved efforts deserved. “There were crucial periods, including that one in the second half, which gave them a leg-up,” their coach, Chris Chester, lamented. He was right. This was better, but still not good enough to rise to the level Catalans are currently at. You have to learn to win in all kinds of ways to win trophies but this did not feel like a game Catalans would have come through unscathed in any other season. That is as clear a warning shot to the rest of the pack as you could wish to produce.