With Luis Suárez about to be unceremoniously shown the door at the Nou Camp, in a state of affairs that is believed to be one of many reasons behind his best pal Leo Messi’s decision to hand in a transfer request, Manchester City striker Gabriel Jesus has been identified as a potential replacement by Barcelona for the Uruguayan striker. Manchester United and Paris Saint-Germain are both reported to be interested in signing Messi, although Manchester City are reported to be in the box-seat with one tabloid reporting the player’s father is already in talks with the club. In the increasingly likely event of Messi’s departure from the club he has served for 20 years, it remains to be seen who will be given the unenviable and frankly impossible task of filling his Adidas Nemeziz 19.1s.By his own lofty standards N’Golo Kanté had a fairly underwhelming season punctuated by injury at Chelsea but that hasn’t put off Internazionale, whose policy of rehoming Premier League stars has enjoyed more than a modicum of success. The Serie A side need to offload another high profile player before they can bring him in and Lautaro Martinez, Milan Skriniar and Marcelo Brozovic are among those they would consider letting go to help fund the deal. Highly regarded QPR midfielder Eberechi Eze looks set to leave Loftus Road for pastures new, specifically the lush green rectangle of grass at Selhurst Park. Sky Sports News have reported the Crystal Palace have agreed a fee of £16m rising to £20m, with the Championships side insisting on a 20% sell-on clause that could yield them a pretty penny in years to come. Wolves full-back Matt Doherty is also on the move to Tottenham after 10 years of faithful service at Molineux. A fee of £15m has been agreed and Doherty’s former League of Ireland club Bohemians – for whom he never actually made a senior appearance – are in line for a bumper pay-day on the back of a clause they shrewdly included in the transfer deal between themselves and Wolves a decade ago. Resigned to losing Doherty, Wolves are in search of a replacement and have identified Arsenal’s Ainsley Maitland-Niles as the man for the job. An initial bid of £15m for the 22-year-old has been rejected, with the Emirates beancounters confident they can hold out for a few quid more.Celtic’s already slim chances of holding on to Odsonne Édouard suffered a major blow following their meek exit from the Champions League at the hands of Hungarian side Ferencvaros. The striker missed last night’s humiliation at Celtic Park, apparently through injury, but has been heavily linked with a move to Aston Villa. Crystal Palace, Leicester City and Arsenal are also reported to be keen. Following Celtic’s earliest elimination from the competition in 15 years, manager Neil Lennon some of his players were distracted by interest from other clubs. “Get your mentality right, get your attitude right,” he said. “If some of you don’t want to be here, leave. Let us work with players who want to be here.” Ouch.