I met Angela Buxton only once, in New York about a year ago, at the US Open. What a treat it was. She was sitting there in her wheelchair in the main media room of the Billie Jean King Center like an unexploded hand grenade, looking with mild suspicion at the notebooks and tape recorders of a small clutch of reporters, most of whom were not born when she was playing her best tennis and who struggled now to figure her out. Buxton died at home in Florida at the weekend, remembered here and there, but not with the acclaim she deserved. While her accomplishments garnered a few lines, there was much more to a story that began in Liverpool 85 years ago. Certainly, she was good enough to win two slam doubles titles and tweak plenty of establishment noses, but by a distance Buxton the Difficult was a more formidable presence and interesting individual than Buxton the Tennis Player. That August day at Flushing Meadows she showed a healthy disregard for convention in a setting that encourages sycophancy. She never lost her spirit. The main point of interest was not Buxton, but the player with whom she will always be associated, whatever her own accomplishments, Althea Gibson. They were quite a pairing at Roland Garros and Wimbledon in the summer of 1956 when they won the doubles titles: the Jewish girl born and raised in the north but educated in the wider world, and her black friend from Harlem. The game has seen nothing like it, before or since. They were the archetypal outsiders: wrong religion, wrong colour in an age of lingering prejudice. And now the United States Tennis Association, a consistently sound organisation where discrimination is concerned, had put up a statue to Gibson, Angela’s long-ago friend. Gibson was the better player, no question, the first African-American woman to both play at the All England Club and win the singles title there. King compared her willowy grace and power to that of Venus Williams, and old film confirms it. But it was as a combination that Gibson and Buxton made a lasting impact, causing complacent backsides in high places to squirm with an audacity on and off the court they could not ignore. They not only broke down barriers, they made the establishment uncomfortable. It took some time for that statue to go up, but there it is today on the eve of this strange 2020 US Open, one that will be emptied of fans and peopled by virus-nervous contenders. Typically, Buxton did not think much of the statue. As the little media huddle leaned forward, she set a few back in their seats when asked what she thought of the statue. “Doesn’t resemble her at all,” she sniffed, disappointing those looking for a soft compliment for the sculptor. That had always been her way. Ever since she discovered tennis as a small girl, she was pressing her nose determinedly against the toy-shop window, on the outside looking in. The family, whose patriarch, Harry, was big in cinemas, fractured over time, moving to South Africa to escape the dangers of the second world war, and, after divorce struck, back to London, where her mother nurtured Angela’s talent. Later, feeling distinct coldness at Wimbledon despite her success, Buxton did what Fred Perry had done before her in similar circumstances, and moved to the US. There was antisemitism waiting for her on her arrival on the west coast, but she persevered and settled in reasonable comfort in Florida, occasionally commuting to Manchester in the summer. But she never forgot Gibson, whose own journey had been more dramatically wretched, from poverty through outright societal hostility, to thrilling victories everywhere. They were as different as they were similar. As Bruce Schoenfeld records in The Match: Althea Gibson And A Portrait Of A Friendship, they were thrown together by the indifference of others, and clicked without giving up any of their hard-won independence. “It was Angela and Althea, Althea and Angela, everywhere you looked,” he wrote. “They were pictured dining together in a magazine snapshot, a white and a black sitting at table in the clubhouse at De Coubertin Stadium [in Paris], laughing as if they were in on a joke that the rest of the world didn’t understand.” They would conquer Roland Garros, to everyone’s amazement, and dined at Le Fouquet’s on the Champs Élysées, “as exalted and expensive a restaurant as Paris offered”. Leaving Parisians agog, they took their skills to Wimbledon, where they prevailed again. They ruled the home of tennis, and there were plenty there who did not know what to make of it. Fleet Street did, though. In the space of a couple of months they were international sporting celebrities, and Buxton was determined they would make the most of their fame and fleeting privilege. “That was really living for her, the best food, drinking good wine,” she remembered of Gibson’s reaction to luxury. “Together they were like a couple of movie characters,” says Schoenfeld, “stumbling in and out of fun and harmless trouble. Althea would goad Angela into accompanying her on some jaunt, some nightclub escapade, and Angela would figure out how to extricate them at the end of the adventure.” Gibson would grab the microphone and sing her scat-jazz, and they rarely paid, as Buxton recalled years later. “Why should we if someone else wanted to?” she said. But, in retirement forced by injury, Gibson lost what money she ever earned and hurtled towards penury and mental illness. Buxton raised $1m for her at the end of her troubled life, a greater contribution than any winning volley she might have struck for them. Buxton never got satisfaction from Wimbledon, though, denied lifetime membership when lesser players were so honoured, certainly anyone who won a title. Was antisemitism at play? She had no doubt. It is an issue still clouded in foot-shuffling embarrassment. As she remembered it a year ago: “They haven’t given me membership, although they say they have. And I say: ‘What happened?’ They said: ‘You refused it.’ I said: ‘I don’t refuse it now. So send it along.’ They said: ‘Oh, no, no, no, we can’t do that.’ I said: ‘Why is that? They said: ‘You’ve gone to the end of the queue now.’ This was 1980. It is a laugh – if you can see the funny side of it.” To her credit, she invariably did.