Diane Morgan’s new comedy vehicle is Mandy, an amusingly truculent grifter seeking work in the gig economy. Face stuck in a lopsided, permanently sullen gurn, she is packed off to work in a banana-processing factory. Cue an inspired, fantastically tasteless musical sequence during which many tarantulas rhythmically meet their maker in time to Harry Belafonte’s Banana Boat Song. However, an unfortunate mishap involving 17 deaths soon means she is back to square one. A pleasingly sour confection. Phil Harrison This series returns with a look at the procedure involved in prosecuting rapes. Obtaining convictions has always been a struggle; tonight, we’re offered an insight into the work of the police and the legal system as they investigate two cases. The harrowing accounts of the alleged victims remind us of the human cost. PH The nation’s favourite yard-walking fundraiser gets a backstory as we look for silver linings after a traumatic few months. Captain Tom Moore may have achieved fame relatively late in life but even up to his NHS walk, he had done some remarkable things. This doc explores his life. PH The gimmick of this Lee Mack sitcom is that events unfold in real time, which in practice means each episode sees his stressed wedding DJ Stuart absolutely dog-piled by humiliations. Tonight, all Stu wants to do is reclaim his iPad, triggering a blackly comic and often profane cascade of disaster. Graeme Virtue The latest of Matt Berry’s spoof documentaries examines relationships. Historian Michael Squeamish begins with “chatting up” (“Showing your trainers, as it’s known up north”). Next “the act of physical love” is under the microscope. Not literally, although Berry’s tone suggests he would relish a closer look. PH Darvell in East Sussex is home to an unusual community. The Bruderhof are radical Christians living a spartan existence, largely outside mainstream society, not least in terms of their gender and sexual politics. This film follows 18-year-old Hannah as she starts to ask some difficult questions. PH Graduation (Cristian Mungiu, 2016), 12.45am, Film4When Eliza (Maria Drăguş) is assaulted outside her school, she is unable to sit the exam that will win her a scholarship, so her father (Adrian Titieni) must plead for help from the authorities. Intelligent and bleak, this is Romanian director Cristian Mungiu’s most scathing indictment yet of a corrupt, oppressive society. Paul Howlett Snooker: The World Championship 10am, BBC Two. The first semi-final continues.Test Cricket: England v Pakistan 10am, Sky Sports Main Event. The first day of the second Test from Southampton.Golf: The Wyndham Championship 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The first day from Greensboro, North Carolina. 