Nick Kyrgios says he is “slim to no chance” of playing overseas again this year, skipping the French Open as well as the US Open because of coronavirus concerns. Kyrgios and defending champion Rafael Nadal this week joined women’s world No 1 Ashleigh Barty in withdrawing from the US Open citing Covid-19 concerns. The world No 40 said he was not surprised a number of stars had chosen not to play. “I knew a lot of players were going to – I don’t think the US Open will be happy seeing some of the biggest names in sport not put their health at risk and go there and play,” Kyrgios told Nine on Thursday. “I wasn’t surprised by Rafa’s decision; I think he’s more eyeing the French Open.” While Nadal will target the rescheduled French Open in October where he will try to match Roger Federer’s all-time record 20 men’s grand slam singles crowns, Kyrgios says he is unlikely to leave Australia. “If I was to play I’d definitely rather go to Europe at this time of the year with everything going on,” said Kyrgios. “There’s a very slim chance I will play in Europe – slim to none to be honest. “I’m going to use this time to stay at home ... train, be with my family and friends, and act responsibly and wait until I think it’s best.” While Australian Open organisers are adamant the tournament will go ahead at its Melbourne home early next year, Kyrgios was not so sure. “I’m not too sure the Australian Open will be going ahead as it did at the start of the year with the pandemic in Melbourne,” he said from his Canberra base. “It’s sad times in Melbourne so I’m not too sure if the Australian Open will go on.” He also slammed players who had criticised him for his views on their “selfish” behaviour through the pandemic, notably at a post-tournament party put on by Novak Djokovic. “Some of the players, their behaviour throughout this time I don’t think has been great at all, especially coming from some of our leaders of the sport who are supposed to be setting an example,” the 25-year-old said. “Them coming back at me with behaviour that I’ve done on court just shows their intellectual level. They’re putting lives at risk – it’s not really comparable.”