At the Happiness and Prosperity service station in the rural reaches of Sichuan province, I prepared to face the public toilet. We had been driving for hours, and my need was urgent, but I still hesitated. Not because the service station was unclean: the restaurant was pristine, and the food cheap and fabulous. It was because of the doors. There wouldn’t be any. I asked my translator if there was an etiquette. Where should I look? What is considered rude? I had no idea, because this was turning all my concepts of public and private upside down. I knew that some schools and institutions in the western world had doorless toilets, the better to foster compliance or – in the case of the military – to extract individuality. But I grew up in a culture that provided privacy abundantly and without question. I like doors. At the Happiness and Prosperity service station, I knew I would miss them. So how did I do it? By studiously not looking at the line of women who had graciously – or pruriently – let me go first, and by building doors in my mind. So you would think that I would run a mile from the new architect-designed public toilets in a park in Tokyo’s Shibuya district. They are made of coloured glass that is transparent, but turns opaque when the user locks the stall. Why? So that users can inspect the stall for cleanliness, apparently, and check there is no one waiting for them inside. The concept is not new: a few London nightclubs have tried the same gimmick. It is intriguing, and in the context of public toilets, not as shocking as it seems. Hard and opaque doors are relatively newfangled anyway. Throughout history, privacy has been the exception not rule. Wealthy Romans sat in communal toilets and exchanged gossip. In London, the 12th-century Longhouse public toilet had 64 seats for men and 64 for women, and no partitions. Even in the early 20th century, you could find family outhouses with a big hole and a little one, for companionable toileting. Privacy arrived along with the S-bend, a toilet improvement that removed smell (mostly), so the toilet could be taken inside the house. Now, the right to privacy seems as solid as the door. But privacy has always required pretence. That door may be solid, but it can’t stop sound. Aural privacy has always been tricky to achieve. I’ve sat in plenty of stalls and listened while the woman next door obviously waits for me to do my business and leave before she does hers. The Japanese, always at the forefront of toilet technology, with their in-built bidets and remote control toilets, invented the Otohime (Flush Princess) to soften the embarrassment of public toilet users: it plays the sounds of flushing water to mask any unseemly noises. The truth about toilets is that we all have to use them with a certain level of pretence. Ask an American about their public toilets and why they have such huge gaps down both sides of the door (plus insultingly low doors in the first place, more suited to a horse than a human), so that it is easy to see into them, and most will respond with bafflement, and say they have never noticed. When I asked Chinese people why some of their toilets didn’t have doors, they couldn’t answer the question, but only because they didn’t see the reason for asking it. Why do you need doors when you’re used to not having them? I don’t know if I’d use the Tokyo toilets, even though, as a fell runner, I’m used to wild peeing with no doors in sight. What’s more interesting about those Tokyo toilets is that they were commissioned in the first place. A city authority that spends money on public toilets? To anyone in the UK or US, this is an extraordinary concept, when we have seen our public toilets closed and removed in their hundreds over the last decade. (A Unison freedom of information request recently found that 979 public toilets had been closed by UK councils since 2010). The desperation felt by many in lockdown who can’t find an open toilet is only an exaggerated symptom of the attrition of our public necessities. Toilets and public toilets are not luxuries but essential. So I see through the gimmick of those see-through toilets and note only that public toilets have been thought valuable, and constructed, and I salute them. Build toilets to be transparent or opaque, communal or private. Just build them.