As I write, there is a heatwave, hence full-on maquillage is anathema to me. But I’m not forgoing blusher because if you want to look alive, even while wilting in the heat, it’s a good shot. So, things to note – cream glossy blushers are brilliant on foundation-free faces, and dry and mature skins. For oilier skins a powder blush is your best friend. Darker skin tones should opt for pigment-rich deep pinks, berries and corals. A powder blush dabbed on the lips looks great but to avoid dryness, base your lips first with balm. A cracked pout is never a great look. 1. Bobbi Brown Cosmetics Pot Rouge £22.50, bobbibrown.co.uk 2. Dolce & Gabbana Solar Glow Illuminating Contour Duo £55, harrods.com 3. Suqqu Powder Blush Compact £58, selfridges.com 4. Hourglass Ambient Lighting Blush £38, spacenk.com 5. YSL Couture Blush £34.50, boots.com I rarely recommend mist, because 99% of them are a waste of money. Many tout just how wonderfully hydrating, refreshing and revitalising they are, and while I roll my eyes cynically, I do get the appeal – especially in this weather. That said, spritzing ice-cold mineral water over your face will give you the same effect. If you’re going to buy a mist, get one that does more than just freshen your face. And that is the point of this one from Allies of Skin. I swear by it because it is a supercharged skincare product that just so happens to come in mist form. The formulation, unlike the majority of its counterparts, is considered and sophisticated. It uses antioxidants, silk amino acids, probiotics and antibacterial ingredients to battle blemishes, reduce redness, protect the skin from the environment, and yes, hydrate. It also gives you an incredible glow that looks healthy as opposed to greasy. If mask-wearing and the climate have given you hydration issues and breakouts, then definitely try this. My only (tiny) criticism is that the texture can initially feel a little tacky on the skin – so I recommend waiting briefly before layering on other products. Nevertheless, I would happily take this mist over its alternatives any day of the week. It is better value and will give you much better skin. Allies of Skin Molecular Saviour Probiotics Repair Mist, £57, cultbeauty.co.uk Face facts As facialists are still not operational, try John Lewis’s new beauty tech section – it includes skin-plumping and acne-fighting light therapy tools. Foreo UFO 2 Smart Mask Device, £250, johnlewis.com The full range This genius consumer-driven range includes a detoxing celery-based cream and a popsicle inspired antioxidant cleanser. Volition Orangesicle Balancing Daily Cleanser, £28, cultbeauty.co.uk Silk route Minimise the risk of ‘maskne’ (breakouts and aggravated acne caused by masks) by wearing something much kinder to your skin, like this exquisite pure silk option. The Vampire’s Wife Silk Face Mask, £35, thevampireswife.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto