Pictures of teenagers leaping in the air as they brandish fluttering results papers are an August tradition. But, in the upside-down world of 2020, they were displaced by images of masked A-level students chanting “Fuck the algorithm!” outside the Department for Education. Their upset was caused by a statistical model that, before the government U-turned on the issue, marked down disadvantaged students and favoured the privately educated, crudely reflecting a society rigged from cradle to grave in favour of the privileged. The obsession with schools – and with how they can be designed to nurture the lucky few – is a colossal distraction However, this is was not the debate we were having. Instead, we were told that this was a crisis of opportunity and aspiration: the poor but talented had had a ladder emblazoned with “social mobility” snatched away from them. Education was an escape route out of hardship, and the cruelty of the algorithm was that it blocked this path off. The premise of this debate is consistent with the Tory approach to education: talent is finite, and the job of schools is to locate the few who have it and allow them to flourish. Social mobility – the process by which these talented few rise out of their class – excuses inequality. As long as there is a distribution of talent and hardworking kids who are willing to make the most of it, there’s no need to address the conditions they are escaping from. If anything the existence of low pay, job insecurity and poor housing encourages them to work harder. This is no caricature: in 2013 the then London mayor, Boris Johnson, declared “some measure of inequality is essential for the spirit of envy and keeping up with the Joneses that is, like greed, a valuable spur to economic activity”. While 16% of the human race had an IQ lower than 85, he suggested, around 2% topped 130. Effort should be expended on elevating these super-bright to their rightful position; or, as Johnson put it, to allow “some cornflakes to get to the top”. The truth is the debate about the role schools can play in improving “social mobility” is a distraction. It would be foolish to suggest they are not relevant, but they are not the main remedy for inequalities that aren’t innate at all but rather manufactured by a society defined by injustice. According to the OECD’s own research, children from privileged backgrounds tend to do as well at state schools as their privately educated peers. The main factor driving their educational success, in other words, isn’t the school they’re going to: it’s their family background. “There’s been a focus on what was going on inside schools, without recognition of what was going on outside them, which was really crucial,” Diane Reay, professor of education at Cambridge University, tells me. This isn’t an abstract debate for Reay: born into a mining family in south Derbyshire, the eldest of eight children, she was written off by the education system until she passed the 11-plus. According to her own research, schools make up just 15% to 20% of the difference in a child’s development. “If you want to understand why kids are failing in schools,” she explains, “you need to look outside the school gates.” Indeed, these inequalities are entrenched before a child is even born. Children born in deprived areas have, on average, a 200g lower birthweight than their richest peers. Children with middle-class, professional parents are exposed to more words earlier on, opening up a gap in vocabulary at a young age: this is why poorer school pupils are more than twice as likely to have a speech, language or communication need. Poorer children are more likely to suffer everything from mental distress to respiratory conditions, damaging their educational potential. For the one in five children living in houses classed as food-insecure, poor diet and hungry bellies interfere with their ability to learn. Overcrowded housing means less quiet space to study. Universal primary and secondary education is expected to overcome such colossal inequalities. While a lucky few will always fight the odds, even the best teaching cannot cure injustices deeply embedded in our social fabric. When a young person leaves the school gates for the last time, they don’t encounter a level playing field. A child from a poorer background who clinches straight As does not have parents who can afford to pay their living costs while they undertake an unpaid internship – a passport into several industries. Their family cannot draw on contacts and networks who can put in a word at a law firm or newspaper. There is no bank of mum and dad to pay for postgraduate qualifications to adorn their CVs – again, often necessities to guarantee a place in many professions – or to put down a deposit and to buy their first home. Medicine, journalism, law and academia are dominated by the children of well-to-do parents not because they’re the brightest, but because they have the financial means to access the experience and education required by these professions. There has been no lack of meddling with school structures under successive governments, all designed to cream off those deemed to possess the greatest talent. Easier to do that, of course, than to question the structure of a society that inherently favours those with financial means. Ours is a country that rewards class privilege, not talent. The obsession with schools – and specifically with how they can be designed to nurture the lucky few – is a colossal distraction. How we tackle the inequalities outside the school gates is where our focus should lie: but that is not a discussion this government is prepared to indulge. • Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist • On Monday 24 August at 6.30pm BST, Guardian journalists will be discussing the fallout from the A-level results fiasco in a live-streamed event. What implications will there be for universities? How will inequality be affected? Book tickets here