All politicians sloganise in haste and repent at leisure. John Major spent years having “back to basics” thrown at him every time a Conservative politician was caught in flagrante. Gordon Brown didn’t, as he claimed he had, end “boom and bust” after all. David Cameron and George Osborne coined “all in this together” long before the 2008 crash, but it became a useful summary of the Conservatives’ pitch to rebuild the economy – and something critics could remind the prime minister of every time he or anyone around him enjoyed a glass of champagne. Boris Johnson and his chancellor, Rishi Sunak, have spent the past few months trying to capture imaginations with a series of lines about their handling of coronavirus. There was the promise that the government would put its “arms around every single worker”, an odd phrase to use while also urging people to stay two metres away from one another. Last week, after a slew of miserable statistics about jobs and the economy, Sunak said that, while Britain was in hard times, “no one will be left without hope or opportunity”. It was a typically elegant line from the chancellor, but it also puts him in a bit of a bind. Even a nebulous pledge like this one is easy to miss: can Sunak really say with confidence that, come the autumn, when the furlough scheme ends and many people lose their jobs, no one will struggle with a sense of hopelessness? His Conservative colleagues are struggling with a range of emotions that don’t suggest that the men at the top of government have succeeded in captivating them with fine language. “I’m through embarrassment now,” says one senior Tory who is usually quite happy to defend Johnson. “Now I’m disappointed with the way my party has handled things, which is so much worse.” Others start by defending the way their ministerial colleagues have had to respond to an unprecedented situation, only to descend into an anxious volley of swearing as they list the messes the government really could have avoided. One Tory in a former “red wall” seat accuses No 10 of, in rather less charming language than Sunak, “wanking into the void” because it failed to make any real preparations for the row about A-level results. Another colleague describes the current situation as a “total mess”, complaining that ministers have lost focus after the first few urgent months of the pandemic. Despite the UK’s high death toll and poor economic performance, many Conservative MPs have felt their party had done its best up to this point. Cabinet ministers point to the way their colleagues “followed the science” and listened to the government’s expert advisers, rather than taking decisions for political reasons. All accept that this is the toughest time to be a minister. So what has changed the minds of those Tories who were previously prepared to give their government the benefit of the doubt? For many, the turning point came over education. One says: “It seems to me that the only thing that has been done in a timely way were Rishi’s interventions. At least they were decisive and staved off the worst impact in the short term. All the other things have been ballsed up to a greater or lesser extent. If the government fails to get schools open again next month, then the fallout will be far worse than from these results “Exams shouldn’t have been cancelled. Schools should have been back months ago, or at least there should have been some serious remote learning followed by exams which at least would have meant schools would be held accountable for doing some teaching.” A fair few Conservatives are frustrated that the government seems to be more concerned about stopping grade inflation than about acknowledging what a stressful and bewildering year it has been for pupils. “So what if you are overgenerous with marks this year? Who cares?” storms one backbencher. “It’s not business as usual, so just go with what the teachers said they’d get, for Christ’s sake.” Not all Tory MPs agree that the big mistake was failing to accept teachers’ predicted grades for their students. Some are more annoyed that No 10 failed to do any real preparation for last week’s announcement. One recently elected MP complains: “No one currently seems to know that 79% of students don’t get their predicted grades normally, and if all the universities had to take all the students, the university system would collapse. It’s done on the basis that 79% of people don’t get their predicted grades. Several of us warned No 10 about this. It was as clear as day that there would be an issue, given what happened in Scotland, yet they fucked around.” MPs and ministers alike are full of praise for Michelle Donelan, the universities minister, who has spent most of the week in Zoom calls with worried colleagues. She has told MPs that the appeals process for results should conclude by 7 September, which has helped them reassure infuriated constituents. But cabinet ministers are even more anxious about the coming year, pointing out that students will still be at a huge disadvantage after missing so much schooling. And all agree that if the government fails to get schools open again next month, then the fallout will be far worse than from these results. If children can’t go back to school, their parents can’t go back to work either. That’s presuming that those parents have a job to return to. A huge amount of work is being poured into preparing for the end of the furlough scheme in October. Deferred business rates and VAT will need to be repaid at some point, but senior MPs are worried that this will come at just the point when businesses have a chance to recover. “We could effectively be putting them out of business, which isn’t really what a government wants to do,” says one. Tory MPs don’t know how they’ll deal with this. “There’s not really anyone in contemporary British politics who has had to deal with large-scale unemployment,” says one minister. “Our whole political life has been against a backdrop of good employment. It’s going to be like a stone in the shoe, just getting more and more painful.” Ministers in the Treasury, the Work and Pensions department and the Business department have been drawing up plans to help people move into new lines of work as their sectors shrink. The hope is that most will find they have transferable skills and are able to move from, say, aviation into social care, because both involve working with people. The scale of government employment programmes being planned for the coming months dwarfs anything that Labour unveiled in 2009. But most Tories are pragmatic about their party making government so big at the moment: on this, they accept another Sunak slogan that “this is not a time for ideology and orthodoxy”. Sunak tends to get a lot of credit from his colleagues for moving swiftly with new policies. But the wider government is still moving too slowly on other issues. MPs complain that committees making important decisions that affect the tourism industry are not meeting until the end of August, by which time it will be too late. There is also widespread irritation with the No 10 communications operation, which many feel isn’t doing a good enough job of explaining why things are happening. “The government really should do better at explaining ahead of time to the country and to the party about why decisions are being made and what the trade-offs are,” says one minister. “We should trust the intelligence of the vast majority of people. For me, this whole situation is a reminder of why effective government communications is really important.” Tory MPs are clearly as much in need of better government communications as the general public. They will need even more reassurance over the next few months. The 109 new Tory MPs have spent the past few weeks telling one another that they need to take time off now, because the autumn is going to be far harder than the time they’ve just worked through. But even veteran politicians aren’t prepared for what is coming. When Sunak next speaks to his colleagues, he may want to deploy a new slogan summing up how the autumn will be: hold on tight. • Isabel Hardman is assistant editor of the Spectator