If the thought of escaping to a private island this summer sounds appealing, head to the far east, well, Essex to be more precise. Osea is a tranquil island in the Blackwater estuary reached via an ancient causeway at low tide or river taxi at high tide. There’s a handful of lovely holiday cottages on the island, and now glamping has been added to the mix this summer. Yurts are comfortably furnished with double or twin beds, linens and towels, with access to private shower cabins. Meals are served in a communal area with lounge, bar and proper loos. There are two outdoor pools and free bikes for exploring. • £180 per person per night, based on two adults sharing a yurt. Minimum two-night stay. Extra beds can be provided for younger children. Older children can share a bell tent for £90pp per night, oseaisland.co.uk Deep in rural Mid Wales, Welsh Glamping will open its doors on 14 August and has some availability left for the end of summer. Choose between a hand-crafted wooden hut, a bell tent or a cottage for two with wood-fired outdoor hot tub. There are three huts and three tents, each with its own wood-burner, fire pit, outdoor kitchen and access to swish washrooms. Spend days exploring the valley, hiking and cooling off in the nearby waterfalls and swimming spots or visit the town of Llanwrtyd Wells, home of the bog-snorkelling championships. • A night in a hut or tent in August costs £120, welshglamping.com The Hoxton Hotel will be decamping to the countryside this summer. If you crave fresh air, but aren’t ready to give up your urban comforts, this pop-up campsite is the answer. Lotus tents with proper beds, electricity and armchairs, plus access to private ‘powder rooms’ with toilets, hot showers and full-length mirrors ensure Camp Hox sits at the “glampy” rather than “campy” end of the spectrum. • From £185 per night. Every booking includes a free night at one of the Hoxton hotel group’s London hotels, to be redeemed before 31 October, camphox.com The cancellation of all this summer’s festivals has meant dozens of luxury bell tents with nowhere to go. Canopy & Stars have come up with a nifty solution: placing these furloughed festival tents in the grounds of properties featured by its own sister company, Sawday’s. For example, at Larkbeare Grange in Devon you’ll camp out in an orchard with rural views, using the B&B’s bathroom. It may not have the usual glampsite bells and whistles, but you’ll have the site to yourself and there are plenty of slots left for summer. • From £75 a night for a bell tent sleeping two, canopyandstars.co.uk Opening this month, Spiers Cabin is the first of five luxury woodland cabins planned for the historic Culdees Castle estate. Tucked away in the trees, the cosy wood-clad cabin for two comes with its own hot tub. Guests lucky enough to bag a stay this summer will have the grounds of the 660-acre estate to themselves, with walking, cycling, riding and fishing on the doorstep. Hampers of local food can be delivered. • The cabin costs £120 a night, coolcamping.com