A federal judge whose son was killed and husband wounded in a shooting by a disgruntled lawyer at her home last month broke her silence on Monday, calling for measures to keep personal information of judges private, amid mounting cyberthreats in her profession. “This is a matter of life and death. We cannot just sit back and wait for another tragedy to strike,” US district court judge Esther Salas, the first Latina to serve on the district court of New Jersey, said in a nine-minute video statement. She noted that her family’s attacker easily found her personal information on the internet. Roy Den Hollander, 72, a lawyer and self-described anti-feminist, went to the judge’s North Brunswick home on 19 July, and shot her son Daniel Anderl, 20, and husband Mark Anderl, 63, when they opened the door. Authorities have said Den Hollander classed himself as a men’s rights lawyer and his misogynist writings dated back more than two decades. He posed as a FedEx delivery person when he came to the family home. Salas said he had her family’s personal information, including her home address, and used it to target them. Such easy access to information about judges on the internet must end, she said. “The monster knew where I lived and what church we attended,” she said. “My son’s death cannot be in vain, which is why I am begging those empowered to do something to help my brothers and sisters on the bench.” She added: “Daniel, being Daniel, protected his father and he took the shooter’s first bullet directly to the chest.” Mark Anderl was then shot three times and remains in hospital. While the motive for the shooting remained unclear, Hollander once had a case before the judge and had published an online screed filled with misogynistic and racist remarks deriding her ethnicity and career. Hollander was found dead a day after the shooting in an apparent suicide about 90 miles north of New York City in the Catskills area of New York state. Salas said that while federal judges understand their rulings may leave people upset, a national dialogue on the issue must commence. She noted that serving as a judge involves “making tough calls” but said judges should not have to “live in fear for our lives”. She added in the video: “There are companies that will sell your personal details that can be leveraged for nefarious purposes.” Salas, 51, was nominated to her position by Barack Obama in 2010 and in the following year began serving. She has presided over a number of high-profile cases. The shooting took place after a weekend in which the family celebrated her son’s 20th birthday with some of his close friends from Catholic University of America in Washington DC. Salas, who was in the basement when the shooting occurred, was not hurt. Authorities believe he also shot and killed a fellow attorney in California in the days before the attack at Salas’s home. Den Hollander had a document with information about a dozen female judges from across the country half of whom are Latina, including Salas with him when he was found dead, two people with knowledge of the investigation told the Associated Press. They spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly about the case. Den Hollander’s website contained vitriolic rants against women and occasionally violent imagery. Among his targets were his late mother, his ex-wife, friends from childhood and “feminazi” judges. In the aftermath of the shootings, some legal experts have said it was time for the US Marshals Service, which primarily provides protection for judges in and around courthouses, to be more aggressive in monitoring online hate speech. The service said it monitored more than 1m derogatory social media posts aimed at people it protects during the last fiscal year.