The coronavirus forced baseball’s 17th postponement in 10 days on Saturday, prompting at least two more players to opt out of the season entirely and casting doubt the league can complete a truncated 2020 season. A Cardinals-Brewers game in Milwaukee was postponed for the second straight day after one more player and three staff members with St Louis tested positive for the coronavirus. Friday’s series opener had been nixed only hours before the first pitch due to two Cardinals players testing positive. Milwaukee then announced that Gold Glove center fielder Lorenzo Cain will not participate in the rest of the 2020 season. St Louis learned of their first two positive tests Thursday night from samples taken Wednesday before a game in Minnesota. Players and staff were instructed to isolate in their hotel rooms, and the club said it was conducting rapid testing and contact tracing. The Cardinals have not been to Miller Park since arriving in Milwaukee, and the Brewers have not reported any positive tests among their players since the season began. Despite that, Cain, a two-time All-Star, informed management that he no longer wanted to participate. “We fully support Lorenzo’s decision and will miss his talents on the field and leadership in the clubhouse,” Brewers general manager David Stearns said in a statement. According to an ESPN report, MLB commissioner has told players union’ executive Tony Clark that baseball could shut down for the season if it doesn’t do a better job of managing the coronavirus. The scuttling of Friday afternoon’s Cardinals-Brewers game meant six major league clubs – or 20% of MLB’s 30 teams – were idle on the day as a result of the pandemic. Two other scheduled games involving the Miami Marlins, Washington Nationals, Toronto Blue Jays and Philadelphia Phillies were postponed due to the fallout from positive tests. MLB said Thursday it was updating its coronavirus safety measures after a 19th member of the Marlins organization tested positive for Covid-19 – 17 players and two backroom staff – less than a week after all 30 clubs opened a shortened, delayed season in empty stadiums.The Marlins’ outbreak, which first came to light on Monday after the team played a three-game series on the road against the Phillies, prompted MLB to postpone all of the NL East club’s games through at least Sunday amid doubts the team will be able to reopen its season as planned Tuesday at home. On a bright note after a nightmarish week, the Marlins received no new positive results in their latest round of coronavirus testing, a person familiar with the situation said Saturday, but second baseman Isan Diaz opted out of the season. The Phillies, meanwhile, said Saturday they had no new positives from tests a day before. Players were permitted to access Citizens Bank Park for staggered workouts beginning in the afternoon. The person discussing the Marlins spoke to the Associated Press on condition of anonymity because the tests had not been released publicly. At least 21 members of the Marlins’ traveling party have been infected by an outbreak at the start of a season-opening trip. The team hasn’t played since Sunday in Philadelphia but hopes to resume games next week. Diaz consistently tested negative while the season was on hold, but he decided to become the first Miami player to opt out. He played in two of the Marlins’ three games before their season was halted. Diaz batted .173 as a rookie last year, but the organization has big hopes regarding his potential. The infected Marlins players and staff left Philadelphia in sleeper buses Friday for Miami, where they will stay together in quarantine. The rest of the team remained in isolation at a hotel in Philadelphia. The schedules of the New York Yankees and Baltimore Orioles have also been scrambled. Cleveland players and staff talked about postponing Friday night’s game at Minnesota. The Cardinals had played at Target Field on Wednesday, a day before the Indians arrived.