Not content with signing Willian, who has agreed a three-year deal and successfully coughed for the Emirates doctor, Arsenal are rumoured to be pondering a move for Ajax winger Quincy Promes. The 28-year-old scored 16 goals before the Eredivisie came to a premature Covid-19-induced end in March and may arrive as a replacement for Alexandre Lacazette, who might be off to Juventus. The Italian champions are planning a summer clear-out and the Mirror say they will offer Arsenal their pick of Douglas Costa, Cristian Romero or Gonzalo Higuaín in a bid to help grease the wheels. Sky Sports say West Ham have denied reports that Chelsea have bid £50m for midfielder Declan Rice and claim such a derisory offer would be the source of much mirth at the London Stadium. Rice is contracted to West Ham until 2024 and his employers have the option of extending it for another year. Bayern Munich midfielder Thiago Alcântara wants to leave the German champions and could find a new home at Anfield if Liverpool decide they want to strengthen their midfield this summer. Last month it was reported Liverpool were preparing a £21m bid but Bayern are understood to want £27m. Highly regarded Burnley midfielder Dwight McNeil is turning heads at Leicester, Wolves, Milan and Juventus. The 20-year-old with the sweet left foot can play on either flank or through the middle and his manager Sean Dyche has previously said that “natural economics” dictate Burnley would be willing to let him go if they get a suitably attractive offer. With one year left on his contract and his employers eager for him to sign a new deal, Wolves boss Nuno Espirito Santo used his post mortem of his side’s Europa League defeat at the hands of Sevilla to flex his managerial muscle. “We need more players to help us,” he said. “It’s a small squad.” Wolves have been linked with Porto winger Jesús Corona and Napoli left-back Faouzi Ghoulam in recent weeks. West Brom, Leeds and Fulham are all courting Scottish winger Ryan Fraser, who is a free agent after leaving Bournemouth when his contract expired at the end of June. Meanwhile in Glasgow, Rangers midfielder Glen Kamara is attracting attention from a raft of mid-table Premier League sides including Everton, Southampton, Sheffield United and Crystal Palace. And finally, Fulham are interested in signing Calum Chambers from Arsenal for £12m after the defender impressed at Craven Cottage during his loan spell the last time the west London side were in the Premier League. The 25-year-old has not played for Arsenal since suffering a knee injury in December but is closing in on a return to full fitness.