India has accused China of “provocative military movements” along their disputed border in Ladakh, escalating tensions between the two sides who have been locked in a months-long standoff. A statement by India’s defence ministry said China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA) had “carried out provocative military movements to change the status quo” on the southern bank of Pangong Lake in Ladakh. India accused China of moving large numbers of troops into disputed territory over the weekend, which “violated the previous consensus arrived at during military and diplomatic engagements”. India claimed to have thwarted the Chinese aggression and said it “undertook measures to strengthen our positions”. “The Indian army is committed to maintaining peace and tranquility through dialogue, but is also equally determined to protect its territorial integrity,” said the statement. The face-off between India and China along their Himalayan border began in early May when China began building up troops and artillery in the area, including along Pangong Lake. Verbal warnings and stone-throwing were reported between the two sides. In June it escalated into a full-blown assault in Galwan Valley, the worst violence between the two sides since 1967, as soldiers engaged in hand-to-hand combat with rocks and spiked clubs at an altitude of about 4,250 metres (14,000ft), which led to the deaths of 20 Indian soldiers. The number of Chinese casualties is not known. The two sides publicly pledged to de-escalate and move troops back to their previous positions. However, multiple rounds of diplomatic and military-level discussion have failed to make progress and India and China have remained in a deadlock. Chinese troops remain at key Indian posts in Pangong Lake, continuing to build roads, helipads and radar towers, and in recent days China was reported to have deployed fighter jets near the border. In response, India has continued to build up infrastructure on its side of the “line of actual control”, and continued to carry out air patrols. On Monday, Beijing claimed Chinese border troops “never cross the line of actual control”. “Both sides are in communication regarding the situation on the ground,” the Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian told a news briefing. Commanders from both sides met on Monday in the Ladakh village of Chushul to try to resolve the issue.