The government has announced a further loosening of coronavirus restrictions in England, which come into effect from Saturday 15 August. The changes were postponed from 1 August. The following businesses and activities can reopen in England, provided they follow Covid-19 secure guidelines: casinos, skating rinks and bowling alleys; indoor play areas, including soft play areas; indoor theatre, music and performance venues with socially distanced audiences. Venues will have to operate at a reduced capacity and limit ticket sales. Performers must maintain social distancing and venues need to be “deep cleaned” between performances; tattoo studios, beauty salons, spas and hairdressers will be able to restart their remaining “close contact” services, including facial treatments such as eyebrow threading, eyelash treatments, make-up application; wedding receptions will be allowed to have sit-down meals again, for up to 30 people, providing the venue is adhering to Covid guidelines; a small number of sporting events will be piloted to test the safe return of spectators. This will begin with the World Snooker Championships in Sheffield at the weekend. Government guidelines state they are still aiming to return crowds to stadium in October. The changes only apply to England – the devolved authorities in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have their own restrictions. Many activities, such as bowling alleys in Wales or “close contact” facial treatments in Scotland, were already reopened in areas of the UK with lower coronavirus transmission rates than in England. The new rules in England also do not apply where local lockdowns in place, which currently includes areas in the north of England, Leicester and Luton. You can check whether your area has local restrictions on the government website. The government says that you are still NOT allowed to: meet indoors in groups of more than two households, even in pubs or restaurants; interact socially with anyone you know, even if you see them when out in a pub or restaurant or place of worship; hold or attend parties or celebrations where it is difficult to maintain social distancing; meet outdoors in a group of more than six people from different households; gatherings larger than six should only take place if everyone is from two households or support bubbles; stay overnight away from home with people who aren’t members of your household or “support bubble”. Nightclubs, dance halls and sexual entertainment venues will remain closed. The advice, when you leave your home, is still to avoid being face-to-face with people from outside your household, to frequently wash your hands with soap and water, and to avoid crowded places. Government advice remains that it is important to maintain social distancing from people you do not live with. Single adult households – adults who live alone or with dependent children only – can form an exclusive ‘support bubble’ with one other household. You should not change or add to your support bubble once formed. Face coverings are mandatory on public transport, in shops, museums, galleries, cinemas, places of worship and public libraries. There are some exemptions to the face covering rule, for example if you are a child under 11 or someone with a physical or mental disability that would make wearing a mask difficult. Travel is permitted throughout the country, but you are advised to try to maintain social distancing as much as possible while doing so, especially in confined spaces like a car. International travel is subject to restrictions. You must self-isolate for 14 days when you arrive in the UK, unless you have travelled from one of the countries where there are “travel corridors”. There are currently 76 countries and territories on the list, which should be checked before you travel. Since 1 August those considered clinically vulnerable to the coronavirus, due to a pre-existing condition such as cancer or a respiratory condition like asthma, are no longer required to be shielding indoors. There are exceptions to this in local lockdown areas. If you have symptoms of the coronavirus – which include a fever, a new persistent cough, and changes to your sense of taste and/or smell – you can book an NHS coronavirus test online. In general, the advice remains that the more people you have interactions with, the more chance the virus has to spread. Therefore, try to limit the number of people you see. All of the UK government’s Covid-19 restrictions and advice can be found on gov.uk. The devolved administrations of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland also provide specific online guidance.