Gatwick airport has reported a £343m loss after passenger numbers plummeted by two-thirds in the first half of the year as the coronavirus takes a heavy toll on the aviation industry. Britain’s second-busiest air hub, which earlier this week announced plans to cut 600 jobs, said revenues plunged by 61% in the first half from £372m to £144m. Gatwick is operating flights from only one of its two terminals and said passenger numbers fell by two-thirds year on year in the first six months from 22 million to only 7.5 million. The airport is forecasting it will take four to five years for air traffic levels to return to pre-pandemic levels. “The negative impact of Covid-19 on our passenger numbers and air traffic at the start of the year was dramatic and, although there are small signs of recovery, it is a trend we expect to continue to see,” said Stewart Wingate, the chief executive of Gatwick airport. “As with any responsible company we have protected our financial resilience by significantly reducing our operational costs and capital expenditure.” The company, which said passenger numbers were down 80% year on year this month, is slashing capital expenditure by more than £300m over the next two years and has cut costs by in excess of £100m. More than 70% of staff remain on furlough. Gatwick’s dire results come as Norwegian, traditionally one of the airport’s four biggest customers, reported a $610m (£459.1m) first-half loss and warned that it needed another cash injection. Norwegian, Europe’s third-largest low-cost airline, said passenger numbers dropped 99% in the second quarter. The airline, which already has a $340m loan guarantee from the Norwegian government, said it would not be enough to get it through the crisis. Royal Schiphol Group, the operator of airports in the Netherlands, is to cut several hundred jobs after reporting a €246m (£220.6m) loss in the first half. The state-owned group, which employs 3,000 staff, said passenger traffic declined 62% year on year in the period. RSG, which also operates airports in Rotterdam, the Hague and Eindhoven, is seeking to cut costs by 25% by 2022. In April, British Airways said it planned to drastically cut back its operation at Gatwick as part of a plan to make 12,000 redundancies. Last month, Heathrow airport reported a £1bn loss in the first half as passenger numbers fell by 96% in the second quarter. John Holland-Kaye, the airport’s chief executive, accused the government of playing “quarantine roulette” by failing to introduce a passenger testing regime at the UK’s major entry points.