Marks & Spencer is to cut 7,000 jobs over the next three months in a new round of redundancies as the retailer slashes costs and overhauls the way the business is run during the coronavirus pandemic. The job cuts will be made in its central support centre, regional management and its UK stores, adding to the  job cuts so far announced by UK companies as a result of the pandemic. The clothing food and homewares retailer, which employs 78,000 people and has more than 1,000 stores, also revealed the damage to trade that has been inflicted by the pandemic. Sales of clothing and homewares made through its shops plummeted 48% in the past eight weeks, compared with 2019 levels. Online sales were up 40% as shoppers switch to the internet, but because M&S is not a top online destination its overall non-food sales were still down 30%. The retailer said it hoped a “significant proportion” of the job losses would be made through voluntary redundancies or early retirement. It has started consultations with staff. Marks & Spencer – 7,000 jobs18 August: Food, clothing and homewares retailer cuts jobs in central support centre, regional management and stores. M&Co – 400 jobs5 August: M&Co, the Renfrewshire-based clothing retailer, formerly known as Mackays, will close 47 of 215 stores. WH Smith – 1,500 jobs5 August: The chain, which sells products ranging from sandwiches to stationery, will cut jobs mainly in UK railway stations and airports. Pizza Express – 1,100 jobs4 August: The restaurant chain plans the closure of 70 restaurants as part of a rescue restructure deal. Dixons Carphone – 800 jobs4 August: Electronics retailer Dixons Carphone is cutting 800 managers in its stores as it continues to reduce costs. DW Sports – 1,700 jobs at risk3 August: DW Sports fell into administration, closing its retail website immediately and risking the closure of its 150 gyms and shops. Marks & Spencer – 950 jobs20 July: The high street stalwart cuts management jobs in stores as well as head office roles related to property and store operations. Ted Baker – 500 jobs19 July: About 200 roles to go at the fashion retailer’s London headquarters, the Ugly Brown Building, and the remainder at stores. Azzurri – 1,200 jobs17 July: The owner of the Ask Italian and Zizzi pizza chains closes 75 restaurants and makes its Pod lunch business delivery only Burberry – 500 jobs worldwide15 July: Total includes 150 posts in UK head offices as luxury brand tries to slash costs by £55m after a slump in sales during the pandemic. Boots – 4,000 jobs9 July: Boots is cutting 4,000 jobs – or 7% of its workforce – by closing 48 opticians outlets and reducing staff at its head office in Nottingham as well as some management and customer service roles in stores. John Lewis – 1,300 jobs9 July: John Lewis announced that it is planning to permanently close eight of its 50 stores, including full department stores in Birmingham and Watford, with the likely loss of 1,300 jobs. Celtic Manor – 450 jobs9 July: Bosses at the Celtic Collection in Newport, which staged golf's Ryder Cup in 2010 and the 2014 Nato Conference, said 450 of its 995 workers will lose their jobs. Pret a Manger – 1,000 jobs6 July: Pret a Manger is to permanently close 30 branches and could cut at least 1,000 jobs after suffering “significant operating losses” as a result of the Covid-19 lockdown Casual Dining Group – 1,900 jobs2 July: The owner of the Bella Italia, Café Rouge and Las Iguanas restaurant chains collapsed into administration, with the immediate loss of 1,900 jobs. The company said multiple offers were on the table for parts of the business but buyers did not want to acquire all the existing sites and 91 of its 250 outlets would remain permanently closed. Arcadia – 500 jobs1 July: Arcadia, Sir Philip Green’s troubled fashion group – which owns Topshop, Miss Selfridge, Dorothy Perkins, Burton, Evans and Wallis – said in July 500 head office jobs out of 2,500 would go in the coming weeks. SSP Group – 5,000 jobs1 July: The owner of Upper Crust and Caffè Ritazza is to axe 5,000 jobs, about half of its workforce, with cuts at its head office and across its UK operations after the pandemic stalled domestic and international travel. Harrods – 700 jobs1 July: The department store group is cutting one in seven of its 4,800 employees because of the “ongoing impacts” of the pandemic. Harveys – 240 jobs30 June: Administrators made 240 redundancies at the furniture chain Harveys, with more than 1,300 jobs at risk if a buyer cannot be found. TM Lewin – 600 jobs30 June: Shirtmaker TM Lewin closed all 66 of its outlets permanently, with the loss of about 600 jobs. Monsoon Accessorize – 545 jobs11 June: The fashion brands were bought out of administration by their founder, Peter Simon, in June, in a deal in which 35 stores closed permanently and 545 jobs were lost. Mulberry – 470 jobs8 June: The luxury fashion and accessories brand is to cut 25% of its global workforce and has started a consultation with the 470 staff at risk. The Restaurant Group – 3,000 jobs3 June: The owner of dining chains such as Wagamama and Frankie & Benny’s has closed most branches of Chiquito and all 11 of its Food & Fuel pubs, with another 120 restaurants to close permanently. Total job losses could reach 3,000. Clarks – 900 jobs21 May: Clarks plans to cut 900 office jobs worldwide as it grapples with the growth of online shoe shopping as well as the pandemic. Oasis and Warehouse – 1,800 jobs30 April: The fashion brands were bought out of administration by the restructuring firm Hilco in April, with all of their stores permanently closed and 1,800 jobs lost. Cath Kidston – 900 jobs21 April: More than 900 jobs were cut immediately at the retro retail label Cath Kidston after the company said it was permanently closing all 60 of its UK stores. Debenhams – 4,000 jobs9 April: At least 4,000 jobs will be lost at Debenhams in its head office and closed stores after its collapse into administration in April, for the second time in a year. Laura Ashley – 2,700 jobs17 March: Laura Ashley collapsed into administration, with 2,700 job losses, and said rescue talks had been thwarted by the pandemic. M&S said its “streamlining programme” was an important step in reducing costs, allowing it to emerge from the coronavirus crisis with a lower cost base and a more resilient business. The shopworkers’ union Usdaw called on the government to intervene to support retailers, saying the latest M&S job cuts were a “bombshell for our high streets”. A month ago M&S announced that 950 jobs would go in store management, property and other head office posts. Other retailers including Debenhams, John Lewis, Boots and WHSmith have announced job cuts in recent weeks. High street dining chains, including Pizza Express, Zizzi and the owner of Bella Italia and Café Rouge are also closing outlets and cutting jobs. Dave Gill, Usdaw’s national officer, said: “This job loss announcement is yet another devastating blow for M&S staff and yet another bombshell for our high streets. The government has a clear choice; do they want to see the high street go to the wall, or do they want to help save it? “What the retail sector needs now is a tripartite approach of the government, unions and employers working together to develop a much needed retail recovery plan. We have long called for an industrial strategy for retail to help a sector that was already struggling before the coronavirus emergency. Now the situation is much worse.” Marks & Spencer’s chief executive, Steve Rowe, said the job cuts were part of its previously announced plans to “learn from the crisis, accelerate our transformation and deliver a stronger, more agile business in a world in which some customer habits were changed forever”. “The outlook is uncertain and we remain cautious,” Rowe said. “These proposals are an important step in becoming a leaner, faster business set up to serve changing customer needs, and we are committed to supporting colleagues through this time.” M&S said it also expected to create a number of new jobs to serve its online operations, including in online fulfilment and a new food warehouse, as it prepares for Ocado to begin delivering its food products on 1 September. The retailer has launched more than 500 new products in stores as part of an expanded online range created for Ocado. Food sales at M&S rose 2.5% in the 13 weeks to 8 August, and the company said demand had steadily improved since the early days of the lockdown, when it closed stores at travel locations such as train stations. M&S said its in-store sales had gradually improved since shops were allowed to reopen, with trading close to last year’s levels at some of its newer out-of-town stores, which customers usually travel to by car. However, sales are still “heavily impacted” at some of its older stores in town centres and some shopping centres. M&S said the rules banning big parties and weddings and the continued closure of many offices meant customers were buying leisure wear and casual clothing, but not office or formal wear. Richard Lim, of Retail Economics, said the M&S job cuts were part of a painful readjustment towards online shopping and a slowdown in spending which was likely to lead to more store closures and job losses. “Retailers remain in survival mode, preserving cash and hanging on for more sustainable levels of demand to return. But the way we shop has changed on a permanent basis for many parts of the sector almost overnight. The reality is that many more retailers will fail and the number of job losses will ramp up as government support is withdrawn. This is the calm before the storm,” he said.