Watching a Vanessa Engle documentary is like watching a really good cleaner tackle a cluttered, filthy room. First, there’s the deep breath in to contemplate the appalling vista. Then the decluttering starts – evidence taken out, dusted down and examined piece by piece to determine whether it is valuable or not, then binned or replaced as necessary. Then the room itself is cleaned and swept for details, with Engle mopping the floor as she backs out of a place now fit for purpose. What an appalling vista she had to contemplate in The Unbelievable Story of Carl Beech (BBC Two). Through footage from police interviews, contemporary media reports, Beech’s own blog posts at the time and interviews then and now with those involved, Engle’s latest documentary laid bare the phenomenon of the man who sparked a £2m police investigation. Beech’s allegations of childhood abuse in the 1970s and 80s by a paedophile ring comprising high-ranking members of the establishment was of course later unravelled as a hoax, apparently designed to secure him what eventually amounted to £22,000 in criminal injuries compensation. Wittingly or unwittingly, the hospital inspector and former NHS paediatric nurse seemed to have chosen his moment well. He made his claims of terrible abuse at the hands of named and nameless individuals – among the former were Sir Leon Brittan, Lord Bramall, Harvey Proctor and Sir Edward Heath – in 2014. They fell on credulous ground, in the wake of the 2012 Jimmy Savile scandal, which had proved beyond all doubt that extraordinarily evil behaviour by prominent people could go unchallenged and either ignored or actively covered up for years. After Beech conducted an interview with the news site Exaro, the Metropolitan police got in touch and launched Operation Midland to investigate his claims, quickly announcing that they felt they were “true”. The Labour MP Tom Watson lent his support to Beech, who added knowledge of three murders and an additional witness, “Fred”, to his claims. In the media, the whole thing – as sex, abuse and conspiracy-based cases speaking to our worst fears tend to do – took on a febrile life of its own. What was lost in the rush to believe – or to be seen to believe, and to overcompensate for former failures – was, well, everything else. As Sir Richard Henriques, the author of a damning report on the case, put it: “There is no doubt that in the early stages of the investigation, police officers proceeded on the basis that everything they had been told – remarkable as it was, and highly improbable in my opinion as it seemed from the outset – was the truth.” Or, as Beech’s ex-wife Dawn – the effortless breakout star of the documentary – put it to Engle, as she recalled her first exposure to her then husband’s claims: “I thought, What? What? Really? Really?! Really? Come on. You just think – what the actual fuck is that about?” Eventually the police and the media all became a little more “Dawn” in their thinking. Beech’s allegations fell apart once the slightest scrutiny was brought to bear on him. It was more than a year into their investigation that the Met looked for the first time at Beech’s own computer, full medical records (to substantiate his extensive alleged injuries) and mobile phone. “These are all matters,” notes Sir Richard, “that would have brought this investigation to a crashing halt within hours.” Dawn’s take would no doubt have been shorter. What they found there led to Beech’s conviction and an 18-year sentence for child sex offences, fraud and perverting the course of justice. Small comfort to the men accused. Brittan died during the investigation, as did Lord Bramall’s wife, and Proctor lost his job and home. The film did leave a corner or two still cobwebbed. Watson’s support was noted in passing but not the extent, which included an inflammatory article after Brittan’s death about the politician’s investigation by Operation Midland. And the BBC’s sceptical edition of Panorama that did much to air and fuel the growing doubts round the case was mentioned, but not its earlier edition of Newsnight that had done quite as much as anything else to fan the flames of suspicion round Brittan et al. Nevertheless, like so many of Engle’s previous films – The Cult Next Door or, most recently, The $50 Million Art Swindle – it succeeded in laying bare the human frailties we try to guard against individually, but which, when they infest an collective endeavour or an institution, bring about disproportionate destruction and harm. But on we go, clearing one room at a time, as best we can.