Thomas Tuchel played down suggestions that Paris Saint-Germain could try to sign Lionel Messi after their hopes of winning a first Champions League title were dashed by Bayern Munich in a tense final. Messi is considering his future at Barcelona following a disappointing campaign and Tuchel, who felt that his side were unfortunate to lose to Bayern in Lisbon, was asked about the Argentinian star after saying that PSG’s chances of becoming European champions next season depend on their Qatari owners investing in new signings this summer. However the German focused elsewhere, pointing out that the French champions need to add more depth to their squad. PSG have already lost Edinson Cavani and Thomas Meunier while Thiago Silva is out of contract and giving serious consideration to an offer from Chelsea, and Tuchel did not make a move for Messi sound likely. “He is very welcome but we lost Edinson Cavani and Thomas Meunier,” PSG’s manager said. “We lose Thiago Silva. Bayern are investing. If we want to compete on this level we have to use the window and make the squad bigger. Next season will be very demanding. We have to build. Which coach says no to Messi? We decided not to talk about transfers. We will sit together in the next days. I think Messi finishes his career at Barcelona.” PSG missed big chances as Bayern secured a treble thanks to a header from Kingsley Coman. Neymar and Kylian Mbappé were wasteful in front of goal and Tuchel admitted that his forwards were not clinical enough. “It was decisive,” Tuchel said. “I had the feeling before, maybe the first goal decides this match. We needed this boost to feel more free. Unfortunately you could see Kylian lacks a bit of rhythm in his game. He’s come back from injury. We showed a big fight but they scored and it was decisive. We showed the attitude necessary to win. We were not lucky enough. “You have to step up again, otherwise you cannot keep that level. It showed we can compete with the best teams. With this attitude and mentality we are strong. We can be proud of that.” Hansi Flick, who has made an extraordinary impact since replacing Niko Kovac as Bayern’s manager in November, praised Coman for seizing his opportunity against his old side. “Perhaps he’s finally stepped out of Ribéry and Robben’s shadow this season,” Flick said. “Kingsley has incredible talent and he showed tonight that he can also score goals.”