Eight Fijian-born soldiers who served with the British army in Iraq and Afghanistan are seeking a judicial review against the Ministry of Defence and Home Office, saying bureaucratic errors have made them illegal immigrants in the country for which they once served. The group of Commonwealth veterans have been forced to go to court five months after first going public because neither Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, nor Priti Patel, the home secretary, have yet responded positively to their initial complaint or properly reviewed their cases. One of the eight, Taitusi Ratucaucau, faces an NHS bill that has risen to £50,000 after an operation to remove a brain tumour. He was treated as if he were an overseas patient in London, and the hospital is waiting to see how the legal case develops. Ratucaucau, 49, who has been shielding from his wife and three daughters while he recovers, said he believed Commonwealth veterans had been “humiliated” by their treatment by the military and immigration system after their discharge. “This case has been dragged on for too long. We are made to feel worried and depressed about not knowing where we stand,” the Royal Logistics Corps veteran said. The group say they are victims of serious and systemic administrative mistakes and that they should be entitled to indefinite leave to remain in the UK without the usual charge of £2,389, because they were not properly advised on how to claim the right to stay legally in Britain after completing their service. The MoD said on Sunday it would start a consultation on the immigration situation faced by Commonwealth veterans “as soon as practicable”. Few other details were immediately available, although MoD sources said it would start by looking at those currently in service or in the process of being discharged. It was not immediately clear whether it would look at the cases of veterans who left several years ago. Ratucaucau was given 28 days’ notice of his discharge in 2011, after serving for 10 years including in Iraq and Afghanistan. His record was said to be exemplary. Despite his pleas, he was not given more time to deal with his and his family’s immigration status before leaving the army. He has struggled to get the money together to pay for visa application fees for himself and his daughters – a cost that was initially £5,000 and has since risen to nearly £10,000. Several Conservative and Labour backbench MPs have said the veterans’ immigration status should be resolved immediately, but the government has so far refused to recognise there was any systematic failures that discriminated against the group. Anthony Metzer QC, acting for the claimants, said they had been “given no choice but to initiate proceedings against the MoD and the Home Office”. As the Home Office began the “hostile environment” process of tightening the UK’s immigration regulations from 2012, the Commonwealth veterans increasingly found themselves squeezed by the official system. Some tried to regularise their nationality status but others struggled with the rising cost of applying for a visa. Some veterans lost their jobs and others became scared to seek medical care and avoided the authorities where possible. Others quit the UK and returned to their country of birth despite having the legal right to remain. Britain has long used foreign-born soldiers, and nearly 7% of troops come from outside the UK. After the Nepalese Gurkhas, soldiers from Fiji are the second largest foreign-born contingent serving in the British army, numbering about 1,300, and they are frequently noted for their dedication and bravery. Lawyers say it was not made clear to the soldiers that they had to apply for leave to remain within two years of leaving service and many assumed they had an automatic right to stay. In many cases, special stamps in their passports making them exempt from UK immigration rules during their time in the armed forces were not cancelled on discharge as they should have been. A crowdfunding campaign organised by David McMullen, an army veteran, aims to help meet the legal costs of the campaign. A government spokesperson said: “The Home Office and Ministry of Defence work closely with our foreign and Commonwealth recruits to make sure they are aware of how they and their families can attain settlement in the UK, and the costs involved. This includes offering financial advice, savings packages and loans to help personnel pay for visa costs should they wish to settle in the UK. “Whilst legal proceedings are ongoing, we cannot comment on these cases.”