Works by Rembrandt, Rubens, Titian, Vermeer, Van Dyck, Canaletto and others have been on the walls of one of the state rooms of Buckingham Palace for two centuries, admired by those invited to receptions as well as by visitors with audio guides shuffling through as part of the annual summer opening. Now, one of the world’s most spectacular collections of art is to be shown in a gallery exhibition setting for the first time, as impending work to overhaul the palace’s ageing wiring and antiquated lead pipes means they have to be temporarily removed. It’s a one-off opportunity, according to Desmond Shawe-Taylor, surveyor of the Queen’s pictures. In total 65 pieces of artwork will make the short journey to the Queen’s Gallery for a year long display. They will be seen for the first time in a “gallery context … as you would see them in a picture gallery instead of a palace,” said Shawe-Taylor. “You can see them reasonably well in the picture gallery but it is still a palace … they are double stacked in a sumptuous interior, most visitors would be going for the whole experience of the summer opening. Many people would not be saying: ‘Oh I’m really looking forward to seeing the Dutch genre painting.’” From December, visitors will be able to enjoy close-up one of the only 35 Vermeer paintings in the world – The Music Lesson, a work far more sexually charged than it may seem. The female subject is playing the instrument but clearly looking at her tutor while doing so, while in the foreground is an aphrodisiac pitcher of wine. There will also be two “extraordinary” Rembrandts, including one which has long been said to be the Queen’s favourite painting: The Shipbuilder and his Wife (1633). “It is an absolutely spectacular painting,” said Shawe-Taylor. “Not just because of the effect of light and realism … I mean the flesh of the two elderly figures is rendered with extraordinary, palpable realism. But it is also a very tender, almost comic depiction of a relationship between husband and wife, so it’s got a very modern feel to it.” Whether it is the Queen’s favourite is for her to confirm. “It is always said,” said Shawe-Taylor. “I have no more inside information than you.” About half the paintings were acquired by George IV, a monarch usually remembered as unintelligent and who spent too much money, but also someone who had a good eye and a passion for art. It was George who commissioned the architect John Nash to transform Buckingham House in to the principal royal residence in the 1820s. Part of the scheme was the creation of a picture gallery to show off the king’s paintings. The 2021 show is a first. “In a way, we’re obliged to do it,” said Shawe-Taylor. “We’ve got to get them out of the picture gallery for the building work.” • Masterpieces from Buckingham Palace is at the Queen’s Gallery, Buckingham Palace, 4 December 2020–January 2022.