Lazio forward Ciro Immobile equalled the Serie A scoring record for a single season when he was on target in his side’s 3-1 loss at Napoli in their final game of the season The 30-year-old took his tally to 36 goals, equalling the record set by Gonzalo Higuain for Napoli in the 2015-16 season. He also finished the season five goals clear of the next leading scorer, Cristiano Ronaldo of Juventus. Fabian Ruiz gave Napoli a ninth-minute lead with a shot from outside the penalty area which took a deflection. Lorenzo Insigne struck the post for Napoli before Immobile equalised in the 22nd minute, sweeping the ball between goalkeeper David Ospina and his near post from Adam Marusic’s pass. Napoli regained the lead from a penalty in the 54th minute, Insigne sending Thomas Strakosha the wrong way after Dries Mertens was caught by Marco Parolo when he was about to shoot. Matteo Politano added a third in stoppage time. Lazio finished fourth with 78 points and Coppa Italia winners Napoli ended the season seventh with 62 points. Champions Juventus suffered their first home league defeat for over two years when they finished the season by losing 3-1 against Roma. The Turin side, last beaten on their own ground in a Serie A match by Napoli in April 2018, have lost both their games since clinching the title one week ago and finished the campaign with 83 points, one ahead of Inter Milan. Juventus rested several regulars including Ronaldo but went ahead with a Higuaín goal in the fifth minute. Nikola Kalinic headed Roma level and Diego Perotti put the visitors ahead from a penalty before half time. Perotti added the third in the 52nd minute following a dazzling run by Nicolo Zaniolo. Inter clinched second place, disparagingly described by coach Antonio Conte last month as the “best of the losers”, when they ended Atalanta’s 19-match unbeaten run with a 2-0 away win. Danilo D’Ambrosio and Ashley Young scored in the opening 20 minutes as Inter finished the season with 82 points, one behind leaders Juventus. Atalanta, whose last defeat was at home to SPAL in Serie A in January, finished third with 78 points. Inter were off the mark in less than two minutes when Atalanta goalkeeper Pierluigi Gollini flapped at a corner and D’Ambrosio headed into the net. Gollini was injured in the process and had to be replaced by Marco Sportiello.Young extended Inter’s lead with a delightful goal after 20 minutes, cutting inside and then curling the ball past Sportiello from the edge of the area. AC Milan veteran Zlatan Ibrahimovic had a penalty saved but later scored as his side finished with a 3-0 win over Cagliari. The 38-year-old, possibly playing the final match of his second stint at the club, took his tally to 10 league goals since returning in January and became the oldest player to score 10 or more goals in a Serie A season.The Swede’s contract ended with Saturday’s match although he could extend it into next season according to some Italian media reports. AC Milan went ahead with an own goal by Ragnar Klavan in the 11th minute. Rafael Leao hit the post from a narrow angle but the ball bounced off the Estonian defender and into the net. Leao also rattled the crossbar before Milan were awarded a penalty for handball by Sebastian Walukiewicz one minute before half time. However, Ibrahimovic’s spot kick was saved by Alessio Cragno. Ibrahimovic made amends when he scored with an emphatic finish from Samu Castillejo’s pass in the 55th minute, and Castillejo exchanged passes with Giacoma Bonaventura to score the third two minutes later. Milan, unbeaten since the season restarted in June, finished sixth with 66 points and will play in the Europa League qualifying rounds.