Iran’s president said on Saturday that the US had suffered a humiliating defeat after the UN security souncil refused to extend an arms embargo on Tehran. US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, meanwhile, called the action a “serious mistake”. The UN security souncil on Friday voted on the US effort to extend the arms embargo on Iran. Russia and China voted against, while 11 members – including France, Germany and Britain – abstained. The US and the Dominican Republic were the only votes in favour. “I don’t remember the US preparing a resolution for months to strike a blow at the Islamic Republic of Iran, and it garners only one vote,” the Iranian president, Hassan Rouhani, said in a televised speech. “But the great success was that the US was defeated in this conspiracy with humiliation.” The UN arms embargo on Iran is due to expire under a 2015 nuclear deal between Iran and world powers, which allowed many international sanctions against Iran to be lifted in exchange for curbs on Iran’s nuclear programme. Donald Trump withdrew the US from the deal in 2018. “It’s a serious mistake, we regret that,” Pompeo said on Saturday of the security council vote in a news conference during a visit to Poland. The US could follow through on a threat to trigger a return of all UN sanctions on Iran using a provision in the nuclear deal, known as snapback. Diplomats have said the US could do this as early as next week, but that it would face a tough, messy battle. Israeli’s foreign minister, Gabi Ashkenazi, said the security council’s decision not to extend the arms embargo on Iran could lead to further Middle East instability. “The extremist regime in Iran doesn’t just finance terrorism: it takes an active part in terrorism through its branches around the world and uses it as a political tool. This behaviour represents a danger to regional and international stability,” Ashkenazi said in a statement on Saturday. The security council vote followed a proposal made by the Russian president Vladimir Putin for a summit of world leaders to avoid “confrontation” over the American threat to trigger a return of all UN sanctions on Tehran.