One tub of nutritional yeast will sort you out for the year, and the incredible cheesy flavour it brings more than justifies a trip to Holland & Barrett. (Once you have some, make kale crisps – you’ll never look back.) Serves 2 One block medium tofu (broken into chunks)1/2 tsp garlic powder1/2 tsp turmeric2 tbsp nutritional yeast1 tbsp olive oilSalt and black pepperSpring onions, peppers or tomatoes, chopped (whatever veg you have will do) In a frying pan over a medium heat, add the oil then the tofu chunks. Fry for a minute to allow some of the water to evaporate, then add in turmeric, garlic powder, nutritional yeast and your choice of vegetables. Fry for another 2 minutes to soften the vegetables and then season to taste with some salt and black pepper. The original pasta bake, and a reliable crowd-pleaser. The bonus of a vegan version is how much more nutritious it is. Serves 4 400g macaroni5 tbsp nutritional yeast1 tsp salt1 tsp garlic powder1 tbsp of lemon juice2 tbsp sun-dried tomato oil200g vegan cheddar, shredded1 1/2 tsp mustard500 ml oat milk (or plant milk) 50g vegan butter or 3 tbsp olive oil 50g plain flour1⁄4 tsp nutmeg For the breadcrumbs50g breadcrumbs3 sun-dried tomatoes, chopped 1 tbsp sun-dried tomato oil1 tbsp nutritional yeast Preheat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Butter a deep baking dish. Mix the milk with the garlic powder, salt, mustard, and two tablespoons of sun-dried tomato oil. Bring a big pot of water to the boil, season, and cook your pasta until al dente. Drain and set aside. Chop up the sun-dried tomatoes and stir into the breadcrumbs, with 1 tablespoon of sun-dried tomato oil and nutritional yeast. Mix well and set aside. Pour the olive oil into the empty saucepan, whisk in the flour and cook for 2 minutes. Slowly pour in the milk, whisking constantly. Season with the nutmeg and stir for another 5 minutes, until it is the consistency of double cream. Remove from the heat and stir in half of the cheese. When melted, add the pasta and stir well. Spread out half in your dish, sprinkle with some of the cheese, then add the rest of the pasta mix. Top with the remaining cheese, then the breadcrumb mix. Bake for 25-30 minutes until golden brown.