Germany is to ban large events until the end of this year, amid fears of a resurgence in coronavirus cases and as the World Health Organization warned that Europe was entering “a tricky moment” as children go back to school. The chancellor, Angela Merkel, has set out a new package of measures in discussions with leaders of federal states. It comes amid a worrying rise of infection rates in Germany not seen since April, and a similar uptick in Italy and France. Under the new rules, German football fans will not be allowed back into stadiums until 2021, later than had been hoped. Regulations on mask-wearing will also be toughened. Mass gatherings including festivals, concerts and big sporting events will remain prohibited. The draft text allows for exceptions in regions with low virus numbers and where participants are all locals. But it goes against a suggestion by Germany’s interior minister, Horst Seehofer, that Bundesliga football games might resume in October with socially distanced spectators. In a briefing in Geneva on Thursday Hans Kluge, WHO’s regional director for Europe, warned that there was growing evidence that young people were infecting others at social events. He acknowledged that classrooms were not a major vector for the spread of Covid-19 but said the beginning of the new school year marked a “tricky moment”. Kluge said that as winter approaches older people should protect themselves by getting a flu vaccine. He urged the young to play their part in preventing the spread of the virus by wearing masks, avoiding crowds and meeting outside. The situation was better than in February, he said. He added: “Vigilance is the key word”. “The younger people are not necessarily going to die from it but it’s a tornado with a long tail ... Younger people, particularly with the winter coming, will be in closer contact with the elder population,” Kluge pointed out. His comments came as France’s prime minister, Jean Castex, announced new measures to deal with an upsurge in cases. The country’s R rate of infection has climbed to 1.4, with a sharp rise in July and August. “The virus is spreading all over the country,” Castex warned. “The spread can be exponential if we do not react quickly.” Grandparents are being told not to collect their grandchildren from French schools, amid fears hospitals will be unable to cope. On Wednesday the health ministry reported 5,429 new daily infections, a new post-lockdown high and level not seen since a peak in early April. The compulsory wearing of face masks outdoors in Paris is set to be rolled out. At the moment masks are compulsory in much of the capital, but are not required in public parks and in less busy streets. The upward trend in cases was “undeniable”, Castex admitted. Italy clocked up its highest daily tally since early May, with 1,367 new cases reported on Thursday. The figures include a cluster from a nightclub in Sardinia belonging to the former Formula One team boss Flavio Briatore. More than 60 confirmed cases were linked to the venue. The club, Billionaire, hosted thousands of guests in August, including Italian and international VIPs. Briatore tested positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday after being admitted to hospital in Milan. Officials are now trying to trace visitors, some of whom gave false names and mobile numbers. In other developments: • India has passed 60,000 deaths from Covid-19, according to the country’s health ministry. It reported its highest daily case rise of more than 75,000, just below a record set by the US. • Global cases of coronavirus have passed 24m, with 812,000 deaths. The US has by far the most cases (5.8m), followed by Brazil (3.6m) and India (3.2m). The US leads the death toll (nearly 180,000), followed by Brazil (116,000), and Mexico (61,000). • Myanmar closed schools as coronavirus infections increased. It has reported more than 200 cases since last week after a month without any transmission. • Libya’s Tripoli-based government announced a 24-hour curfew to halt the spread of coronavirus amid protests over living conditions and corruption.