Roberto’s disappointing spell at West Ham is set to end after Real Valladolid reached an agreement to sign the goalkeeper for an undisclosed fee. The Spaniard struggled after joining West Ham on a free last year. The former Espanyol player came as Lukasz Fabianski’s deputy and was pushed into action when the Pole suffered a serious injury last September. It soon became clear Roberto was not good enough for the Premier League. He made a series of errors and West Ham slid into a relegation battle after picking up one point from the six league games he started. The pressure on Manuel Pellegrini to drop Roberto was huge and he eventually bowed to the pressure, bringing in David Martin for the 1-0 win at Chelsea in November. The signing of Roberto raised doubts over Pellegrini’s judgment and played a big part in the manager’s sacking in December. Roberto was recommended by Mario Husillos, who lost his job as director of football when Pellegrini was replaced by David Moyes. Moyes targeted a new back-up goalkeeper in January, signing Darren Randolph from Middlesbrough, and Roberto moved back to Spain, joining Alavés on loan. West Ham subsidised 75% of his £30,000-a-week wages there and have been looking for a buyer since the end of the season. Valladolid finished 13th in La Liga last season. West Ham, who are set to lose out to Crystal Palace in the race to sign Eberechi Eze from Queens Park Rangers, are looking to raise funds through sales. They have sold Jordan Hugill to Norwich in a deal that could rise to £5m and Albian Ajeti to Celtic for £4.5m. Jamie Vardy has signed a one-year contract extension with Leicester City. The former England striker has been rewarded after he scored 23 goals to claim the Premier League’s golden boot award. The deal will take Vardy to 2023, with the 33-year-old having joined from Fleetwood in 2012. He said: “The journey that I’ve been on with this football club is hard to describe, and although we’ve accomplished so much together already, I know that I’ve got so much more to achieve with this team.” Vardy follows James Maddison after the midfielder signed a new four-year deal this week. Nampalys Mendy also agreed a fresh two-year contract and 19-year-old Luke Thomas signed a long-term deal, although the left-back Ben Chilwell has joined Chelsea.