The eponymous subject of Alex from Glasto Dave and AJ Tracey’s barnstorming grime ditty, Thiago Silva, will be available on a free transfer once the final whistle signals the end of Sunday night’s Champions League final. At 35, the Paris Saint-Germain defender is past his prime, but it seems Frank Lampard could be of a mind the Brazilian veteran can help him plug a hole in Chelsea’s defence. Thiago is also attracting interest from Italy, where Fiorentina and Milan are reported to be keen. French sports daily L’Equipe say Arsenal are on the verge of signing Thiago’s compatriot Gabriel Magalhaes from Lille for £22m in a deal that could be completed later on Thursday. Everton and Napoli had also been courting the 22-year-old centre-back, who is expected to put pen to paper on a five-year contract at the Emirates. Missing from Liverpool’s pre-season touring party as he recovers from an unspecified injury, Harry Wilson is turning heads at Aston Villa and Leeds United. The Wales winger, who scored seven goals on loan at Bournemouth last season, is unlikely to get much playing time with the Premier League champions this season and is reported to be in favour of a permanent move elsewhere rather than another loan deal. Manchester United are eager to bring Jack Grealish to Old Trafford and it’s no secret the Aston Villa skipper is keen on going there. With goalkeeper Dean Henderson back at his parent club following a successful loan spell at Sheffield United, who have just signed Aaron Ramsdale from Bournemouth, Sergio Romero is now surplus to Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s requirements and assorted media outlets are reporting he may be offered to Villa as part of a swap deal to help entice Dean Smith to part company with his skipper. The Argentina international is understandably tired of his role as bench-warmer at United after five years at the club and may have no shortage of offers. Leeds, Everton and Chelsea are also reported to be interested in securing his services. Having had two offers for Brighton central defender Ben White rejected, Leeds are upping the ante to offer £25m for the 22-year-old who was so impressive during their promotion campaign while on loan at Elland Road. Interest in White abounds, with both Liverpool and Chelsea believed to be monitoring his situation with interest. Brighton are reported to be uninterested in selling their young star and have offered him a new and improved contract which remains unsigned. Brentford striker Ollie Watkins is a player in big demand and looks a shoo-in to be playing Premier League football next season despite his club’s rather heroic failure to win promotion from the Championship. West Brom, Aston Villa and Crystal Palace are all prepared to give him an opportunity to strut his stuff at the highest level, but will have to shell out £25m for the privilege. The Baggies are also keen on bringing Brentford defender Rico Henry to The Hawthorns. And finally, Leeds are giving £10m Rangers winger Ryan Kent the glad eye, while Fulham have joined the unseemly scramble of Premier League clubs hoping to sign England striker Callum Wilson from relegated Bournemouth.