Apple on Thursday removed the enormously popular video game Fortnite from its App Store for violating its in-app payment guidelines, in a move likely to escalate debate over the tech giant’s grip over the industry. Its removal from the App Store came after Fortnite circumvented Apple’s in-app payment system and 30% fee, encouraging users to pay the gaming company directly. Epic Games responded to the removal by announcing legal action against the iPhone maker, and calling on supporters to “join the fight” against Apple in a video spoof of the tech giant’s famous “1984” commercial. Fortnite’s dramatic move represents one of the most public challenges yet of Apple’s allegedly monopolistic practices. “Apple’s removal of Fortnite is yet another example of Apple flexing its enormous power in order to impose unreasonable restraints and unlawfully maintain its 100% monopoly over the iOS In-App Payment Processing Market,” Epic said in a statement. Apple takes a cut of between 15% and 30% for most payments made inside apps, though there are some exceptions for companies that already have a credit card on file with iPhone customers if they also offer an in-app payment that would benefit Apple. “The fact that their (Epic) business interests now lead them to push for a special arrangement does not change the fact that these guidelines create a level playing field for all developers and make the store safe for all users,” Apple said in a statement. Fortnite, produced by Epic Games, is one of the world’s most popular video games, particularly among young people, and announced in May it had reached more than 350m registered players. The App Store has been a a focal point in recent antitrust hearings in Congress. The historic hearing saw Tim Cook, Apple’s CEO, and other tech leaders including Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook, Sundar Pichai of Google, and Jeff Bezos of Amazon, face a grilling from lawmakers over the companies’ dominance of the online world. In one line of questioning, the representative Hank Johnson of Georgia told Cook that Apple’s rules for the App store represent “an enormous amount of power”. Cook argued the App Store does not constitute a monopoly because it does not charge the vast majority of apps to list there. He said 84% of apps are not charged anything and Apple has not increased commissions on apps since 2008. Agencies contributed reporting