Formula One has confirmed the remainder of its calendar for the 2020 season. Four more races have now been finalised to conclude the season in Turkey, Bahrain and Abu Dhabi, taking the total to a potential 17 meetings this year, should none be adversely impacted by coronavirus. Before this weekend’s Belgian Grand Prix, F1 presented what it intends to be the conclusion to the schedule for the 2020 season. The Turkish Grand Prix at Istanbul Park will be held on 15 November, followed by two races at Bahrain on 29 November and 6 December and then the season finale at Abu Dhabi on 13 December. It is understood F1 has been looking into holding the second Bahrain race at the Sakhir circuit on an alternate layout of the usual GP track. Istanbul Park hosted the Turkish Grand Prix between 2005 and 2011, then it ceased to do so for commercial reasons. F1 has gone to considerable lengths to ensure the sport was able to resume racing during the coronavirus outbreak and was the first international sport to return. It has thus far been very successful in operating a strict testing regime and with preventive protocols in place and to manage 17 races given the threat of the virus will be considered a great success. F1 has stated that a number of the remaining races will be open to a limited number of spectators although is yet to confirm at which meetings. Reaching a finalised calendar of 17 events was crucial for the sport. F1 is required to host a minimum of 15 to meet contractual obligations to broadcasters. This calendar allows leeway for two races to be dropped should the pandemic make hosting them impossible. The race this weekend in Spa is the beginning of a run of three over three weeks that includes Monza and the first F1 race to be held at Italy’s Mugello. The next round after these meetings will be held at Sochi in Russia on 27 September, followed by the German GP at the Nürburgring on 11 October. Portugal’s Autodromo Internacional do Algarve in Portimão will host its first F1 race on 25 October, followed by a return for F1 to Imola in Italy on 1 November. Belgian GP, Spa, 30 AugItalian GP, Monza, 6 SeptTuscan GP, Mugello, 13 SeptRussian GP, Sochi, 27 SeptEifel GP, Nürburgring, 11 OctPortuguese GP, Portimão, 25 OctEmilia Romagna GP, Enzo e Dino Ferrari, 1 NovTurkish GP, Istanbul Park, 15 NovBahrain GP, Sakhir, 29 NovSakhir GP, Sakhir, 6 DecAbu Dhabi GP, Yas Marina, 13 Dec  “We are proud to announce that Turkey, Bahrain and Abu Dhabi will be part of our 2020 season,” said F1’s chairman, Chase Carey. “This year has presented Formula 1 and the world with an unprecedented challenge and we want to pay tribute to everyone across Formula 1, the FIA, the teams, and our partners who have made this possible.” The debut meeting in Vietnam had remained in discussion for inclusion in the latter part of the season but has not been included in this final schedule. An official announcement confirming that the race therefore will not be taking place is expected shortly.