There is still time for a change of heart but connections of Kameko are minded to send him to York next week for the Juddmonte International, rather than France on Sunday for the Jacques le Marois. It will mean a first attempt at a mile and a quarter for the Guineas winner, whose best distance is not yet established. “I think he’s going to go to York,” said Andrew Balding, the colt’s trainer, on Wednesday evening. “It’s a change of plan but I’ve just spoken to the clerk of the course at York, who feels they won’t get dramatic amounts of rain between now and Wednesday.” Just the same, Kameko was left in the Marois at the latest entry stage on Wednesday, making him one of just nine possible runners in the Deauville contest. That would mean staying at a mile, the trip at which he won the Guineas and the Vertem Futurity, but was also an unlucky fourth in the Sussex a fortnight ago. Kameko tried a mile and a half in the Derby but the way that race was run made for anything but a satisfactory test. The intermediate distance might yet prove ideal. “It’ll be very interesting,” said Balding. “I just don’t know. I’ve always felt 10 furlongs would bring out the best in him but we won’t know until we try. It’s been a funny season, I just feel like we’re experimenting with him the whole time.” Kameko saw little daylight during the Sussex and was never able to express his ability but Balding can take some consolation. “We’d like to have had a proper crack at them but, look, he didn’t have a hard race as a result, so he should be bouncing back.” In the York race, Kameko will be an intriguing representative of the three-year-olds against what Balding describes as “a strong older generation”, headed by Ghaiyyath and Lord North. The Marois features Palace Pier, Persian King, Circus Maximus and Romanised. Mohaather, the Sussex winner, was withdrawn from the Marois on Wednesday and his trainer, Marcus Tregoning, can imagine him going straight to the QEII on 17 October. “I’d like to have a run before then but to be honest there’s nothing suitable. There’s a big gap,” Tregoning said. Tregoning will consider the Prix du Moulin at Longchamp next month but that may become impractical if travellers to France are by then required to go into quarantine on their return. What should have been an interesting Salisbury card is coming apart at the seams because the track was forecast lots of rain last night and got none. The going is firm, which many trainers would rather not race on, and so there has been a slew of non-runners, leading to just two runners in the final handicap and a favourite who is 1-25 in places. Almareekh (2.50) is still just about backable at 2-1, six of her rivals having stood their ground. Quite well related and bred to appreciate fast ground, she was still learning when scoring on her handicap debut last month and another 4lb is neither here nor there for a filly with more to offer. The Sir Michael Stoute yard, bereaved yesterday by the loss of Coral Pritchard Gordon, has its runners in peak condition just now. Bath will be tricky for jockeys as well as punters, with bits of rain expected today on fast ground. Fortunately, there is still Hamilton, where the going should be just on the soft side. Alix James (3.10) made all at Musselburgh last time and doubtless the plan will be to do the same over a shorter trip. He is well drawn for that, against the stands rail, and has the look of an improving youngster who may prove hard to pass. He comes from an in-form yard and could be shorter than the current 11-2. Pour Me A Drink (3.40) is back on the kind of surface that worked so well for him at Ayr two runs ago. He got involved in a pace burn-up last time but the in-form Kevin Stott is an interesting booking and perhaps this race will work out better for him. He’s well handicapped and appeals at 13-2. Salisbury 12.45 Olivia Mary 1.15 Modmin 1.45 Little Downs 2.20 Queen Power 2.50 Almareekh 3.20 Iron Heart 3.50 Tuscan Oasis 4.20 Burguillos 4.55 Prince Llyr (nb) Hamilton 1.35 Better By Far 2.10 Lady Celia 2.40 Credible 3.10 Alix James (nap) 3.40 Pour Me A Drink 4.15 Throne Hall 4.50 Tigerten 5.20 Millie The Minx 5.50 Be Bold Bath 3.55 Silvestris 4.25 Swift Approval 5.00 The Golden Unicorn 5.30 Onebaba 6.00 Waseem Faris 6.30 Star Prize 7.00 Songo 7.30 Derry Boy 8.00 Agent Basterfield Be Bold (5.50) is worth a look at a similar price in the last, having shown his first form of the year last time. A bit of cut seems important to him and a good claimer is booked.