Born in London, Simon Mayo, 61, joined BBC Radio 1 in 1986 and presented Radio 2 Drivetime from 2010 to 2018. He is now a host on Scala Radio. He is the author of the Itch children’s series, and publishes his debut thriller, Knife Edge, on 20 August. He is married with two sons and a daughter, and lives in London. What is your greatest fear?I am a hardcore Spurs fan. My main fear is that José Mourinho is going to stay as manager – and that’s going to be bad for my team and bad for my health. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?I have a tendency to be quite unenthusiastic about things. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Lateness, pomposity, and those who seem to have a complete inability to disagree with someone quietly and with good manners. What was your most embarrassing moment?Not recognising Naomi Campbell when she came on the radio programme to wish me a happy birthday. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought?My glasses. They were more than a grand. What is your most treasured possession?My glasses. What makes you unhappy?Worries about our family’s future, the state of our union and the sheer incompetence of our leaders. All are connected. What do you most dislike about your appearance?That I look tired, even when I’m not. If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose?The Ramones, specifically because they played a gig at Warwick University in 1978 and I was there but didn’t go. Who would play you in the film of your life?Gorgeous George MacKay, then lovely Brad Pitt, and Carry On’s Charles Hawtrey to finish off. What is your most unappealing habit?I chew the inside of my mouth. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?A BBC insider said that I was too ugly for television. What does love feel like?Kindness, security, being at home. What was the best kiss of your life?The most memorable was with DJ Alan “Fluff” Freeman. I was doing breakfast for Radio 1 and he had just been re-signed. He was a radio god. He opened the door to the studio, said, “Simon, darling!”, put his hand over my mouth and kissed the back of his hand. It was hilarious. What has been your biggest disappointment?Feeling as though I had to leave Radio 2 to get my life back on track. I had every intention of being David Jacobs or Brian Matthew and going on until I was 127, but it didn’t turn out like that. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?A new spine. What do you consider your greatest achievement?I was the subject of a celeb cartoon in Private Eye. I’ve a copy hanging in the downstairs toilet. How would you like to be remembered?The friend behind the microphone. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?When all is said and done, there are very few better things than a plate of crisp poppadoms, a jar of mango chutney and some onion pickle.