Former St Kilda footballer Robert Muir says he has been “overwhelmed” by the reaction to a story detailing his experience of racism in football. Muir opened up in an interview with the ABC which published a feature article on Sunday revealing his story of persecution throughout his 68-game career in the 1970s and 80s and the hardships he had suffered since. It led to St Kilda apologising “unreservedly” to Muir and his family and committing to supporting the 66-year-old, while also drawing responses from the AFL and other clubs. A Go Fund Me page set up on Sunday to help pay for a shoulder operation raised more than $100,000 within the first 24 hours and had reached $112,105 by Tuesday afternoon. “In the last two days, I have been overwhelmed by the reaction to my story and want to thank everyone who has sent me kind wishes,” Muir said in a statement. “I appreciate it greatly, because for most of my life people have not understood the difficulties I’ve faced because of racism and trauma. “Although the recognition of the St Kilda Football Club and the AFL community has made me feel more valued, and I look forward to forming an ongoing relationship with them, for the time being I would appreciate some space.” Muir said he now wanted to process his feelings and prioritise his family and his mental health. In the story, Muir detailed examples of racist abuse he had received from opposition players and fans and the lack of support he had received from St Kilda and the league. He also recalled when one of St Kilda’s star players urinated on him after walking into the showers following his first training session with the club in 1974. In his statement, Muir made note of the former teammates and opponents who had attempted to get in touch and said a time would come when they could reconnect. St Kilda have also set up an email address to allow those with a personal connection to Muir to contact him and will pass messages onto the 66-year-old when he is ready to read them. “Although I have suffered greatly because of my involvement in the game, my love for football and for St Kilda remains,” Muir said. “I missed out on the support I needed when I played, but I am glad it is being offered now. “I’m also pleased that the many brilliant Indigenous footballers currently playing the game are finally getting the support they require. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have made a huge contribution to AFL football. All we ask for in return is respect.”