This recession, more than any previous, has hurt women workers as much as men. It means the recovery will need to be as concerned with restoring women’s employment as it is with men’s. For the first time there is a worry about whether the level of women working will return to pre-recession levels. It is not quite true that all recessions are alike, but historically men have always suffered more than women. One of the almost counter-intuitive aspects of recessions in Australia is that for the most, part women’s employment barely falls. This aspect of course excludes younger workers – whether you are male or female, being young is the biggest strike against you in a recession. Young workers of both genders are always the first to go and often the last to come back. For prime age workers (aged 25-64), however, you can easily chart periods of recession by just looking at the percentage of men of that age with a job: In a recession the rate of prime-aged men with jobs collapses. Afterwards some of the lost jobs are slowly regained, but never enough to get back to the pre-recession point. Then another recession occurs and down it goes again. This is even more obvious for the rate of prime-aged men working full-time: The recovery of full-time work is always weaker, due to shifts towards “greater flexibility” and more part-time work. Crucially since the GFC there has been no recovery at all. Prior to the GFC, 76% of prime-aged men worked full-time. Just before the pandemic hit it was down to 73.4%. If history is any guide, we will not see that level again. But a very different picture merges when we look a women’s employment rates: While the rate of prime-aged women employed either stagnates or slightly falls during a recession, it’s essentially just a blip on the path of increased women in work. Even when we look at women’s full-time employment we see nothing like the drastic falls that occur with male labour, and certainly no sense that the pre-recession peaks are never again to be reached: Women of course do suffer during recessions. Their unemployment rate rises and it would be wrong to suggest that getting work is easy for women when the economy falters: But the ever increasing employment rates reflect that women are now much more likely to work than they were 30 or 40 years ago. A recession might stall social change, but it doesn’t stop women becoming more independent and more accepted in the workforce. It also reflects that in past recessions they have mostly smashed male-dominated industries. But not this time. In both the 1990s recession and the GFC, five of the top six job losses occurred in industries dominated by men. But in this current crisis, the top three industries to lose jobs are in industries where women make up a majority of workers: And while clearly many of those workers are under 25 with weak attachment to the workforce, prime-aged women have for the first time suffered greater loss of work than men during a recession: And this brings a new wrinkle to the recovery. In the past, the focus could always be on male employment. Governments could aim to get manufacturing and construction going again and know that women’s employment would to a large extent take care of itself. Yes, policies to encourage women’s participation were needed – better access to child care, for example – but societal change was always there to help drive the recovery. This time it’s different. A major problem with recovering from a recession is that not all businesses open their doors again, and many that do, do so with fewer staff than before. This can be because there is either not enough work or because the owner/manager has determined that they can make do with fewer staff. In the past this has meant men have much more than women struggled to get back to square because they were the ones losing work. This time many more women are going to have to deal with the problems that men faced in the 1980s and 1990s. And so the question of the recovery is not just about whether we will ever see as many men in full-time work as before, but women as well. Ever since the surge of women entering the workforce in the 1980s and 1990s not even recessions have halted their growing numbers. But with a recession that has specifically affected industries that are large employers of women we are now faced with the uncharted territory of women suffering as greatly from a recession as men. And thus, the government will need to specifically target their work as well and not just hope societal change will do the job for it.