Old dog, meet new tricks. RB Leipzig will meet Paris Saint-Germain in the semi-finals after a dramatic late winner from the substitute Tyler Adams, whose goal knocked out a resilient but uninspiring Atlético Madrid. Dani Olmo had opened the scoring soon after the interval but João Félix’s penalty seemed to have forced extra time in Lisbon. Atlético looked the likelier winners but Leipzig, who hardly missed the Chelsea-bound Timo Werner, found the extra edge. Love them or hate them, they add new life to the last four. In preparing Leipzig for their journey through uncharted waters, Julian Nagelsmann opted to roll back the years. That is relative, of course, given the club’s tender age, but Werner’s replacement is their closest thing to a totem who has seen it all. Yussuf Poulsen, who was perhaps their first “statement” signing when he joined the then-third tier side in 2013, was tasked with leading the line and also wore the captain’s armband. A touch of experience seemed appropriate given the knowhow with which Diego Simeone’s gnarled machine, once upstarts themselves, navigate their way around this stage. But Leipzig began with the tempo and freshness that have become familiar; when they missed a glorious opportunity to score within four minutes, it had little to do with the reshaping of their front line. The chance fell to Marcel Halstenberg, their left-sided centre-back, after Renan Lodi had half-cleared a devilish delivery from Dani Olmo. He was eight yards out and had a clear sight of goal, but boomed a volley over the bar and Atlético had an invitation to dig in. For the moment it was Leipzig who continued to press, Dayot Upamecano bringing the ball purposefully out from defence and teeing up Angeliño for a miscued effort that Kieran Trippier hacked away. Atlético had squad issues of their own, the important forward Ángel Correa joining Sime Vrsaljko in missing out after testing positive for Covid-19, and continued to be tested by their opponents’ crisp, structured movement. When Atlético did show some initiative, though, Stefan Savic looped a header that stretched Peter Gulacsi. Then they earned a corner and José Giménez charged onto the delivery, seeing his header blocked at point-blank range. Saúl Ñíguez and Gulacsi pursued the loose ball, the Spain international taking a tumble. On the side, Simeone screamed blue murder and made his own VAR signal. A check did ensue, taking more than two minutes in the background while play continued, and decided any slight contact from Gulacsi was irrelevant. The tempo dropped, Leipzig suggesting they were happy to allow Atlético a reasonable share of the ball. It meant the first half morphed into a slightly attritional tussle between teams who knew the cost of a counter-punch. Commitment remained at the full-blooded levels required of any game coached by Simeone, one eye-watering aerial clash between Halstenberg and Savic bringing a lengthy stoppage before the latter returned in bandages. Beyond a downwards header by Upamecano, rising to meet another set-piece, that flew straight at a grateful Jan Oblak there was little else to suggest the tie might open up any time soon. Thank goodness, then, for the wonders a half-time break can instil. Leipzig came out as they had in the opening period, zipping the ball from side to side, and picked the lock with a marvellous goal. The buildup was studious: nothing fancy but precise, lucid and patient enough to wait until Marcel Sabitzer had space on the right to deliver. His cross required superb reactions from Olmo, running in at relatively close quarters, and duly brought them. Olmo’s header, angled delightfully across Oblak, was perfect and if Simeone had hoped to churn out a result then this one was no longer going to go by the book. The outstanding Upamecano tried to double the lead but Oblak held his daisycutter. Simeone immediately introduced Félix and the 20-year-old sparked a thoroughly dreary performance. First he played in Lodi, who tumbled in the box with Upamecano close but was rightly booked for an egregious dive. Atlético were hardly bashing at the door, but Félix had imbued their attacks with personality and he found himself clear after a canny one-two. Lucas Klostermann clipped him and this time the penalty was clear. So was Félix’s head as he beat Gulacsi from the spot. Leipzig had threatened on the counter although one miscue by Poulsen, slashed out for a throw-in, summoned Werner’s ghost for the first time. Once level, it was Atlético whose attacks shimmered with threat. Yannick Carrasco, previously invisible, saw a shot deflected wide but then saw his team denied by an even more significant snick. Adams, found 20 yards out after fine play from Sabitzer and Angeliño, had a go and saw a huge touch off Savic give Oblak no chance. It was the American’s first goal for Leipzig and history was made.