Multidisciplinary artist Larry Achiampong was born in 1984 and grew up in Bethnal Green and Dagenham, east London, in Ghanaian households. He received his MA in sculpture from the Slade School of Art in 2008. His work, which mainly looks at pop culture, class and colonialism, has been shown at Tate Modern and Somerset House in London, the 57th Venice Biennale and the Institute for Creative Arts in Cape Town. His most recent exhibition was When the Sky Falls at the John Hansard Gallery in Southampton and his latest work, Sanko-time, is part of The Line, London’s free art walk. It’s an audio piece that accompanies the cable-car ride from Greenwich Peninsula to the Royal Docks. It can also be heard anywhere in the world at the-line.org. Mordechai by Khruangbin I passed my driving test in January and, as I’m based in Essex, I’ve been going to London to check on my mum. I’ve been listening to albums in the car and Khruangbin’s Mordechai is so special. It brings musical flavours from around the planet and it feels like this Texas-based trio really studied their craft. Some artists have an interest in a certain culture and it can feel derivative, but Khruangbin have created a psychedelic, soulful mix of sounds. The drummer, Donald Johnson, has got such an effortless flow it actually reminds me of Tony Allen. I don’t think the hole that Allen has left will ever be filled, but in the meantime it’s nice to have Johnson’s drums for company. Watchmen (HBO/Sky Atlantic) I was a fan of Alan Moore’s Watchmen comic and even the Zack Snyder film was OK. But what writer Damon Lindelof and actors Regina King and Yahya Abdul-Mateen II created with this series filled the holes that I felt were in the comics. It concerned me that the conversations around race and gender in the original comics weren’t as important as they could have been. This show opened things up in a way I was completely surprised by. I must watch it again: it’s like a deep book where you pick up on symbolism and have to reread. The Tulsa massacre in the first episode was so powerfully written and shot. The way they looked at the diasporic American perspective… it was incredible. Splatoon 2, Nintendo Switch This is a third-person shooter team game. Your avatar morphs between human and squid and they have weapons but the guns are full of ink. Third-person shooters are usually violent but this isn’t. If your character is splatted, it just explodes into ink. I’ve been playing this for years and I’m still really into it. It nails aspects of popular culture such as mods and skinheads, and it’s an energetic and social game. I’ve played it a lot with my son and I’ve made friends playing it online. Purfleet and Rainham Marshes I spent some of my childhood in Dagenham and then moved out to Purfleet-on-Thames from London in February. The nature and quiet in Rainham Marshes is incredible and Purfleet is also very interesting. It’s maritime, but not like I’ve known before. It’s very industrial. There are derelict areas in the docks that have rusted away, but they’ve beautifully rusted away. I’ve sat out and spent time there this summer and I’m looking forward to seeing how it changes with the seasons. It’s been nice to be able to walk around and have contemplative moments. Skating I grew up skating with hand-me-down and secondhand skates. But I recently bought myself some new quad skates. I haven’t skated for 25 or so years and it’s strange rekindling those muscle memories. I thought they were gone, but not at all. To be outside, especially in the heat and when there aren’t many people about, has been so special. Skating was the thing I loved as much as drawing when I was a kid. That has become my job and, for a while in a naive way, I used to dream about competing at the X Games. It didn’t happen but it’s nice to find that energy again as an adult. Mum’s jollof rice Even though I’ve moved out of my mum’s place in London, she always insists on making packed meals for me to take away after a visit to hers. Mum’s awesome, she hooks me up with some of my favourite dishes – omo tuo [rice balls] with peanut soup and jollof rice. When it comes to these dishes, I accept no substitutes – if it ain’t Mum’s recipe, then I’m staring at my plate with a critical eye!