Belarusians are preparing for a second Sunday of massed rallies against Alexander Lukashenko, after the country’s authoritarian president told his military to be on full combat alert to deal with supposed external threats. Last Sunday saw the biggest demonstration in the country’s recent history, over Lukashenko’s rigged election win and subsequent police violence against protesters. The protest has continued throughout the week, with the riot police largely absent, but Lukashenko has promised to “solve” the issue of protests within a few days, leaving some wary of a new crackdown. This Sunday’s rally, dubbed “the march for a new Belarus” by its organisers, is meant to show that the protest movement is not losing steam, and events are planned in the capital, Minsk, and cities across the country. However, rainy weather as well as measures taken by the authorities, including putting roadblocks at the entrances to Minsk, may reduce the turnout. While last Sunday the strength of the protest made the regime appear to be tottering, over the week Lukashenko has reasserted control. On Saturday, he addressed a rally in the western city of Grodno, where a carefully assembled crowd cheered him and waved the red-green national flag. He told the crowd that without him the country would collapse in the face of foreign aggression. He said: “We would no longer be our own masters on this square. They would have already chopped us up, chewed us up and spat us out.” Born in August 1954 in Kopys, Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko has served as president of Belarus since the establishment of the office in July 1994. On his initial election, Lukashenko set about establishing an effective dictatorship, sustained by shamelessly rigged elections. Over the years, Lukashenko has offered his people a sort of Soviet-lite system that prizes tractor production and grain harvests over innovation and political freedoms, and the key part of his political offer has always been political and economic stability. Lukashenko tried to push this line again into the run-up to 2020’s disputed presidential vote, painting Belarus as an island of stability in a world buffeted by economic crises, political unrest and coronavirus. But the scale of discontent has shown that for many Belarusians, this messaging will no longer work. The 2020 elections have been described as the deepest crisis he has faced in his career, and in order to secure his supposedly crushing victory, Lukashenko required what appears to be some of the most brazen vote-rigging in recent European history. He appears to have subsequently forced his main opponent, Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, into exile. After the election, in a congratulatory message, Vladimir Putin urged Lukashenko to consider further economic and legal integration with Russia, which the opposition has warned would undermine Belarus’s sovereignty. The man sometimes described as “Europe’s last dictator” may have engineered a sixth term in office, but the balance of power has shifted away from him in a way few would have thought possible even a month ago. The EU has said it does not recognise his election, and mass protests against his rule have continued in Belarus. Lukashenko denounced the protests as backed by western countries, and ordered the army to defend western Belarus. He also visited a military range, where he suggested Nato troops were preparing to invade. “The fatherland is in danger,” he said, denouncing the protests as backed by western countries. “It involves taking the most stringent measures to protect the territorial integrity of our country,” he told commanders. Lukashenko reiterated that he had asked Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, to intervene and help. Putin has so far refrained from direct intervention but on Friday held a meeting of his security council to discuss events in the country. Nato put out a statement on Saturday denying any military buildup on the border with Belarus. “As we have already made clear, Nato poses no threat to Belarus or any other country and has no military buildup in the region. Our posture is strictly defensive. We remain vigilant, ready to deter any aggression and defend our allies. We call on Minsk to demonstrate full respect for fundamental rights,” said Oana Lungescu, the alliance’s spokeswoman. The European Union has denounced the Belarusian election as invalid, and called on Lukashenko to negotiate with opposition leaders, including Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, who stood against Lukashenko for the presidency but fled to Lithuania the day after the vote after receiving threats. The US deputy secretary of state, Stephen Biegun, was due to visit Vilnius next week and meet with Tikhanovskaya, her representatives told journalists. On Friday, Tikhanovskaya gave her first press conference since leaving Belarus, in which she said she would return to the country only when it was safe for her to do so. Belarusians “would never accept” Lukashenko’s continued leadership, she said. Lukashenko has made it clear that he does not plan concessions, handing out awards to KGB and riot police involved in the recent crackdown for “impeccable service” and saying he would rather die than hold new elections. His prosecutors have launched a criminal case over the creation of a coordination council set up by opposition leaders to oversee a potential transition of power. Two of its leaders were called to questioning by investigators on Friday. Protest leaders insist this will not deter them, and say they are ready for the long haul. “We know it won’t finish immediately and we know we have a journey ahead of us,” Pavel Latushko, a former culture minister who sits on the new coordination council, told the Guardian on Friday. “But it won’t be a long journey. People won’t agree to live in the old way again. Even if they manage to extinguish the protest today, then tomorrow it will re-emerge with even greater force.”