The pivotal scene in the wonderful Oscar‑winning film Parasite comes about halfway through, with the impoverished Kim family gathered in the living room of a luxurious mansion they do not own, glugging expensive whisky they have not bought, enjoying a life that is not theirs. Through various nefarious schemes they have all managed to worm their way into the confidences of the fabulously wealthy Park family and, with their hosts away on a camping trip, they can simply spread out on the opulent chaise longue, look out over a perfect manicured lawn and imagine this all belongs to them. For a few crushingly fleeting moments they can taste what it feels like to be rich. They’ve crashed the party. They belong. No spoilers, but it will not shock you to learn that this idyllic state of affairs does not necessarily endure until the end of the film. After all, Parasite is a parable of class warfare, about haves and have-nots, about the insuperable gravity of wealth and the unerring efficiency with which it shakes down imposters. In short, there’s a difference between belonging and belonging, and perhaps it’s the difference between losing 2-1 and feeling vaguely jubilant about the fact that it wasn’t 6-1. Perhaps it’s the fleeting illusion of parity in a game that offers nothing of the kind. For once the confetti had blown to the winds, once Manchester City’s victorious players had left the pitch, once Aston Villa’s fans had filed out of their seats and back up Wembley Way, what remained of this game? Just the throbbing memories of a match that for an hour was far closer than it might have been and yet went the way everyone knew it would anyway. Aston Villa fought. Aston Villa hauled their way heroically back into the game. Aston Villa threw everything they had into the final dramatic minutes, drained every last drop of sweat from their bodies, sang themselves hoarse. Meanwhile, Manchester City won. Take nothing away from City, of course: even at their rarefied level of play, winning trophies on their industrial scale takes more than just skill. Their record in finals – seven in a row now, including Community Shields – is too clinical to be coincidental and all the more impressive when you consider the barren decades that preceded them. Even so, there were points during this match when they were so superior – not just better than Villa but extravagantly, insouciantly better – that it ceased to feel much like a cup final at all. How many cup finals end with one team enjoying 71% of possession, taking 22 shots to five, with their goalkeeper completing more passes than any of the opposition’s front three? Again: this isn’t a condemnation of one side or the other. It’s just, you know, weird. One of the more animated debates among Villa fans over the past week was a hypothetical question: if forced to choose, would they rather lose this game and stay in the Premier League, or win it and get relegated? Back and forth they went all week: silverware equals glory, memories, European trips, the very stuff of which football is made. Yes, but relegation leads to wilderness, mediocrity and a socking financial black hole. Like all the best debates you could make a case for both sides. But, in a way, the very existence of the question served as an acrid reminder of Villa’s place in the world. For clubs of their stature, outside the elite looking in, there can be no such thing as uncompromised success. All pleasures must be caveated, all triumphs contextualised. No wonder 17th place in the Premier League can feel adjacent to winning a cup. Once you have spent as long on the fringes as Villa, achieving glory and averting ruin begin to look like the same thing. And so if you’re a club of Villa’s size, what do you do about all this? Bide your time, build from a strong base and hope for the best? Invest in the academy and training ground, try to improve by tiny increments? That certainly seems to be the plan for now under the owners, Nassef Sawiris and Wes Edens. And yet the idea of a Villa ever seriously challenging a City – not just for an hour but for a season or even a decade – feels more remote with every passing year, with every new financial settlement, with every proposed change to the Champions League format. How long do you keep playing a game that is rigged against you? In the meantime, perhaps, you just recalibrate what winning looks like. This is a problem that all medium-sized teams face these days, whether it’s Villa and their 24 years without silverware, or Everton with their 25, West Ham’s 40, Newcastle’s 51. Arsène Wenger was widely pilloried for suggesting fourth place was akin to a trophy but perhaps this was just his way of deriving some meaning from the vastly uneven financial landscape he faced. And so for Villa perhaps avoiding a trouncing is their trophy. Fighting like tigers in the second half: a trophy. Forcing City to bring on Kevin De Bruyne: a trophy. Claudio Bravo’s late save: a trophy. Never giving up and singing your team off the Wembley turf like heroes: a trophy. It may not be the sort of trophy you can plonk in a cabinet or buff up and show the grandchildren. But for now, and for the foreseeable future, it may just have to do.