On a historic day for Britain, all of the national newspapers have given over their front pages to news of the unprecedented coronavirus lockdown. The Guardian says today that Boris Johnson will order police to enforce a strict coronavirus lockdown, with gatherings of more than two people banned. The headline: “PM: Stay at home, this is a national emergency”. Guardian front page, Tuesday 24 March 2020 – PM: 'Stay at home, this is a national emergency' pic.twitter.com/q3etUT6JnA The Sun has “House arrest” as its headline imposed on top of some bleak artwork imposing the Union flag on a padlock. The Daily Mail gives the first 22 pages of the paper to Johnson’s Monday evening announcement. Describing it as an unprecedented move, it reported all non-essential shops would close during a lockdown that is expected to last at least three weeks, and that police would have powers to fine those breaking the new rules. “Lockdown Britain” is the headline. Daily Mail: Lockdown Britain #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/GZ1KVmGKbM The Daily Express tells its readers: “You must stay at home … for all our sakes.” Daily Express: You must stay at home...for all our sakes #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/t21hdy0eG7 The Daily Mirror reports the prime minister as saying only drastic action can help the NHS cope with the coronavirus outbreak. “National lockdown,” is the headline. Tomorrow's #frontpage - National Lockdown #tomorrowspaperstoday https://t.co/yUaEXLBzEc pic.twitter.com/qLsSShSttc The Times goes with: “You must stay at home” and says fines for breaking the new rules will range from £30 to £1,000 once legislation passes on Thursday. It carries a sketch from Quentin Letts who notes that the “absence of melodrama” in Johnson’s televised address made it all the more striking and urgent. The Times: ‘You must stay at home’ #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/CT9UhpQ9T5 The Daily Telegraph stands alone with its take: “End of freedom”. In a separate story lower down it carries criticism by former health secretary Jeremy Hunt, who says authorities are focusing more on social distancing than testing and tracking cases in the community. The Daily Telegraph: End of freedom #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/4eulyL9PEw The FT says: “Johnson forced to close Britain in bid to halt rapid spread of virus” alongside a picture of a lonely figure on the street. It also gives prominence to a letter from the editor, Roula Khalaf, in which she explains the challenges of putting the paper together with many journalists at home, and why some FT articles are no longer behind a paywall. Just published: front page of the Financial Times, UK edition, Tuesday 24 March https://t.co/b0pZNpgsMI pic.twitter.com/hcFD0i4WVc Metro says “Britain on lockdown” and features a large image of a crammed tube train to illustrate why stricter measures were needed. “Find the gap,” is the picture story headline. Tuesday's front page:BRITAIN ONLOCKDOWN#tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers #skypapers pic.twitter.com/Tu2Quh9yrG The i says: “Lockdown UK: Public told: stay indoors.” It reports Johnson acted “after infections grow fast and ministers threaten mutiny”. Tuesday's front page: Lockdown UK. Public told: stay indoors#TomorrowsPaperToday pic.twitter.com/kco7Ti0zzZ