The death toll from Italy’s coronavirus outbreak has risen to 52, an increase of 18 since Sunday, as the number of confirmed cases in Europe’s worst-hit country rose to 1,835. The civil protection agency said 149 people had recovered from the virus, up by 66 since Sunday. The authorities said 742 people had been admitted to hospital, with 166 in intensive care. The vast majority of those infected had shown few or no symptoms and were recovering at home. The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the Wuhan coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine. The UN agency advises people to: Despite a surge in sales of face masks in the aftermath of the outbreak of the coronavirus outbreak, experts are divided over whether they can prevent transmission and infection. There is some evidence to suggest that masks can help prevent hand-to-mouth transmissions, given the large number of times people touch their faces. The consensus appears to be that wearing a mask can limit – but not eliminate – the risks, provided they are used correctly. Justin McCurry Among those to have tested positive on Monday is a councillor from the Lombardy region, where there are more than 1,000 cases. Authorities there have advised people aged 65 and over, the group most vulnerable to the illness, to stay at home as much as possible over the next two weeks as the region tries to contain a virus. Meanwhile, Rome confirmed its first cases, that of a police officer and a firefighter. The officer’s wife, two children and sister-in-law were also infected, the Lazzaro Spallanzani hospital for infectious diseases said. Until Monday, the virus in the Italian capital had only been detected in a Chinese couple from the Wuhan, the city at the centre of the global outbreak, and an Italian man repatriated from China. All three have recovered after undergoing treatment at the hospital. Coronavirus has spread to more than half of Italy’s 20 regions as cases were confirmed in Molise and on the island of Sardinia. The economy has been badly damaged by the outbreak, with Ryanair announcing on Monday that it was scaling back services to Italy after a significant drop in bookings. BA and easyJet have also cancelled some flights; American Airlines has suspended flights to Milan until 24 April. The Italian government is seeking support from Brussels to approve a €3.6bn (£3.1bn) package to help businesses withstand the economic fallout. This follows €900m worth of financial relief measures for 11 towns in Lombardy and Veneto that are still under lockdown. Paolo Gentiloni, Italy’s former prime minister and European economic affairs commissioner, said the European commission would probably support the request. “We will assess the requests of governments with a spirit of solidarity and understanding in these non-ordinary moments,” he said.