Katharine Viner’s article underlining the Guardian’s commitment to news about Europe, and for Europe, was heartening (A message to readers: Why it’s vital to make Europe a priority now, 2 March). It would have shown more conviction, however, if the north, south, east and west of the Europe outlined in her alliterative phrases – “from Paris to Porto, Madrid to Munich”; “tease out trends and dig into the data that tells us why life is different in Copenhagen, Cardiff and Cádiz” – had gone further east than Copenhagen and Munich. Central and eastern Europe are alluded to only via the wars that its journalists have covered so well. Married to a Romanian and with friends all over the “new EU”, I hope that the Guardian’s Europe will actually run from Valladolid and Valletta to Varna and Vilnius, from Roscommon and Reykjavik to Rostov and Rethymno.Owen MountfordBucharest, Romania This is Europe is a new stream of Guardian journalism that investigates the big challenges that transcend national boundaries, and seeks out the solutions that could benefit us all. These are testing times, and crises are not limited by national borders. But then neither are we. • Thank you so much for your commitment to continue to inform us about people and events in Europe. I am Portuguese but have lived in this country for over 50 years and am deeply saddened by the inward, narrow, insular future it has chosen. I would love to see, for instance, the enlightened social policies of Portugal, with the decriminalisation of drugs (that has been such a great success) and now the legalisation of euthanasia become more widely known to a bigger audience. We should learn from them, as the “war on drugs” will never be won. And may I add a Portuguese PS to the marmalade correspondence? In Portugal we make marmalade from quinces, not oranges. Quince is “marmelo” in Portuguese, which is where “marmalade” comes from (not orangeade, for instance!), “marmelada” in Portuguese.Maria Isabel CunhaBrentford, London • My life has been inextricably linked to Europe for almost six decades, so I welcome wholeheartedly the Guardian’s decision to renew and extend its commitment to Europe. However, I am one of many (by now, maybe even a majority) in the UK whose European citizenship has been rescinded by charlatan politicians, completely against our will. In order to make clear my resistance to this political theft I use the EU flag as my email profile image and encourage like-minded folk to do so, both as an expression of unity, and as a means of mutual recognition.Chris GibsonLeominster, Herefordshire • There is something those who don’t want to leave the European Union can do as UK citizens are losing our European citizenship because of Brexit. Stay European is the campaign for an EU associate membership scheme that would give us the option to continue as EU members as individuals. I would dearly like to continue as an individual member because it makes more sense to be part of a whole than a separatist, co-operating towards a peaceful outcome is far more preferable to division and warfare, and Europe is 21 miles away from England – nearer than Swansea, where I live, is to Bridgend which is just up the road. A world without borders, full of kindness, empathy and peaceful cooperation, is what we need.Karen LaurenceMurton, Swansea • Thank you for the European focus you have chosen. I haven’t read every word but to see a chunk of news about the mainland and to know this will continue has lifted my spirits. In the same vein, thanks also to Helen Pidd for her distinctive and knowledgeable coverage of the north. Regards from a London-based, one-time Mancunian, ex-Brit, now Irish, regular reader of 58 years.Eileen FlinterLondon • Having just read your article on what the Guardian believes in regarding Europe, I most definitely agree. If only you could convince the press owned by the millionaires.Roy GillUlverston, Cumbria • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition