More than 11 million people tuned in to watch Pope Francis deliver a blessing in an empty Saint Peter’s Square, television bosses have said, as the Italian prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, said the EU risked losing its purpose. The pope’s blessing, Urbi et Orbi (To the city and the world)is usually reserved for Christmas Day and Easter Sunday, with thousands flocking to take part. Images of the cloudy sky and the glistening square on Saturday, with the pope, alone, praying upon a platform illuminated by the faint light of six candelabras, travelled the world over. “For weeks now it has been evening,” he said. “Thick darkness has gathered over our squares, our streets and our cities; it has taken over our lives.” “The pandemic has reminded us that we are all in the same boat,” he added. “The storm exposes our vulnerability and uncovers those false and superfluous certainties around which we have constructed our daily schedules.” “And now that we are in a stormy sea, we implore you: wake up, Lord!” The hour-long blessing, which started at 6pm on Friday, was punctuated by moments of dramatic silence with the pope, standing, intent on praying, behind the famous “Miraculous Crucifix”, a wooden cross kept in the Church of Saint Marcellus which, according to devout Roman Catholics, saved Rome from the plague in 1522. According to official data from the broadcasting groups Rai, Sky and TV2000, the event was viewed by more than 11 million people. Since the outbreak of the coronavirus emergency in Italy, the number of viewers of live broadcasts of the pope’s prayers has increased, in part because the government’s stringent measures to halt the spread of coronavirus include the cessation of all masses, funerals and weddings. It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals. The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as: Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities. In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 28 March, more than 595,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering. There have been over 27,000 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Italy has been worst affected, with over 9,000 fatalities, and there have been over 5,000 deaths in Spain. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated. More than 130,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus. On Friday, Italy recorded its single biggest leap in coronavirus deaths, announcing that 969 people had died from Covid-19 in the previous 24 hours. The country also became the second country to overtake China in terms of the number of infections, reaching 86,498 cases. That included 66,414 current infections, up 4,401 from Thursday. Conte warned on Saturday that the European Union could lose its purpose if it failed to come up with a strong response to the coronavirus threat and accused other member states of a timid response to an unprecedented economic shock. Meeting via a video-link, Conte aired his grievances after the 27 EU leaders could not agree on an action plan during an argumentative six-hour video conference on Thursday and gave their finance ministers two more weeks to forge a policy that could please Italy and Spain. “If Europe does not rise to this unprecedented challenge, the whole European structure loses its raison d’être to the people,” Conte told Saturday’s edition of the Il Sole 24 Ore financial newspaper. “We are at a critical point in European history,” Conte added, “I represent a country that is suffering a lot and I cannot afford to procrastinate.” Rome and Madrid want the EU to start issuing “corona bonds” - a form of common debt that governments sell on markets to raise money and address individual economic needs. But nations such as Germany and the Netherlands are balking at the idea of joint debt.