Disney’s plan to kick-off its entry into the European streaming wars with a glitzy event to promote Disney+ has been left in tatters after the company cancelled over coronavirus fears. The entertainment firm had planned a star-studded private event in west London on Thursday, with hundreds due to attend from across Europe to unveil the service before its consumer launch on 24 March. Disney has also scrapped a press conference, including a panel with senior Disney+ executives, scheduled for Friday morning. “Due to a number of media attendee cancellations and increasing concerns at the prospect of travelling internationally at this time, we have decided to cancel our Disney+ launch events scheduled to take place on Thursday and Friday,” the company said. “We will be planning a Disney+ executive press briefing via webcast for next week.” The consumer launch of Disney+ in the UK, Ireland, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Austria and Switzerland will go ahead as planned. The new service aims to be a global rival to Netflix and Amazon Prime Video. On Tuesday, Disney announced a deal with Sky to make its new streaming service available to more than 13m UK households. Disney+ is to be integrated into the Sky Q box, to be followed by Sky’s Now TV streaming service in the coming months. Disney+ will also be available as a standalone app. The multiyear deal is structured in a similar way to Sky’s collaboration with Netflix, with Netflix programming being included in the Sky TV and on-demand service that was renewed last month. As part of the new deal, content from Fox, such as The Simpsons, and Hollywood films including Le Mans ’66 and Terminator: Dark Fate, will continue to be available on Sky TV and Sky Cinema as well as Disney+. Disney paid $71bn (£55bn) for Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox last year. Grab yourself a D'oh-nut and stay tuned... pic.twitter.com/orfYKCYgKG Jeremy Darroch, the group chief executive of Sky, said: “We’ve built a strong partnership with Disney over three decades and we’re pleased that our customers in the UK and Ireland can continue to enjoy their world-class content – all in one place on Sky Q.” Disney is expected to announce similar deals in Sky’s other European markets, including Germany and Italy, this week. Sky’s tie-up with Disney is non-exclusive, meaning Sky’s rivals Virgin Media and BT will be able to strike distribution deals. “We are delighted that Sky is selling the Disney+ service on their platform and, along with our other distribution partners, will deliver exceptional reach at launch,” said Kevin Mayer, the chairman of Walt Disney Company’s direct-to-consumer and international business. Disney is expected to announce a collaboration with the BT-owned telecoms company EE to be the exclusive mobile operator to offer Disney+ in the UK. It has a similar deal with Verizon in the US, where customers receive Disney+ free for a year. Paolo Pescatore, a media and tech analyst at PP Foresight, said: “EE looks to be in prime position, given its track record in securing key premium content partnerships.” Disney+, which is charging £49.99 for an annual subscription as an introductory pre-launch offer, will feature popular content including the $100m Star Wars spin-off series The Mandalorian, Toy Story and Frozen 2. The initial Disney+ offering is significantly cheaper than Netflix, which charges £7.99 a month for its most popular package, and Prime Video, which costs £79 a year.