This year marks Vladimir Putin’s 20th in power and, after his recent dramatic overhaul of the Russian constitution, he could be president for much longer than the supposed end of his term in 2024. This three-part documentary sets out to expose the man behind the villainous myth. It features revealing interviews with the likes of Marina Litvinenko, the wife of the poisoned spy Alexander, as well as Boris Yeltsin’s daughter, Tatyana Yumasheva. It starts by charting Putin’s route from KGB agent to political fixer. Ammar Kalia The niche series returns, as Dick Strawbridge and his wife, Angel Adoree, give practical tips to Brits running French chateaux as businesses. In this opener, Fiona braves sub-zero conditions to renovate a bedroom, while Tim and Sasha face a sound-system glitch during a party. Ali Catterall It is best known as the home of the World Economic Forum – the premier meet-up for leading politicians – but this investigation delves into the darker side of Davos. Cate Brown examines allegations of harassment. AK It was the worst child poisoning case in Britain since the thalidomide drug scandal: thousands of infants with birth defects caused by toxic waste produced at the Corby steelworks. In this powerful and deeply emotional documentary, the mothers of affected children speak. AK The final part of James Fox’s series brings us up to date: we live in an era when “images have become more like reality while reality has become more like an image”. Via the sculptures of Ron Mueck and the innovations of Jurassic Park, we arrive in the age of the curated self. But can we trust what we see? Phil Harrison The west London-set reality-hit-turned-finishing school for affluent young people living a gilded existence returns for a 19th series. This time, Binky and Ollie turn up (the latter with a fiancee) and Zara and Sam’s relationship continues to hang in the balance. Hannah J Davies Still Alice, 2am, Film4 Julianne Moore is a 50-year-old professor with early-onset Alzheimer’s. Her efforts to navigate an increasingly strange world – supported by husband Alec Baldwin and daughter Kristen Stewart – are charted with sensitivity by writer-directors Richard Glatzer and Wash Westmoreland. Paul Howlett