Your article on British attitudes to empire (‘Alarming’ survey shows UK leading the world in nostalgia for empire, 11 March) confirms my own observations that British people believe their empire to have been a force for good in the world, or at the very least did nothing to be ashamed of. The true impact of colonialism is still widely misunderstood within the British psyche. The point is illustrated by a piece in G2 (The lessons of 1918, 11 March). Your correspondent explains that the vast majority of deaths in the flu pandemic were “in the developing world”. The countries referred to had just been economically and socially raped by the imperial powers of western Europe, Britain prominent among them, rendering them particularly vulnerable to the pandemic when it came. “Developing world” is post-colonial terminology. 1918 was a colonial world; and until this truth seeps into the general British consciousness, the hubris of a beneficial British empire will continue to poison British self-perception.Dr Kevin ShillingtonAuthor, History of Africa • As an Irish woman who came to the UK in 1974, I was amazed that there was so little known about Irish history or why there were the Troubles in Northern Ireland at that time. Why would young people my own age not know about British Rule in Ireland when I had learned all about the industrial revolution and woollen mills of England? My children have been through the education system here and have not learned about Irish history either. Under British rule our family farm in Galway had six households living on it prior to the famine of 1848. From my research all these died or emigrated during the famine years. The population of Galway fell from 22,000 to 10,000 from 1841-71. Over 150 years later the population of Ireland still has not reached the pre-famine levels. During the famine when people were dying on a daily basis it is estimated that over 400 shiploads of food, mainly livestock and corn, were exported to England. The absentee landlord of our farm at that time was the Marquess of Clanricarde who owned 52,000 acres and earned £25,000 per year in rent. He and his ancestors used this income to build Somerhill House in Kent. The contrast between the tree-lined communal famine grave on our farm in Galway and the stately home in Tonbridge and how the two are linked is pertinent when reviewing the impact of colonisation.Dr Frances RehalSelling, Kent • Over the years the words “British” and “English” have been used in equal measure not only to refer to the UK but to describe anything pertaining to what should be British. That is why I suspect these feelings for empire are something English rather than British. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have always been regarded by the English as parts of the empire!James GriffithsBangor, Gwynedd • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 