Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The number of coronavirus deaths around the world has reached 30,652, with confirmed cases passing 660,000, according to the Johns Hopkins University. To date, 139,415 have recovered. The Spanish government has ordered all non-essential workers to stay at home for the next two weeks in an attempt to lower the spread of the coronavirus and reduce the pressure on the country’s healthcare system. It came after the head of Spain’s centre for health emergencies said that the country might be close to peaking in the number of cases of coronavirus. Panama’s government has said it will allow the Zaandam cruise ship to pass through the Panama Canal. The cruise ship has 130 people with flu-like symptoms, and four have died. At least two of those with symptoms are confirmed to have coronavirus. Previously, Panama’s authorities had not given approval to let the ship pass through the canal, leaving passengers stuck on board. No one from the ship will be allowed to disembark in Panama, but the passage will allow the ship to attempt to dock in Florida. Northern Ireland has announced a series of restrictive measures aimed at reducing the spread of coronavirus. Gatherings of more than two people have been banned, and anyone who can work from home must do so. The regulations also give the authorities the power to close certain premises and prohibit anyone from leaving home without a reasonable excuse. Authorities will have the power to enforce the measures, which came into force at 11pm GMT on Saturday. The coronavirus death toll in France has reached 2,317, with more than 38,000 cases. The official death tally is expected to jump next week, when authorities begin to include deaths in retirement homes, as well as just hospitals. The British-Iranian aid worker who has been detained in Iran on spying charges has had her prison leave extended and her case put forward for clemency, her husband said. Richard Ratcliffe said his wife’s father had been told that her temporary release from Evin prison in Tehran would now continue until 18 April. The leave was originally granted in response to the spread of coronavirus in Tehran, with Zaghari-Ratcliffe reportedly suffering from symptoms of Covid-19 before her recovery earlier this month.