The 2020 AFL season has been postponed after just one round and the AFLW competition cancelled midway through the finals series, with no premiers crowned, following new measures introduced by federal and state governments to combat the coronavirus outbreak. Victoria, NSW, Western Australia and South Australia announced on Sunday a range of measures that will come into force in the next few days to shut down non-essential services and travel. With state borders closing amid the worsening global pandemic, national sports competitions have effectively become unviable, and pressure is mounting on the NRL and Football Federation Australia, both of which also sanctioned play this weekend, to follow suit. But neither the NRL nor FFA on Sunday advised a halt to their leagues. ARL chairman Peter V’landys said it was the commission’s intention to proceed with the NRL until there is advice from the government to shut down matches, while FFA CEO James Johnson said the outcomes of the national cabinet meeting on Sunday evening will be considered before providing further advice on the A-League season on Monday. CEO Gillon McLachlan said the AFL industry was facing an unprecedented challenge and the financial effect of Sunday’s decision would be felt far and wide. “Our industry provides livelihoods for thousands and thousands of people but our key focus at the moment – like every organisation in the country – is to do everything that needs to be done to help slow the spread of this virus and to keep people as healthy as possible,” Mr McLachlan said. “To say this is the most serious threat to our game in 100 years is an understatement. It is unprecedented in its impact. It is unprecedented in the impact it is having on our game and the wider community, and as a community and as a code, we all need to take the unprecedented and required actions to get through this together. “I know that everyone involved in our game and our millions of supporters will be impacted by this decision and that many people will suffer significant hardship as are people right across the community but I also know that we all have a responsibility to the community and each other. And we have the will to work collectively to overcome this crisis.” McLachlan said a priority over the coming days, other than ensuring the safety of players and staff, would be to address the financial hole the suspension had created and seek to plug it by working with its funding partners. Sunday’s match between West Coast Eagles and Melbourne will be the last match before the AFL suspension, which is in place until at least 31 March. The league will review the situation in April upon medical advice and government regulations in place at the time, but a further period of suspension has not been ruled out. The women’s competition has been cancelled outright after just one week of finals, with the final match of the season played between Carlton and Brisbane on Sunday. Given the twin conference structure of the AFLW and with the finals series not completed, the AFL commission decided not to award a premiership this season. The AFL made a late decision to the green light for the 2020 men’s season, confirming the opening match would go ahead just 24 hours before Richmond and Carlton players took to the MCG last Thursday night. The fixture had already been reduced from 24 to 17 games per club, while the final two rounds of the AFLW season had been cancelled and the finals series brought forward. All AFL and AFLW matches were to be played behind closed doors for the foreseeable future. McLachlan stood by last week’s decision – made following consultation with the government and the chief medical officers – and said it was always possible that advice would change. “It was the right decision to start the season, and clearly it is now the right decision to stop,” he said. “That is why we have acted immediately to take this step to play our role in the community and to protect the long-term future of our game.” It remains the AFL’s intention to play all 144 games plus finals this season; how that will work once play resumes will be discussed over the coming weeks, although McLachlan said the league was prepared to run as late as possible this year to complete the season.