Canada’s most populous province has declared a state of emergency as fears of a widespread coronavirus outbreak continue to deepen. “Covid-19 constitutes a danger of major proportions,” Ontario’s premier, Doug Ford, said in a Tuesday morning announcement. ”We must act decisively, we must not delay.” The move will force the immediate closure of restaurants, bars, movie theatres, recreation centres and childcare facilities and houses of worship. It comes a day after the prime minister, Justin Trudeau, unveiled “increasingly aggressive” measures against the outbreak, closing the country’s borders and urging citizens to “stay home”. Grocery stores, pharmacies and public transit would remain open and operating as normal, Ford said. Restaurants and cafes will be permitted to continue operating if they offer takeout and delivery options. All public schools in the province have been closed since last week. The state of emergency is expected to last until 31 March. “I hope the seriousness of this declaration will make it clear to every resident how important their personal actions will be in the coming days,” Toronto’s mayor, John Tory, said in a statement, following Ford’s announcement. Tory had previously asked residents to stay home and to avoid large crowds on St Patrick’s Day. The province plans to open an additional 25 testing facilities, bringing the total to 42. Ford said health authorities will add 75 critical-care beds and 500 post-acute care beds and have purchased additional medical supplies, including face protection, gowns and gloves. His government also promised C$300m (US$212m) in relief to workers and businesses. “This is changing hour-by-hour, day-by-day,” Ford said in his second press conference in as many days. As the virus spreads across the country, Ontario has experienced far more cases than other provinces. As of Monday night, 177 coronavirus infections had been confirmed, but the number was expected to increase when the province releases updated numbers on Tuesday. There are currently 407 confirmed cases of coronavirus in Canada. Four deaths have been recorded, all of which were in British Columbia. Despite Ontario’s announcement, Trudeau has so far resisted calls to implement a federal state of emergency, telling the radio broadcaster 680 News on Tuesday morning that the federal government currently had sufficient powers address the Covid-19 pandemic. Trudeau plans to announce a number of relief measures on Wednesday to offset the growing economic burdens from the virus outbreak.