For an episode of my BBC series The Broker’s Man in 1998 we were lucky enough to get Roy Hudd to play a club comic. His scenes involved two days of filming in a dark and grubby venue with 30 or so crowd artists. This could have been a fairly tedious time for everyone, but at every break between setups Roy stayed at his microphone and told gags without ever repeating himself. I swear he must have told hundreds of jokes and stories, and his warm and mischievous character entertained us and the crew royally, making those two days some of the most memorable of my career.Kevin Whately A few years ago, some friends and I organised a small 80th birthday show for Peter Reeves, a retired all-round entertainer, in his home. I knew he had worked with Roy Hudd, and I asked Roy if he could send a message of congratulation. He did much better than that: with his wife, Debbie, he travelled from Suffolk to Devon to be there in person. This gave me the profound pleasure of shocking the audience, not to say Peter himself, by announcing, as next on the bill, my own comedy hero. Roy entered from the kitchen, and was an absolute delight, as he and Peter reminisced about their times together. He was enthusiastic, authentic and charming – a lovely man.Jef Pirie In 2017 the comedian Ken Dodd was knighted at Buckingham Palace and for the celebration that followed I was privileged to be a guest with a seat at Roy Hudd’s table. He enchanted us with his account of the inner workings of pantomime – he both made a significant impact on and had a great understanding of the world of entertainment.Norma Hornby In the mid 1990s the chocolate company Cadbury’s asked Roy Hudd to voice the information telephone lines for the nationwide season of pantomimes they were promoting. As the exec in charge of the recording, I booked the studio for two hours from 10am, but there was one factor I had not taken into account. For each theatre venue Roy was given the title of the pantomime, the dates and the leading players, most of them household names, and he would ad lib the content. He required very few retakes and was very particular in listing the cast in the order he felt was merited rather than their position on the bill. He bemoaned the fact that stars such as John Inman, a perennial panto performer, were being billed below “here today, gone tomorrow” soap stars, who had no conception of the real value of the traditional British pantomime, even if they were needed in order to attract the younger audience. Roy had reminiscences and funny anecdotes about all the venues and the performers involved: we were in stitches all day and in the event finished around 5pm. We will not see his like again.Simon McIntyre