More than 50 Australian Associated Press journalists are likely to be offered jobs at News Corp Australia and Nine Entertainment as the two media giants look to boost staff ranks after pulling their millions out of the wire agency. Announcing the imminent closure of the service in June, the AAP chief executive, Bruce Davidson, told staff there was some blue sky: News Corp and Nine would be making “additional investment in their own news teams to replace some of the content they currently source from AAP”. Sources say at least a dozen additional journalists may be picked up by other media organisations who have already expressed an interest in hiring some of the 180 well-regarded journalists, who will be made redundant by the shock closure of the 85-year-old agency. AAP also employs 12 award-winning staff photographers and another 100 contributor photographers around the country. While they are unlikely to be rehired full time, more freelancers will be needed to fill the gap left by AAP, especially at News Corp, which laid off dozens of photographers in 2017 and relies heavily on the agency. But the shock closure of AAP is not just a blow for the staff, which total 600 when non-editorial employees are added in. It’s an industry-wide bombshell. The outlets that will be hit hardest by the closure will be regional and rural outlets like Antony Catalano’s Australian Community Media, which he bought from Nine last year. ACM relies on Pagemasters to supply the racing and TV guides, as well as photos and copy from the newswire. Daily Mail Australia and SBS also use dozens of AAP stories and photographs to fill their websites each day. SBS will adapt by asking reporters and cameramen to take still photographs and by using other wire services and more international news, insiders said. The main areas that will be hit are courts, sport and big inquiries like royal commissions. The Daily Mail Australia editor, Barclay Crawford, says it came as a shock and the service will be missed in the media landscape. “It’s sad for all those involved. AAP have trained up some of Australia’s best journalists and photographers,” Crawford said. One idea being discussed is that News Corp will create a breaking news hub with 30 new reporters. If they were on salaries of $70,000, the staff bill would be $2.1m, a far cheaper proposition than the investment in AAP. This would see the Murdoch empire boosted after last year’s round of targeted redundancies which saw 55 staff laid off. AAP has covered every single hearing day of every national royal commission in recent years: child abuse, banking, aged care and disability. We don't get the credit we deserve. @AAPNewswire #saveAAP Nine is also looking to create a new pool of reporters, as well as drawing on the resources of its newspapers including the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age. While AAP staff, including senior editors, didn’t see the bombshell coming, the end of the business had been discussed at board level for more than six months. “We knew times were tough but we had been given assurances there weren’t going to be any more cuts,” one staffer said. The news blindsided everyone. “It feels like we’ve missed a couple of stages,” one editor said. “Instead of talking about making savings or restructuring they just pulled the pin.”