Jason Stanley is right to emphasise the close similarity between the rabidly anti-Muslim nationalism of Modi’s BJP government in India and Trump’s white supremacist ethnic nationalism (For Trump and Modi, ethnic purity is the point of power, 25 February). He is also right to draw attention to the part such nationalism played in shaping US immigration policy, which was much admired by Hitler, in the early 20th century. There are indeed unmistakable similarities between the fascism of the 1920s and 1930s and the resurgence of far-right racist nationalism today. Stanley says the Nazi Nuremberg laws of 1935 “created a category of second-class citizenship for the Jews”. Actually, the Nuremberg laws didn’t turn Jews into second-class citizens. Instead, It was much worse; they were deprived of citizenship entirely. They became non-citizens, or “subjects of the state”, deprived of all rights. This is where fascism leads. There are other lessons from the history of fascism that are relevant today. Trump rails against Muslims and dark-skinned people from “shithole countries”, while claiming that “America loves India and is “a loyal friend of the Indian people”. He embraces Wahhabi Saudi Arabia as a close friend and ally. Where interests of foreign policy are concerned, realpolitik trumps the most passionate racist bigotry. Pseudo-scientific Nazi race theory established a hierarchy of subordinate races below the Aryan “supermen”, according to which Asians occupied an inferior status. The Japanese, however, Germany’s close allies, became “honorary Aryans”. Modi’s Hindu nationalists and the Saudi Wahhabis are Trump’s “honorary Aryans”.Mike FaulknerLondon • Mukul Kesavan (The violence in Delhi serves Modi’s agenda, 27 February) makes the important point that non-Muslims have also joined the protests against India’s Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and the imposed National Register of Citizens (NRC). During my recent visits to Bangalore, Hyderabad and Raipur, friends emphasised that these protests are being made in defence of India as a secular nation. Those who have taken to the streets in opposition to these new discriminatory laws include many Hindus who have shown solidarity with their fellow Muslim citizens. Unfortunately the media has depicted this conflict as founded solely on religious grounds. To do so provides fuel to those who, as Mukul Kesavan rightly states, promote a Hindu supremacist agenda.Richard RoseProfessor emeritus, University of Northampton • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 