‘Here they are in the ruins of what once looked like a bold and adventurous dream. One stroke and, crash, the whole house of cards collapses. No wonder they’re frightened.” Since her parents live in Spain, Katie could be talking about the Brexit debacle but, as she is a character in a Joanna Trollope novel, her concerns are less about big political shifts and more about issues closer to home. They are the worries of any daughter squashed between the demands of elderly parents and young children. Trollope is the queen of contemporary women’s fiction and seems to be wired to the anxieties of a devoted, predominantly female, readership. The complexities of life and love cascade through novels that have confronted lust, adoption, divorce, infidelity and the changing nature of the modern family. In 2018’s An Unsuitable Match, she dealt with remarriage late in life. The previous year’s City of Friends explored friendship among middle-aged women with careers, while in 2013 she brought Jane Austen’s Sense and Sensibility into the age of YouTube trolling and Taylor Swift. But it is intergenerational relationships that are at the top of her mind. She is fresh off a train from Edinburgh, where she saw one of her nine grandchildren in a student production of a musical. “He brought such poignancy to it. It was really very, very moving, seeing the vulnerability and the overcoming of it as well,” she says. “Bringing up your own children, you’re too close to it. You don’t see the fragility as you do when you’re a grandparent.” Her latest novel, Mum & Dad, transports us to the south of Spain, where Gus and Monica’s well-heeled expatriate life is derailed when Gus suffers a stroke, forcing their adult children to come running. So begins a great unravelling in which it transpires that Gus and Monica have been genteelly miserable for years, separated from their family and increasingly estranged from each other. It is all very restrained and very English. “I think it’s a national characteristic to be reticent and in many ways I’m rather admiring of it, but not if it obscures the realities,” she says. One of those realities is that 400,000 British people moved to Spain during the heyday of the EU, drawn by the lifestyle and the low land prices. Trollope’s characters are not those who clustered around the “Costa del Crime”, but a rarefied breed who opted for integration into local life, albeit as landowners. “You could have acres and acres of land if you were inclined to have horses,” she says, disarmingly. Does she see Mum & Dad as a Brexit novel? “I think one of the daughter-in-laws mentions Brexit at one point,” she says, tentatively. “But I’ve just read Jonathan Coe’s Middle England and, although it was of course extremely good, I think it had a very male perspective.” This parry is classic Trollope – so politely framed that one hardly notices how acerbic it is. The male perspective, it seems, is about structuring stories around the big picture. She admits she is “more a social than a political writer”, adding: “What I’m trying to do in all these novels is mirror a contemporary preoccupation. I’m not providing any solutions. I’m simply saying: ‘Can we please get the conversation going?’” You don’t turn to a Trollope novel for literary style or cultural nuance. But more than once during Mum & Dad I felt myself welling up: as a stepdaughter, sister and mother, juggling a career with a long-term relationship, I am undeniably part of the vast sisterhood that unites her readers and her characters. She recognises our foibles and gives us agency, but doesn’t patronise us by guaranteeing a happy ending or, as she puts it, “tying it all up in a bow”. The conversation points in Mum & Dad range from parental incapacity and stagnant marriages to sibling jostling and self-harm among adolescent girls. Although the relationship between grandparents and grandchildren is pivotal, the starting point was the in-betweeners. “I wanted to write a novel about the sandwich generation: parents falling to pieces at one end of your life and children being quite demanding at the other. You, the woman, are probably working full-time, but society, which is really very old-fashioned, still expects women to do all the caring.” Like Monica, Trollope is part of a generation of women who were expected to follow their husbands around. However, she kicked over the traces, divorcing the father of her two daughters when the children were still young and supporting them before her first novels were published in her late 30s. Her second marriage added two stepsons to her family, but also ended in divorce. I’m trying to mirror a contemporary preoccupation. I’m not providing any solutions Tall and elegant in a herringbone jacket and shiny black knee boots, she looks like a cross between the headteacher of a private girls’ school and the principal boy in the school pantomime. But appearances are deceptive, she warns. She may sound posh, but “we had a rather frugal, austere and threadbare middle-class existence and I was actually a grammar school girl, so there’s really nothing to be deduced from my accent.” Her story is awash with the strange cross-currents of an upper-middle-class childhood in the mid-20th century. Born in 1943 in her grandfather’s Gloucestershire rectory, the oldest of three children, she didn’t meet her father until he returned from military service in India when she was three. He went on to run a small building society, commuting to the City of London from Surrey. While she and her sister were state-educated, their brother was sent to private school (the trauma of boarding school lurks in the background of Mum & Dad – an unspoken injury, repeating itself through generations of families). Much has been made of her distant relationship through her father’s side to the novelist Anthony Trollope, but less familiar is the colourful story of her maternal family, who lived in a house with five bathrooms in Glasgow and once had to escape the ministrations of a murderous housemaid who tried to poison them with arsenic. This privileged lifestyle was recounted by her mother, Rosemary, in columns for the Scotsman newspaper; in a neat piece of reverse nepotism, they were engineered by Joanna and later collected into a book. Unable to cope with the more mundane duties of motherhood, the “grandly chaotic” Rosemary, an artist, would set up her easel in her children’s playpen to paint in peace while her toddlers roamed the house freely. The effects of distracted mothering are a theme of Mum & Dad. Neither Monica nor Katie is a very good parenting role model (Monica abandons her children to boarding school, while Katie is too busy managing her law career to notice her daughter’s distress until it has become pathological). How did it work out for Trollope’s children? “You’d have to ask them,” she says. “But it was always a question of working at the kitchen table in rented cottages after they’d gone to sleep.” Discouraged at school from aspiring to university, she won a scholarship to read English at Oxford, where a careers officer solemnly informed her and her best friend: “The world, of course, is your oyster, girls: you can teach, you can nurse or you can sit the civil service exam.” Trollope says: “I remember going out from this interview and standing rather gloomily by our bicycles, and Jill looking at me and saying: ‘D’you know, I think we’re going to have to get married.’” Instead, she briefly worked at the Foreign Office, before marrying a banker, David Potter, at the age of 22 and retraining as a teacher. She began her first (unpublished) novel while pregnant with the first of her two daughters, honing her skills for years while holding down a range of teaching jobs and at one point running a children’s clothing business as well. In 1980, she won the Romantic Novelists’ Association’s novel of the year award for her second novel, Parson Harding’s Daughter, an 18th-century yarn about a “proud, plain and poor” young woman whose pursuit of a husband carries her from Dorset to Kolkata. Since rebranded under her pseudonym Caroline Harvey, along with her other early historical works, it continues to win fans as a “feminist tale set in a time before feminism”, as one convert described it on a reader website. Although she abandoned historical romances in the mid-80s, she returned to them twice under her nom de plume, funding a law conversion course for one of her daughters through a publishing contract with Marks & Spencer (“They were very bad at it and marketed the books down among the lavatory rolls,” she says). She turned to contemporary fiction on the advice of her second husband, the TV dramatist Ian Curteis, who persuaded her that it was no longer an honour to be thought of as the new Georgette Heyer. He was proved right in 1991, when her fourth novel since the change pushed Jeffrey Archer off the top of the bestseller charts. The Rector’s Wife went on to become the first of her novels to be adapted for TV, in a classy Channel 4 miniseries starring Lindsay Duncan and Ronald Pickup. Although her sales no longer rise to such dizzy heights, they chug along nicely. Writing at a rate of one novel every two years, she has sold more than a million books in the past decade. An Unsuitable Match has shifted 84,000 copies to date, narrowly missing a place among the top 100 paperback bestsellers of 2018. Between Joanna Trollope and Caroline Harvey, she has written more than 30 novels. But with popular success came a particular sort of literary scorn that is reserved for writers of middle-brow women’s fiction. The term “Aga saga” was invented by a (male) critic in 1992 to describe novels that, like hers, were largely set among middle-class families from small country towns (she has pointed out that Agas feature in only two of her novels). Does she think she has suffered from the label? “Yes,” she says. “Being categorised in this very narrow way has meant that it has been easy to dismiss the novels. And that is terribly patronising to the readership.” It is a contempt that male genre writers don’t suffer, she says, pointing to the recent vogue among the literati for Lee Child’s Jack Reacher novels. “It’s the reverse of intellectual snobbery, isn’t it? A kind of snobbery of its own.” It surprises her, “because the novels seem to me improbable: the situation, the narrative, the man himself. But then I’m just not very good at anything that is fantastical. I can’t read science fiction. I can’t read fantasy. I can’t even read Harry Potter very well, because of the magic.” A cliche is only a cliche if it’s happening in someone else’s life What matters, she says, is that people believe in her characters and find them useful. “For all that somebody gets dumped every nanosecond in the world, you don’t want to be lumped in with everybody else – you want it to be expressed as poignantly and vividly as you feel it yourself,” she says. “A cliche is only a cliche if it’s happening in someone else’s life.” This brings her to her impatience with those who dismiss novels as frivolous entertainment. “Men of my generation say to me: ‘Of course, my wife might read everything you’ve ever written, but I only read nonfiction.’ But if you wanted to know what the retreat from Moscow really felt like, you wouldn’t read a history of the Napoleonic wars – you’d read War and Peace.” Fiction, she suggests, “can be a physical confessional: when you’re within the covers of a book, you can admit to all kinds of things that you can’t otherwise. It’s also where you learn about the rest of human life and where you get your most profound experience of life – except from actually living it.” Trollope lives in a house in central London, “which I occupy with no trouble at all on my own”, writing in longhand at an old director’s desk. Already an OBE, she was made a CBE in the Queen’s birthday honours last year for services to literature. She supports a raft of causes that reflect hard times in her own life: Meningitis Now, in thanks for the narrow escape of one of her daughters at the age of seven; Alzheimer’s research, in honour of her father, who had the disease for 15 years; and various cancer charities, in memory of Jill, her university friend with the bicycle, “who died far too young”. Her record as the chronicler of a world where problems are seldom simple raises her above any number of sneering reviews. “I suppose I’m a feminist of the old school,” she says, in that she believes in women’s right to equality, but thinks the pendulum has swung too far. “There are some women who want to change the world and there are some who want to stay at home and make jam with a three-year-old. They should all be allowed to do all of those things without being judged. When will we stop judging each other?” After all, she concludes briskly, “it’s that Virginia Woolf thing: ‘Let us not take it for granted that life exists more fully in what is commonly thought big than in what is commonly thought small.’ There’s something very salutary about just cleaning the bathroom, because, when you can’t control huge emotional upsets in politics or in your life, you can at least polish the taps.” Mum & Dad is published by Pan Macmillan on 5 March. To order a copy for £15.95 (RRP £18.99), go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15; online orders only. Phone orders minimum p&p of £1.99.