World leaders are to hold a G7 video summit on Monday devoted to strengthening the financial markets during the coronavirus pandemic and improving coordination on finding a vaccine. There has so far not been a coordinated international response, in contrast to the 2008 financial crash, with many countries opting for unilateral monetary and health interventions sometimes in competition with one another. The idea of a summit at leader level, bringing together the main western economies and Japan, was proposed last week by Emmanuel Macron, the French president. Since then the crisis has spiralled and major economic interventions by the US Federal Reserve and Japanese Central Bank in the last 24 hours have failed to reassure markets, leaving world leaders to meet amid another round of crashing stock markets and figures showing the spread of virus in Europe is now worse than in China. The US is the current chair of the G7, but Donald Trump’s leadership on coronavirus has been haphazard and the US president, who has an inherent dislike of multilateral solutions, had to be coaxed into holding the summit. In a symbol of the lack of coordination, Trump did not consult with European leaders before he imposed a travel ban on last week and the weekend revelation that the US sought to secure exclusive access to a potential vaccine by offering a lucrative contract to CureVac laboratory in south-west Germany has infuriated public opinion. Stay at home for 7 days if you have either: This will help to protect others in your community while you are infectious. Do not go to a GP surgery, pharmacy or hospital. You do not need to contact NHS 111 to tell them you’re staying at home. People who are self-isolating with mild symptoms will not be tested. Source: NHS England “German researchers play a leading role in the development of medicines and vaccines and we cannot allow others to seek the exclusivity of their results,” the German foreign minister, Heiko Maas, said. US officials insisted the German resentment was misplaced and Washington had spoken to more than 25 pharmaceutical companies and assured that “any solution that comes up will be shared with the rest of the world”. The EU is meanwhile taking steps to ban the export of medical masks, gloves and protective clothing outside the bloc without prior authorisation. “We need to share this equipment within the European Union,” Ursula von der Leyen, the EU Commission president, said. Shinzo Abe, the Japanese prime minister, said he hoped the video summit would yield results. “I hope we’ll discuss global cooperation for the fight against the virus. Japan wants to overcome this hardships by joining hands with other countries.” Before the summit, Boris Johnson spoke to leaders in Canada, Italy, Germany and Saudi Arabia – the current chair of the G20. The wider group of economic powers – including India, China, South Africa, Russia and Korea – the G20 might be seen as the more natural body to address the crisis, but the logistics of putting together a coordinated policy among such a large group so quickly is difficult. Scott Morrison, the Australian prime minister, said he had been in discussion with his Indian counterpart, Narendra Modi, to hold such a meeting. In total, about 50 countries have announced restrictive measures – ranging from the ban on entry into their territory, such as Israel or the US, to health checks or quarantines. Almost all countries are facing difficult choices over demand stimulus, protecting laid-off workers, overstretched hospital services, the closure of public spaces and the value of widespread testing. South Korea, seen as a leader in combating the virus, has offered to brief the world leaders either at G7 or G20 level on how it believes widespread testing for the virus is critical to its containment. South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in, said on Monday he was increasingly confident the country would overcome the coronavirus as the rate of new infections continued to drop, although authorities noted another large cluster had emerged in the greater Seoul area. There are tentative signs that the scale of the crisis is leading some traditional foes to see if there is scope for cooperation. Iranian officials for instance had a rare conversation with their counterparts from the United Arab Emirates and world leaders will have to confront at some point whether to lift sanctions in Iran to help the country fight the virus, where the death toll is 853, since the world will not be safe from the disease unless it is eradicated worldwide. The main G7 leaders’ summit is due to be held at Camp David, the US presidential retreat, in June, but the chances of a physical gathering of leaders is now in the balance. The G20 summit is not due to occur until November in Riyadh although lower-level ministers are due to meet throughout the year. A range of other summits have been cancelled, including a meeting in Istanbul on 17 March to discuss the crisis in Idlib.