‘I don’t do buses,” says Shuntelle. She works for an international accountancy firm and enjoys first class air travel. There’s a woman – I think, after an admittedly brief acquaintance – who appreciates high thread counts and trolleyed room service. What she is doing in the second series of Race Across the World (BBC Two), in which backpackers are tasked with travelling from one end of Latin America to the other in cattle class or worse is beyond me. Michael, by contrast, is ex-army. He looks like he not only does buses, but could fold them into his backpack and skip over the Andes. He actually likes camping, which is the definition of absurdity. He’s your go-to guy if you need someone to catch, kill and skewer a squirrel in the kind of extreme survival scenarios people such as Shuntelle and myself have spent our lives avoiding. Shuntelle, 40, and Michael, 47, are one of five teams competing against each other to travel from Mexico City to the southernmost city in the world, Ushuaia in Argentina, with the fastest pair bagging a £20,000 prize. The appeal of this series has nothing to do with the Mayan temples, natural infinity pools and other Instagrammable blah that the contestants visit. Moreover, its quest is not to discover if the teams can survive jungles, tooled-up bandits and camera crews in their faces 24/7, but each other. Jean-Paul Sartre was wrong or at least imprecise when he claimed hell is other people. Hell is backpacking with other people who smell. Air travel is forbidden, and taxis folly, given that their daily budget is £26. At the outset, the contestants are stripped of phones and credit cards, given £1,400 cash and sent out into Latin America with Britain’s two greatest gifts to the world – negligible Spanish and winning smiles. Hats off to the production team for finding a bunch of people in crisis. Every pairing is in compelling peril. Will Emon and his nephew, Jamiul, renew the close friendship they had before what John Hannah describes in his voiceover as “a family estrangement”? Will the oldest contestant, Jo, be able to cope with her own type 1 diabetes and her son Sam’s attention deficit hyperactivity disorder to celebrate her 55th birthday in the rainforest … or will she die on the million steps up to that photogenic church? Can the siblings Dom and Lizzie rekindle their childhood bond? How will the couple Jen and Rob cope with Rob’s recent hearing loss, which has left him understandably miserable? My money is on Shuntelle and Michael to win because they get the first row of the adventure under their belts. As you know, the first row of a holiday is as bracing as makeup sex, but less fun. Long-unexpressed resentments, mingled with new niggles about who packed what and why, result in things being said that can’t be unsaid. And yet, by airing these resentments while other guests cover their mouths in shock, couples develop something like emotional scar tissue, bonding them more strongly than hitherto. Unless they murder each other first. Shuntelle and Michael’s row happens like this. They have just broken their journey on an island paradise off Belize. But, while Shuntelle is looking forward to checking her bags and kicking back in plush accommodation, Michael goes off and books a pitch for their tents. Without asking her. Rookie mistake. “Do I look,” she asks him rhetorically, “like someone who has slept outside in my life?” How did this odd couple get together? “We met on Tinder,” says Shuntelle. “We swiped.” It’s possible they swiped right meaning to swipe left. And yet their relationship has survived for three years, overcoming such setbacks as when Michael rocked up in a camper van he had bought, suggesting that he and Shuntelle could go travelling in it together. One look at its ludicrous floral curtains should have told him he was living in a fool’s paradise. Near the end, Michael ramps up the jeopardy to the max. There are two possible outcomes from this race to the bottom of the world, he tells us. Either Shuntelle and he will split up or they will get married. If their relationship doesn’t make it to Argentina, it will be because of the real star of the show. It’s a little thing that even older readers may have forgotten existed. It’s called a map. Divorce courts used to teem with couples citing irreconcilable map-folding differences. How lovely to have it back, ruining relationships like it used to do.