The candidate who secures the mandate of the Labour membership in April will require humility and subtlety. Humility, because the size of the Tory majority is formidable; subtlety, because the electorate is changing in ways that suggest there is no easy path to revive Labour’s vote share. To win the most seats at the next election, let alone form a majority government, the new leader will need to engineer a breakthrough in several parts of the country simultaneously, from politically ambivalent Cornwall to the new SNP strongholds in Scotland. Along the way, of course, large chunks of support will need to be clawed back in the so-called “red wall” areas of the post-industrial north and Midlands, which turned so decisively blue in 2019. In reality, of course, Labour has been losing support in these parts of the country since the last millennium. The red wall was a convenient term of journalese that seemed to arise in the last days of the 2019 campaign to describe a large, disparate part of the country north of Oxford. Labour’s collapse in post-industrial areas is in fact far more complex than the simple idea of a breached barricade suggests. Rebuilding support among this section of the electorate will not be a question of simply aping the Tories by adopting stereotypically “socially conservative” positions on Brexit and patriotism. Labour will always come off worse when the debate is framed in those terms. Neither, it seems, can the party count on lavish manifesto spending pledges cutting through in places such as Teesside and South Yorkshire. It tried this in 2019, and it failed spectacularly. The problem demands a more nuanced political strategy. The new leader will need to adjust to new political realities, accepting that Labour’s once monolithic heartlands now contain multiple shifting and conflicting demographics. If the party is to win power once again, it must develop a new understanding of this changing landscape and do away with the reductive, primary-colour metaphors. Though countless regional differences still exist, there is now no great tribal divide between the post-industrial north and Midlands and the rest of the country when it comes to party loyalty. Once there was widespread cultural allegiance to Labour in industrial communities, which mostly transcended the finer points of politics and economics. But in the 2020s the political worldview of a disgruntled, middle-aged voter in Workington is likely to be much the same as a disgruntled, middle-aged voter in Woking. The poet Frank O’Hara once wrote that the countryside is just the city without houses. In a similar way we can now say that the north is just the south with less money. Though every political party should try to appeal to as many voters as possible, Labour should respond to the demise of its tribal heartlands by accepting that some demographics in the north and Midlands may now be out of reach, for the time being at least. Just as the party has traditionally regarded many rural areas in the south as lost electoral causes, it may now be true that some rural and semi-rural post-industrial areas in the north have swung fairly solidly to the Tories. Bishop Auckland, with its new 8,000 Tory majority, now looks like a relatively safe Conservative seat, on a par with constituencies such as South West Surrey. But this doesn’t mean, as some have suggested, that Labour should abandon the non-urban north and Midlands and instead build up support in the south-west and the “London overspill” areas of the south-east, where it has made substantial gains in recent years. Aside from the fact that such a narrow geographical focus will never win the party a majority, Labour should be mindful that there are other social layers to its lost heartlands. Alongside older, more affluent voters who have shifted firmly rightward in recent years, many former industrial areas in the north and Midlands contain large portions of younger, less secure residents who could form the basis of Labour’s revival in the 2020s. An older working-class resident in a relatively isolated area such as Copeland might now be a natural Tory voter. But a young call-centre worker in Blyth Valley (Conservative majority: 712) who commutes to work in nearby Newcastle and only voted Tory to get Brexit done in 2019 might easily switch back to a Labour party that makes a more determined, plausible case for energetic policies on employment rights, local infrastructure and housing. It is on this winnable demographic – young people, families, and precarious workers in areas closer to major urban centres – that Labour should focus as it seeks to build up a nationwide network of support to replace its older strongholds. In order to secure this new, more catholic support base, Labour must become the party of the future rather than one that pines for its industrial past. Rather than lurching to an imagined “moderate” centre, refining and normalising the radical policy agenda it has formulated over the past five years will be crucial if Labour wants to attract the support of younger, suburban voters in the north and Midlands. In place of the patronising stereotype of the socially conservative northerner who can be won over with a bit of tough talk on immigration, the next Labour leader must imagine a new kind of 21st-century heartland voter, one who will be excited and energised by bold plans for a green industrial revolution, new public housing and transport and a fairer, less miserable work life. There are large numbers of people who fit this description in the marginalised towns and suburbs of the north and Midlands. In an election where pro-Brexit and anti-Corbyn sentiment are taken out of the equation, and where Boris Johnson’s pledge to “level up” the regions has run into inevitable difficulties, this new kind of swing voter could end up making all the difference to Labour’s chances of future success. • Alex Niven is a lecturer in English literature at Newcastle University and the author of New Model Island