From the south London streets of Southwark, Crouch End in the north, and around the City and West End, to Ramsbottom in Greater Manchester, the Forth Bridge and central Glasgow, the story was a similiar one. An eerily beautiful sunny day, quiet on the streets, with people not really sure how to pass the time. Judy, just sitting in the square on her own in Walworth. Traffic in Waterloo on Tuesday morning. Photograph by David Levene. The day started with images on social media of busy underground trains as the reduced service resulted in a familiar crowding of the carriages, but this was not a normal day in the capital. Non-essential shops were closed, but the list of key workers is long, and London appeared overwhelmingly quiet on the deserted streets of Waterloo that David Levene photographed early in the day. Graffiti around Waterloo on Tuesday morning. Photograph by David Levene. A Big Issue seller on London Bridge at 8am. Regent Street just after 4pm. Scenes this morning at East Street Market, Walworth, London. Photograph by Jill Mead. Jill Mead discovered her local street market was busy in Southwark. The combination of spring weather, worries about supplies and unease about the government lockdown made for a strange atmosphere. People space themselves out in Waterlow Park in Highgate, north London Masks and headgear on the streets of Crouch End. Photograph by Graeme Robertson. Graeme Robertson found people observing physical distancing rules in the parks of north London in Highgate, masks and hats in Crouch End – and stillness on the quiet suburban streets of Archway. London’s skyline as seen from Archway. Photograph by Graeme Robertson. A cyclist in the City of London around midday. Photograph by Sean Smith. A visitor who had just arrived from Mexico. Sean Smith found a rather deserted square mile area, with a lone Domino’s Pizza delivery rider, before heading to the West End, where he came across the last performance artist working in Leicester Square – and met a tourist who had just arrived from Mexico and was trying to get to Germany. A lone Domino’s Pizza delivery rider in the City of London, a solo street performer in Leicester Square. Photographs by Sean Smith. A woman sits alone on her balcony overlooking Ramsbottom in Greater Manchester. Photograph by Christopher Thomond. A woman taking the sunshine on a balcony, an ambulance passing through the streets – these were the sights of Ramsbottom in Manchester, where Christopher Thomond spent the day. An emergency ambulance passing through Ramsbottom. The Queensferry Crossing road bridge. Photograph by Murdo MacLeod. Murdo MacLeod found the rush-hour traffic much thinner than the usual gridlock after the government’s lockdown in response to the coronavirus outbreak. A closed restaurant in Glasgow city centre. The city centre of Glasgow was quiet, with shops and cafes all closed – and the railway station was deserted. Health advice is displayed in an almost deserted Glasgow Central railway station. Ryan Bowman is the proprietor of Mezcal Mexican restaurant. After being forced to close the premises, he decided to put the perishable food to good use, by donating it to NHS staff and hospital workers. MacLeod photographed him in Renfield Lane where he was carrying the food to his car. Ryan Bowman carries food that he is donating and delivering to NHS staff and workers at hospitals in Glasgow. Despite the distancing measures in place, there was still time for romance in Kelvingrove Park.