In these unprecedented times, is wearing makeup a superficial occupation? I’d argue it’s a much-needed mood booster. Historically, women have boldly sported bright lipstick in challenging times. In 1912, Elizabeth Arden famously handed out red lipsticks to the suffragette movement and in the Second World War sent tubes of it to women serving in the military. Wearing a bold lip colour is a sign of defiance, it symbolises fearlessness and it will bring you a little comfort and joy every time you catch your reflection in the mirror. There’s nothing frivolous about that. 1. Kevyn Aucoin Unforgettable Lipstick £24, spacenk.com 2. Kilian Paris Le Rouge Parfum Lipstick £42, harveynichols.com3. Dolce & Gabbana Dolcissimo Matte Liquid Lip Color £36, harrods.com 4. Tom Ford Lip Spark Lipstick £40, selfridges.com5. Smashbox Always On Cream To Matte Lipstick £19, lookfantastic.com Blusher can be reassuring, making us look healthier and happier. Surely there’s something in that. Lovers of blush are usually divided into two camps: cream and powder. I’ve never really bought into the cream variety. On fair skin, it adds a youthful flush and the malleable texture means you’re less able to go overboard with it. For darker skins it is a little more complicated – creams and liquids are rarely bold enough to show up. And if wearing foundation, it doesn’t matter what colour you choose, it’ll all turn to a brown sludge. So I prefer powder blushes. This one from KVD – a premium vegan, cruelty-free brand – is one of the best. There are six shades ranging from a nude beige to a tawny rose, with a bold orange thrown in for good measure. It’s enough to suit all skin tones; no one needs a million blushers, just great colours and pigments – which this has. The texture is also impressive; it glides on like silk. It doesn’t sit in pores and lines, and doesn’t oxidise as the day goes on, so it’s great for all skin types, including mature and oily. The things I love most, however, are that it lasts all day – hence the name – and it makes my face look happy. So, if you are looking for a small way to find pleasure in your beauty routine, this is a good place to start. KVD Vegan Beauty Everlasting Blusher, £22, boots.com Soothe and smooth For a cream that acts as skincare for your hands, look no further. This evens skin tone, plumps skin while also strengthening your nails. Clarins Super Restorative Age-Control Hand Cream, £40, clarins.co.uk Scented softness This lotion smells great – of juniper, clove and rosa centifolia – and jojoba oil and vitamin E help alleviate dryness and minimise fine lines. Floris Centifolia Luxury Hand Lotion, £24, florislondon.com Perfumed paws Shea butter, argan oil and rose meets oud… This fashionable fragrance house has created a hand cream that elevates the everyday. Miller Harris, Scherzo Hand Cream, £18, millerharris.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto