Pete Buttigieg, the former Indiana mayor whose long-shot bid for the presidency saw brief success in Iowa and New Hampshire, has dropped out of the Democratic primary. When Buttigieg launched his campaign in April of last year, the millennial mayor of the fourth-largest city in Indiana acknowledged his relative lack of experience in a growing primary field that came to include a former vice president, multiple senators and mayors of much larger cities. “I recognize the audacity of doing this as a Midwestern millennial mayor,” Buttigieg said. “More than a little bold – at age 37 – to seek the highest office in the land... But we live in a moment that compels us each to act.” Buttigieg’s youth and experience as the leader of a Midwestern town came to be seen as an asset in the first voting state of Iowa, where the candidate affectionately known as “Mayor Pete” became the polling leader starting in the fall. More moderate Democrats in Iowa said Buttigieg’s rejection of progressive policies like Medicare for all, which he had previously embraced, made him a fresh political face capable of defeating Donald Trump in November. Casting himself in the mould of Barack Obama, Buttigieg predicted his success in Iowa would set him on the path to the nomination and help him become the first openly gay nominee of a major political party. “The same state that took a chance on a young guy with a funny name, who a lot of folks didn’t think could win 12 years ago,” Buttigieg said at an Iowa event earlier this year, “this state could help us make history one more time.” Buttigieg did eventually win the most delegates in Iowa and came within striking distance of Bernie Sanders in New Hampshire, but the former mayor could not extend that success to more racially diverse states like Nevada and South Carolina. Buttigieg’s early success may have owed something to his fiery presence throughout the Democratic primary debates. Recognising that he needed to stand out among the crowded field he seemed to relish taking aim at his rivals. He often had pre-prepared attacks and clashed frequently with Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, and Amy Klobuchar. There are currently eight leading Democratic presidential candidates: former vice president Joe Biden, senators Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren and Amy Klobuchar, former mayors Mike Bloomberg and Pete Buttigieg, billionaire philanthropist Tom Steyer and Hawaii congresswoman Tulsi Gabbard. Sanders and Warren are on the progressive side of the party, while candidates like Biden, Klobuchar, Bloomberg and Buttigieg are regarded as more moderate. Super Tuesday will be the first time that Bloomberg will be on the ballot, and will be a key test of whether the hundreds of millions of dollars he has invested in his own campaign have paid off. He controversially skipped the first early voting states to concentrate on winning support in larger, delegate heavy states. Buttigieg had faced questions since entering the race about his struggle to appeal to voters of color, who make up a key segment of the Democratic Party, and his support among African Americans in the early voting state of South Carolina landed in the low single digits. As more states voted, it became clear Democrats were not convinced that Buttigieg was the candidate best suited to defeating Trump, as he had repeatedly claimed on the campaign trail. Buttigieg often opened his rallies by asking attendees to envision the first day the sun rises over the United States of America and Donald Trump is no longer president of the United States. That day may soon come, but Pete Buttigieg will not be the one who delivers it.