After most national polls had been showing a considerable lead for Bernie Sanders in the Democratic primary, former vice-president Joe Biden’s strong showing on Super Tuesday caught most of the country by surprise. Notably, his largest margins came in states with substantial black populations: Virginia, Alabama, North Carolina and Arkansas. The surge of momentum that led to him winning 10 of 14 states began last Saturday in the South Carolina primary, where Biden’s 30-point win was the result of his taking almost two-thirds of black votes there. In fact, to date, Biden has done what every successful Democratic nominee has done over the past 30 years: win the most black votes in every state. Every nominee, that is, with the exception, in 2004, of John Kerry, who finished three points behind his eventual running mate, John Edwards, in just one state. What does this all mean? Black voters, particularly in the South, changed the course of the Democratic primary. And it’s safe to say they will play an outsize role in deciding who wins the White House. For more than five decades, an average of about 90% of black voters have supported the Democratic candidate. Those voters are concentrated in the South, where most of the states vote Republican. However, in a few battleground states, – Michigan, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, and Florida in particular – the number of black voters is sizable enough to be the deciding bloc. So a Democratic candidate who demonstrates the strongest black support in the primary can make the case that he or she is better positioned to win the presidential election. What the Super Tuesday results suggest is that Biden can gain black support in ways that Sanders cannot, and the recently exited Michael Bloomberg and Senator Elizabeth Warren could not. Donald Trump and his campaign strategists are clearly aware of the pivotal role black voters will play in the election. It is no coincidence that in the past few months alone, the president has kicked off a Black Voices for Trump initiative in Atlanta, dedicated a considerable portion of his State of the Union address to the “bootstrapping black American”, and announced plans to open “community centers” in strategically targeted black communities in seven battleground states. The president also reminds the nation at every opportunity about the low black unemployment rate and the federal prison reform bill he has signed into law. In doing this, Trump’s goal is not to win over the majority of black voters – depriving the Democratic Party of its core electoral constituency in the process. Rather, it is an attempt to accomplish two basic aims. First, he wants to get the Republican Party’s black support back to its historical average. Between 1968 and 2004, Republican presidential nominees polled an average of just over 11% of the black vote – Trump only managed 8% in 2016. If he can convince black Republicans to “come home”, he increases his chances of winning a close election. Second, he is hoping to dampen black voters’ enthusiasm for the Democratic nominee and for the election overall. Based on recent voting patterns, for every 10 black voters who stay at home on election day, the Democratic nominee loses nine votes and Trump only loses one. This reality is what makes Biden’s commanding performance last week even more meaningful. Trump’s disapproval rating among black voters is exceedingly high – just one in 10 has a favorable view of him, and only a dismal 4% support his policies all or some of the time. But dissatisfaction with Trump is not enough to improve the most important metric when it comes to black voters in the general election: turnout. Biden’s Super Tuesday wins suggest he is best-positioned to accomplish it. In 2016, the black voter participation rate fell by seven points from 67% in 2012 to 60%, its lowest level in two decades. That reduced the black share of the electorate from nearly 13% in 2012 to less than 12% in 2016. And for an election that was essentially decided by 77,000 votes over three battleground states, higher black turnout might have resulted in a different electoral outcome where Hillary Clinton became the first female president. Trump won the 2016 election for a number of reasons – lower black turnout was not the sole cause, but higher black turnout is critical to the Democratic nominee’s chances of beating Trump. Based on the results from Super Tuesday, the indication seems to be that black voters think Biden is the pragmatic choice and the safest bet. And the accompanying increased black turnout across the primary states bodes well for Democrats’ chances of winning the election this Fall. A month ago, Biden’s bid for the presidency seemed to be running on fumes. Then, in the span of just a few days, black voters helped his campaign go from also-ran to frontrunner. It remains to be seen which candidate emerges from the primary and goes on to face Trump in the election, but whoever the nominee is, he or she will necessarily rely on black voters to help deliver victory just as they did for Biden last week. If black turnout increases, especially in battleground states, and the Democratic nominee can hang onto a 90% share of their votes, 2020 will undeniably be the year of the black voter. Theodore R Johnson is a senior fellow at the Brennan Center for Justice