Shortly before kick-off the man on the public address system assumed a grave tone of voice and informed everyone to telephone the NHS 111 service should they develop symptoms of coronavirus. Throw in the earlier sight of a couple laden down with giant packs of toilet rolls staggering past the ground and it would have been easy to assume a hint of panic was swirling in the South Yorkshire air. If so, it has not reached a Sheffield United dressing room in which a majority of players simply do not do fear. Thanks to Billy Sharp’s winning goal and stellar performances from, among others, John Lundstram and Dean Henderson, Chris Wilder’s team shrugged off almost every question Norwich asked them. It left the Blades set fair for European qualification, while leaving Daniel Farke’s recently slightly resurgent Norwich stuck at the bottom and in real danger of becoming stranded after their manager pressed a series of tactical buttons to no avail. These teams have been on very different trajectories since winning promotion last spring. There are several reasons why but, foremost among them, is money. While Wilder dropped his record £22m signing Sander Berge to Sheffield United’s bench, where the Norway midfielder sat alongside the £10m Lys Mousset, Norwich’s collective starting XI cost less than £20m. To place such sums in context, Wilder has still spent an awful lot less than most Premier League counterparts but, unlike many peers, he has managed to keep his squad remarkably fresh and injury free. Not for the first time this season his entire 25-man squad was passed fit for this game and although luck plays a certain part in that, Sheffield United’s manager is clearly doing an something right in the training and sports science spheres. Medical science repaired the shattered knee which, for a time, threatened to end Tim Krul’s career and, after a lengthy stint in the shadows at Newcastle and then Brighton, Norwich’s Dutch goalkeeper is back to his best. Krul swiftly emphasised that point by expertly tipping Oli McBurnie’s powerful close-range header over the bar as Sheffield United began flexing their muscles. Although Norwich enjoyed periods of pleasing possession, Wilder’s excellent back three restricted them to half chances with Jack O’Connell even finding time to advance from centre-half and see his goal-bound shot deflected narrowly wide. The stage was set for Sharp to demonstrate precisely why he is keeping Mousset and David McGoldrick on the bench by meeting the excellent Lundstram’s fabulously weighted, subtly curving, cross with the most acrobatic of flying headers. This time Krul had no riposte, Sheffield United were in front and the 34-year-old Sharp had registered his third goal in four games. They nearly doubled that lead when Lundstram’s volley swerved fractionally wide and a suddenly extremely lightweight looking Norwich had reason for relief when the half-time whistle blew. Farke reorganised things at the interval withdrawing the talented but slightly tired Todd Cantwell – partly at fault for the goal – as he tightened midfield by shifting to a diamond shape featuring Alexander Tettey sitting at its base and shielding the defence. With substitute Josip Drmic joining Teemu Pukki in attack, Norwich also went a little bit more direct and Wilder’s Manchester United loanee goalkeeper Henderson earned his corn by somehow keeping out Mario Vrancic’s close-range shot after Emiliano Buendía’s chip into the box prompted a bout of goalmouth bagatelle.