Tennis is expected to shut down on Thursday for up to 10 weeks. The French Open in May and Wimbledon in June are thought to be safe at the moment, but the Guardian understands several other big tournaments are almost certain to be cancelled, including the Miami Open, which is due to start on 25 March. The slow response by the ATP, who oversee the men’s game, has frustrated players and tournament directors seeking guidance on the coronavirus crisis that forced the cancellation of the Indian Wells Masters and, since then, other minor tournaments. However, after a series of urgent overnight phone calls between tournament organisers and the ATP, confirmation that the calendar will be suspended indefinitely is expected later on Thursday, sources tell the Guardian. In contrast, the game’s oldest governing body, the ITF, responded quickly to the global Covid-19 threat on Wednesday by cancelling the Fed Cup finals in Budapest in April, as well as the play-off matches in eight other venues, including Great Britain’s tie in Mexico. The Miami Open will be the next big event to be cancelled – scuppering any plans Andy Murray had of returning to the game in the city where he has second home – even though the website of the season’s second Masters tournament was still advertising tickets on Thursday morning. However, suspension of the NBA programme and the steadily rising awareness in the United States of the scale of the pandemic has sharpened the focus of tennis administrators there. The Masters tournaments under threat are Miami, Monte Carlo (12 April), Madrid (3 May) and Rome (10 May) as well as smaller events in Houston, Marrakech, Barcelona, Budapest, Estoril and Munich (all scheduled for April), and Geneva and Lyon (both in May). If circumstances improve, the second grand slam of the season, the French Open, will be saved, but sources stressed on Thursday there could be no guarantees. Between Roland Garros (24 May) and Wimbledon, which starts on 29 June, a slew of minor tournaments could go ahead, including the Libéma Open in the Netherlands on 8 June, where Murray might have begun his preparation for Queen’s and Wimbledon, and the following week in Halle, where Roger Federer, recovering from knee surgery, potentially would have returned to the game. The Olympic Games in Tokyo in July and August are still under threat, and tennis is monitoring developments as players and federations wait to see if qualification will proceed. The ITF said: “We are working closely with the IOC to address any impact on athlete eligibility.”