Mary Mallon was a super-spreader before the term existed, a disease carrier so notorious she acquired a celebrity nickname: Typhoid Mary. Mallon showed no symptoms but was infected with typhoid and triggered multiple outbreaks in New York at the turn of the 20th century. She was a cook for affluent families, and everywhere that Mallon went the bacterial infection followed, sickening one household after another. In 1907 a medical researcher identified her, leading to Mallon being forcibly quarantined for the rest of her life on North Brother Island, a containment site on New York’s East River. She died in 1938, aged 69, vilified in folk memory as “the most dangerous woman in America”, a patient zero who needed to be isolated and locked up, a de facto prisoner, until death. A century later it is the turn of cruise ship passengers, air travellers and millions of people in Italy, China and other countries to be quarantined – temporarily – in the battle to control coronavirus. Measures range from pleas for social distancing and self-isolation to travel restrictions, bans on public gatherings and strict surveillance. A church congregation at the centre of an outbreak in South Korea has been accused of murder. In some parts of China there are rewards for informing on sick neighbours. China’s drastic measures seem to be working, fuelling debate about how far to curb individual liberty in order to protect public health. Mallon’s fate offers a cautionary tale about getting the balance wrong, according to scholars who started revisiting her case in the wake of HIV, Sars and other epidemics. They cast Mallon, an Irish immigrant, as a victim of public hysteria and official over-reach, a woman who committed no crime but ended up incarcerated and dehumanised as a metaphor for contagion. “It is very difficult for most healthy Americans to envision themselves as the ones whose liberty might be threatened in the effort to protect the health of the community,” Judith Leavitt, a historian, wrote in her book Typhoid Mary: Captive to the Public’s Health. Mallon was born in 1869 in Cookstown, County Tyrone. She emigrated to the United States as a teenager and from 1900 started working as a cook for wealthy New York families. A pattern emerged. Her employers and other domestic staff members became feverish and nauseous – stricken with typhoid, some fatally – while Mallon, busy in the kitchen, remained healthy. Oblivious to her infection, she would move on to another household. In 1906 Mallon cooked for the family of Charles Henry Warren, a banker, at their rented house in Oyster Bay, Long Island. When six of the 11 people in the household fell ill, the owners hired George Soper, a civil engineer, to investigate. Through a process of elimination he tracked down Mallon as the source – the US’s first confirmed asymptomatic carrier of the disease. Seven of eight families she had worked for had become infected. Mallon denied any responsibility and reputedly rebuffed Soper’s request for stool and urine samples by brandishing a carving fork. After Soper published his results in the Journal of the American Medical Association authorities detained her. She did not go quietly. Five policemen were involved in her capture. An official who had to sit on her in the ambulance compared it to being “in a cage with an angry lion”. Mallon insisted she was healthy and felt unjustly held in isolation at a clinic on North Brother island. After three years, in 1910, she was released on condition she no longer cook. Mallon worked in laundries but the pay was poor so she changed her name to Mary Brown and resumed working in kitchens, including the Sloane Hospital for Women. It had a typhoid outbreak in 1915. Mallon was exposed and returned to quarantine for the rest of her life, linked to dozens of infections and three deaths. Lurid rumours claimed she had infected thousands. On the island she was frequently tested and prodded but left largely ignorant about her condition. “I have been in fact a peep show for everybody,” she wrote in a letter. “Even the interns had to come to see me and ask about the facts already known to the whole wide world. The tuberculosis men would say ‘There she is, the kidnapped woman’.” Mallon’s refusal to recognise the danger she posed to others, and act responsibly, put authorities in a difficult position. However, Leavitt and other scholars believe that as a poor, unmarried Irish immigrant, and a woman, she suffered prejudice not shown to other asymptomatic typhoid carriers, including some who infected more people than Mallon but were quarantined for only a few weeks. Today workers in service industries across the world face a choice about whether to stop working as a precaution against coronavirus – and possibly forfeit pay and health insurance. In a 2001 book the late television chef Anthony Bourdain defended Mallon as a kindred rebel spirit who worked because she needed to work. “Cooks work sick. They always have. Most jobs, you don’t work, you don’t get paid. You wake up with a sniffle and a runny nose, a sore throat? You soldier on … it’s a point of pride, working through pain and illness.”