While the racing world occupies its thoughts with the running plans of Willie Mullins and Gordon Elliott in the buildup to next week’s Cheltenham Festival, a more modest yard near the Somerset village of Bruton is quietly preparing for its biggest day yet. Rose Loxton, who used to show up in a lot of pictures alongside Kauto Star and Big Buck’s during her years working for Paul Nicholls, is planning to have no fewer than three runners in the Foxhunter Chase on Friday week, giving her a serious chance of a first success in jump racing’s biggest week. “I don’t even want to think about it,” she says, having answered the phone while riding out on Tuesday morning. “I’ve only got two racing bridles, I’m going to have to borrow one from Paul.” Victory would be an extremely welcome change of luck because Loxton has been in the wars. A horror fall in November 2018 sent her to hospital in an air ambulance with a laundry list of injuries and, while she was being treated, doctors discovered she was also suffering from cancer. Showing the toughness for which jump-racing folk are known, Loxton, born and raised on the Galway coast, is inclined to look for the positives. “If I hadn’t fallen off a horse, I would never have found out I had cancer. “I’ve had lots of treatment, I’ve had operations and I’m still going in every three weeks to have what they call a management drug. That goes on for another three or four months, I think. Fingers crossed, the doctors seem really happy. “It’s not something you can cure. It’s something you just keep under the thumb. I’m so busy with the horses, I hardly think about it. “It just seemed such a simple fall, but I kind of fell under the horse and then he tripped over me. I had a compound fracture of my right leg, a broken collar bone and a few ribs and I punctured my lung. “About a month after the accident, I still had my leg in a cast but I just had to get on a horse, to see if I could, so I rode around the roads. The children were furious.” The horse who did the damage, Earth Leader, is the least fancied of Loxton’s three intended runners next week. The others are Caid Du Berlais, to be ridden by the vastly experienced Will Biddick, and Shantou Flyer, whose owner-jockey, David Maxwell, would not claim to be as skilled as Biddick but has still been able to rack up 18 wins on his various horses this season. Maxwell switched Shantou Flyer to Loxton’s yard after the pair finished a fine second in last year’s Foxhunter, perhaps hoping a change of scenery would help the horse make up the necessary ground on Hazel Hill, who beat them last March. Loxton, who has had a winner at the Punchestown Festival in each of the last two years, is quietly upbeat. “I don’t want to be a tipster but if Shantou Flyer is well and fit, you’d think he’d have to have a serious chance. And Caid, if he can get up the hill, I’d love to see him placed. Catterick 2.20 Pepper Street 2.50 Django Django (nap) 3.20 Zoutoise 3.50 Las Tunas 4.20 Transpennine Star 4.50 Wishing And Hoping 5.25 Anythingforlove (nb) Lingfield 2.30 Golden Times 3.00 Renardeau 3.30 Pitcher’s Point 4.00 Al Daiha 4.30 Corvair 5.00 Percy’s Prince Kempton 5.15 Star Of Bengal 5.45 Songo 6.15 Be Fair 6.45 Cemhaan 7.15 Chares 7.45 Fujaira King 8.15 GriggyFontwell Abandoned (waterlogged) “It would be awesome to win, a dream come true. It’s the sort of thing you think about when you first get into racing. I mean, I can remember rushing home from school to watch the racing when I was young and thinking, gosh, it’s Cheltenham.” Nicholls, who is likely to run Alcala in the Foxhunter, says of Loxton: “She’s an amazing lady and you can see how the horses keep her going. She was here for a lot of years, she was head girl, and she still rides out when she can. She deserves all the success she gets.”