Two decades ago, 19-year-old Princess Shamsa was snatched from the street in Cambridge. She and two friends had visited a bar. Later that evening, a car pulled up and, by her account, at least four armed men were inside. She claimed they were Dubai nationals from Sheikh Mohammed’s personal staff. Shamsa said she was ordered into the car, driven to a property in Newmarket and flown to Dubai by private jet the next day. These events in August 2000 triggered a police investigation, accusations of diplomatic interference and questions about the behaviour of one of the UK’s most distinguished royal visitors. The previous month, Shamsa had fled the Longcross estate near Chobham, Surrey, where her father – Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, the vice-president and prime minister of the United Arab Emirates and ruler of Dubai – had installed the family for the summer. Her mother, Houria Ahmed Lamara, is Algerian. Slipping through an open gate to Chobham Common, Shamsa made her way from Surrey to a temporary hostel in south London. She went to see an immigration solicitor and sought advice about remaining in Britain. She then travelled to Cambridge, from where she was abducted. In an email she later managed to smuggle out from captivity in Dubai to the solicitor, Shamsa alleged: “I was caught by my father, he managed to track me down through someone I kept in touch with. “I was caught on the 19th August, in Cambridge. He sent four Arab men to catch me, they were carrying guns and threatening me, they drove me to my father’s place in Newmarket, there they gave me two injections and a handful of tablets, the very next morning a helicopter came and flew me to the plane, which took me back to Dubai. I am locked up until today.” She added: “I haven’t seen anyone, not even the man you call my father. I told you this would happen … I know these people, they have all the money, they have all the power, they think they can do anything. You said that if he kidnapped me, you would contact the Home Office and involve them. Now, I am not only asking you to report this immediately, I am asking your help and to involve the authorities (involve everyone).” The family court judgment says that police were aware of her abduction as early as the month it happened. Police records reveal the investigating officer, DCI David Beck, “spoke on the telephone to an individual who purported to be Shamsa” who confirmed that she had been taken to Cambridge by a man who booked a room for her in a hotel. “At a time when she was drunk, the man drove her to a remote location. He got out of the car and four armed men got in. She was taken to Newmarket and then by helicopter to an airport in France where she was met by her brother and others before being put into one of her father’s private jets and flown to Dubai.” Shamsa named three individuals whose identities were later confirmed by Mohammed Al Shaibani, the current director general of the ruler’s court in Dubai. Police confirmed that the first person named by Shamsa had indeed booked the precise room number in the hotel identified by her for the relevant dates in August 2000. News of Shamsa’s alleged kidnap and forced return to Dubai was revealed by the Guardian in December 2001. At that stage, the sheikh declined to comment on the claims. Last year, in a witness statement to the court, the sheikh said Shamsa was vulnerable and just a child and he felt “overwhelming relief” when his missing daughter was found. Shamsa has not been seen in public since her abduction. While the disappearance of Shamsa was soon forgotten, the abduction of her sister Princess Latifa, in March 2018, was far harder for the sheikh to dismiss. A video created by Latifa, and brave testimony given by one friend in particular, provided the rationale for the attempted escape, as well as the alleged brazen and violent manner in which the princess was returned to Dubai by officers acting for her father – according to him, for her own welfare. The video, which Latifa had instructed associates to release in the event that anything happened to her, described her father as someone who “will kill people to protect his own reputation … he only cares about himself and his ego. So this video could save my life. And if you are watching this video, it’s not such a good thing. Either I’m dead, or I’m in a very very very bad situation.” It relayed how in 2002, just two years after her sister’s disappearance, Latifa had also decided to flee but was sent back at the border with Oman and imprisoned for three years and four months. “It was constant torture, constant torture, even when they weren’t physically beating me up, they were torturing me,” said Latifa. “They would make sounds to harass me and then they would come in the middle of the night, to pull me out of bed, to beat me …” Latifa’s friend, Tiina Jauhiainen, who gave oral and written evidence to the family court, was on the boat on which the princess attempted to escape. The court judgment details how Jauhiainen, who first met Latifa in 2010, said that as they became closer, the princess confided in her about Shamsa and about her own attempt to escape Dubai in 2002. Jauhiainen said she agreed to help her friend in a new escape plan, with the original idea being to swim underwater from the coast of Dubai out to a boat. In the end the distances involved were too great and an alternative plan was hatched, involving reaching the yacht from a light dinghy from Muscat, Oman. At about 7pm on 24 February 2018, they reached the yacht, the Nostromo. Over the next eight days, it sailed south in international waters in the Arabian Sea. During this period, Latifa and another crew member communicated with various individuals, which may have enabled the Dubai authorities to locate them. After about six days, they became aware of a boat shadowing their passage and a coastguard spotter plane from the Indian mainland making regular sorties over the boat. Jauhiainen said the Nostromo was about 30 miles off Goa, India, when it was boarded by Indian special forces, employing smoke grenades or gas and gunfire. She said she was “frightened to death”, dragged to the deck with her hands tied behind her back, and saw Latifa lying prone on the floor with her hands similarly bound. Jauhiainen alleged that Indian commandos repeatedly shouted: “Who is Latifa?” before an Arab man was brought onboard and identified the princess. Meanwhile, her friend was desperately shouting that she was entitled to asylum. Jauhiainen, who has not seen or heard from Latifa since, claimed: “Latifa’s last words that I heard as she was dragged away kicking and screaming were words to the effect that: ‘You can’t get me back alive. Don’t take me back. Shoot me here; don’t take me back.’” Jauhiainen said she and other crew members were taken back to Dubai by members of the UAE army, who had replaced the Indian soldiers on the boat. She was accused of a plot to extort money from the sheikh but was eventually released on condition that she would not talk about any aspect of the story or try to contact Latifa. Princess Haya, the sheikh’s sixth and youngest wife who was reported to have fled Dubai last year, said she initially believed her husband’s account that Latifa was unbalanced and that the story was an attempt by others to extort money from him, but became increasingly concerned after reading reports in the international media. Describing a visit to see Latifa on 6 December 2018, Haya told the court: “She opened the door, looked at me, embraced me, and burst into tears. She cried for a long time. She looked vulnerable. She had no makeup on and she had pale skin.” Latifa was seen in public in December 2018 during a meeting in Dubai with Mary Robinson, the former UN high commissioner for human rights and ex-president of Ireland, which was arranged by Haya. But as her concerns increased, Haya says she was told by the sheikh to stop interfering in events that did not concern her. Although the abductions of Shamsa and Latifa had been previously reported, they had always been rubbished by the sheikh. The judgment of the president of the family court, Sir Andrew McFarlane, is the first time they have been heard in court and vindicates the reporting. He concluded: “The description of the way in which Latifa was treated by the Indian security services and also once the Arabic man had identified her, does not give any indication that this was a rescue rather than a capture. The final words that TJ [Jauhiainen] heard Latifa shouting say a great deal. She was pleading for the soldiers to kill her rather than face the prospect of going back to her family in Dubai. Drawing these matters together, I conclude, on the balance of probability, that Latifa’s account of her motives for wishing to leave Dubai represents the truth. She was plainly desperate to extricate herself from her family and prepared to undertake a dangerous mission in order to do so.” He added that he had no reason to doubt her account of her attempted 2002 escape and subsequent imprisonment, during which Latifa said she was kept in solitary confinement in the dark and repeatedly beaten. McFarlane said: “I feel confident in relying upon all that Latifa has said in the video film and elsewhere, both about her earlier abortive attempt to escape over the border to Oman and her subsequent detention.” Haya is said to have decided to flee Dubai after learning the full details of what happened to Latifa. The 45-year-old – full name Princess Haya Bint al-Hussein – is the daughter of the late King Hussein of Jordan and half-sister of the current king, Abdullah II. She married Sheikh Mohammed in 2004, and the couple have two children. Haya and the Sheikh were seen as the perfect couple before the court case lifted the lid on the internal fractures of the family. Last spring, the princess was reported to have travelled initially from Dubai to Germany and supposedly sought asylum there. In July, the Guardian revealed that a legal battle had been launched in the family courts over the welfare of the two children. That dispute escalated into a series of hearings before Sir Andrew McFarlane, the president of the family division of the high court of England and Wales. Among those who gave evidence were DCI Beck, formerly of Cambridgeshire police, who led the investigation into the disappearance of Princess Shamsa in the UK in 2000, and Jauhiainen, who helped Latifa’s escape from Dubai in 2018. Most of the proceedings were not open for public reporting but the media, who are allowed to attend family court hearings, were present for much of the evidence and were eventually allowed to publish the findings after attempts by the sheikh to suppress them. The sheikh has denied all the allegations against him. In a statement issued to the media, he said: “This case concerns highly personal and private matters relating to our children. The appeal was made to protect the best interests and welfare of the children. The outcome does not protect my children from media attention in the way that other children in family proceedings in the UK are protected. “As a head of government, I was not able to participate in the court’s fact-finding process, this has resulted in the release of a ‘fact-finding’ judgment which inevitably tells only one side of the story. I ask that the media respect the privacy of our children and do not intrude into their lives in the UK.”