Mel Giedroyc and Sue Perkins’ seven-series tenure as hosts of The Great British Bake Off nearly did not happen after they resigned on the first day of filming. The pair have revealed that they quit because they feared producers wanted to make a more intrusive and crueller show than they were happy with. “We resigned, basically,” Perkins told the Radio Times. “Because it was not a kind show. They were pointing cameras in the bakers’ faces and making them cry and saying, ‘Tell us about your dead gran.’ So we had very stiff words about how we wanted to proceed. I think we can say that, now we’re out of it, can’t we?” Mel and Sue’s chemistry and gentle, innuendo-packed presenting style was a big part of the programme’s success as it grew from an audience of 2 million on BBC Two to nearly 16 million at its peak on BBC One. When Channel 4 came knocking with a £25m-a-year deal to broadcast a show, which had become a BBC staple, the pair – along with Mary Berry – declined to move. They declared: “We’ve had the most amazing time on Bake Off, and have loved seeing it rise and rise like a pair of yeasted Latvian baps. We’re not going with the dough.” Giedroyc and Perkins have worked together on stage and television since they met 32 years ago at Cambridge University. They said they only continued with Bake Off after a frank discussion with producers about the nature of the programme. “We’re quite cheesy and homespun and we just want to have a laugh,” said Perkins. “Who wants to see people crying? I don’t. Especially if you work in television and you know the mechanisms that have been used to make them cry.” They say they properly quit Bake Off in 2016 after hearing on a television news bulletin that the programme, made by Love Productions, was being poached by Channel 4. It was painful, said Perkins. “There’s no antagonism there. I just think, ‘If you’re going to let us find out that way [from TV], then we’re not really a team, are we?’” Paul Hollywood did go to Channel 4, starting a successful judging partnership with Prue Leith. The pairing of Sandi Toksvig and Noel Fielding as new hosts was a surprise but most Bake Off fans seem to agreeit has worked, with the tone set by Giedroyc and Perkins continuing. Toksvig announced she was stepping down in January after three years presenting the show. Last week Matt Lucas was named as her replacement, saying: “I’m chuffed to bits to be joining the most delicious show on television. I can’t wait to break bread with Noel, Prue and Paul and meet the brilliant bakers. And bearing in mind my love of cake, I’ve already ordered some much larger trousers in anticipation. See you in the tent!” Giedroyc and Perkins will soon be seen together playing assassins in a new Sky One comedy, Hitmen.