Jami Attenberg is an American novelist, short story writer and essayist. Her third novel, The Middlesteins, was a New York Times bestseller and she has been described as “the poet laureate of dysfunctional families”. Her new novel, All This Could Be Yours, is an emotionally taut tale exploring the power and toxic influence of a controlling patriarch. Your patriarch, Victor, is a bullying, overbearing narcissist. How much was this novel a response to the current US political landscape?Our bad president is not the first bad man that has ever existed. It was a book I could write now, but I have a long history of writing about men treating women poorly. I didn’t have to dig too deep to think of a bad man character. They’ve been around for a long time. Victor is also an abuser and sexual predator. Is the novel a commentary on the #MeToo movement?I thought #MeToo was an amazing movement – this iteration and the iteration before – but it [sexual harassment] has been going on a long time. Before I started writing this book I spent two or three weeks writing down every bad thing that a man had ever done to me and I think that was something I had to do before I could write. I’m 48 years old and I’ve been getting harassed for 30 years. It never ends. Alex, Victor’s daughter, is desperate for answers about her father’s conduct, but her mother, Barbra, remains tight-lipped. Do you see Barbra as an enabler or a victim?When Trump got elected, I thought about the complicity of white women voting for him. I was interested in exploring that complicity. I see Barbra as an enabler. I was very angry with her at the beginning of the book and I tried to write myself into a place of understanding. Victor’s children worry about being infected by his toxicity. Can children escape the influence of their parents?We have to decide that we want to move on. And we have to decide that we aren’t going to engage in toxic behaviour. But as a society we tend to blame our parents long past the point when we should still be blaming them. We have to take responsibility for our own actions at a certain point. It’s a very western idea that we need closure. The theme of forgiveness runs through the novel. Do you think some things are simply unforgivable?Yes, as long as it doesn’t destroy you. Some people don’t feel comfortable living without forgiving. This book is really about what it’s like when you have to grieve somebody you don’t love. Because you don’t get to choose grief. You don’t get to choose love. There’s so many feelings that you don’t get to choose; they just sneak up on you. Alex is grieving a sad, complicated, hard past that she fought her way out of. Your first three books were marketed as women’s fiction and after a change in publisher, you’ve been positioned as literary fiction. Are categorisations helpful to readers or writers?I give a talk called A Career in Book Covers or How I Survived Being a Woman in Publishing. I show all my book covers through the years and talk about how I was put into a box and, finally, with my fourth book, was pulled out of that box. It’s misleading to the audience more than anything, so it’s unfair both to the audience and the author. And it’s cynical on behalf of the publishing world. I learned to read aged about three or four off the back of cereal boxes What’s your favourite novel about dysfunctional families?When I was writing my first dysfunctional family novel, I read The Corrections [by Jonathan Franzen], which was instructional for me. I also read Olive Kitteridge [by Elizabeth Strout], which taught me how to write about place. Did you grow up in a bookish household?My mother was an elementary school teacher. I learned to read aged about three or four off the back of cereal boxes, so I was always reading voraciously and there were plenty of books coming through the house. But it wasn’t an academic household. What were your favourite books as a child?I read a lot of Nancy Drew mysteries. There was a used bookstore near my house and books were a quarter and I used to steal money from my parents’ change jar to buy theme. I remember buying a Joyce Carol Oates collection of short stories when I was 13 or 14 and she was like a role model: reading a woman who was writing contemporary things and who was successful and young. Which writers have most influenced your own writing?I’m a big Grace Paley fan. She’s like my mother ship; she’s so good. Reading her was absolute freedom – the freedom to have a voice. And which writers working today do you most admire?I read a lot of poetry because that’s where you get access to really modern ideas. I love Morgan Parker’s and Ada Limón’s poetry. Is there a famous book – classic or contemporary – that you’ve never got around to reading?I haven’t read A Little Life yet. I want to. I heard it was awesome but that it’s really heart-wrenching and I haven’t been in a place where I feel like having my heart wrenched. Which book would you give to a young person?A Complicated Kindness by Miriam Toews, which is about being a young woman in a community that is a complicated place to grow up. Also Esmé Weijun Wang’s The Collected Schizophrenias – she explains a lot about mental illness but it’s written in a youthful, accessible way. And Mary HK Choi has written a couple of young adult novels that are really fun. What book might people be surprised to see on your bookshelves?There should never be any surprises! You should read everything and have a curiosity for the entire world. What’s the book you most like to give to other people?Just Kids by Patti Smith because I know a lot of people who are creative and that’s a great book if you’re having a complicated relationship with your art, and if you’re at a crossroads in your life. Who would you like to write the story of your life?I’m writing a memoir now so it’s got to be me because I wouldn’t wish going through all the banalities of my existence on anyone but myself. • All This Could Be Yours by Jami Attenberg is published by Profile (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15