Paris Saint-Germain beat Borussia Dortmund 2-0 in a Champions League last-16 second leg to reach the quarter-finals 3-2 on aggregate. The match was played behind closed doors due to coronavirus fears, with many PSG fans congregating outside the Parc des Princes stadium instead. Neymar and Juan Bernat scored before half-time to overturn a 2-1 first-leg deficit and send the French champions into the last eight for the first time since 2016. Dortmund finished with 10 men after Emre Can was sent off in the dying minutes for a clash with Neymar. PSG made it past the last 16 after painful exits at the same stage in the last two years. They let slip a 4-0 advantage in a 6-5 aggregate defeat by Barcelona in 2017 and lost to Manchester United on away goals after beating the English side 2-0 at Old Trafford 12 months ago. Over 3,000 ultra fans gathered near the Parc des Princes before kickoff after being granted authorisation by the police - demonstrations being considered an exemption to the ban of gatherings of more than 1,000 as French authorities try to contain the coronavirus, which has infected 2,281 people and killed 48. They lit firework and their chants could be overheard in the stadium. “Our only virus is Paris SG,” a banner in the empty arena read. PSG were without captain Thiago Silva, who had not fully recovered from a hamstring injury, while Kylian Mbappé started on the bench after suffering from a sore throat.PSG dominated possession and had the first clear chance when Edinson Cavani’s cross shot from Ángel Di María’s through ball was deflected by keeper Roman Bürki. Neymar put the hosts ahead in the 28th minute as he dived in to head home Di María’s free-kick for his 35th goal in 57 matches, making his presence count after missing the return leg against United through injury last season. Bernat doubled the lead on the stroke of half-time by flicking Sarabia’s attempt past Bürki. PSG pressed high after the break while Erling Braut Haaland, who scored a double in the first leg, never looked likely to add to his 10 Champions League goals this season. Thorgan Hazard and Axel Witsel made way for Julian Brandt and Giovanni Reyna as Dortmund coach Lucien Favre looked to freshen up his attacking line with PSG on the back foot for much of the second half. A brawl erupted two minutes from time after Can fouled Neymar and pushed the Brazilian to the ground. Can was sent off while Di María picked up a yellow card which means the Argentinian will be suspended for the first leg of PSG’s quarter-final.