Annalena McAfee’s London home, on a quiet cobbled mews not far from Great Ormond Street hospital, seems a fitting place to be speaking about a book full of beautiful flowers. The author’s third novel, Nightshade, is about a botanical artist, and I approach her house through a sea of pot plants. McAfee – elegantly dressed in grey, her silver-blond hair falling about her shoulders – greets me at the door and shows me upstairs to a sitting room. An olive tree shimmers outside the window, jasmine clambers over the balcony. McAfee makes coffee and we sit on leather chairs. Jane Bown prints line the walls. There are relatively few books in the room, just two shelves with a mixture of her work – I spot both McAfee’s first novel, The Spoiler, which drew on her time as a journalist for the Financial Times and London’s Evening Standard, and 2017’s Hame, set on a fictional Hebridean island. There are also copies, several of them in translation, of her husband’s books. McAfee is married to Ian McEwan, whom I think I hear clattering about somewhere below us several times during our conversation. We have met once before, at a literary festival, but she appears on edge, sipping her coffee with her shoulders hunched. I ask her how she feels about the promotional merry-go-round. “Maybe some people enjoy it, but I feel it’s like volunteering for the stocks and saying: ‘Throw those vegetables right at my face.’” I remind her of something her husband said – that having to talk about a book you might have finished a year or more earlier was like being in the service of your former self. “I love that he said that,” McAfee laughs. “Another thing that he says about me is that I’m the only writer he’s ever met that doesn’t want anyone to read their stuff. He’s taking it to extremes, the fact that I’m reticent about promotion. But any rational person would be reticent, I think.” She shouldn’t have too much to worry about – Nightshade is a glorious novel. Darker and more troubling than her earlier books, it tells the story of Eve Laing, a gifted artist railing against late middle age. Laing had a glamorous early life as the muse of a creepily controlling older painter, Florian Kiš, then slid into a comfortable married existence with the doughty Kristof. Now, suddenly aware of the passing of time, she casts aside her home and family and commits herself fully to her flower paintings. This is a novel full of twisted sexuality, art and power, about what it means to commit yourself entirely to the artistic life. One of the novel’s narrative engines is the rivalry between Eve and an art-school contemporary, Wanda Wilson, a conceptual artist who was also entangled with Kiš. The book’s ending is brutal and unforgettable. Nightshade is remarkable because Eve’s character is spiky, unpleasant, a bad mother, wife and grandmother, vain and coldly controlling of the young men she manipulates, as Florian once manipulated her. And yet the reader still roots for her. “I was quite enjoying writing this really rather unpleasant character,” McAfee says, “when my own unconscious sexism made me ask, ‘Who’s going to believe in this monster?’ Then I said to myself, ‘Well, just change the sex and think about that. Entirely plausible.’ A monster of selfishness whose talent gives them an out and exempts them from normal decent behaviour? It’s every male artist. Just think of all the weeping women that Picasso left behind.” To research the novel, McAfee took a course in botanical art at Ruskin College, Oxford, as well as reading “a hell of a lot of books about colour theory and pigments”. She had always loved flowers and art and the book was a way of getting closer to both. “I remember reading something by Ruskin where he said that whenever he wanted to find out about something, he wrote a book about it. This was my way of going deeper into art, into botany, subjects that have always fascinated me.” McAfee came late to adult novels, publishing The Spoiler in 2011, just before her 60th birthday, but she has been writing all her life – not only journalism (she launched the Guardian Review) but also eight children’s books. After a hardscrabble Glaswegian upbringing and student days that were, she says, “wild, absolutely wild”, she went to work at Marvel comics in the early 70s. “We’d bought up the back catalogue of the golden age of US comics from the 1950s,” she says. “My job was to edit the speech bubbles, to anglicise them and to take out all of the wartime references. I loved comics as a kid and I loved working on this.” She also wrote Stan Lee’s responses on the magazines’ letters pages. “I made up letters when the ones we received were all too batty to print.” We meet for lunch. It’s like a job but much more fun. Less office politics Her children’s books came in the wake of a personal tragedy. “I was diagnosed with a terminal illness in my late 20s and amid all the blizzard of emotions swirling about was the thought: ‘You never wrote a book, you fool.’ I had a very good friend – still a very good friend – Anthony Browne, the children’s book illustrator. During my long period of convalescence, we began to work on my first children’s book. We enjoyed the experience and worked on several more together. I realise this now, looking back, I was writing about the children I wasn’t going to have as a result of my illness.” She met McEwan in 1994, when she interviewed him for the Financial Times. He was recently divorced from his first wife, Penny Allen. The couple now split their time between the London mews house and a home in Gloucestershire. They work together and are the first to read each other’s work. “We write every day, mostly,” McAfee tells me. “We keep office hours. We meet for lunch. It’s like a job but much more fun. Less office politics.” I ask if it’s ever claustrophobic, writing in such close proximity. “We work in separate studies and in the early stages of a piece of writing, we respect each other’s reticence about what we’re doing. Later, when we’re more confident and immersed in a project, discussing it in the evening or while on walks feels like an extension of rich conversations about family life.” McAfee and McEwan met when they were already in their 40s and had accumulated the possessions of their separate lifetimes, including a vast number of books. “We had an interesting commitment ceremony melding our libraries when we moved in together,” she says. “We’d been married for five years before we lived in the same house. So we had lots of doubles – we got rid of those. It was tough. There are some upstairs here, some downstairs. They’re separated into fiction and nonfiction. The only really alphabetised bit is the history and biography. A step-daughter who worked in Waterstones alphabetised them for her pleasure. We want her to come and finish it all off.” Beside her bed, she tells me, are “two great piles of books. One of the secrets of my poor housekeeping. At the moment there is a children’s book that we had when we were kids called Wee MacGreegor, written in Scots, which I got out of nostalgia. Then there’s William Feaver’s [The Lives of Lucien] Freud, the first volume, and Celia Paul’s memoir. Celia Paul was his lover, mother of his child. A very good companion piece. There’s also Mary Gaitskill’s This Is Pleasure – I loved that - and Julian Barnes’s Man in the Red Coat. It’s delicious. That’s just the top layer of the pile. I don’t want to go pre‑Cambrian.” We end by talking about McAfee’s latest obsession – the work of Anthony Trollope. “I love Trollope. All of it. I recently read all of the Chronicles of Barsetshire and am halfway through The Pallisers. I grew up a Catholic, Irish-Scots family. I had no interest in Church of England politics whatsoever. But then I read The Warden a few years ago and I thought, ‘This is genius. Such humanity.’ I’m on Phineas Redux at the moment. Trollope! I prefer him to Dickens.” • Nightshade is published by Harvill Secker on 19 March (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15