When I say my entire life revolves around death, it is not hyperbole. I am director of the Centre for Death and Society at the University of Bath, one of the world’s only research centres dedicated to the interdisciplinary study of death, dying and the dead body. My father is also a retired American funeral director. My younger sister, Julie, and I spent hours and hours of our youth in the different funeral homes Dad worked in. We never actually lived in a funeral home, much to the disappointment of Six Feet Under fans worldwide, but we did grow up watching our father moving RIP floral arrangements around, or vacuuming a visitation chapel’s carpet, and frequently disappearing on Christmas mornings because someone had died the night before. This was all totally normal for us. Our parents had made a point of not hiding anything about death, funerals or dead bodies when we were kids. In late July 2017, my sister was diagnosed with an aggressive glioblastoma multiforme brain cancer and underwent emergency surgery to reduce the tumour’s size. She then received multiple radiation and chemo treatments for the next year before dying on 29 July 2018, in Milan, Italy, where she lived with her family and worked as a schoolteacher. Despite my lived experience and academic credentials on human mortality, I was completely unprepared for Julie’s untimely death at the age of 43. I was not unprepared in that way many people are wholly unprepared for a person to die. There was an element of that emotion, but I was raised to understand that any person, especially the people we know and love, unexpectedly die all the time. My own form of unpreparedness came in a different form: throughout the year that Julie spent living with brain cancer I constantly felt that I should intervene and ask about hospice care, to make sure that my sister understood she was dying – but for reasons I do not fully understand, I did not say anything until the very end. I finally said something on the night of 13 July 2018, when I was with my sister in Italy and she asked me what was happening. I held her hand and did what none of her medical team had done and said what the counsellors kept telling my brother-in-law not to say – I told my kid sister that she was never going home to Wisconsin, that she was going to die in Italy, and that we would do everything we could to make her end of life comfortable. Julie died 16 days later. What I remember most about this experience is my sister saying three things: (1) thank you for telling me, (2) I know I’m dying (we did grow up the same way, after all), and (3) I am glad you are the one who told me because I would do the same for you. This was one of the last conversations I ever had with my sister. Julie’s health was rapidly declining by this time. She had already lost vision in her right eye because of the tumour, the left eye was on its way out, she was bedbound because of severe balance problems also caused by the tumour, and her hearing was failing. On the upside, she was not in much physical pain because a local hospice recently started providing her with palliative drugs and outpatient medical care. But even after the local hospice got involved, no one said anything about dying. It was a matter of days after our conversation that an ambulance transported my sister to the same hospice’s comprehensive inpatient facility for comfort care. Julie requested that she not die at home, contrary to the conventional wisdom on where people prefer to die, so my brother-in-law dutifully made the arrangements. Two nights after I told my sister that she was dying, I asked if she wanted to talk on Skype with Mom and Dad in Wisconsin. She said yes, so I stretched out next to her on the bed and held up my laptop so we could all see each other. The conversation was short, mostly because it was difficult for my sister to maintain even medium-length, focused conversations by this point, but we did talk about how much we loved each other and how Julie understood she was dying and how unfair it all felt. A common narrative around terminal illness often describes dying people walking peacefully toward death, exhibiting stoic acceptance. My sister was angry about dying. She fully understood and accepted that death was coming, there was no supposed death denial in her final weeks, but her exact quote to my parents was: “Dying sucks. It really sucks.” Julie just wanted a longer life. We did, too. Neither my parents nor I could know it at the time, but this conversation on my computer screen was the last all four of us ever had together. In April 2018, I was in Italy with my partner and parents for Julie’s birthday, and it was abundantly clear even then that the cancer and its associated treatments were aggressively dismantling my sister. Looking back at that time, I realise I made a mistake by not saying anything about end-of-life care and dying. But it was also Julie’s birthday party, and my partner is always reminding me that most people are not ready to hear the word “dying”. My partner is absolutely correct, and I understand all this, but I still struggle with balancing what I professionally recognise versus what I personally say. The whole situation felt bleakly ironic, since being a funeral director’s kid meant death was our familiar friend. One of my earliest childhood funeral home memories is touching the dead hand of an older woman before her visitation started. I remember her skin’s distinct coolness as she lay in the casket, and asking my parents why the hand felt cold. They both explained that the woman was dead, and that a person’s body temperature changed after dying. Her hand was completely normal, they said. Dead bodies were completely normal, they said. And this was when I learned, at a very early age, that human corpses were not scary – they were just dead and cool to the touch. I also remember the blue polyester trouser suit that the woman wore, mostly because this all happened in the mid-1970s. When my sister took her final turn and died, I was in Bristol, where I live, preparing to board a 4.55pm flight for Italy. This was on a Sunday. A mutual college friend, already at the hospice, phoned while I waited to board the plane and told me that Julie had died holding her husband’s hand. My niece and nephew had said goodbye the day before. The friend had texted me several times while I waited in the airport to say that Julie’s breathing had become more laboured, so I was not surprised when the final call came in. I made sure during all the pre-death texting that our friend knew Julie did not want any resuscitation, should the hospice decide to take measures keeping her alive. Everyone around Julie agreed on this point, and it would be strange to see a hospice make such a move, but my brotherly protectiveness took hold and I needed to make sure that my sister remained dead if and when she died. Communicating all this over text messages was surreal, but I also know it is how we humans die now. During that final phone call I kept repeating: “Do not move her body. Keep her body there. I want to see Julie when I get to the hospice.” Our friend said not to worry. By the time I finally arrived at the hospice, my sister had been dead for several hours. The nursing staff had moved Julie from her room down to the hospice’s mortuaria level. I know this because I saw “Mortuaria” on the elevator signs as I descended to the basement, making a mental note along the way about experiencing the world’s weirdest version of Dante’s Inferno. Two extremely compassionate nurses showed me to the private room and told me in halting English to take as much time as I needed. I used my restaurant-level Italian to thank them. I took immense comfort seeing my sister this way. In that room. On that stainless steel. In a mortuary. Stainless steel. That is the first thing I noticed when I walked into the room. My dead sister’s body laid out on a stainless steel table, next to a stainless steel counter complete with a sink and retractable hose. She still wore her hospice gown, and a shroud covered her lower torso. In the room’s floor, at the foot of the table, sat a drain. It took me two seconds, using my advanced-degree critical thinking skills, coupled with my experience growing up in funeral homes, to realise I was looking at my dead sister in the hospice’s prep room. The prep room is where a funeral director “prepares” a body for a funeral. What I am about to say may not make sense, but I took immense comfort seeing my sister this way. In that room. On that stainless steel. In a mortuary. This was our youth. We grew up in these rooms. I was far more at ease talking with Julie in that familiar stainless steel room, holding her hand, hugging her and kissing her goodbye, than if we had been in her hospice room. I spent around 45 minutes with my sister, reading her what I had written on the different planes and making sure she knew that I would look after our parents. It took me a long time to actually leave. I wanted nothing more than to sit for days and hold my sister’s hand and think about all the prep rooms we saw as children. Late that night, as I left the hospice with everyone, I noticed that the lampposts outside the building all had advertisements for local funeral homes, or funebri in Italian. And not small adverts, I mean large banners that were impossible to miss. They reminded me of banners announcing Fourth of July parades or pride festivals, but designed by goth kids who went into marketing. I asked my brother-in-law if this was normal in Italy, because, well, I did not think you would see banners advertising funeral homes outside US or UK hospices. He said it was normal(ish) and just proved that Italian businesses knew where to find their customers. Then we started laughing because we both knew that Julie would think the funeral home advertisements were funny and that I must tell Mom and Dad about them. Rest assured, I did. They eventually took photos of the banners. Julie’s funeral service took place in an exceptionally stylish and modern Italian funeral home. A kind of funeral home very different from the midwestern American ones we knew as kids, but a funeral home all the same. She always appreciated marble floors and modernist architecture; the Jesus stuff (as we both called it) not so much, but, you know, this was Italy. Julie and I used to joke about spotting funeral homes of any kind in any city before anyone else. “That’s a funeral home,” I would say or she would say, well before any visible signage appeared. Our friends would then look at us with slightly terrified bemusement, as if we saw Death silently creeping up behind them in a New Yorker cartoon. We just intuitively recognised these places. My brother-in-law organised the funeral within hours of my sister’s death, contacting the funeral home and meeting with someone while I made my way to Italy. Funeral planning is emotionally difficult no matter the circumstances, but I could tell that my brother-in-law needed to make these arrangements on his own out of love and devotion. Besides, had I gone with him to meet the funeral director, I would probably have spent more time asking questions about how and why Italian funeral homes did certain things than actually focusing on my sister. He also made sure that the funeral home staff knew his deceased wife’s father was a retired American funeral director, and I got the sense that the unspoken code many American funeral directors follow when helping a colleague’s family – a look that says you have carried the dead for so many others, now let us help you carry your dead daughter – also applied in Italy. My parents flew in that day from Wisconsin, and we collected them at the airport on the way to the funeral. That last goodbye is when my familiarity with death, dying, dead bodies, funerals, funeral homes, funeral directors, grief and bereavement, the academic literature on when a loved one dies and watching parents weep over their dead child became profoundly conflicted. I knew exactly what to do with my parents when we arrived at the funeral home and my death professional mode immediately kicked in. At the same time, I remember thinking that this experience of death was never supposed to happen – that my younger sister was never supposed to die first and that our parents were never supposed to see Julie dead. She and I occasionally talked about who would die first, Mom or Dad. But we never seriously discussed what would happen if either one of us died first. I say seriously because I bought a motorcycle in my early 30s during a pre-midlife-crisis moment, which meant my sister told me in no uncertain terms that she would kill me if I died riding it. I thought about that motorcycle a lot after Julie died and how unfair it seemed that despite my best efforts, I managed to live, while she died from brain cancer. Connecting the two is not wholly rational, but it is often the way a person thinks while holding a dead sibling’s hand. Mom and Dad spent a long time with Julie in the private visitation room where mourners can see the deceased before the actual funeral. Then it was time to move Julie’s body, put her in the European-style tapered-end coffin selected by her husband, move the coffin to the funeral chapel for the service and close the coffin’s lid. I had spent time with my sister in the visitation room the day before, after filing the death notification paperwork, and she looked good, which was a relief because I did not want to call my parents and tell them that the funeral home handling their dead daughter botched the job. It seems crass, I know, to describe “botched jobs”, but this was my immediate concern. If you grow up around funeral homes, then you know what poorly done body prep looks like. Julie and I certainly knew. My sister was not embalmed. Embalming is relatively unusual in Italy, so she was placed on an electric cold pad that slowed her body’s decomposition. The funeral home dressed her in the clothes provided by her husband, applied cosmetics and styled her hair. Again, she looked good. In addition to funeral directing, my father also taught mortuary science for many years – specifically, funeral cosmetology – so trust me when I say that Mom, Dad and I spent a long time scrutinising how the funeral home prepared my sister for public viewing – in between crying and occasionally chuckling at the enormous Jesus crucifix above Julie’s head, which she would never have wanted. Then the funeral happened. The neo-rococo chapel quickly filled to capacity, so people spilled out into the funeral home’s foyer and quietly listened. The floral arrangements contained many sunflowers and gerbera daisies, my sister’s favourites. Musician friends played music. And everyone told funny stories about Julie in both English and Italian, which many of the Italians found quite different from their usual, more sombre funeral practices but very much liked. Julie was cremated the next day, and her urn sat for many months on a family bookshelf in Italy so that her children could say hello to Mama. I argued with myself for a long time over how to describe my sister’s funeral – in that way writers sit at a keyboard and talk to themselves, not realising other people can hear them, saying, “Make sure and describe your dead sister’s body but don’t make it weird.” As an academic, one of my aims is to understand all the physical tools and technologies humans use to make modern death and dying visible. Defined. Knowable. Experienced. So, for example, when I saw the electric cold pad keeping my sister’s body from decomposing, I automatically recalled the history of non-invasive preservation technologies used in funerals since the 19th century. But when it came to Julie’s funeral, all I really wanted to say is that it happened. She lived. She died. Everyone laughed and cried. People instinctively posted things on social media. Language seemed impossible. Words were not applicable. For years I had read academic articles and books that quoted grieving people describing what I was now feeling, which meant I unintentionally prepared myself for Julie’s death, but also meant I simply wanted to say I get it now. I think I get it now. • Adapted from Technologies of the Human Corpse by John Troyer, which will be published by MIT Press on 28 April • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, and sign up to the long read weekly email here.