Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: Japan recorded 1,016 cases of coronavirus as of Saturday. The tally rises to 1,728 if the 712 infections from the Diamond Princess cruise ship that was stranded at port near Tokyo last month are included. The death toll in the country, including fatalities from the ship, is 43. In Australia, 1,049 cases of Covid-19, and seven deaths, have been reported. And Canada has 1,044 cases, and 13 deaths. While the elderly and those with pre-existing medical conditions are the hardest hit by the virus, WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus warned young people: “you are not invincible”. Urging young people to act responsibly, he said: “This virus could put you in hospital for weeks – or even kill you.” In Britain, pubs, cafes, gyms and restaurants closed for business on Friday night as the government announced an unprecedented wage-support scheme to try to prevent a wave of job losses. The New South Wales government temporarily closed Bondi Beach after thousands flocked there on Friday and Saturday, when temperatures were unseasonably hot. Once it reopens, if more than 500 people are on the beach at any one time, it will be closed. The same applies for all beaches across the state. Federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said what happened at Bondi on Friday was unacceptable and told people to act responsibly. In the United States, tens of millions began living under stricter quarantine measures. Illinois and Connecticut on Friday afternoon joined New York in telling all residents to stay home outside of certain permissible activities and essential work services. This followed an order by California earlier in the week, while Pennsylvania on Thursday mandated all non-essential business to close and New Jersey planned to take similar action on Saturday. Singapore recorded two coronavirus-related deaths on Saturday, marking the city-state’s first fatalities from the pandemic. Singapore, widely praised for its response to the virus, has confirmed 385 cases of the infection. Jacinda Ardern asked citizens to restrict their movements around the country, and cancel all non-essential domestic travel. Those who could work from home should now do so, she said, but reassured Kiwis that essential services such as supermarkets and pharmacies would remain open. Mainland China reported no new locally transmitted cases of the coronavirus for a third day running, though imported infections continued to rise on Saturday. Mainland China had 41 new confirmed cases of coronavirus, all involving people who had travelled abroad, according to the National Health Commission. Syria will not allow visitors arriving from countries that are dealing with outbreaks to enter the country, as part of measures to prevent the spread of the virus. No cases have been recorded by the government, or in the large parts of the country that fall outside of government control. There is deep concern about an outbreak occurring in the country’s cramped camps and settlements. Jordan began an indefinite, nationwide curfew to prevent people from moving except for emergencies. Anyone violating the curfew, can be jailed up to a year, the army said. The Philippines’ recorded its 19th death from the coronavirus, with confirmed cases rising to 262. More than half the country is in strict home quarantine. The Indian state of Tamil Nadu on Friday took the rare step of closing its borders with several neighbouring states.