There are a number of things you should check before you hire a new babysitter. Are they experienced? Can they show up on time? Are they up-to-date with the latest government guidance on feeding children spoonsful of sugar? (“Not even if it helps the medicine go down.”) But if popular culture is to be believed, one question is more pressing than the rest. Before you leave your child with a new caregiver, it’s important to double check whether they are secretly an undercover agent from a law enforcement agency. It also might be helpful to ask: “Do you plan to use my child as a de facto therapist who will teach you that there’s a soft heart hidden beneath those extremely hard pecs?” Action comedy My Spy stars retired wrestler Dave Bautista as a “hardened CIA operative” who finds himself looking after a precocious nine-year-old after he is sent to spy on her family. Bautista is just the latest in a long line of bodybuilding babysitters; if the plot sounds familiar, it’s because My Spy is a tale as old as time (or at least, 1990). Arnold Schwarzenegger started it. In Kindergarten Cop, the professional big man became John Kimble, a police detective working undercover at a preschool. Three years later, wrestler Hulk Hogan followed suit with Mr Nanny, the story of bodyguard tasked with looking after two mischievous kids. A year after that, in 1994, bodybuilders Peter and David Paul starred as the Twin Sitters, hired to look after two young boys. There are no literary precedents to these stories – this isn’t a case of a classic being retold again and again. And yet, somehow, this is a trope that has popped up repeatedly over the last 30 years. Nearly a decade after Twin Sitters, Vin Diesel played a US Navy Seal who had to take care of five kids in The Pacifier. In 2007, The Game Plan saw the Rock play a quarterback who had to take an eight-year-old girl to ballet. In 2010, Jackie Chan was a undercover CIA agent who babysat three kids in The Spy Next Door. In 2019, wrestler John Cena starred in Playing With Fire, the tale of a firefighter and the three kids suddenly in his care. The recipe for success couldn’t be clearer: take one large man, one small kid, and you have a clear-cut comedy. Except Big Man, Small Kid movies are unfortunately subject to diminishing returns. While Kindergarten Cop has a forgivable 50% rating on review-aggregation site Rotten Tomatoes, both The Pacifier and Playing With Fire score just 21%. The Spy Next Door fares even worse with an unfortunate 12%, while Mr Nanny gets 7%. So why do these movies keep being made? Part of the appeal is the intrinsic comedy of an actor playing against type – it’s an easy and good-natured laugh to see a famous action man take on an unexpected role. The 1980s also saw a wrestling boom, with the World Wrestling Federation making its first film in 1989, creating new career opportunities for retired wrestlers. Then there’s the fact that kids are easy comedy fodder, especially when they’re juxtaposed with a 6’2” Arnie and are saying the line: “He’s a poo-poo face.” Yet Bautista himself isn’t happy about the comparisons. On 3 March he called a Twitter user “ignorant” for complaining that “every muscle bound action movie star” attempts to remake Schwarzenegger’s “seminal classic”. “Enjoy being a judgmental prick,” Bautista tweeted in response. Perhaps he’s yet to learn the lesson espoused by the nine-year-old in his own movie trailer. “Under the rough exterior,” she says, “you’re a nice guy.” • My Spy is out in the UK on Friday