Now that Meghan Markle has had her royal purse strings cut, the time has come for her to prove that she is capable of making a living on her own merits. And, ever the everywoman, it has been reported that Markle’s first step is exactly the same one that we’d all make upon finding ourselves suddenly short of money – she has instructed her agent to find her a role in a superhero film. At this point it’s best to assume that she’s looking for something more substantial than her pre-royal movie career offered; she won’t want a made-for-TV superhero movie, or to appear in a single scene of a larger film as a nameless woman whose only purpose in the universe is to give the middle-aged leading man something to absent-mindedly flirt at. So, who should she play? Luckily, as crowded as the superhero genre currently is, there is still plenty of untapped potential for her. Here are my suggestions. One of the biggest stumbling blocks to Meghan Markle’s return to acting is that she is now so well-known that it will be impossible for audiences to meaningfully separate her from the characters she’ll play. So it makes sense that her first big superhero role should blur the line between fiction and reality, which is why she should play DC’s Princess Projectra. Projectra is a member of the royal family, for starters. Better yet, her primary characteristic is revenge, after her royal and financial privileges were forcibly removed from her despite her wishes. Honestly, it could have been written for her. Then again, Markle’s reintroduction could also serve a dual purpose, showing her formerly adopted home country that she still feels some lingering affection. If the rumours of the Marvel Cinematic Universe developing a Captain Britain are true, then she would be a tremendous Roma. As the Omniversal Guardian, Roma is effectively a mystical string-puller who gives Captain Britain his powers and then just sort of naffs off. It’s a small role, but it would mean so much to the 12 people in this country who still have a genuine affection for peripheral members of the royal family. Big Barda was born in Apokolips to a woman named Big Breeda and was trained in the ways of combat by a second woman called Granny Goodness. She is seven feet tall and 250 years old. Her weapon is something called a mega rod. By all accounts, Big Barda is a slightly worse Wonder Woman created by someone who wasn’t very good at thinking up characters. If Markle is going to start somewhere, it may as well be there. Now, OK, look. I know there’s already a Gamora in the MCU. Two, in fact. But hear me out; as good as Zoe Saldana is in the role, Meghan Markle would be better. Gamora is, after all, a woman fated to drift through the cosmos after her home planet became unviable. She falls in love with a cocky young man with a powerful father. Most importantly of all, though, her father is awful, and every single one of Gamora’s actions is designed to distance herself from him. Something tells me that Meghan Markle would have plenty to work with here. An Egyptologist who has to shout the phrase “I am Isis” whenever she wants to transform into a superhero. Actually, scratch that. This one is a terrible idea.