• At a recent lunch the conversation turned to marmalade. What struck me was the question asked about the use of Ma Made, seemingly an ingredient which eases or enhances the process, and which guests all admitted to using. I wonder how many of your marmalade contributors also use it, and is that cheating?Jean Stringfellow Salford • I reached my “marmalade years” in 1961 at the age of 17. I had left school and before university I went to work for Robertson’s in Catford, South London. I was quickly promoted to assistant marmalade maker, a process which involved 1 cwt. sacks of sugar, salted Seville orange skins in in wooden barrels from Spain and a pressure cooker the size of a cement mixer lorry. I have never made marmalade since.John AndrewsGreat Haseley, Oxfordshire • That old line about the definition of a gentleman being someone who can play the accordion, but doesn’t (Letters, 11 March) always brings a smile. But it would be a shame if such thoughts put folks off the music of French-speaking Cajuns from Louisiana, which is often driven by the drone of the accordion. For decades this music was looked down upon as working class trash, but saw a revival in the 1970s. Try Pine Grove Blues by Nathan Abshire or the “Cajun national anthem”, La Jolie Blonde, by almost anyone, including, for instance, Belton Richard.Giles OakleyLondon • I always thought a gentleman was someone who takes his weight on his elbows.Bruce HolmanWaterlooville, Hampshire • How lovely and imaginative was the description of the stegosaurus’ footprint found on the Isle of Skye (Report, 12 March) as being the size of a small teapot. Can I suggest: as round as a pot of Marmite or as flat as an empty hot water bottle.Geraldine BlakeWorthing, West Sussex • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition