The most significant comment in Martin Kettle’s column (Defeating the Covid-19 crisis could need a wartime coalition government, 19 March), is that Boris Johnson and Dominic Cummings would be wrong to believe that they can spin their way through the present crisis and then return to political life as it was before the virus. That analysis applies equally to all the parties. The delicate ill-health of western politics in the face of populism, nationalism and the selfishness of developed countries is now compounded by new vivid considerations, such as the vulnerability and fragility of civilisation in the face of a single virus, and the high financial price of providing the basic necessities for living and for maintaining a minimum economic level. The urgent task for each of the major political parties is to focus on how their political values provide a vision of a society that can accommodate these new burdens and challenges. It requires judgment as to how far the resilience of the British people in coping with the current privations will continue into the future, and make them prepared to accept difficult policies if they believe that they will lead to a worthwhile future. If, as Martin Kettle states, a coalition of the parties is required to deal with the national crisis, this in itself may improve the miserably low public opinion of politicians.Michael Meadowcroft Leeds • How quickly Boris Johnson’s inability to lead has been unmasked (When Johnson says we’ll turn the tide in 12 weeks, it’s just another line for the side of a bus, 20 March). Instead of dreaming about being Churchill, he should have been learning from him. You cannot reason with a tiger when your head is in its mouth. Cajoling and flattery is not what is required. People need clear and blunt instruction, with a willingness to take unpopular decisions. I never thought I’d wish we had Tony Blair back, but I do. Alan Horne Poynton, Cheshire • It is strange that in a time of crisis Boris cannot find a three-word slogan to power the populace. How about STAY AT HOME? Vanessa RaisonAldeburgh, Suffolk