The whole of football may be in doubt but the Mill is still churning and the transfer vultures still circling. And with Tottenham in apparent “crisis”, Premier League rivals are looking to pick off some prime cuts. And they don’t come much more prime – when fit – than Harry Kane, over whom Manchester United and Manchester City are prepared to have a good old ding-dong, according to reports. They suggest that the England captain’s “representatives are exploring options for a potential transfer away from Tottenham” with sources at both Manchester clubs letting their interest be known. We’re talking big wedge though – £150m, no less. From a World Cup 2018 star to one from the previous tournament, 2014’s James Rodríguez, who is very much out in the cold at Real Madrid these days. So cold in fact that the relative warmth of the Black Country could beckon, with Jorge Mendes reportedly being summoned into action to “prepare the machinery” for a move to Wolves, according to Defensa Central. Everton are keen too, apparently. With goalkeepers who can actually stop the ball and reliably play it out suddenly sought-after, Bournemouth’s Aaron Ramsdale is on the radar of Chelsea and Tottenham, claims the Mail, in light of the flaky recent form of Kepa Arizabalaga and Hugo Lloris, respectively. And as Spurs mull over that chastening defeat by RB Leipzig, the German club’s Marcel Sabitzer, who stuck two past Lloris on Tuesday, could be a target for José Mourinho. They could face competition for the 25-year-old Austria midfielder from their old chums Arsenal, however. Rumour Mill mainstay Willian may have been more prominent at Chelsea of late, but so too remains talk of an impending departure. Bayern Munich are the latest to stress their interest. For their part Chelsea are still very much interested in the full-backs Alex Telles, of Porto, and Leicester’s Ben Chilwell. West Ham are pondering a summer bid for Napoli’s Hirving Lozano (provided they stay up, one would assume), for a fee close to the €40m they shelled out for the Mexico international. Everton and Atlético Madrid may prove more tempting options for the 24-year-old winger, though. In other goalkeeping news, Leeds are expected to pay Lorient the buy-out clause that will land the on-loan Illan Meslier permanently. Another Championship player attracting gossip is the Huddersfield striker Karlan Grant, on whom Aston Villa and West Brom are keen. Grant has hit 16 goals this season.