Amid widescale closures of cultural venues across the world in an attempt to stem the spread of coronavirus, classical music venues in Europe have turned to livestreaming their concerts in an effort to comfort music fans. At Staatsoper Berlin the curtain went up on a production of Bizet’s Carmen as planned on Thursday evening, under the baton of Daniel Barenboim, before empty stalls. Local broadcaster RBB, in collaboration with the Staatsoper, livestreamed a Geister (ghost) performance, starring Georgian mezzo soprano Anita Rachvelishvili, on the opera house’s website and it was also broadcast simultaneously on radio. The performers, all of whom played for free, applauded themselves at the end in place of the usual rousing appreciation and foot-stamping of a Berlin audience. “The mood amongst the performers had been extremely down when it became clear we would have to close the house to the public,” Matthias Schulz, the director of the Staatsoper, told the Guardian. “But there was a lot of enthusiasm about the idea of bringing the opera to the people despite the house being ordered to close to the public. “During the performance we could see that people had tuned in from around the world, about 160,000 in total, which is a staggering figure for us, and made us realise how important culture is in a time of crisis and ‘Corona-depression’.” Rachvelishvili said after the performance: “It was a sad and painful feeling to perform in an empty opera house. But my heart was still full of joy because I knew that this way we were bringing art and music to everybody’s homes worldwide.” Messages left on the Staatsoper’s Facebook page and elsewhere on social media were full of praise for the opera house’s decision to take its production to the world, despite the forced closure by Berlin authorities. Among the viewers were people in quarantine in Italy, including employees of La Scala, Milan’s opera house, who are currently in lockdown, the Staatsoper said. On Thursday night, Sir Simon Rattle conducted the Berlin Philharmoniker in a concert which was also broadcast live for free. Speaking ahead of the performances by Luciano Berio and Béla Bartók, Rattle said: “On this strange day where we perform for you out there while we’re performing just for us in the hall, we hope you are here with us ... we hope that simply playing sends a signal and we send much love and more music to you out there in the real world.” The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine. The UN agency advises people to: Despite a surge in sales of face masks in the aftermath of the coronavirus outbreak, experts are divided over whether they can prevent transmission and infection. There is some evidence to suggest that masks can help prevent hand-to-mouth transmissions, given the large number of times people touch their faces. The consensus appears to be that wearing a mask can limit – but not eliminate – the risks, provided it is used correctly. Justin McCurry At the Elbphilharmonie concert house on the banks of the Elbe River in Hamburg, British singer James Blunt also took to the stage last Wednesday in an empty hall which would normally have been packed with over 2,000 fans. Rather than call off the concert, Blunt livestreamed a performance for free, attracting viewers from across the globe. Other artists, from poets to pianists, have taken to social media to console their fans. From Ian McMillan, the so-called Bard of Barnsley, in Yorkshire, with his coronavirus poetry, to the German-Russian virtuoso pianist Igor Levit, who on Saturday, regaled his 58,000 Twitter followers with Brahm’s adaptation of Bach’s Chaconne in D-minor, calling it a “life-affirming work ... which also offers consolation”, the offerings have been many and varied. With German cultural venues from theatres and music clubs to concert halls and cabaret bars forced to close at least until 19 April, online petitions have been set up by freelance artists concerned that many who already live a precarious existence will be among those worst-hit economically. Germany’s culture minister, Monika Grüttgers, has promised a special fund of billions of euros of financial help for artists and cultural venues. “Amid a fall in tourism and restrictions on large gatherings and events, I’m aware that this situation places a huge burden on the cultural and creative industries and can cause considerable distress, especially for smaller institutions and independent artists,” she said in a statement. The culture ministry had drawn up financial measures to help “those art institutions and creatives who are facing uncertainty”, she added.