Dietmar Hopp stood in the rain, hands clasped together, brandishing them in thanks to the Bayern Munich players who stood around him, to the home supporters in the PreZero Arena and to Karl-Heinz Rummenigge and Hasan Salihamidzic, who had already warmly embraced him on the pitch. It was an unusual, unprecedented ending to an unusual, unprecedented afternoon. Bayern had beaten the home side, Hoffenheim, with far greater comfort than expected, 6-0, but the champions running riot in the rare absence of their seemingly indestructible top scorer Robert Lewandowski became barely a footnote in proceedings. It was all down to one banner, raised in the visitors’ section in the corner of the stadium, with the game long since done. “Du Hurensohn,” it said. You son of a whore. That simple message was the straw that broke the camel’s back. In accordance with the three-step protocol for discriminatory incidents – initially introduced by Uefa for racist incidents – the game stopped, and both the Bayern players and bench approached the fans to ask them to bring the banner down. Hansi Flick, who spent five years as Hoffenheim coach, seemed particularly incensed. Then came the really strange part. When the game resumed, Hoffenheim and Bayern acquiesced to not score – and to not attempt to – for the closing 15 minutes, and played the ball among themselves, like players warming up. The home fans applauded and, as the players of both sides surrounded the grateful Hopp in a show of solidarity at the end, it was a group saying that enough is enough. 1️⃣ Bayern fans unveil banner insulting Hoffenheim owner.2️⃣ Match almost abandoned.3️⃣ 13 minutes of uncontested football.4️⃣ Show of solidarity at full-time.An explanation of exactly what happened in a surreal Bundesliga clash between Bayern and Hoffenheim... pic.twitter.com/lddyqzNgBO As a software billionaire who brought his home village team from the fifth tier to an unbroken stay in the top flight of more than a decade and into the Champions League, on the back of copious investment, Hopp is seen by many fans as an affront to the traditional values of German football, of paying one’s dues. Dortmund fans – more of whom later – led protests against him down the years and were punished 10 days ago, banned en masse from attending their team’s match at Hoffenheim for the next two seasons, despite a DfB pledge to move past collective punishment. Ultra culture has, both last weekend and this, hit back. DfB president Fritz Keller, guesting on ZDF’s flagship Das Aktuelle Sportstudio on Saturday night, referred to the events in Hoffenheim as a “disaster”, and told host Katrin Müller-Hohenstein: “We’ve reached the lowest point. It can’t go on like this.” On Sunday Borussia Mönchengladbach sporting director Max Eberl – who criticised ultras at his club last week with captain Lars Stindl for displaying a banner depicting Hopp in crosshairs, similar to the one used by Dortmund ultras in the past – guested on Sky 90 and reiterated his position. “They have a voice,” he said. “Protest is OK, but not in this way.” Hopp himself pulled up the drawbridge to compromise, relaying in a statement that after previous dialogue with opposing – and specifically Dortmund – supporters “who wouldn’t give a millimetre,” further talks were “no longer an option for me,” he said. “I don’t see any point in dealing with people who I’ve never done anything to, who have insulted me massively for years without a reason and who don’t want to find any consensus at all,” he continued. Many Dortmund fans would take issue with this. Part of the reason some have continued to target Hopp is that in August 2011, a Hoffenheim employee was caught emitting a shrill noise from loudspeakers in the away section to drown out anti-Hopp chants from Dortmund fans. Worse things are chanted at football stadiums in Germany. When Hertha defender Jordan Torunarigha was racially abused in the recent DfB Pokal tie at Schalke, he received a second yellow card for his furious reaction. The game wasn’t stopped, and nor did the players decide to abandon the game to have a protest kickaround. While the crosshairs banner may be in very poor taste – and particularly last week at Gladbach, in the wake of the terrorist attack in Hanau – the offensive word “Hurensohn” used in the Bayern banner is chanted about footballers, teams and opposition supporters most weeks. While the incident at Hoffenheim garnered the most headlines, because of Hopp’s presence and the game’s extraordinary coda, the stand of Bayern’s ultras was widely echoed elsewhere. In the late Saturday game in Köln, where captain Jonas Hector and other players, sporting director Horst Heldt and coach Markus Gisdol approached the Südkurve to implore them to bring down a banner referencing Hopp. At Dortmund, where chants alone were enough for there to be the brief threat of the game being suspended. On Sunday at Union, one banner with an image of Hopp in crosshairs and another reading simply “Hurensohn” led to the players being taken off the pitch for a couple of minutes by referee Bastian Dankert. At the same time in the second tier, at Bochum, the restart was delayed after Arsenal loanee Jordi Osei-Tutu’s goal for the home side when fans raised a banner on the issue decrying the lack of a similar response of that at Hoffenheim for racist incidents, such as that which involved Torunarigha. All of these protests had something in common. The word hurensohn for one, which referenced Hopp in the same terminology as previous protests, without mentioning him by name in most cases. And just as the Bayern players and staff’s reaction wasn’t just about that one little noun, the protests weren’t just – and hardly even at all – about Hopp, but more about what a crackdown on their freedom to criticise him might represent. Bayern’s Südkurve ultras, making a statement of their own on Sunday, underlined this. “Even if the punishment [of Dortmund] doesn’t concern us and the subject of Hopp isn’t as relevant to us, we see this as an attack on fan rights in general,” they wrote, finishing with an emphatic “Fuck you DfB!” And while the ultras are united, not all fans are. During the stoppage at Köln, supporters booed and whistled, but for different reasons. Some in the stands heckled the ultras or stood and gave them the middle finger. Others saw the match officials as being over-fussy and wanted them to get on with the game. At Bochum, as the banners came down, words and a little more were exchanged on the Ostkurve between fans with differing views, and stewards were pressed to break up at least one scuffle. Some agree with Eberl that the ultras’ method of expression is too much. Yet how many outside Hoffenheim agree with those players massed at the end, who feel so strongly about a rich owner being the subject of offensive language that a whole stadium of fans must be punished for it by the two teams effectively knocking off early? And how, as the Bochum banner said, can you compare some mean-spirited words directed at that rich owner to a player being demeaned for the colour of his skin? Keller, in particular, has attracted a lot of heat for some non-committal answers on Das Aktuelle Sportstudio, in which he was firm on the Hoffenheim incident but did not offer a strong statement on the continuing issue of racism. After a weekend of decisive action, those same standards must be applied to the sort of issues that require greater fortitude. What must Jordan Torunarigha think? Augsburg 2-3 Borussia Mönchengladbach, Borussia Dortmund 1-0 Freiburg, Cologne 3-0 Schalke, Fortuna Dusseldorf 3-3 Hertha Berlin, Hoffenheim 0-6 Bayern Munich, Mainz 2-0 Paderborn, RB Leipzig 1-1 Bayer Leverkusen, Union Berlin 2-2 Wolfsburg POSTPONED Werder Bremen v Eintracht Frankfurt