Iran has announced plans to mobilise 300,000 soldiers and volunteers against the deadliest outbreak of the coronavirus outside China, as state television quoted an MP as saying 23 members of parliament were infected. On Tuesday, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the country’s supreme leader, ordered the country’s armed forces to assist health officials in combating the outbreak. “Whatever helps public health and prevents the spread of the disease is good and what helps to spread it is sin,” Khamenei said, as the deputy health minister, Alireza Raeisi, reported more infections and a death toll of 77. Raeisi said 2,336 cases had now been confirmed in Iran, 835 more than the previous total, but experts fear Iran’s high ratio of deaths to infections – now about 3.3% – may mean the actual infection figure is far greater. Two senior Iranian officials have already died from the virus and several more are infected. Semi-official news agencies on Tuesday reported that the head of the country’s emergency medical services, Pirhossein Kolivand, was now also ill. Fast-spreading outbreaks in the Middle East, Europe and South Korea – where authorities declared “war” on the virus after 582 new cases took its total to more than 5,000, with 28 deaths – contrasted with apparent optimism in Beijing. Officials said the count of new virus cases dropped again on Monday to just 125, after a six-week low of 202 the previous day, although China remains by far the hardest-hit country, with 80,151 cases and 2,943 deaths. China now appears as concerned about the risk of importing infections as it is about new domestic cases: it has confirmed 13 such cases so far, including eight Chinese nationals who worked at the same restaurant in the Lombardy region of Italy. Foreigners and Chinese nationals coming from South Korea, Iran, Japan and Italy must be quarantined for 14 days, Chen Bei, the deputy secretary general of the Beijing municipal government, said on Tuesday. Globally, the virus has killed more than 3,100 people and infected more than 90,000 in 70 countries, even as a clear shift in the crisis emerges, with nine times as many cases now recorded outside China as inside, according to the World Health Organization. Finance ministers and central bank governors from the G7 group of leading western nations pledged after a conference call on Tuesday to use “all appropriate policy tools” to maintain growth as fallout from the epidemic continued to hit economies around the world. China – which imposed draconian quarantines and travel restrictions to keep large swathes of the population indoors for weeks – has resumed a large number of inter-provincial bus services since the weekend, in another sign of confidence there. In Wuhan, where the epidemic is thought to have begun at a food market selling wild animals, the first of 16 hospitals hurriedly constructed last month to treat the rising number of coronavirus cases was shut down, the state broadcaster CCTV reported. China’s ambassador to the UN, Zhang Jun, said the country was winning its fight against the virus. “We definitely believe that with the coming of spring we’re not far from the coming of the victory of the final defeat of Covid-19,” he said. Elsewhere, the epidemic is still progressing fast. In the US, which has said it expects to have capacity to carry out 1m virus tests by the end of the week, schools and subways were being sanitised. A senior official said he feared a likely jump in the number of cases, which already number more than 100, with six deaths in Washington state. “When you have a number of cases that you’ve identified and they’ve been in the community for a while, you’re going to wind up seeing a lot more cases than you would have predicted,” said Dr Anthony Fauci, the head of the infectious diseases unit at the US National Institutes of Health. In the South Korean capital of Seoul, drive-through virus testing centres began operating, with workers in white protective suits leaning into cars with mouth swabs, and troops were dispatched across the city to spray streets with disinfectant. President Moon Jae-in said the country was now waging “war” on the virus and that subject to parliamentary approval, the government would inject $25bn (£19.5bn) into measures to contain it, as well as fund clinics and aid for small businesses. In Italy, Europe’s worst-affected country, the infection count rose to 2,036 and officials said it could take up to two weeks to know whether measures including quarantines in 11 northern towns were working. In Japan, questions continued to build about how the virus might affect the Olympics, set to open in Tokyo on 24 July. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the head of the WHO, said on Monday that the outbreaks in South Korea, Italy, Iran and Japan were the agency’s greatest concern, adding that the virus was uniquely capable of community transmission but could be contained with the right measures. While Italy has placed a number of towns in lockdown, most countries have stopped short of following China by imposing mass quarantines, instead discouraging large gatherings, delayed sporting events and banned arrivals from virus-hit nations. Twitter staff across the world were asked to work from home in an effort to stop the spread of the epidemic, while thousands of staff at Google’s European headquarters in Ireland were told to stay away for the day after an employee reported flu-like symptoms.