Every citizen in the United Kingdom must play a part if the number of deaths from coronavirus are to be kept below 20,000, the national medical director has said. The call for a national effort to reduce deaths came as the total who have died rose by 260 since Friday to 1,019. In total, 17,089 have tested positive in the UK. At the daily press conference on Covid-19 at Downing Street, Prof Stephen Powis said: “If we can keep deaths below 20,000 we will have done very well in this epidemic.” Saying it was no time for complacency, he added that the UK could keep within NHS capacity: “If we do ensure we are to stay within the NHS capacity everyone has a part to play … and it can work.” The business secretary, Alok Sharma, said prime minister Johnson continued to show “mild symptoms” and was determined to lead the government “right from the front”. He added: “There are no gaps in the government.” Sharma announced a range of measures to help companies facing insolvency and having to restructure as a result of the sudden onset of financial pressures. He said changes to insolvency rules would allow firms “greater flexibility as they face the current crisis”. “It is crucial when the crisis passes, as it will, we are ready to bounce back,” he said, as he detailed measures to help businesses “emerge intact the other side of the Covid-19 pandemic”. “These measures will give those firms extra time and space to weather the storm and be ready when the crisis ends whilst ensuring creditors get the best return possible in the circumstances,” he continued. The new rules will allow companies undergoing restructuring to continue access to supplies and raw materials. And, he said, there would be a temporary suspension of wrongful trading provisions – which will apply retrospectively from 1 March – for company directors to remove the threat of personal liability during the pandemic. “However, to be clear, all of the other checks and balances that help to ensure directors fulfil their duties properly will remain in force.” Suren Thiru, head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said: “Businesses will welcome the government’s sensible steps to amend insolvency laws to help protect companies weakened by the impact of coronavirus. Companies would also be allowed to delay annual general meetings or hold them remotely. “It is right that the rules on wrongful trading are temporarily suspended to ensure that directors are not penalised for doing all they can to save companies and jobs during this turbulent period. “Companies that were viable before the outbreak must be supported to ensure they can help power the recovery when the immediate crisis is over. “Cashflow remains an urgent concern for many businesses, so it’s vital that government support packages reach businesses and people on the ground as soon as possible.” Also announced were measures to cut red tape to allow companies to produce personal protective equipment (PPE) and hand sanitiser more quickly. BCC co-executive director Hannah Essex said: “Businesses across the UK will welcome measures that help them contribute to the national effort to tackle coronavirus. Action to speed up the production of these supplies will be vital in limiting the spread of the virus and reducing the burden on our health service. “Chambers and their members are working together to see how they can play their part, including gathering unused PPE equipment from local businesses and delivering it to the NHS.”