British racing is considering the feasibility of a limited return to action at a small number of all-weather tracks with horses to be stabled and trained on site, as a possible means of getting the sport going again while some coronavirus-related restrictions remain in place. The idea was hinted at by Nick Rust, chief executive of the British Horseracing Authority, during an appearance on RacingTV on Sunday.While he did not suggest that any such move was imminent, Rust said: “The UK’s people may get fed up at some point in this and government will be looking for a return to economic activity as quickly and as safely possible ... We are looking at a number of possibilities about whether we could race safely and, given the restrictions that are in place now, we’re going to have to think very creatively. “We’re effectively being told, stay at home, so any solution will have to involve something very creative, probably in a very localised area. It’s too early to suggest that that’s going to happen ... I don’t want to set any hares running but I want to assure people that we’re not sitting here waiting for 12 or 14 weeks to go by and then we’d better start thinking about how we’re going to return.”The appeal of an all-weather track, in the context of a limited resumption, is that it could be relied on to stage perhaps three racedays a week, which could not be taken for granted at a turf track. If Southwell were chosen, for example, it could take 110 horses in its stables and benefit from another 35 potential runners at Scott Dixon’s base within walking distance. That would avoid the need for runners to be driven long distances to the track from training centres around the country and so there would be no breach of the government’s advice against unnecessary travel. Dixon has made arrangements to keep his stable functioning and his horses cared for during the crisis. “We’ve got six staff living on the site now,” the trainer said on Sunday, “and strict procedures are in place, trying to keep everyone healthy. We’re doing a group shop for everybody to reduce the need for anyone to go out and obviously we keep doling out the hand sanitiser.”Meanwhile, Saturday’s Dubai World Cup has become the latest sporting event to be lost due to the coronavirus pandemic, organisers having accepted on Sunday that the sensationally valuable night’s racing could not be staged. The event, with a total prize fund of around £30m, had been due to be held behind closed doors at Meydan and was scheduled to be part of a packed 11-race broadcast on ITV4.Only one day earlier, officials were insisting World Cup night would go ahead, despite other sporting fixtures in the UAE having been suspended on Thursday. But a statement was issued at lunchtime on Sunday, saying: “To safeguard the health of all participants, the higher organising committee of the Dubai World Cup 2020 has decided to postpone 25th edition of the global tournament to next year.” Naas2.00 Poetic Flare 2.30 Knight Of Malta 3.00 Dark Vader 3.30 Elusive King 4.00 Sir Dragonet 4.30 Even So (nb) 5.00 Russian Emperor (nap) Benbatl, a winner at Newmarket last autumn, had been the 2-1 favourite for the World Cup, in which he was expected to clash with the US-based Pegasus World Cup winner, Mucho Gusto. Those lined up for other valuable races on the card included the Melbourne Cup winner, Cross Counter. Most of the visiting runners were reported to have arrived in Dubai by the end of last week. Monday’s best bets will appear here by 10.15am