As Diana Souhami sees it, lesbianism is much more than a sexual preference: it extends into an artistic vocation, an enraptured emotional cult and a political campaign that challenges the bullyboy patriarchs who assumed that “women’s bodies belong to men” and should be consecrated to perpetuating the male line. Souhami has written several fine biographies of what Truman Capote once reprehensibly called the “daisy-chain” of “butch-babes”; now, in a comprehensive cultural history, she awards lesbians the credit for modernising art, manners and morals in the early 20th century. Like a tabloid headline, her book’s title is intended to provoke, and it depends on a somewhat tenuous analogy: “modernism in art upended 19th-century rules of narrative and form”, so why shouldn’t modernity in life revise the “codes of conduct for sexual exchange”, licensing women to defy men or dispense with them and love each other instead? To paraphrase her slogan a little more modestly, what Souhami shows is that there might have been no modernism if the lesbian bookseller Sylvia Beach had not arranged to publish James Joyce’s Ulysses in Paris when editors in London and New York, fearing prosecution for obscenity, refused to touch it. Beach, who founded the Left Bank bookshop Shakespeare and Company, behaved towards Joyce with a wifely devotion that was lacking in his actual spouse, the rebarbative Nora Barnacle. She happily performed the endless editorial chores he set her, and glorified the labour as her “missionary endeavour’. The moment that wealthier backers became available, Joyce of course forgot about her service to him. The ancient female function of helpmeet was hard to shed. Beach’s shop, installed in a former laundry, was a domestic space, furnished with comfortable chairs and vases of flowers; brewing tea or lending books to customers who could not afford to buy them, she officiated as a mother hen. Souhami rails at the “old-style masculine domination” that results in war, mass murder and sexual repression Another of Souhami’s characters dispensed patronage on a grander scale. Bryher – born Annie Winifred Glover, though she reinvented herself by borrowing a new name from one of the Scilly Isles – was the munificent daughter of a shipping magnate. She bankrolled the artistic whims of everyone she knew, paid Freud a small fortune to psychoanalyse her lover Hilda Doolittle, and presented Edith Sitwell with a house. In her saintlier or dottier moments, she played Lady Bountiful to strangers in the street: she bought new dentures for a woman she found toothlessly chomping in a bread queue, and replaced the ill-fitting wellington boots of a woebegone fireman. Throughout her book, Souhami rails at the “old-style masculine domination” that results in war, mass murder and sexual repression. As the jack-booted invaders march into Paris in 1940, trampling what was once “the sapphic centre of the western world”, she calls patriarchy “militaristic, fascistic”. Yet power is not an exclusively male preserve, and it lurks in the relationships between women examined here. The painter and poet Natalie Barney appears as a reckless predator who breaks a sofa when pouncing on a supine seducee; the Princesse de Polignac – another heiress, born Winnaretta Singer, whose liberation was bankrolled by her family’s output of sewing machines – brings the skittish Violet Trefusis to heel with a whip. Gertrude Stein and Alice B Toklas act out a paradoxical variant of this power play. Stein was cubistically solid, gruff and glowering, while Toklas, even with her bristly moustache, looked meek and dainty. Alice kept house, cooked, and allowed Gertrude to be a full-time genius, which was hard work because “you have to sit around so much doing nothing”. Yet the apparent weakling in this menage turned out to be the slave-driver, as Ernest Hemingway testified when he overheard Stein beg for mercy as she was tongue-lashed by the partner she called “Pussy”. Stein made up for such grovelling when she announced her artistic status by declaring that “20th-century literature is Gertrude Stein”. Her self-puffery now sounds absurd, and Souhami’s view of her as “the mother and father of modernism” is not much more persuasive. At best, Stein was the fairy godmother of modernism. Like Beach and Barney, she kept a salon where she performed the traditional role of hostess, supervising the camaraderie of the male painters, writers and musicians who attended; armed with the inevitable private income, derived in her case from San Francisco streetcars, she amassed an uninsurably valuable collection of paintings by Cézanne, Picasso and Matisse, which she left unframed and sometimes casually stashed in closets. Daunted by Stein’s droning epic The Making of Americans, Souhami has better luck with the avian burbling of her libretto for Virgil Thomson’s all-black opera Four Saints in Three Acts. Here Stein’s verbal tics are subsumed into music, and Souhami writes about the witty, frothy piece with verve. Then, getting overzealous, she claims that Four Saints was more epochal and innovative than Ulysses, if only because Joyce’s novel was still fuddy-duddily “bound within the covers of a book”. Souhami ends with some blithe mimicry of Stein’s echolalia, rejoicing in a Parisian paradise where “lovers of love and refreshment in life still loved, and loved lovers and loved love”. I abbreviate a long alliterating paragraph of hallelujahs: here is Capote’s daisy chain made of words, though the repetitions hardly erase memories of the miserable childhoods and agonising affairs Souhami has chronicled. Love is lovely and even heavenly, but sex, regardless of gender, can be diabolical. • No Modernism Without Lesbians by Diana Souhami is published by Head of Zeus (£25). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on orders over £15