The Bank of England has promised to do whatever it can to shore up the economy against the impact of coronavirus after mounting anxiety about the disease sent stock markets into freefall. The value of FTSE 100 companies slumped by £200bn last week, in tandem with a broader global sell-off in which global stock markets suffered their steepest falls since the 2008 financial crisis. However, Asian markets rallied overnight as investors gambled that central banks will respond by cutting interest rates to stimulate growth, offsetting the coronavirus effect. The UK’s central bank joined the Bank of Japan in telling investors that it is keeping tabs on the situation and stands ready to use its monetary policy levers to promote financial stability. “The Bank is working closely with HM Treasury and the FCA [Financial Conduct Authority] – as well as our international partners – to ensure all necessary steps are taken to protect financial and monetary stability,” a spokesman said. While the FTSE 100 initially rallied by 3%, having lost 11% last week, the recovery proved short-lived. The index was back in negative territory shortly before noon, down 0.5% after the OECD said global growth could halve this year to 1.5%. Other major European markets also fell, with Germany’s Dax down 1% and France’s Cac down 1%. As central banks sought to bring calm to markets, the effect that the virus is having on business widened still further. The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the Wuhan coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine. The UN agency advises people to: Despite a surge in sales of face masks in the aftermath of the outbreak of the coronavirus outbreak, experts are divided over whether they can prevent transmission and infection. There is some evidence to suggest that masks can help prevent hand-to-mouth transmissions, given the large number of times people touch their faces. The consensus appears to be that wearing a mask can limit – but not eliminate – the risks, provided they are used correctly. Justin McCurry UK factory output experienced “a noticeable impact on supply chains during February”, according to the latest survey of manufacturing by the data firm IHS Markit. Goldman Sachs, which warned last week that US companies could experience no profit growth this year, joined the ranks of companies banning all “non-essential” travel and curbing staff travel to China, South Korea, Italy and Iran. Nike has temporarily shut its European headquarters in Hilversum, the Netherlands, after an employee was infected with the coronavirus. The HQ is being disinfected. The travel and aviation industries have been particularly hard hit, with TUI, easyJet and the British Airways owner, International Airlines Group, all suffering share price falls of more than 20% last week. The holiday money firm Travelex, owned by Finablr, said it expects to feel the effect of a slump in air passenger numbers. Travelex said: “The outbreak of Covid-19 is an incremental negative for Travelex’s business, given broad exposure to airports and travel flows. “VAT and related services will also be negatively impacted. While China and other Asian in-country revenue account for approximately 10% of Travelex revenues, other markets closely linked to Asian outbound travel are also experiencing headwinds.”