It’s been eight years since Fiona Apple last graced the world with a studio album, but an illuminating profile in the latest issue of the New Yorker, filled with a fair number of wild anecdotes involving her celebrity cohorts, serves to remind us of her brilliance. Here are six reasons why Apple is just the performer we need in this mixed-up, locked-down world. She doesn’t shy away from the difficult topicsApple has said that her new album, Fetch the Bolt Cutters, is about “women” and “not being afraid to speak”. Throughout her career she has spoken, in her songs and in the press, about her issues with depression, self-harm, OCD, PTSD, and the fact that, when she was 12, she was raped by a stranger. In so doing, she paved the way for other women to speak about their experiences, from Kesha to Lady Gaga, and on to the #MeToo movement. She has the best story about giving up cocaine“Every addict should just get locked in a private movie theatre with QT [Quentin Tarantino] and PTA [Paul Thomas Anderson] on coke,” she jokingly told the New Yorker magazine. “And they’ll never want to do it again.” She can teach us a thing or two about self-isolationApple doesn’t venture out much these days, save to walk her dog along the beach near her home in Venice Beach, California. She has learned how to live a little more wiselyOnce a bottle-of-vodka-a-day level drinker, Apple is now sober and has been vegan for many years. She knows her political onionsLast summer, Apple pledged two years’ worth of earnings from her song Criminal to the While They Wait fund, which finances legal support and necessities for immigrants seeking asylum. In 2017, she released Tiny Hands for the Women’s March on Washington. She has said that one of her latest tracks, For Her, was written in a cloud of rage after the nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to Supreme Court Justice. She has her priorities straightIn late 2012, Apple postponed the South American leg of her tour due to the ill-health of her dog, Janet.