It’s OK, everyone: I’ve checked the official Tokyo Olympics website, and everything seems to be fine. The main news story on the homepage is about how the Tokyo 2020 mascots, Miraitowa and Someity, have been having a lovely time in Barcelona on the latest leg of their promotional tour. Then there’s a nice heartwarming tale about Panasonic signing up to sponsor the torch relay. Then an announcement for something called the “Tokyo 2020 Open Innovation Challenge”. Nothing at all about deadly viruses or global disease outbreaks. Nothing about precautions for spectators or athletes. Certainly nothing about calling off the Games altogether, and frankly they would know best. So that’s a relief. Nevertheless, the malignant rumours persist, driven not just by the continuing spread of coronavirus but by the growing swathe of sporting events succumbing to it. We could probably live without Ireland v Italy in the Six Nations. The Chinese Grand Prix always felt expendable in a calendar already swollen to grotesqueness. But the Olympics? The actual, real-life Olympics? Perhaps for many of us, encased in our idyllic little sporting snow globes, this was the moment when the full gravity of the situation finally hit home. And so we now face a scenario so outlandish that nobody under the age of 80 can really describe it. Olympic Games have been cancelled before through world war: it happened in 1916, 1940 and 1944. They have been played out under the pall of human tragedy – at Munich in 1972 and Atlanta 1996. Even an Olympics without crowds – a ghostly, behind-closed-doors affair unfolding in near-total silence – has its precedent, as anyone who attended the Rio Games four years ago will attest. But somehow this still feels like an idea too dystopian and existential to be taken seriously: like a robot uprising, erasing the sky, postponing next Wednesday, abolishing France. Even as the International Olympic Committee member Dick Pound speaks of coronavirus as “the new war scenario”, even as Japan goes into lockdown and schools are closed and domestic baseball games are held before oceans of empty seats, the spectre of a cancelled Olympics still belongs to a different, scarier world: one of barbed-wire borders, soldiers on the streets, petrified citizens stockpiling Super Noodles. Nobody wants that. The first point to make is that, for now, the Games remains on. The IOC and the Japanese government insist that it will go ahead as planned. Besides, every modern Games goes through a point in its narrative cycle when its crises – both real and imagined – threaten to swallow it whole. In Rio it was Zika. In London it was the G4S scandal. In Athens it was construction issues. This, too, must surely pass. And in all likelihood it will. One of the reasons the Olympics feels so inviolable is the immense and unanswerable obstinacy of the Big Sport machine, an animal that must be fed at all times. After all, sport is a business, and business demands certainty, returns, guaranteed windfalls. Already we are beginning to detect the first rumblings of discontent from the sponsors and broadcasters that have already ploughed billions into these Games. “Coronavirus is going to be pretty large for the property and casualty insurance industry,” one analyst told the Financial Times, which is certainly one way of describing the deaths of thousands. And yet the suspicion persists that this particular crisis is not your regular pre-Games scaremongering, that the usual tropes of spiralling budgets or logistical strife (although Tokyo has enjoyed plenty of that, too) do not necessarily apply here. The Olympics has long been an extremely efficient disseminator of disease: all those millions of athletes and fans and volunteers from every corner of the planet, brushing shoulders on packed shuttle buses, mingling in bars and restaurants, convening in sweaty dorm rooms. Are we really prepared to unleash this germ factory in the midst of a global health crisis? There is, perhaps, more than one legitimate response to this question. To sports fans, the natural reaction is disappointment: the glum prospect of a summer without Biles or Asher-Smith, without Osaka or Ledecky. To athletes, already predisposed to self-sacrifice, the reaction is probably more akin to blithe defiance. “Even if there was a 100% chance of contracting the virus, I would still want to compete,” the former Great Britain hockey player Samantha Quek said this week. For smaller sports, who rely on the exposure and prestige of the Olympics, the consequences of a cancellation could be catastrophic. And yet to take a broader view, what message would it send out if the Games were to proceed in the jaws of a pandemic? That the bloated and entitled modern Olympic movement is simply too enormous to be thwarted. That it is essentially immune to the forces shaping the wider world. That corporate contracts and vested interests must take precedence over human wellbeing. This is the alternate reality already being constructed around us: by the likes of the IOC president, Thomas Bach, who remains “fully committed” to the Games going ahead as planned, or the official Games website that – unlike 70 countries around the world – remains entirely free of coronavirus. But perhaps there is also a rare opportunity here to ask questions that have long been forestalled. Has the Olympics become too big for its own good? Should it reflect the world’s problems or run from them? Does it exist to make money or make money to exist? A cancelled or postponed Olympics would be a great sadness on multiple levels. But in many ways it would also represent the triumph of human collaboration over human self-interest. Which, if you think about it, is what the Olympics was always about in the first place.