Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak: In all, 4,090 people have died as a result of the outbreak and 116,558 have been infected, according to figures compiled by the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering. As of Tuesday afternoon GMT, the centre said 64,391 people with confirmed infections had also recovered. According to the Agence France-Presse news agency, the death toll outside China has passed 1,000. The number of cases in the UK increased by 54 to 373 on Tuesday, according to Department of Health and Social Care figures, and the sixth death was confirmed after West Hertfordshire Hospitals NHS Trust said a man in his early 80s who had underlying health conditions had died. The number of people who have died in Italy since the outbreak began increased by more than a third; up by 168 to 631, the local civil protection agency said on Tuesday. It was the greatest daily rise in absolute numbers in the country since the contagion came to light on 21 February, Reuters reported. British Airways, EasyJet and Ryanair cancelled all flights to and from Italy as the Italian government’s decision to place the entire country on lockdown came into effect. The start of the UK peak of the outbreak is expected within the next fortnight, England’s deputy chief medical officer has said. Dr Jenny Harries said the UK was likely to see “many thousands of people” contract the virus, but that “99% of those will almost certainly get better and most people will have a really quite mild disease and will not need to be in hospital”. People who have experienced instances of racial hatred linked to the coronavirus in the UK were encouraged to speak to the police after a Chinese student’s jaw was dislocated in a street attack. Institutions including Harvard, NYU and Trinity College Dublin moved lectures online in an attempt to tackle the spread of the virus. Harvard limited all non-essential gatherings to no more than 25 people. More than 60 million Italians woke up to lockdown conditions, after the measures imposed on the northern “red zone” were extended to the rest of the country. The steps include restrictions on travel and public gatherings, including all Serie A football matches. The Chinese president has arrived in Wuhan for the first time since the outbreak began. It was seen as a signal that the Chinese leadership believes its fight against the epidemic is largely won. Xi was notably absent from public view at the height of the outbreak, instead sending his deputy Li Keqiang to the city. In the US, people on the cruise ship that has been kept off the Californian coast for five days after coronavirus cases were detected onboard were allowed to disembark at the Port of Oakland. In all, there were 21 confirmed cases of coronavirus.