In 2016, Bernie Sanders’ stunning Michigan upset against Hillary Clinton propelled his campaign forwards and dramatically altered the course of the race just as some had begun to write him off. Four years later, the Vermont senator returns to Michigan in need of another win in the Democratic nomination race as the state represents a crucial make or break chance for his campaign after former vice president Joe Biden swept into the lead on Super Tuesday. While Sanders’ populist message and democratic socialism resonated with Michigan’s large population of white working-class voters in an economically anxious state in 2016, fear of four more years of Trump is now a top motivator for Democrats and that is believed by many to now favor the more establishment cause of Biden. The latest Michigan polling mirrors others around the country and suggests the state is leaning toward Biden. While Sanders led by as much as nine points in late February, a poll taken after Biden’s huge South Carolina win put Biden up seven. But, despite the appearance of an uphill battle, there is optimism among some Sanders supporters, who point out he has generally polled better than Biden in a hypothetical matchup against the president in Michigan. “He’s working for it and Biden isn’t,” said Detroit resident Kevin Allen, who voted for Sanders in the last primary. “His policies help Michigan. Biden’s don’t. It’s a new state and there’s been a lot of ups and downs in the race so far.” Three groups of voters largely boosted Sanders in Michigan in 2016. He did particularly well with working-class white voters, won a larger share of the black vote than expected, and overwhelmingly won young voters who turned out in high numbers. In the days leading up Tuesday’s contest, Sanders put together a “get out the vote” swing that targets those groups. That started with a Friday evening rally in Detroit, which is 80% black. As with elsewhere around the country, he’s polling particularly well with younger African American voters in Michigan. The swing also included a stop in Grand Rapids, a largely white, liberal city in western Michigan where Sanders soundly defeated Clinton in 2016. Bernie Sanders is showing up, he’s here on the ground … and you need to be here, be present to win The campaign cancelled a Saturday rally planned for Jackson, Mississippi and instead visited Ann Arbor, a young, liberal college town. It also added a stop in Dearborn, a working class city with a large Muslim population that’s a stronghold of Sanders support. Biden, by contrast, has only spent about $500,000 on television ads in Michigan, and his only confirmed stop in the state so far is a fundraiser in Grosse Pointe, one of the state’s wealthiest cities. However, Biden didn’t campaign in many Super Tuesday states and that didn’t stop him from winning in unexpected places like Minnesota, Massachusetts and Maine. But Sanders partly won Michigan in 2016 because he made far more stops here than Clinton, and the get out the vote swing is “exactly what he needs to do,” said state congressman Yousef Rabhi, a progressive in Ann Arbor who endorsed Sanders. “Bernie Sanders is showing up, he’s here on the ground … and you need to be here, be present to win,” Rabhi said. “He’s holding rallies, getting people who are young, old and from all backgrounds revved up and excited to vote for him.” Critics also note that one of the few stops Biden has made in Michigan in recent years ended up helping incumbent Republican congressman Fred Upton defeat a Democrat challenger during the 2018 midterm elections. The incident – in which Biden heaped praise upon Upton in a speech later used in Republican ads – infuriated local party officials and was seen as crucial to Upton’s win. Sanders is seen as stronger on the environment and the only to voice opposition to Line 5, a controversial proposed oil pipeline that would run through the Great Lakes. He’s also hammering Biden on his support for the NAFTA trade agreement, which many view as responsible for decimating Michigan’s working class amid mass factory closures. Clinton’s support for the unpopular trade deal was partly behind her losses here, and Rabhi said Biden’s votes on NAFTA are also a serious liability, including potentially against Trump. However, the trade issue seems to be getting Sanders less mileage than in 2016, said Michigan pollster Bernie Porn. “Trade doesn’t seem to have the same resonance in 2020 that it did in ‘16,” he said. That seems backed up by the results of Super Tuesday. Biden won white working class voters in eight states, a phenomenon that lifted him in Minnesota, which has a similar electorate to Michigan and could foreshadow what’s to come Tuesday. Sanders won Minnesota with 62% of the vote in 2016, but only got 30% this year. Porn noted that the failure of young people to turn out is partly responsible, and he says reversing that trend is critical for Sanders’ Michigan hopes. “In just about every other state Bernie has come up short in terms of younger voters, so the question is in Michigan, ‘Can he generate turnout among younger voters that he has not generated in most of the other states”? Porn said. There are other variables that also make Michigan unpredictable. Fellow progressive senator Elizabeth Warren has now dropped out of the race and that could bump Sanders’ support. However, there hasn’t been any polling since the announcement, she hasn’t endorsed anyone and some polling shows many of her supporters back Biden. Still, Sanders’ base remains optimistic. “There’s too much unknown to count him out in Michigan,” Allen said.