The ability of Tiger Woods to defend the Masters successfully has been thrown into doubt after a lingering back problem ruled the 15-times major champion out of next week’s Players Championship. Ordinarily the PGA Tour’s marquee event at Sawgrass would constitute a key part of Woods’s Masters build-up. The first major of the year, which Woods won in such sensational style in 2019, is now little over a month away. Mark Steinberg, Woods’s manager, issued a statement via ESPN on Friday evening as the deadline to enter the Players approached. “Back just not ready,” Steinberg said. “Not concerning long term, just not ready.” Nonetheless the long-term nature of Woods’s back problems means wider speculation is inevitable. Woods has undergone four surgeries on that area. “I have to listen to my body and properly rest when needed,” said Woods. “My back is simply just not ready for play next week.” The 44-year-old complained of rigidity in his back when finishing last among players who made the cut at the Genesis Invitational. “I feel stiff but I have weeks like that, especially in the cold mornings,” added Woods. “I don’t quite move as well and that’s just kind of how it’s going to go.” He subsequently skipped the WGC Mexico and this week’s Arnold Palmer Invitational, with the prevailing sense he would make a return to competitive action at the Players. Steinberg had previously claimed his client was “not quite ready” to participate in the Arnold Palmer. That fitness concerns have persisted will inevitably raise eyebrows. Woods is a two-time Players winner, with this year’s event carrying a record prize fund of $15m. Curiously Woods’s year had started reasonably well. He shared ninth at the Farmers Insurance Open and played his first nine of the Genesis in 31. Matters appeared to deteriorate thereafter, however. It now remains to be seen whether Woods is capable of playing tournament golf at all before the Masters. Should he opt to do so, the Valspar Championship from 19 March or the WGC Match Play the following week would come into the equation. The Masters tees off on 9 April. In maintaining an ominous theme, Jason Day withdrew from the Arnold Palmer Invitational midway through his second round, with a back injury the cause. Day was three over par for the tournament at the time of his latest departure. “Jason had some stiffness in his lower back on putting green before the round,” read a statement from the player’s management. “He tried to play through it but it stiffened up again later on the golf course.” Tyrrell Hatton, seeking a first win on the PGA Tour, is tied with Sung Kang at the top of the leaderboard after 36 holes. The pair are seven under, one clear of Danny Lee. Rory McIlroy’s 73 means he is two adrift at halfway. “I think if I shoot two scores in the 60s and get myself to double digits under par, I’ll have a really good chance,” said McIlroy. Phil Mickelson was among those to miss the cut on Friday at Bay Hill. Mickelson added a 72 to Thursday’s 77. “It was a really hard golf course and I enjoyed the challenge of trying to play in these type of conditions,” he said. “I’m a little frustrated that I haven’t gotten off to the start this year I would like but I’m not discouraged. I don’t feel like I’m that far off, but yesterday’s score was a little disappointing.” Mickelson subsequently appeared to aim a dig at McIlroy, who was forceful in his dismissal of the breakaway Premier Golf League plan. Mickelson’s interest in the scheme was endorsed by the playing of a pro-am in Saudi Arabia with some of the individuals behind the ambitious project, which seeks to offer players an alternative and highly lucrative playing environment. “I wouldn’t come out and say I’m not going to do it right away ... and lose all your leverage,” Mickelson added. Meeow.