What do you do if you’re a teacher and one of your students writes the N-word in your classroom? Well in my case, it turns out that you try to convince yourself that you haven’t seen what you thought you saw. I’m a senior lecturer in psychology in a multicultural city. My adult life has been largely protected from the more visceral acts of racism that I read about every day, and I’m grateful for that privilege. I was a little taken aback, then, when I went to teach a class on campus recently, and found that someone had scrawled the N-word on the whiteboard eraser. What do you say when racism is routinely dismissed, and when being offensive is more acceptable then being offended? I’ve seen and heard that word many times before, not least on notes tied to bricks that crashed through the windows of my family home when I was a child. But my immediate reaction to seeing it written right there in my classroom was to double-check what I was seeing. Gaslighting is the process of manipulating someone into questioning their own sanity. It’s a word mainly used in terms of women being coerced and belittled by men. But this form of abuse is troublingly familiar to all people of colour. Though part of our daily lives, in a more high-profile way it commonly takes the form of TV “discussions”, where black and brown thinkers are invited into the studio to explain why a racist thing is racist – while being shouted down by the show’s white host or well-known guest, who have little knowledge and no experience of what racism actually is. “But is it really racism?” ask interviewers with feigned interest in what the answers might be. From the media coverage of Meghan, Duchess of Sussex, to all-white awards shortlists, to BBC Question Time rants, the “debate” rages. When this form of deliberate humiliation is experienced often enough, even if on screen happening to someone else, it becomes internalised. I think that’s what happened to me. When faced with unmistakable racism, I first doubted my own experience, then seriously wondered whether there would be any point in even mentioning it. I was self-gaslighting … not the response I expected of myself, given that I’m well aware that racism on British university campuses is on the rise, from banana-throwing to chants of “we hate blacks”. I reflected on other times when I’ve had to explain why something is racist, justify how I feel, and expose my own lived experiences to people who have already decided that they don’t and won’t see what I see. It’s exhausting. So, shamefully, there are also times when I just haven’t bothered. I’ve put up with daily micro-aggressions, like the time a student talked at me for a full five minutes before she realised it was the other black lecturer in the department that she needed to speak to. I’ve put up with “friends” who think singing to me about “the blue-black child” from their racist rugby songs is OK. I’ve put up with the “affectionate” mispronouncing of my surname for a lifetime. I’ve put up with being detained by customs officials who refused to believe I am a psychologist. And I’ve had to deal with the police being called on several occasions, once as I waited next to my own car near a friend’s house: waiting while black is apparently very suspicious behaviour. I know these things should be challenged, but experience tells people of colour to pick our battles. The anger and frustration at the racism itself is always coupled with the disappointment in the aftermath that I should have said something, and the resolve that I’ll speak up … next time. This is how racism endures. The gaslighting we experience, and that our broadcasters specialise in, fuels racism by labelling anyone who dares to call it out as having a chip on their shoulder, playing the race card, making a fuss over nothing, or (and this is my personal favourite) being the real racist. Labour MP Dawn Butler experienced this only last week, when she upset Tory MP Laura Trott by pointing out Boris Johnson’s multiple examples of racism. “I find it extremely offensive,” Trott said, while broadcaster Nick Ferrari harrumphed in agreement in the background. It all works to silence people of colour, subduing our urge to speak out when we see what we know to be unjust. The frustrating thing is that bringing instances of racism into focus could lead to much-needed, nuanced discussions about racism, privilege and power. Instead, these discussions descend into shouting matches, as those with the power direct and dominate the conversation. The truth is, people of colour are often trying quite hard not to play the race card. When we do call out racism, it’s entirely possible that we’ve struggled with our own experiences, taking time to weigh up the costs and benefits of bothering to say anything at all. I mean what are you supposed to say when a man who refers to “flag-waving piccaninnies” and “watermelon smiles” can become the prime minister? What do you say when racism is routinely dismissed and downplayed as clumsy language, and when being offensive is more socially acceptable then being offended? What do you say when you find the N-word written in your classroom? Well … you have to say something. • Dr Peter Olusoga is a psychology lecturer at Sheffield Hallam university