Wild Rose writer Nicole Taylor brings another tale of Glaswegian class divides in this riveting five-part thriller. Line of Duty’s Martin Compston and Peaky Blinders’ Sophie Rundle star as the supposedly blissful Dan and Emily, a wealthy couple who have long been trying for a baby and find an unlikely surrogate in 18-year-old Kaya, a mysterious and seemingly unshakeable girl from the other side of the city. Newcomer Mirren Mack is convincingly manipulative as the opportunistic Kaya. Ammar Kalia Bradley Walsh is back on our screens as the giggle-prone quizmaster in this family special series of gameshow The Chase. Opening the series is the Hartes family from County Antrim in Northern Ireland. They will be teaming up to pit their general knowledge against one of the super-brain chasers. AK The street-level scramble from Mexico City to the very tip of South America continues, but one team has already dropped out. After reaching Panama City, the remaining four pairs must work out how to get past the dense jungle of the Darien Gap, one of the most lawless places on Earth. Graeme Virtue Ah, to be young and gifted … Such is the premise of this two-part documentary, following six talented kids in New Zealand, aged six to 16, as they pursue their various talents. In this first episode, we get a glimpse into the pressurised and complicated lives of a concert pianist, a pilot, and a maths university graduate. AK This Downton-esque yarn about a wealthy family’s scandal is perfect Sunday sedation. This week, Anne (Tamsin Greig at her buttoned-up best) lets a secret slipt, then it’s full pass-the-smelling-salts time when James (Philip Glenister) busts out a confession that could ruin the Trenchards’ family’s fragile peace. Hannah Verdier Two grime-ridden households with set-ups that would make Kim and Aggie barf swap homes to see if they can improve one another’s abodes. Will they clean up their act? Or just rely on Quentin Crisp’s famous maxim about unattended housework: “After the first four years, the dirt doesn’t get any worse.” Ali Catterall Parkland, 11.05pm, Channel 4 Peter Landesman’s account of the assassination of the US president in 1963 has a quiet authority; the action focuses on ordinary people caught up in tumultuous events, including Zac Efron’s surgeon and Marcia Gay Harden’s head nurse at the Parkland Memorial Hospital. Paul Howlett