Italian football authorities look set to order Serie A to play matches behind closed doors as the country struggles to control the coronavirus outbreak. Following a series of postponements, including this week’s Coppa Italia semi-finals, Italian football is facing a backlog of fixtures as the virus continues to spread. This has prompted the head of the Italian FA to suggest that playing matches without crowds is an increasing likelihood. “We are heading towards that decision,” Vincenzo Spadafora told reporters when asked if the government was thinking of barring fans. “We will continue all activities, and so will the league, but we will respect public health.” So far 10 Serie A matches have been postponed, as well as the two Coppa matches between Juventus and Milan and Napoli versus Internazionale. The news comes as the Italian government seems poised to close schools in the country until the middle of March, part of a dramatic upscaling of the response as coronavirus continues to spread through the country. Currently Italy has confirmed 2,502 cases of the disease, with 79 people having died. Italian sporting events across the board are facing pressures from the virus. Three cycling races, the Strade Bianche, Milan-San Remo and Tirreno-Adriatico all appear in difficulty after teams began to request to drop out from competition. The American men’s team EF Pro Cycling have written to the Union Cycliste International (UCI) asking to withdraw from all three races, according to reports in the Wall Street Journal. Parkhotel Valkenburg, the Dutch women’s team, has also announced that it will not be taking part in the Strade Bianche which is due to take place in Tuscany on Saturday. Earlier this week RSC Sport, the organisers of the races, had insisted they would be going ahead. Meanwhile, in the United Arab Emirates, several cycling teams remain under forced quarantine in an Abu Dhabi hotel. Members of the French teams Cofidis and Groupama-FDJ as well as Russian outfit Gazprom – including 18 riders – have been confined to the fourth floor of the Crowne Plaza since Thursday. The UAE health ministry said on Tuesday that six new cases relating to the cycling event had been discovered. They were identified as Russian, Italian, German and Colombian nationals but it was not clear if they had been confined to either of the hotels. “All of our riders and staff in the UAE have been tested negative for Covid-19. Still several positive results – not involving our team – have been reported inside our hotel,” FDJ said in a statement. The biggest sporting event of the year, the Tokyo Olympics, remains on course to take place as planned, according to the head of the British Olympic Association, Andy Anson. Anson told BBC Sport: “It is not affecting our plans in any way, in that we are absolutely focused on getting the team to Tokyo for the Olympics in July and everyone is obsessed with that, that is the number one focus. “At the same time we are getting information from all the relevant bodies, so we have got the most up-to-date information on coronavirus, and it is changing every day as you can see with the news stories.”