Ocado’s website and app crashed several times on Friday as supermarkets struggle to cope with a barrage of online orders from shoppers trying to avoid a trip to the shops. In some locations, those able to access Ocado’s site found it was not possible to get a delivery slot for a week. Other supermarkets have no slots for several days as fears of coronavirus infection have driven up demand for online grocery shopping. In an attempt to protect its delivery drivers from infection, Ocado told those shoppers who were able to make an order that its staff would no longer be taking goods into homes or taking back plastic bags. The government is understood to be considering relaxing the plastic bag tax, of 5p on single use bags, in order to facilitate doorstep deliveries with less risk of contamination for drivers and shoppers. The changes would come on top of relaxation of restrictions on night-time deliveries to stores in built-up areas, which the government has already agreed to. It is also considering extending the number of hours drivers can legally work. Deliveroo, the takeaway delivery firm, and other supermarkets, including Sainsbury’s, Tesco and Waitrose, have asked customers to flag if they are self-isolating so that deliveries can be left outside the home. The changes come as grocery retailers continued to cope with a surge in demand for store cupboard essentials, including toilet roll, dried pasta and tinned tomatoes, as shoppers stock up in preparation for potential self-isolation amid fears of shortages or store closures. Suppliers and retailers are struggling to keep up with sudden demand that is on a par with Easter or Christmas, events that normally involve months of planning. A spokesperson for Ocado said: “Due to exceptionally high demand, our app is experiencing some intermittent technical issues. “We apologise for any inconvenience caused by this and thank our customers for their support.” There are fears that the surge in sales is also putting pressure on small suppliers as they try to cope with sourcing materials and ramping up production. Morrisons is to speed up payments to its smallest suppliers to help them with cash flow during the coronavirus outbreak. From next week, suppliers who sell less than £1m of goods a year to the supermarket will receive payments within 48 hours rather than the usual two-week window, benefiting about 3,000 small businesses – more than half of whom are farmers. The supermarket, which will report annual results next week, said it would be operating the new system until at least the end of May, when it will be reviewed. The chain has also reclassified 1,000 suppliers to enable them to benefit from the policy change. David Potts, the chief executive of Morrisons, said: “We are Britain’s biggest single foodmaker and we want to be there for the smaller foodmakers, farmers and businesses that supply Morrisons. We’re a British family business and we will be doing our best to support them through this challenging period.” The environment secretary, George Eustice, said: “These measures will support our farmers and food producers in their vital work of feeding the nation. “We already have a highly resilient food supply chain in this country and I am continuing to work closely with Morrisons and other retailers on their response to coronavirus. The government has pledged £30bn in this year’s budget for those affected and we’ve been clear that we will do whatever it takes to support people and businesses.” Some small producers may have suffered a slowdown in trade because of interruption to exports or lower orders from hotels, restaurants and other hospitality businesses as people stay at home. With stockpiling focused on store cupboard essentials, some fresh produce has not sold as well in stores. There are also concerns that some suppliers will suffer from staff shortages as people become ill, or ingredient or component shortages because of unexpected high demand and problems with importing goods. Fresh produce traders at New Covent Garden Market in London, who supply large restaurant chains, pubs and hotels, have seen demand dive by up to 60%, according to the Fresh Produce Journal trade magazine.