Five people on a government charter flight died when their light plane crashed trying to land near the Cape York community of Lockhart River in far north Queensland. Queensland police confirmed the 10-seat plane had attempted to land two times at Lockhart River in wild weather about 9.30am on Wednesday, before crashing into sand dunes during its third attempt. “We know there were five people on board. At this time, we’re trying to contact their next of kin to advise those people personally of the tragedy that’s occurred,” acting chief superintendent Chris Hodgman told reporters. “Nobody has survived that crash.” The wreckage was found on a beach about 5km to the east of the Lockhart River airstrip. Hodgman would not speculate on the cause of the accident. “We know the weather conditions are pretty rough up there at the moment, but we are investigating on behalf of the state coroner at the moment, so I won’t be making any comment in regards to any causal factors,” he said. Hodgman confirmed all the victims were from Cairns but said out of respect for the families no further comment would be made regarding their identities at this time. The plane, a Cessna 404 twin-engine piston aircraft, was found on the beach about 1.20pm. The Australian Transport Safety Bureau said it was investigating the crash and a preliminary report would be released in about a month. “ATSB transport safety investigators with experience in aircraft operations, aircraft maintenance and aeronautical engineering are preparing to deploy to the accident site,” a statement said. “The investigation’s final report can be expected to be released in about 18 months.” Perth-based charter company Aerohire has confirmed it was their aircraft. The Cape York area, mostly populated by remote Indigenous communities, is in a region where the Bureau of Meteorology has warned of high winds and flooding rains due to a tropical low that is expected to develop into a cyclone over the Coral Sea at the weekend. Such charter flights are commonplace for government service delivery to remote communities.