Leonardo da Vinci’s Last Supper, silkscreened from a reproduction, is repeated 60 times across a panoramic canvas whose tarry black inks and squeegee’d fadeouts and mis-registrations churn across the wall in the otherwise empty darkened room. The degraded mechanical reproduction, gritty, stark and overwhelming in its insistence, brings Tate Modern’s latest Andy Warhol retrospective to a sudden close – so sudden that I thought I must have missed a turn somewhere. Warhol’s death was as premature and abrupt as the end of this tightly edited resume of his life and career. Warhol died in 1987, following gallbladder surgery. He was 58. Spooling back to the beginning, one of the first things we see, in another dark room, is Warhol’s lover, the poet John Giorno, sleeping. Made in 1963, the slow-mo, black-and-white film lasts more than five hours. Almost static, filled with shadow and the weight of slumber, it is a kind of stilled-life, a great counterpoint to Warhol’s version of the Last Supper, which turns Leonardo into a kind of static film-strip. Warhol was a great fan of Luis Buñuel (Warhol wore his culture lightly) who turned a beggar’s banquet into a tableau vivant of the Last Supper in his 1961 movie Viridiana. Sex, queerness, death and religion are constants in Warhol’s art. In a stack of early drawings – Warhol really could draw – he moves his pencil as if he were running his fingertip along a man’s neck, recounting a feast of tongues and lips and lazy eyes, crotches and hairlines. In Warhol’s self-published Gold Book from 1957, he drew sexy young men, all the terrific lettering done by his mother, who really only knew Cyrillic script. Some little details in the show really count – the passenger manifest of the ship that bought Julia Warhola to Ellis Island in 1921; and Richard Avedon’s photograph of Andy’s chest, scarred from the emergency operations he underwent after Valerie Solanas shot him at the Factory in 1968. The vitrine containing three of the artist’s wigs feels less essential. What forlorn and miserable relics they are. Often when an artist dies their reputation takes a dip, sometimes never to recover. Warhol’s own dip took place while he was still alive, when his art appeared to have become secondary to being Andy, bewigged: gnomic, fame-obsessed but unknowable. Since his death, his reputation and his influence have soared. In 2002 Tate Modern gave Warhol an entire floor. A year ago the Whitney in New York took us on a monumental journey through 350 works (with yet more offsite). To cap it all, a new and magisterial Warhol biography by Blake Gopnick has just thundered in at almost 1,000 pages. The end of the current show felt like an expulsion. Where are all the movies, the electric chairs, the shadow paintings, the early, deliciously sprightly and camp commercial illustration work? Where are those later portraits of the famous, the infamous and the unsavoury (as well as giving the last Shah of Iran and Michael Jackson the Warhol portrait treatment, he also nearly did a portrait of Donald Trump)? Some things are worth passing over. The current show, while alluding as much to his biography as it does to the trajectories and complications of his art, gives us the Warhol we might need in 2020. When we come to the work that made Warhol famous as a pop artist (a term he hated) we meet 168 pairs of Marilyn’s lips, 50 Marilyn portraits, a woman falling from a building 35 times, five deaths 17 times in black and white, 10 Brillo boxes in a corner, 100 Campbell’s soup cans, 112 bottles of Coke and Marlon Brando twice. There’s more, but while the numbers don’t matter, the repetitions do – with all their insistence and their estrangements. Warhol was an expert in the power of repetition, making them add something, rather than dulling us and cancelling themselves out. The repetitions of sex, of breathing, the tides, of reproduction, of the insistence of repeated lies, the constant repetitions of the fame industry, of self-aggrandisement and self-negation are all here. How prescient Warhol’s art still is. “I want to be a machine,” he said. This big room swings from deadpan humour to horrible deaths and race riots, pin-ups and nose jobs to a grieving Jackie Kennedy and a golden tondo of a single Marilyn that is like a tawdry Byzantine icon. Silver clouds drift up to the ceiling, swaying as we pass between them. These weightless sashaying helium balloons that are as much a comment on minimalism, and the work of Donald Judd (who as a critic hated Warhol) as they are a pleasure in themselves. We go from the funhouse of the silver-walled Factory to a whole gallery dedicated to the Exploding Plastic Inevitable, the multimedia shows that combined projected films, live performance by the Velvet Underground, a light show and disorientation noise-fest. Salvador Dalí mugs for the camera, the Velvets screech, there’s a BDSM scene in one corner and the habitués of the Chelsea Hotel wander about. I could, and nearly did, stay for hours. On a monitor, Andy, who is off-screen, talks to his mother. She sings and reminisces. On another, Andy gets a makeover and slowly turns into Marilyn. A late series of paintings immortalise Latinx and African-American trans performers from local bars, their silk-screened photographic portraits lushed-up with acrylic that covers, blends and smears much as make-up does. Warhol turns painting itself into a kind of drag performance, before going on to look back at colour field and abstract expressionist rough-housing, but does so by way of golden showers, he and his assistant pissing on the copper pigment and creating chemical reactions on the canvas. Sombre though the painting is, you can almost hear the laughter. Soon enough, we are at the exhibition’s bleak, summary end. To see how it echoes back to what preceded it, you need to walk the show at least twice. You need to repeat. Andy Warhol is at Tate Modern, London, from 12 March to 6 September. There is a 2-for-1 ticket offer for Guardian and Observer readers. Visit tate.org.uk/warhol-2020 and use code GUARDIAN241. Tickets must be booked by Wednesday 11 March.