A woman suspected of murdering a seven-year-old girl in a park in Greater Manchester has been detained under the Mental Health Act. The 30-year-old woman, who has not been named, has been sectioned, Greater Manchester police (GMP) said on Monday. The force said the criminal investigation was ongoing. She was arrested on Sunday afternoon shortly after a girl was stabbed to death in front of her parents in Queen’s Park, Bolton. The woman was not known to the family, GMP said. A member of the public reportedly chased after the suspect and pulled her off the girl, and detained her until police and paramedics arrived. Russ Jackson, an assistant chief constable, said: “We have informed the family of the detention. They are understandably distraught over what happened yesterday and we will continue to support them with family liaison officers in the coming months. “It is hard to describe how terrible this incident was. It happened in front of the parents of this little girl who had taken her out yesterday afternoon to enjoy the spring sun and play in the park. “Having seen this horrendous attack, a member of the public bravely chased after the suspect and detained her until police arrived and made an arrest. I would like to thank him for his actions, which enabled us to quickly make the arrest and prevent anything else from happening. “Several officers who attended the park were very young in service in the police, some with only weeks on independent police patrol. They and all the officers who went to the scene are incredibly upset over what has happened and all of us have this little girl and her family in our thoughts. “I want to stress that this is not an end to the criminal investigation, we will consider the evidence and consult with the Crown Prosecution Service and if appropriate we will be seeking criminal charges.” Mark Logan, the Conservative MP for Bolton North East, said: “I’ll be praying for the young girl’s family tonight, and fully support the police’s investigation into the motive behind this most inhumane of acts. Now more than ever we must come together for one another.” Police said they had finished their forensic searches at the park on Monday afternoon but that the park was now closed as a response to the coronavirus pandemic.