A wonderful winning goal from the substitute Paulo Dybala sent Juventus back to the top of Serie A with a 2-0 win over title rivals Internazionale at an empty Allianz Stadium on Sunday. Juve, who opened the scoring through Aaron Ramsey, lead on 63 points, one ahead of Lazio and nine clear of Inter in third, although Antonio Conte’s side have a game in hand. Ramsey fired home the first goal from close range soon after the break and was also involved in the second. Dybala exchanged passes with the Wales international on the edge of the area before dribbling around defender Ashley Young and showing great invention to find the bottom corner with the outside of his boot. The game was played without fans present after the Italian government ordered that all matches are held behind closed doors until 3 April. Real Madrid failed to build on last week’s Clasico victory as they lost 2-1 at Real Betis in a fiery match on Sunday and surrendered top spot in La Liga to Barcelona. The defeat leaves Real second on 56 points after 27 games, two behind Barça who beat Real Sociedad 1-0 on Saturday to regain first place a week after losing 2-0 at the Bernabeu. Betis went ahead in the 40th minute after a moment of confusion as they appealed for a penalty when Sergio Ramos collided into Nabil Fekir but the loose ball landed at the feet of defender Sidnei who rifled it into the roof of the net. The Brazilian’s joy was cut short when he was penalised for tripping Marcelo in the area and Karim Benzema converted from the spot, his first goal in seven matches in all competitions. Betis captain Joaquin missed an open goal early in the second half but his side, fired up by a scorching atmosphere in a packed Benito Villamarin, eventually restored their lead in the 82nd minute through former Barça forward Cristian Tello. Bayern Munich never really needed to hit top form in their 2-0 victory at home to Augsburg on Sunday as they moved four points clear at the top of the Bundesliga. The Bavarians, who have now won 10 of their last 11 league games, were far from impressive, having only one shot on target in the first half, with injured top scorer Robert Lewandowski’s marksmanship sorely missed. Bayern had to wait 53 minutes before finally breaking down the disciplined Augsburg defence when Thomas Müller timed his run into the box perfectly to volley in a Jerome Boateng chip. Bayern’s Leon Goretzka then slotted in their second in stoppage time to kill off the game. “We knew it would be hard and the first half proved that,” said Bayern coach Hansi Flick. “We did not have enough pace in our game. Then in the second half we struggled to finish the job before Augsburg had their own huge chance.” In Ligue 1 a first-half goal by Loic Remy earned Lille a 1-0 home victory over Lyon and kept their hopes alive of playing in next season’s Champions League.