Pep Guardiola believes Phil Foden will “get what he deserves” after his outstanding performance in Manchester City’s Carabao Cup final triumph. Foden took advantage of a surprise start in the 2-1 win against Aston Villa at Wembley to show he has the potential to replace David Silva, who leaves in the summer. Sunday’s final was the 19‑year‑old’s 10th start of the season. “I want the best [for him],” the City manager said. “He will get what he deserves. I am delighted with his performance and his behaviour in good and bad moments. He just has to think work and work and it always pays off.” Guardiola was not concerned that Foden’s inclusion might have been a gamble because of limited action. “I have played a final with Phil because I see him every day. Every time we decide to let him play, always he plays good, at a high level. “Last season he played when we played Tottenham [in April, scoring the winner] in the Premier League after being knocked out of the Champions League by them. People said in pre-season when Leroy Sané got injured that we may have to go the transfer market and I said: ‘No, because Phil can play in the middle or wide’.” Guardiola was pressed why Foden was used in the final and not the Champions League victory at Real Madrid in the previous game. “I thought I needed freshness – not just legs and mentally but the desire. I need them [those who had not featured] angry and wanting to show me they should have played against Madrid.” Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/03/02-59790-gnl.fw.20200302.jf.cushion.mp3 City are at Sheffield Wednesday on Wednesday in the FA Cup and Guardiola has no doubt his players will be motivated to defend this trophy, too. “I learned in the big clubs I was at before about their history that when they win a trophy they go and take a shower and are thinking in that moment about the next one.” The cup tie will be too soon for Sané. “He is not ready,” Guardiola said. “After six months he needs a process [to come back]. He is doing the normal steps to come back, playing in the second team [for] 50-60 minutes.” Claudio Bravo will again start after playing in the League Cup final. The goalkeeper is out of contract in the summer and no decision has been made over an extension