Painterly maquillage is all the rage. This is brilliant for everyone, from the cackhanded to those who are good at art, because its carte-blanche ethos makes it simpler than all that blending malarkey you were required to excel at with traditional eye shadows. While the inspiration behind this SS20 Salvatore Ferragamo look – Venetian meets abstract expressionism – sounds convoluted, the reality isn’t. Mix tanning drops into your moisturiser for a natural-looking glow, paint a myriad of colours over your eyes and finish with a light-reflecting clear gloss. Pat McGrath Skin Fetish Sublime Perfection Concealer £25, patmcgrath.comMAC Pro Palette Paintstick £60, maccosmetics.co.ukMAC Lipglass in Clear £16, maccosmetics.co.ukIsle of Paradise Tanning Drops £19.95, theisleofparadise.comGlossier Skywash in Lawn £15, glossier.com There was a period where liquid lipsticks landed on my desk so consistently I began to wonder whether the traditional bullet lipstick was becoming extinct. I loved the textures, the finish, the ease of application of the liquids. And so the ratio of lipstick to liquid lipstick you’d find in my numerous makeup bags was probably 1 to 25 (I know, ridiculous). This launch, however, from Hermès, has made me reevaluate my choices. It is the brand’s first foray into cosmetics and to say the beauty world has gone gaga over this is an understatement. There are 24 shades – Orange Boîte, the perfect elegant orange, is set to be a classic – that have all been chosen from the brand’s colour archives. The tri-coloured cases – created from the lacquered metal used on the hardware of its bags – are not only aesthetically desirable (they also come with that expensive click when you close them), they are refillable, too. And the actual lipsticks? I’ll be honest, when I first received them, I wondered if they’d live up to the hype. Well, they did not disappoint. The textures – in satins and mattes – are mind-blowingly velvety. You can’t feel a thing on your lips as they are so lightweight and the pigment is magnificent. It went on my lips in a single swoop and stayed there all day. It’s worth every penny and will be giving my liquid lipsticks a run for their money.Rouge Hermès lipstick, £58, hermes.com Time for a lift One bottle of this powerful serum – think of it as a plumping treatment sans needles – is sold every minute in the US. Finally, it’s available here, too. L’Oréal Revitalift Filler Hyaluronic Serum, £24.99, boots.com Cheap and chic Anyone who is not familiar with Beauty Pie, the high-quality low-priced luxe brand, should head to its pop-up shop. You are bound to discover a few gems. Beauty Pie Pop Up at Harvey Nichols, beautypie.com Seeing the light Battling with pigmentation issues, be it from sun damage or from acne scarring? Try this. It reduces the appearance of spots in seven days. REN Overnight Glow Dark Spot Sleeping Cream, £49, spacenk.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.