In this series we’re listing the previous day’s top articles by reading time. You can read a little more about how and why we’re doing it here. Today’s list is for Wednesday 25 March. This new series from the sports desk has become a staple of these lists. Jamie Fahey was a ballboy on the night in question, and his piece drips with the wonder and passion of a 13-year-old fan. “When Søren Lerby sauntered into the Goodison cauldron without shin pads even my 13-year-old eyes could see it was a reckless act. Nearly 35 years on, the artful midfielder’s decision can be dismissed as the quaint machismo of a bygone age.” One of the joys of these lists is that they aren’t dependent on popularity, so they can surprise us and tell us something new. Quite a small audience has read this piece. But in great depth. Even if the Chats aren’t your next favourite band, Brodie Lancaster’s interview with Australia’s punk sensations is enormous fun. “The first time they shared a song was for their Catholic high school’s music class: called Mum Stole My Darts, it still has pride of place in their live shows.” Hulk Hogan has finally settled a sex-tape lawsuit that has been dragging on for years. Here, Arwa Mahdawi concisely lays out the serious free speech ramifications of a private legal battle that morphed into a proxy war between a billionaire and the media. Another piece read by a small but dedicated audience. This wonderful review of the director’s second memoir is rammed with glorious detail that you might otherwise have missed. David Lean confides in him: “The tragedy of my life is that I always took the women who wanted me. I never had the courage to go after the women I wanted.” “Does that apply to all five wives?” Boorman asks. “Absolutely.” Alexis Petridis’s interview with the man behind one of the most successful independent record labels in the world is eye-opening, even just in terms of the sheer number of extraordinary acts he signed. “I’ve never been good at guessing what’s really going to sell, but what I can sometimes see is a stop on the map. I wanted people to recognise how great Dizzee was. I wanted him to create an opening, which he did, and look at how many people have piled in.”