Ørjan Nyland Could do little about the goals he conceded and made two important saves in the second half. 6 Frédéric Guilbert Helped to subdue Sterling but was unable to stop Rodri from meeting a cross to score City’s second goal. 6 Björn Engels Made a terrific early block to deny Agüero and nearly equalised with a late header that was pushed on to post. 6 Tyrone Mings As wholehearted as ever and well-positioned most of time, but could not get to Agüero for first goal. 6 Matt Targett Uncertain first half, when Foden continually eluded him, including in the buildup to the first goal. 5 Ahmed Elmohamady Back four allowed the Egyptian to start on the right-hand side of midfield but he made little impact. 4 Marvelous Nakamba Raised his game in the second half and began to make life less easy for City in midfield. 6 Douglas Luiz Worked relentlessly but struggled to disrupt City and rarely made creative use of ball when he got it. 4 Jack Grealish An unusually lacklustre display from Villa’s star man, with even his set pieces below par. 4 Anwar El Ghazi Regularly dangerous and supplied a lovely cross for Villa’s goal. Faded and replaced in 70th minute. 6 Mbwana Samatta Always available despite lack of service and took his chance expertly when it came with firm header. 6 Subs Trézéguet (for Elmohamady 70); Hourihane (for El Ghazi 70); Davis (for Samatta 80). Not used Reina, Taylor, Lansbury, Konsa. Claudio Bravo Little chance of stopping Samatta’s header but did prevent Engels from equalising with fine save. 6 Kyle Walker Solid when forced to defend but not particularly impactful going forward. 6 John Stones Distribution was erratic and helped to create Villa’s goal by falling as if his laces were tied together. 4 Fernandinho Comfortable for long periods but lost sight of Mbwana Samatta for Villa’s goal. 6 Oleksandr Zinchenko Attacked well down the left wing but did not provide adequate cover when Villa struck. 6 Ilkay Gündogan Busy and tidy in midfield but replaced before the hour as Guardiola sought more inspiration. 5 Rodri Pulled strings from deep midfield. Clipped pass led to first goal and he scored second with mighty header. 8 Phil Foden Dangerous, full of crafty runs, exquisite touches. Even ran back to muscle Grealish off the ball in the first half. 8 David Silva Spanish veteran was full of inventive intent but no magic came from the man they call Merlin. 5 Raheem Sterling Continued his ordinary recent form with a bland display. Harshly booked for tackle on Guilbert. 4 Sergio Agüero Predatory instincts as sharp as ever to dart in front of Mings to fire City into lead with early goal. 7 Subs De Bruyne (for Gündogan 58); B Silva (for D Silva 77); Jesus (Agüero 83). Not used Ederson, Mendy, Mahrez, Otamendi.