We are experts in public health, healthcare, medicine and law with experience shaping federal health and healthcare legislation and public health infrastructure. With input from over 50 other experts – including academics and leaders with experience crafting health policy at the federal, state and local levels – we are putting forward recommendations for Congress to protect health, the full set of which is now published on the Health Affairs blog. With nationwide community-spread of Covid-19, congressional action is needed to protect our country during this public health crisis. The response will require the full participation of all segments of American society, including all levels of government, the private sector and individual citizens. Four basic principles underlie our recommendations. First, government at all levels – federal, state and local – has a fundamental responsibility to ensure health security. Second, protecting Americans’ health in this time of crisis should be a unifying – not divisive – effort. Third, immediate and targeted action is required to address the epidemic. Fourth, sustained investments in public health and healthcare are needed to prepare the nation for future epidemics, which are inevitable. The public’s health depends on us coming together in shared action and even sacrifice. Guided by these principles, we present recommendations in six areas. We must protect all individuals, regardless of their insurance coverage status, from high out-of-pocket costs that act as barriers to timely testing and treatment, and threaten financial wellbeing. Congress can require all plans to guarantee coverage for all medically necessary care related to suspected Covid-19. Related preventive and diagnostic services must be covered with no cost-sharing. Plans must cover services regardless of whether covered services are obtained from in-network providers, with payment at the plan’s median in-network rate for out-of-network care, and regardless of whether the patient receives a Covid-19 test or whether the test is negative, and providers may not balance bill for these services. The administration should initiate a 60-day special enrollment period for individuals seeking coverage through the health insurance marketplaces to ensure everyone has access to coverage. Federal policymakers should create a state option that extends Medicaid eligibility for the duration of the outbreak to any uninsured state resident. And the Affordable Care Act’s enhanced federal match rate should be reinstated to encourage additional states to expand Medicaid. While CMS has encouraged Medicare Advantage plans to reduce or eliminate cost-sharing for members affected by Covid-19, it should require these plans and original Medicare to do so. We must implement specific protections for especially vulnerable populations who will be disproportionately affected by Covid-19 including homeless, institutionalized and incarcerated populations. The federal government must institute protections for healthcare workers on the frontlines in this epidemic. The government must ensure these workers have adequate personal protective equipment. A healthcare worker fund, similar to the James Zadroga fund established for 9/11 first responders, could be created so that providers do not personally bear the costs of their public service. Soon, the surging demand for hospital beds, intensive care units, ventilators and healthcare providers could outpace current healthcare capacity. We need national coordination of resources and capacity. To rapidly increase capacity, we should allocate funding to set up drive-through testing in community areas, tents for evaluation and treatment of stable patients with suspected Covid-19 near metropolitan areas, and augment telehealth capabilities. We could also deploy military personnel to help fill gaps in the workforce. The nation’s key public health institutions are underprepared to take on this imminent threat. While additional funding was recently allocated, it is woefully inadequate. In addition to establishing a dedicated CDC public health emergency fund, the federal government can deploy additional personnel and resources from other agencies to support local public health authorities, which are critical to containment, monitoring and mitigation. We must support research during this crisis. Incentives should be designed for the development, testing, and production of Covid-19 vaccinations or therapies. Simultaneously, mechanisms should be created to expedite access to vaccination and/or treatment as soon as they become available, such as expedited processes for Food and Drug Administration (FDA) review and approval and price gouging precautions. And any resulting vaccines developed as a result of public funding should be available free of charge as a covered preventive benefit. These recommendations provide a roadmap for the public health and healthcare components of the government response this pandemic requires. Time and again in US history, federal leadership – or the lack thereof – has determined the nation’s course in the face of national threats. With immediate and decisive action, we can still mitigate harm, save lives and be prepared for a safer and healthier future. Writing group members and op-ed authors: Howard P Forman, professor of public health, radiology, and management, Yale University.* (Founding member and lead of the group.) Elizabeth Fowler, executive vice-president for programs, The Commonwealth Fund* Megan L Ranney, associate professor of emergency medicine and health services, policy and practice, Brown University* Ruth J Katz, vice-president and executive director of the health, medicine and society (HMS) program at the Aspen Institute* Sara Rosenbaum, Harold and Jane Hirsh professor of health law and policy and founding chair of the Department of Health Policy, Milken Institute School of Public Health, at the George Washington University* Kavita Patel, vice-president, Hopkins Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University* Timothy Stoltzfus Jost, emeritus professor, Washington and Lee University* Abbe R Gluck, professor of law and faculty director, Solomon Center for Health Law and Policy, Yale Law School; professor of medicine (general medicine) Yale Medical School* Christen Linke Young, fellow, USC-Brookings Schaeffer Initiative for Health Policy, The Brookings Institution* Brendan Carr, chair of the Department of Emergency Medicine at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mt Sinai* Erica Turret, student, Yale Law School* Suhas Gondi, student, Harvard Medical School* Adam Beckman, student, Harvard Medical School* *Author affiliation presented for information, only; these views do not necessarily represent those of the listed institutions. Additional expert signatories of the recommendations: 14 Harlan Krumholz, Harold H Hines Jr professor of medicine (cardiology) and professor in the Institute for Social and Policy Studies, of investigative medicine and of public health (health policy); director, Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Yale-New Haven hospital 15 Nirav R Shah, senior scholar, Stanford University Clinical Excellence Research Center; former NY state commissioner of health 16 Bob Kocher, partner Venrock and senior fellow at the Leonard D Schaeffer Center for Healthcare Policy at USC; former special assistant to the president for healthcare and economic policy 17 Seth Trueger, assistant professor of emergency medicine, Northwestern University; digital media editor, JAMA Network Open 18 Dave A Chokshi, chief population health officer, NYC Health + Hospitals 19 Albert Icksang Ko, professor of epidemiology and medicine and chair, Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public Health 20 Donald M Berwick, president emeritus and senior fellow, Institute for Healthcare Improvement; former administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 21 Leana S Wen, visiting professor, health policy and management, George Washington University School of Public Health; former health commissioner for City of Baltimore 22 Ezekiel J Emanuel, vice-provost for global initiatives; chair, Department of Medical Ethics and Health Policy at the University of Pennsylvania; former special adviser for health policy to director of White House Office of Management and Budget