Gamblers are switching from wagers on sport to far riskier online casino and slot games amid lockdown restrictions to curb the spread of Covid-19, according to one of the UK’s biggest gambling websites. In an update to the stock market, 888 Holdings said it had been affected by the postponement or cancellation of events such as the Premier League and Grand National, cutting income from sports betting, which accounts for about 16% of its revenues. However, it said there was evidence that gamblers were migrating to alternative products. People in the UK will only be allowed to leave their home for the following purposes: Police will have the powers to enforce the rules, including through fines and dispersing gatherings. To ensure compliance with the instruction to stay at home, the government will: Parks will remain open for exercise, but gatherings will be dispersed. “There is currently evidence of increased customer activity in the group’s casino and poker products that might, in part, compensate for the sports betting disruption for a period of time,” it said. A cross-party group of MPs called for online gambling companies to impose a £50 daily cap on bets earlier this week, citing concern that vulnerable people and addicts would be particularly vulnerable during the lockdown period. About 1.2% of people who take part in gambling have a problem, according to the most recent analysis published by the Gambling Commission. The relatively low figure includes people who play the national lottery, where problem gambling rates are low. Online sports betting with a bookmaker carries a slightly higher rate of disordered gambling, at 2.5%. However, online slots, casino and bingo attract a much higher rate of potential addicts, with about 9.2% of people who spend money on those products classed as having a problem. The MPs’ request for online gambling firms to impose a daily betting cap has so far gone unanswered. However, 888 said it was working particularly hard to ensure that it spots signs of problem gambling among its customers. “The board recognises that, with people spending more time at home and with potentially increased stress from economic uncertainty, 888’s vigilance on safe gambling and preventing gambling-related harm is even more important than ever,” it told investors. “The group continues to offer its customers support and is proactively communicating with its customers to make them aware of safe gambling tools to limit and control their play.” William Hill has previously told the Guardian that it is being “extra sensitive” in its marketing, after evidence emerged that it was suggesting customers bet on table tennis, Japanese baseball and the Belarusian Premier League.