John McKie, who has died aged 80, was the man behind the Wee Stinker in the paper I still call the Glasgow Herald; I have never seen a solver’s prize coveted as passionately as the Wee Stinker T-shirt. Some even claim to have amassed a small collection of the T-shirts over the years, having toiled at the Herald’s puzzle, which, as its name suggests, has always been small (well, smallish: it’s 13 x 13 squares), Scottish and very challenging. It started in 1988 when the Herald’s editor, Arnold Kemp, decided that the paper could do with a stiffer challenge – much like the later Telegraph Toughie, to which McKie also contributed. McKie – AKA Myops, the Greek for gadfly – was already setting the Herald’s Christmas jumbo and Saturday prize puzzles, but the Wee Stinker is unlike those or any other crosswords. For one thing, it’s avowedly not for beginners and those in a hurry, to use a phrase we see around here. Finishing the puzzle involves using Chambers dictionary (often for its Scottish-specific language) and sometimes the odd encyclopaedia. And, like Crosaire in the Irish Times, the Stinker does not follow quite the same rules as other puzzles. Here are some clues that give a sense of McKie’s style. First, a straightforward multi-word clue with a cracking surface reading … Smelling a rice wine and, swallowing it, drunk (4,2,1,4)[ wordplay: synonym for ‘smelling’ + A (‘a’) + name of a rice wine containing IT (‘it’) ][ HIGH + A + SAKE containing IT ][ definition: drunk ] … for HIGH AS A KITE and an example of a playfully cryptic “definition” … Title without peer in South Pacific (4)[ reference to South Pacific song ] … of DAME. Next, let’s have one of those definitions you need to check … Like this scent? (4)[ definition 1: like this ][ definition 2: another name for frankincense ] … in this case, THUS and some non-obvious wordplay … Vergil’s art first grasped the meaning of the underworld (5)[ wordplay: Latin (‘Vergil’s) ‘art’ (as a verb) preceded by (‘first’) synonym for ‘grasped the meaning of’ ][ ES preceded by HAD ][ definition: the underworld ] … this time from a Toughie clue for HADES. But what the Stinker solver needs to especially prep themselves for is the breaking of a rule followed almost everywhere else: that if the solver needs to make an anagram of a word, the setter puts it in the clue, rather than just hinting at it. From memory, here’s an example … Work out colour (5)[ wordplay: anagram (‘out’) of synonym of ‘work’ ][ anagram of CHORE ][ definition: colour ] … cluing OCHRE. Elsewhere, this would be a no-no; within the Wee Stinker’s world, it was just another device. Finally, there’s this: G-GAG (5,8) You could stare at that one for a long time, even with crossing letters. The thinking behind it is recounted in a compelling 1993 Herald piece that begins with McKie’s wife, Lorna, saying: “I’ve nothing of interest to say” and later recalling: I have a friend who is a pianist and John asked for her number – so I listened in, naturally, that’s what wives do. I heard him ask what key you would play Happy Birthday in. She said if it was for a child it would be G. The clue in the Wee Stinker was G-GAG and the answer was Happy Birthday. Now there were idiots all over Glasgow who actually got that. I recommend this profile, these responses from solvers – and some of the puzzles can be found in the collections of Herald crosswords.