Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The country’s death toll has increased by 25% to 1,809 from 1,441 on Sunday – a rise of 368. The number of infected in the country has risen from 2,853 to 20,603. Meanwhile the overall total of cases, including those recovered is 27,747 The UK death toll from coronavirus has risen from 21 to 35, with one death in Scotland and the rest in England. The Department of Health and Social Care’s latest figures show that as of 9am on Sunday the total number of cases stood at 1,372, up from 1,140 at the same time on Saturday. Deaths in Spain have more than doubled in a day, to 288, with the number of infections near 8,000. Across the country there are 7,753 confirmed cases, making Spain the second hardest-hit country in Europe after Italy. More than half of Spain’s cases are in Madrid. Germany is to close its borders with France, Austria and Switzerland from 8am on Monday to try to stem the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic, German media reported on Sunday afternoon. Exceptions are expected to be made for goods traffic and commuters. Several African countries have closed borders, cancelled flights and imposed strict entry and quarantine requirements to contain the spread of coronavirus. Kenya is not letting anyone in from countries with reported cases. Ghana is banning visitors from countries with more than 200 cases and Namibia has closed schools for a month following two confirmed cases. Schools in the Netherlands are set to close from Monday as the Dutch government steps up measures to combat the spread of coronavirus. All restaurants, bars and sports clubs have also been ordered to close from Sunday evening. The measures will last until 6 April. The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said he would not rule out closing the country’s borders or forcing people arriving from foreign nations to self-isolate to help combat a coronavirus outbreak. He told CTV: “We are not taking anything off the table.” So far, 249 Canadians have tested positive for Covid-19 and one person has died. The Trump administration has offered German medical company CureVac “large sums of money” for exclusive access to a Covid-19 vaccine, German broadsheet Die Welt reports, citing German government circles. According to an anonymous source quoted in the newspaper, Trump was doing everything to secure a vaccine against the coronavirus for the US, “but for the US only”. All pubs and bars in the Republic of Ireland have been ordered to close from Sunday evening to tackle the coronavirus outbreak. The government said there would be “real difficulty” in implementing social distancing in pubs, and has also asked people not to throw private parties that would put other people’s health at risk. A gathering at a mosque in Malaysia that attracted 16,000 attendees has been linked to a major spike in infections in the country, as well as clusters of cases in nearby countries. On Sunday, officials in Malaysia confirmed 190 new patients had been identified, the biggest leap in cases in the country yet, making it the worst-hit nation in south-east Asia.