Stevenage builder buddies Lee and Dean are back, though Dean is self-isolating on the other side of the double glazing. Luckily, Lee is on hand to provide the essentials. We made a @leeanddean video about self-isolation whilst genuinely self-isolating. https://t.co/vVUkSFhGnC Britain’s Biggest Bridezilla Georgina Francis, created by Anna Morris, is locked down in her luxury Cotswolds holiday home. But that won’t stop her sharing an inspiring poem for the nation. Kae Kurd recalls the joy of working from home before the coronavirus outbreak – and faces up to the grim new reality of 24/7 flatmates. WORKING FROM HOME BEFORE & DURING CORONAWhen you had to work at home before if was amazing - you had the house to yourself, everyone else was in the rat race and you felt special. Now you’re stuck with your housemates or your family and they’ve taken over a room each. pic.twitter.com/vhLUd7GhMT Tom Allen sizes up the competitive home-schoolers in this instalment of his magazine show, Locked In, accompanied by his inflatable green co-host, Linda. How’s everyone doing with the kids at home eh?! Here’s the episode to help with that. #homeschooling #selfisolate #socialdistancing #stayhome A post shared by  Tom Allen (@tomindeed) on Mar 25, 2020 at 1:28pm PDT Elf Lyons’s aspiring singer-songwriter Saint Bernard isolates during the millennium bug and offers an unlikely cover version of John Cage’s 4’33”. Drop that dirty beat: BenDeLaCreme gives a helpful 20-second tutorial in hand-washing (but turn that tap off, eh?). #washyourhands 🎶@netherfriends A post shared by  BenDeLaCreme (@bendelacreme) on Mar 22, 2020 at 2:52pm PDT Mawaan Rizwan decides to try out a new comedy character but his sister fails to see the funny side. A post shared by Mawaan 'MANGO' Rizwan (@mawaanr) on Mar 26, 2020 at 9:18am PDT Lauren Silver and her sabre-toothed tiger present a 60-second guide to pandemic anxiety. Pandemic Anxiety explained... pic.twitter.com/6Shj6xhgh3 Guz Khan has a go at doing yoga and discovers pains in new places. FACTS...#Coroni A post shared by  STAY IN YOUR BLUDCLART HOUSE (@guzkhanofficial) on Mar 21, 2020 at 9:43am PDT Pierre Novellie returns to his original love, doodling, and spends an hour of self-isolation drawing a creepy elf. Listen up to Baked Potato in this very important public service announcement from Matt Lucas. A VERY important message pic.twitter.com/8X03czKetu Just because the clubs are closed, it doesn’t mean you can’t dance – take it from London Hughes. The World’s on lockdown, I’ve stopped wearing underwear, and I wont be able to catch a strong dick til May. But John Legend and Stevie are getting me through it. #DontYouWorryBoutAThing 🥂💕 pic.twitter.com/2TuwkDZTva If you can’t stomach the real news every night then Laura Lexx, AKA White Teeth McSerious Face, has an alternative update for you in News Drip!