Over the coming weeks more and more of us will find ourselves unable to leave home. With live TV shutting down, no sport, and even the soaps likely to shut up shop, here is our writers’ guide to the top 50 shows to get your teeth into – starting with 31-50. These may not be the most intellectually demanding programmes of all time, but they are the ones you won’t be able to tear yourself away from. Let us know your favourites to binge in the comments, and come back tomorrow for the next instalment. NetflixYou shouldn’t need an opportunity to rewatch The Thick of It. You could watch it a million times in a row and Armando Iannucci’s political satire would still maintain its bite. If you haven’t seen it since the altogether more slick Veep, you might be taken aback by how joyously ramshackle this cheap little no-risk BBC Four sitcom feels. But that is part of its charm. When Malcolm Tucker bares his teeth for the first time in the first scene of the first episode, it is like stumbling across a found-footage horror film. It’s nightmarish. You might not think now is a good time to watch a show about the incompetent failings of national government. But, if you have the stomach for it, there’s nothing better. Stuart Heritage Netflix They’re here, they’re queer, and they’re about to get you a whole new wardrobe (and house!). The Queer Eye reboot – helmed by the fab five of Jonathan, Antoni, Karamo, Tan and Bobby – saw the 00s makeover show get a whole new lease of life, via questionable avocado recipes and incredible interior design. By focusing more closely on the inner struggles of its participants, helping people who had seemingly fallen through the cracks to regain their confidence, and rectify the areas which needed fixing in their lives – from broken relationships to coming out – it became “more than a makeover”. If the Japanese spinoff felt like overkill, there are still four other series to blitz through. Hannah J Davies Sky/Now TV Given what it was – a mystery show with no real intention of answering its own mystery, made by a figure who specialises in deliberately oblique storytelling – the original Twin Peaks was a blockbuster of a show, with an old-school riddle at its heart. A girl died. A good-hearted stranger comes to town to investigate. Then weirdness ensues. But, at least to my mind, the 2017 sequel has now become the definitive Twin Peaks. Aggressively avant garde in places, and truly terrifying in others, it is like nothing else that has ever been on television. It is not an easy watch by any means. In fact, sometimes it is downright maddening. But nevertheless, it will affect you in ways you didn’t think you could be affected. Stuart Heritage Sky/Now TV Ever wanted to see Lovejoy scream “cocksucker” at a procession of bemused cowboys? Then this is the show for you. Set in the “hey!”-day of the wild west, with a host of real-life historical figures such as Wyatt Earp and Calamity Jane popping in and out of its small South Dakota town, Deadwood’s stellar reputation never translated into viewing figures, leading to its premature cancellation after three seasons. Luckily, the storylines were rounded out in a feature-length special last year, making now the perfect time to appreciate this thoroughly modern western. Ian McShane chews the scenery as the saloon owner Al Swearengen, but it is Timothy Olyphant, playing the long-suffering sheriff, who holds it all together. If you are not hooked after the first four episodes, culminating in the depiction of the real-life murder of Wild Bill Hickok (an all-too-brief turn from Keith Carradine), there is something wrong with you. And if all else fails, just count the F-bombs; there are 43 in the first hour alone. Toby Moses Netflix It may have been created for a pre-streaming world, but there are few sitcoms as binge-friendly as the Bluth family’s madcap saga. Stuffed to the gills with callbacks and inter-show references, Arrested Development benefits hugely from back-to-back (and repeat) viewing – and the impressive gag-rate and endlessly ridiculous narrative accelerations mean the episodes simply fly by. Masterminded by The Ellen Show co-creator Mitchell Hurwitz, Arrested Development began airing in 2003, with three near-peerless seasons before it was cancelled, only to be resurrected for two more disappointing outings on Netflix. Nonetheless, we will always have those early years tracing the many trials (sometimes literally) of the extremely rich, extremely entitled and extremely eccentric Newport Beach crew. Cue layers of cartoonish plotlines, catchphrases galore and a veritable labyrinth of addictively quotable in-jokes; not to mention some of greatest slapstick that television comedy has ever seen. Rachel Aroesti Netflix A true millennial phenomenon. The idea of a feminist musical sitcom that majors on mental health issues might cause eyes to roll. But don’t switch over to Friends just yet. Crazy Ex-Girlfriend is hilarious, pioneering and eminently watchable. It has caused controversy since first being aired in 2015, chronicling the life struggles of its main character Rebecca (played wonderfully by its writer-creator Rachel Bloom) – from her obsessive fixations and borderline personality disorder, to suicide attempts and abortions – all with a sunny musical theatre soundtrack. What could be heavy, dramatic fare, is dealt with confidently, accompanied by a righteous wink; the Cats special is a thing to behold, and Period Sex will be stuck in your head for weeks. Bloom has been nominated for multiple Emmies, Glaad awards and Golden Globes for her performance, and rightly so – she shines. But the supporting cast are beautifully played, too, with one of the most authentic portrayals of bisexuality ever put to screen in Pete Gardner’s Darryl Whitefeather. Dylan B Jones Netflix All dressed up with nowhere to go? Then try Next in Fashion, the Netflix reality show in which already competent and semi-established designers, stuck in the shadows of their big-name bosses, get to compete in front of an impressive array of fashion insiders, from Christopher Kane to Phillip Lim. Better still, its focus on bringing people up rather than putting them down offers a welcome reprieve from the more typically brutal world of TV talent competitions, and presenters Alexa Chung and Tan France provide warm, supportive, well-tailored shoulders to cry on. Plus, you don’t have to wait 10 weeks to find out who the winner will be; the duo very much urge you to binge this, with a reminder to press “next episode” at the end of every episode. Rebecca Nicholson All4 Between 2004 and 2013 the writer Paul Abbott embedded us in Manchester’s Chatsworth council estate, with the sprawling, chaotic Gallagher family, headed up – nominally – by their drunkard dad Frank (David Threlfall) and, actually, by his eldest daughter Fiona (Anne-Marie Duff). So much good came from the Gallaghers: Fiona’s unutterably sweet on-screen romance with Steve led to the real-life marriage of Duff and co-star James McAvoy; Maxine Peake built her reputation as fearsome neighbour Veronica, and stories were told about British working-class life without condescension or judgment. Are the Gallaghers the type of family to have a coat of arms? Probably not. But if they were, its motto would read: “Honi soit qui mal y pense” – Shame on those who see shame in it. Ellen E Jones All4 Masterful matchmaking is what makes First Dates stand out. It sometimes feels like the only dating show on television with producers who actually care, as proven in a 2015 special episode First Dates: The Proposal, which welcomed back couples who had found love on the show and offered a second chance to those who had not. Not everyone who presents themselves at Fred the maître d’s famous check-in desk will find romance. But the 42 cameras placed around the restaurant mean we miss none of the tragic chat-up lines, awkward silences, tear-jerking backstories and uplifting moments. After a few episodes, even the most hardened cynic is guaranteed to find themselves whooping like the drunkest guest at a wedding. Ellen E Jones Netflix There are so many things about Sex Education that may irritate at first. Why does the school look so American – right down to the lettered bomber jackets – despite being set (and filmed) in rural Britain? For that matter, why film in Wales yet feature no one with a Welsh accent? And let’s not forget that hardy perennial: why do most of its teenagers look about 30? (Answer: because they are.) But be patient; get past that. The show may attempt to lure you in with Inbetweeners-style crudeness, but it unfolds into a thoughtful, well-paced comedy drama, with an almost public-service zeal for exploring the issues around sex and relationships with sensitivity and warmth. There is, of course, the show’s breakout star too, Ncuti Gatwa (real age 27). He has become a meme as lead character Otis’s out-and-proud gay best friend, Eric, and is now a rather unexpected spokesperson for the coronavirus pandemic, with his line after spotting another character leaving the toilets without washing their hands doing more to stop the spread of the virus than any Boris Johnson press conference: “Wash your hands, you detty pig.” Scott Bryan iPlayer There are few voices more soothing than David Attenborough’s, and here he narrates what must be one of the greatest nature documentaries of all time, and certainly the most visually stunning. While its 2017 sequel (also on iPlayer) played a vital role in shifting attitudes towards plastic pollution around the world, it started here, with the the original Blue Planet in 2001, which took five years to make and is still one of Attenborough’s career highlights. The sheer beauty of all that it uncovered is wonderfully escapist in itself (episode two, The Deep, is a psychedelic wonder), and at a pinch, it may also provide just a little of what’s needed in times like these: travel without travelling, education without crowds, and a reminder of the respect we must have for the unforgiving power of nature. Rebecca Nicholson BBC iPlayer Malorie Blackman’s hit young adult series arrived earlier this month, its tale of star-crossed lovers separated because of their races and backgrounds seeming more urgent as bigotry continues its worrying resurgence. Over six episodes – all of which are available to stream now – this Romeo and Juliet in a race-reversed society draws you into a world where the microagressions and discrimination frequently suffered by people of colour are drawn into sharp relief, and the lines between rich and poor are more pronounced than ever. Besides this, it is also a gripping tale of families with hidden secrets, changing allegiances and, of course, love. Peaky Blinders’ Jack Rowan and newcomer Masali Baduza are captivating as the leads, while Paterson Joseph is among its strong ensemble. Hannah J Davies Sky Go/NowTV/Amazon Prime Video Modern Family is a show you can bond with, settling into and going the distance with its 10 series. Those 200-plus episodes, along with the ongoing 11th and final series, make the story of various factions of the Pritchett clan – including a gay couple with a daughter, introduced to a mainstream American audience as part of the happy warp and weft of normal suburban life – one of the longest running sitcoms in television history. Of course there have been peaks and troughs in that time, but it has always been of standout quality, with laugh-a-line scenes, some of which are so light and fleet that you barely catch them skimming past you, making every episode ripe for rewatching. Lucy Mangan Netflix As podcasts become ever more popular, so the number of pods that have been made into TV series continues to grow, from Homecoming (Amazon Prime Video) to Limetown (Facebook Watch). Chief among them is Dirty John, adapted from the hit Wondery show about a devious, bedraggled conman who wormed his way into the life of a moneyed businesswoman, Debra Newell, by posing as a successful anaesthesiologist (he was in fact a former nurse anaesthetist who had spent time in prison for fraud). The total gall displayed by John Meehan – as he attempted a Parasite-esque takeover of Newell’s life – would be enough to stun most people. But, combined with a helping of Netflix melodrama, it makes for a particularly shocking, if knowingly cheesy, watch. Hannah J Davies Amazon Prime VideoThis Zooey Deschanel vehicle has two main things going for it. First, it is funny. Second, there are a lot of episodes. I adopted New Girl as my back-up binge show a couple of years ago, dropping in and out when there wasn’t anything exciting on, and I still haven’t made it to the finale. The best thing about an ensemble sitcom such as New Girl is that – if you hang in there for long enough – all the characters have their time to shine. Schmidt is the breakout character, but then he is eclipsed by the ornery Nick. And then, out of nowhere, Winston becomes the absurdist one who holds the whole show together. This is a series so egalitarian that even Megan Fox is able to become its funniest thing for a decent stretch of episodes. Stuart Heritage BBC iPlayer Increasingly, you can just stroll down to your local supermarket to achieve an effect comparable to watching Russell T Davies’s 2019 future-shock family saga. With its grim projections about rampant populism, accelerating climate crisis, the madness of crowds and the bewildering pace of technological change, Years and Years felt worryingly on the nose when it aired last year. Suffice to say, its vision hasn’t got much more comforting in the meantime. But as horrifying – and frequently plausible – as the travails of the Lyons family were, the show does, eventually, speak to resilience and continuity. By the skin of their teeth, and not without a couple of casualties, the family keeps it together. And so, just about, does the country. Phil Harrison NetflixThe sitcom previously known as Scrotal Recall was always far better than a show with that painful pun as a name had any right to be. But with a new moniker, and a shift to Netflix, fresh life was breathed into the tale of four twentysomethings navigating friendship, relationships and STIs post university. The laughs may be gentle, but the writing by Tom Edge is subtle and the characters well drawn, with Johnny Flynn (brother of Jerome) leading the cast as the chlamydia-infected Dylan tracking down his previous conquests to break the news. It’s a neat conceit, and the will they/won’t they romance with Antonia Thomas’s Evie is in the greatest of sitcom traditions – and far less frustrating when watched in one go. Toby Moses All4The cop comedy Brooklyn Nine-Nine is a feelgood proposition on every level. It is a properly funny comedy. It is undemanding moreish fare. It has charm, it has warmth, it has heart. Its characters are fundamentally united, chafing and rubbing together enough to strike comic sparks but essentially hanging together in the fight against the villainry. True antipathy or hostility has no place here. But best of all, and most valuably perhaps in our current times, it also shows every sign of the ensemble cast being free of it, too. It is impossible to know for sure, of course – the set may be a hotbed of hatred and warring egos – but one feels that the easy camaraderie on display is impossible to fake entirely. Add to that the joy of seeing Andre Braugher – Frank freaking Pembleton from Homicide: Life on the Streets, people! – in a light comic role and all that it left to say is, of course, NOICE! Lucy Mangan Amazon Prime Video/BritBoxThey don’t, in so many senses, make them like this any more. ITV’s 1981 version of Evelyn Waugh’s 1945 novel was, with its 11-hour running time, not far off granting the wish of those viewers who like dramatisations to include every word of the book. That meant the world Waugh conjured – fading nobility, eccentric inter-war hedonism and grassy afternoons at a perfectly proper Oxford University – could be allowed to completely envelop the viewer. In the days before the big US box-set beasts, Brideshead Revisited was routinely cited as the best TV show of all time. In part, that was due to the exquisite score, the sky-high production values and the brilliant cast. But its appeal has always been mainly as a door to a fantasy of a bygone world. That’s now perhaps more valuable than ever. Jack Seale All4 Making a followup to Peep Show was always going to be tough for its writers Jesse Armstrong and Sam Bain, and shorn of the natural comedic chemistry of Mitchell and Webb you might find yourself wondering where all the laughs have gone. But this is not a sitcom – it sits in that weird half-space, not quite a drama, not quite a comedy – where so many TV shows flounder. Yet Fresh Meat pulls through with a hugely talented young cast bringing to life a collection of university misfits adjusting to house-sharing – and hinted at the drama chops of Armstrong, who would go on to write Succession without his long-time collaborator. Jack Whitehall impresses as the posh dimwit best avoided in the uni bar, while Zawe Ashton’s beautifully surreal turn as Vod never fails to entertain, even if the thrill is somewhat diminished in the latter series when the character is pushed to the emotional forefront. Across four series, we see the characters mature, regress and mature again – before it reaches its natural endpoint with graduation. Toby Moses