Leigh Griffiths hat-trick helped Celtic to a thumping 5-0 win over St Mirren at Celtic Park and confirmed his return to form ahead of Scotland’s crunch Euro 2020 semi-final play-off. The Celtic striker is keen to get back into Steve Clarke’s set-up for the game against Israel at Hampden Park later in the month. Two well-taken goals before the break had the Ladbrokes Premiership leaders on easy street and his third in the second-half, after strike partner Odsonne Édouard had notched in the 54th minute, had him surely back on the international radar. Callum McGregor scored from the spot in the 90th minute and with eight games remaining, the league leaders remain unbeaten domestically in 2020 and are now 16 points ahead of Rangers who have two games in hand, the first of which is at Ross County on Sunday, but that seems almost academic as Neil Lennon’s side show no signs of faltering. Griffiths came in to partner Édouard, a pairing would dominate the afternoon, while Tom Rogic was rewarded for his late equaliser against Livingston in midweek with a start at the expense of Ryan Christie. St Mirren manager Jim Goodwin made three changes to his side, with midfielder Cameron MacPherson and attackers Tony Andreu and Junior Morais named up front. There was no whirlwind start by the home side. St Mirren slowly played themselves into the game and midfielder Cameron MacPherson’s free-kick from 25 yards forced Celtic keeper Fraser Forster to make a save down at his left-hand post. However, the hosts took the lead in the 18th minute in simple style. Édouard’s cross into the box from the left found Griffiths all alone and the 29-year-old Scotland forward confidently swept the ball low past Vaclav Hladky from five yards, with the Paisley side looking in vain for the offside flag. The goal relaxed the league leaders. Édouard’s curling shot from the edge of the box was punched away by Hladky and he then saved a header from wing-back James Forrest at point-blank range before clutching a left-footed drive from the Scotland winger. Hladky then denied Rogic but just before the break the midfielder was key to Celtic’s second goal. After Griffiths took a pass from Nir Bitton at the edge of the box, he played a clever one-two with the Australia player before flicking the ball past Hladky and in off the post. Griffiths went all out for his hat-trick after the break, coming close when his drive from 25 yards was tipped past the post by Hladky. However, the over-worked St Mirren keeper had no chance when Édouard, shadowed by Sam Foley and Jamie McGrath, took a pass from Griffiths inside the box before turning and driving low into the corner of the net for his 28th goal of the season. Griffiths’ third came in the 74th minute when he drilled a shot in from just outside the box for his first hat-trick since January 2016, in an 8-1 win over Hamilton. A couple of late efforts from Andreu and MacPherson bore no fruit for the visitors before Foley was judged by referee Gavin Duncan to have tripped Celtic substitute Hatem Abd Elhamed, on for Kristoffer Ajer, in the box and McGregor blasted in the penalty. Roundup Aberdeen came from behind to beat 10-man Hibernian 3-1 for their first league win at Pittodrie this year. Christian Doidge gave Hibs the lead in a pulsating first half but the Dons were denied a penalty shortly afterwards and, helped by Steven Whittaker’s red card, used that grievance as the basis for a comeback. Adam Jackson’s own goal and an Andrew Considine strike turned the game on its head before Curtis Main wrapped things up. Conor Washington netted his second goal in three days to earn Hearts a point from a 1-1 draw with Motherwell at Tynecastle. Christopher Long brought Hearts back down to earth following their consecutive wins over Rangers and Hibs as he capitalised on Craig Halkett’s mistake to give the visitors a 21st-minute lead, but Washington followed up his Edinburgh derby goal as he netted from close range four minutes into the second half. A late Callum Hendry strike boosted St Johnstone’s hopes of a top-six finish as they edged out Livingston 1-0. The 22-year-old striker smashed home the winner six minutes from the end of a dull affair which had looked set to end scoreless. Marios Ogkmpoe scored a late penalty to boost Hamilton’s hopes of surviving in the top flight to beat Kilmarnock 1-0. Mikel Miller saw red in the 78th minute but Ogkmpoe converted from the spot just before full-time as Accies extended their unbeaten run to four games.