Cultural differences in gardening are fascinating. In Japan, there are many specialist nurseries dedicated entirely to moss cultivars. In the UK, the only thing you’re likely to find in a garden centre with “moss” on it is a bottle of moss killer. However, thanks to the blossoming of cross-cultural exchanges of gardening ideas, often generated by following accounts on Instagram, it seems a whole generation of Brits is getting excited about “mossariums” – miniaturised landscapes of moss and rocks encased in glass vessels. But given our lack of dedicated moss nurseries, how do you even get hold of the stuff? Here’s my guide for beginners who want to get in on this trend. Given our lack of dedicated moss nurseries, how do you even get hold of the stuff? Here’s my guide for beginners First, a lesson I have learned the hard way: species choice is crucial. You can’t simply gather bits of moss from garage roofs and garden paths and expect them to work in terrariums. They will die in a few weeks. This is because most temperate mosses either need low temperatures, extremely high air movement or a dormancy period (sometimes all three) to survive. Sealed in the warm, cosseted environment of a closed terrarium, many will start to etiolate, growing long and spindly, often simply succumbing to black mould infections before that even happens. Having tested just about every species I can get my hands on, I have so far found only a tiny handful that really work well. Out of these, far and away the most reliable is a cushion-like species called Leucobryum glaucum. Fortunately it is also the most affordable. It is widely available and is sold under the name “bun moss” or “cushion moss”. This can be ordered online, or via a good florist. I love its fresh, apple-green colour and soft, tactile texture, like a croquet lawn in miniature. It will grow well in sealed terrariums, going pale yellow or white when it needs a spritz of water. Staying on the native theme, Polytrichum mosses are like miniature pine trees, and can be found very commonly in damp areas. Just a couple of sprigs can be snipped off with scissors and inserted directly into a “lawn” of bun moss to add detail and variety. For other moss species, you will need to track down aquarium plant suppliers online. These outfits have started cultivating all sorts of different tropical and temperate moss species, which, despite being sold for underwater cultivation, will grow just as well in a sealed terrarium as long as the air humidity is high enough. For me, the most successful are the tiny feather-like fronds of Fissidens fontanus moss, which usually come strapped to wire mesh. Snip the thin lengths of black cotton thread that keep it in place and lift the sheet of moss away. Other mosses, such as Amblystegium and Vesicularia, will come in tiny sealed plastic cups containing a growth jelly, the result of laboratory propagation. To use these, wash the jelly off under a tap and snip the fibrous threads into small lengths. Pressed against a moist surface in a terrarium, these will quickly establish their own colonies. Follow James on Twitter @Botanygeek