Jürgen Klopp lamented the defensive lapses he felt condemned Liverpool to a 2-0 FA Cup exit at Chelsea but he maintained his team could regain their momentum as they look ahead to next Wednesday’s Champions League showdown against Atlético Madrid. Liverpool are hardly struggling, with a first league title since 1990 virtually in their hands but the defeat at Chelsea was a third defeat in four matches. It was also the third on the spin away from home, following the 1-0 last 16 first-leg loss to Atlético and the shock 3-0 league reverse at Watford on Saturday. Chelsea were helped on their way to a morale-boosting win when Adrián fumbled Willian’s shot after Liverpool had lost possession at the back. Klopp was also critical of how his team surrendered possession in the buildup to Ross Barkley’s stunning second on the counter. “Momentum went our way for so long because we defended outstandingly,” Klopp said. “Usually you don’t get a lot of chances against us but now we have to admit that in the last four games [including the 3-2 home win over West Ham] we conceded absolutely too many goals. But they are all completely different situations, so it’s not one problem. “I’m not worried about momentum. You don’t get it as a present and you have always the chance to get it back. We’re not 100 miles away and the boys are strong. We have done very well but tonight was not good enough in decisive moments and that is what we have to accept. Losing 2-0 is not good but it’s easy to explain. We made massive mistakes around the goals.” Frank Lampard has seen his Chelsea team perform better, at times, against the bigger sides. “There’s a big positive and some negatives to that,” he said. “In the first two games against Liverpool this season, we may have played better football than today – in the European Super and the league [both of which they lost]. But this time there was an extra spirit about us. “What wins or loses games is what you do in both boxes. We got a slice of luck and had some quality saves from Kepa and quality defending from individuals. And we took two chances that won us the game. It’s hard to be comprehensive against Liverpool because they remain in the game because of the team they are. But we can’t ask for any more in terms of spirit, work ethic and quality.”