Asked why he wanted to “free solo” El Capitan – “by far the largest and most dramatic rock formation in Yosemite” – Alex Honnold replied: “Some things are so cool, they’re worth risking it all.” Free soloing is to climb without a safety rope, relying solely on the grip of one’s hands and feet, and Honnold would be the first to scale El Capitan this way. It is, as his friend and fellow climber Mark Synnott says, “an impossible climb” – 3,000ft of “sheer, gleaming, glacier-polished wall”. One of the most difficult sections, known to climbers as the Boulder Problem, was a 600ft slab that Honnold himself described as “like walking on glass”. Devoid of grips to stand on or hold, it requires a foot-hold called a “smear”. This relies on the adhesion of the slick rubber sole of the shoe on the smooth rock. Honnold had fallen there previously, and then he had been wearing a rope. This time he would be attempting it alone, with no equipment, 2,100ft up. He wouldn’t even wear a helmet. One slip and he would be dead. Honnold was 31 and the world’s greatest free solo climber when he scaled the granite face of El Capitan in June 2017. After bailing from a previous attempt in 2016 (“it wasn’t my day”), Honnold knew that it was now or never, telling Synnott: “Physiologically I’ll never have the body I did when I was 24.” His climb was kept secret, although it was filmed. He started climbing before dawn, using a headlight to scale the smooth cliff. It took Honnold just three hours and 56 minutes. There were no crowds to greet him at the top: “He stood on the rim, squinting into the bright morning sun, arms by his side.” Below him stretched the beautiful Yosemite valley, immortalised in Ansel Adams’s photographs. Synnott’s book is as gripping and nail-biting as a thriller. It is a memorable portrait of the fearless and driven Honnold, who was nicknamed “the Monk” because he doesn’t smoke or drink (not even caffeine). From reading The Brothers Karamazov 10,000ft up a cliff in Borneo, to his passionate commitment to environmentalism, Honnold is a remarkable figure. Introverted and geeky as a youngster, he admits to being “somewhere on the autistic spectrum”. Synnott’s book is also an attempt to understand what drives people such as Honnold to risk their lives on the world’s most dangerous mountains. One climber describes it as a primal experience: “Everything is more intense.” Although he denies being an adrenaline junkie, Honnold clearly lives for climbing, the only thing that has ever “lit his fire”. Climbers such as Honnold are only happy when they are hanging from a fingertip jammed in a fissure of rock a thousand feet off the ground. They want, as Henry David Thoreau put it, to “live deep and suck out all the marrow of life”. • The Impossible Climb is published by Allen & Unwin (RRP £9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.