The writer Fiona MacCarthy, who has died aged 80, believed fervently, like her adored William Morris, that design was about the power of choice – not just what to buy and use, but what to do, how to live; that actively choosing was the core of life. In that belief, she wrote mighty biographies about outsider creators and their difficult choices. Her first major book, which calmly revealed the devout artist Eric Gill as an extreme sexual predator, was an outrageous success in 1989, yet her work most likely to last is the 1994 Morris biography, subtitled A Life for Our Time. She wrote it in the Round Building complex, Hathersage, near Sheffield, the home and perfect factory that she and her partner, the industrial designer David Mellor, built in 1990, an exemplar of the balance of craft, domesticity and community Morris had longed for but never quite achieved. MacCarthy tramped Morris’s landscapes (“things dawn on you just being in the place”), made pilgrimage to his minor works, and understood the contradictions of his politics. The book both recreates his period peculiarity, and is a manifesto for his perpetual modernity; MacCarthy, like Morris, wanted to find out the proper occupation for humans in a mechanical age. She knew purposelessness makes people unhappy. As she explained in her memoir, The Last Curtsey (2006), she had crashed into this world of aesthetic choices from an unlikely height. Her great-grandfather was Sir Robert McAlpine, self-made builder and engineering contractor, whose daughter Agnes married a diplomat, the Baron de Belabre. Their socialite daughter, Yolande, wed a Royal Artillery officer, Gerald MacCarthy, who was killed in action in the North African desert in 1943, leaving adrift Yolande and two children – Fiona, still a toddler, and her baby sister Karin – and their nanny. They lived in Kensington, London, then in Scotland and eventually the unfashionable end of Chelsea, camping out during wartime flying bomb attacks in the Dorchester hotel, which McAlpine had built, and where Agnes lived in style. MacCarthy’s earliest memories were of roaming the corridors of “the Dorch”, observing other well-heeled shelterers. She grew into a natural swot, who set herself alight reading Charlotte Brontë by the nursery fire and realised that words would be her way out of her stultified world. Her peers believed education superfluous for girls (“frightfully brainy” was no compliment) but she passed easily from Wycombe Abbey school to Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. Between the two was a term in a Paris flat being “finished”, plus taking curtsey lessons and making wardrobe purchases (ballgowns, 24 pairs of nylons, five pairs of gloves), before she became one of the 1,400 debutantes presented at court in 1958 in the last official season of cocktail parties, balls and dances. Only four debs went on to university, among them a relieved MacCarthy. After graduation she retained enough conventionality to marry, in 1961, a business executive from a county military family, only to realise at a drunken hunt ball in Chelmsford that being Mrs Ian White-Thompson was “like the season, only worse”, its duration interminable. They later divorced. However, the season had taught her initiative, sociability and networking, useful qualifications for journalism. Besides shrewd words, MacCarthy had an acute visual sense; she had once dumped a teen suitor on seeing his family’s art gallery: “I could never love a boy whose mother dealt in paintings of drinking cardinals.” At Oxford she enjoyed the lectures of its first professor of art history, Edgar Wind. That commended her to Robert Harling, editor of Condé Nast’s House & Garden, a magazine then less about consumption than intelligent design as a mode of living. He ran the office as “an amiable harem, extracting his mini-skirted girl assistants … for a cappuccino in a nearby coffee bar”, but he recognised talent, and MacCarthy soon moved up from merchandise editor (unwisely advising her readers that cabbages could be deep-frozen) to interviewing smart buyers of decor for “what would soon be known as lifestyle features”. The Guardian, then in transition from its Manchester origins to a London-based national, and in want of female readers, recruited her in 1963. She was design correspondent, dispatched to interview Alvar Aalto in Helsinki or investigate the classic Isokon Long Chair, but she defined her job as “swinging 60s correspondent”, and extended her interviewees to include David Hockney, John Lennon and the feminist Betty Friedan. The paper promoted her ferocious opinion column in an ad with her picture, captioned “Fiona MacCarthy may look like a fashion model but she writes like a sabre-toothed tiger”. She produced so many pieces that she adopted an alternative byline so her name would not appear twice in the same edition. Many of her subjects came from backgrounds she had never previously encountered (her first crush, after all, had been the master of the Eton beagles), working-class heroes such as Mellor. In 1964 she interviewed him in his native habitat, the modernist studio-workshop with bedsit he had designed in Park Lane, Sheffield. The city was then an environment of making – steelworks and cutlery – where design was fought for, and over. Mellor and MacCarthy shared compatible aesthetics; she espoused his philosophy of design and democracy, then him. They married in 1966, and he added domestic quarters to the Park Lane premises. She inspired Mellor’s advance into retail in 1969, with a shop off Sloane Square, in Chelsea, selling utensils for the new posh cooking. MacCarthy left the Guardian in 1969, and was briefly women’s editor of the London Evening Standard before migrating to Sheffield, becoming, as her mother had hoped, a lady of the manor, albeit a manor with heavy machinery, when the family moved, in 1973, into the magnificent Broom Hall, converted to office, workshop and home. Their children, Corin and Clare, were pushed in the buggy to local art galleries, where MacCarthy re-evaluated the Pre-Raphaelites. Sheffield connections with metal crafters brought her to biography. She had interviewed Mellor’s friend, the silversmith Robert Welch, in the Cotswold village of Chipping Campden, where the arts and crafts designer CR Ashbee set up a utopian community in 1902. It had quickly failed but she could still feel and identify with its dreams, and Ashbee, gay leader of its rurally relocated East End craftsmen, who later married and had four children, was an irresistible subject. She rated the resulting The Simple Life (1981) lightweight and under-researched, although, as a first attempt at managing frankness about sexuality, it prepared her for the Gill biography. Harling had introduced her to Gill’s typography, and she admired his art and the principles of his commune, but she hesitated not a moment over including his diary entries about affairs with commune women and abuse of his sisters and daughters. MacCarthy innocently intended only to tell the truth, as exactly as she could establish it. She was shaken to tears when rebuked by critics, readers and friends for her refusal to condemn Gill and repudiated by his family for the disclosures. Stanley Spencer’s kin, too, were unhappy about her clear-eyed and tender 1997 account of him and his sexy art, An English Vision. By the time Byron, Life and Legend, was published in 2002, her carefully documented case for his homosexuality seemed almost mainstream; the book was respected for its years of deep research, with none of the many scraps of his handwriting left unread. MacCarthy had always wanted to prove her seriousness, and Byron did that. Spencer and Byron were written in the Round Building, and there, as Mellor became unreachable because of dementia during his final decade (he died in 2009), MacCarthy went back into Morris’s familiar world to research Edward Burne-Jones: The Last Pre-Raphaelite (2011), about the man who clambered from industrial Birmingham to a knighthood as the artist of a melancholy imagined Camelot. Her final biography, published last year, was of Walter Gropius, Bauhaus founder, which returned MacCarthy to her original metier. He had been an educator and facilitator of design, certain it could create a satisfying life. MacCarthy curated exhibitions for the Crafts Council, the V&A, Sheffield Museum and the National Portrait Gallery (her 2014 William Morris show there was stroppy with social and political protest). She was appointed OBE in 2009 for services to literature, and was a fellow of the Royal College of Art and the Royal Society of Literature. She was the only president of the 20th Century Society to have lived in two homes that were fine specimens of the century’s design. Corin and Clare, both designers, survive her. • Fiona MacCarthy, biographer and journalist, born 23 January 1940; died 29 February 2020