‘We can grow that grass. When I go on holiday in Spain, I’m like: ‘Ah, it’s brown.’ You come here, it’s green! That’s because of our ability to grow grass!” I have to admit, this wasn’t exactly the answer I was expecting when I asked Tom Pemberton what made him proud to be British. Pemberton is the only farmer I’ve ever met. And therefore the only vlogging farmer I’ve ever met. He runs a highly successful YouTube channel called Tom Pemberton Farm Life, which he started three years ago as a way to publicise his dad’s farm shop. His videos include Let’s Talk Grass and Poo, and We Need a Big Hammer. And his 145,000 subscribers lap it all up. I’ve been travelling around the UK for the past four months and quizzing young people including Pemberton about Britishness for my new podcast, United Zingdom. What makes them proud – or not – to be from here? How do they see their identity? And, most crucially: could I be British? When I was a teenager, I moved to London from Singapore – a freckle of a city on the lower elbow of the Malaysian peninsula. Now, 15 years later, I’m eligible for a British passport. But Singapore doesn’t let people claim dual nationality, so I’d have to give up one for the other. I’ve always hesitated to make the jump. I’m pretty comfortable claiming my identity as a Londoner – but British? What does that even mean in these post-Brexit times? I decided that I had to find out before I committed. I told friends that it was like scoping out a party invitation (and, before you ask, yes, I’m the kind of person who stalks the other attendees before I click “attending”). Truth be told, it’s more like marriage. A citizenship ceremony isn’t so different from a wedding – they both involve taking vows in front of a council official and your loved ones, and pledging yourself for ever more to a single person. Or, in this case, a country. So it made sense to, well, get to know my beau a little better. After months of traversing the UK, here’s what I’ve found: Britishness isn’t easily defined. Every time I thought I got a handle on it, I’d meet someone who upended it. I found myself both passionately disagreeing and agreeing with the things people told me. But what struck me most is the fact that British people have such little self-awareness, and I mean that in a purely observational way (no offence). The things that seem most self-evidently British to me – such as the strained, almost sweatily perverse, urge to remain polite at all times and the love of drinking pints – are never what occurs to anyone. There are the cliches, obviously. Harry Potter gets mentioned; so does the Queen. But there have also been lovely moments of clarity. RuPaul’s Drag Race contestant Sum Ting Wong said that multiculturalism made her proud to be Brummie; an insight that made me – an immigrant who has felt, at times, unwelcome in this country – feel much more at home. As the country slowly shuts its schools, offices and pubs in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak, it’s easy to look at your neighbours with suspicion. Are they hoarding loo roll? Are they coughing a little too loudly through the walls? Did they nick the last bag of pasta from Aldi? Small-minded parochialism can be part of the British identity – after all, this is the country that invented the phrase “curtain-twitchers”. But my experience making United Zingdom is that it doesn’t have to be. I’ve sat on sofas in Cardiff, split fried halloumi sticks in Bradford and shared countless pots of tea up and down the country. People have let me into their lives, their living rooms and, yes, their farms. I haven’t made up my mind yet about the passport, but I think that kindness counts for something in a potential date. Don’t you? United Zingdom is available to listen to now on BBC Sounds