As they chase the dream of a place in the Champions League, Wolves were forced to settle for a momentum-halting draw with Brighton as a largely uneventful Saturday afternoon ended goalless at Molineux. It was an opportunity missed. With none of the Champions League contenders above them in the table in action, Wolves could have exerted pressure at the upper end of the Premier League by moving level on points with fourth-place Chelsea, their fight for the top table only emboldened. Instead, their rivals will have a chance to gain on them again. Brighton departed Molineux with a strong point and increased swagger in their step with the knowledge that they remain Wolves’ bogey team, but issues remain and things will only get more difficult for them. They may not yet be fully submerged by the relegation battle, but they are close enough and their remaining fixture list makes for grim reading. After Wolves, four of their next six opponents are Arsenal, Manchester United, Liverpool and Manchester City. The away team arrived at Molineux after seeing their season reflected in 90 trying minutes in last weekend’s 1-0 loss at home to Crystal Palace, where they enjoyed a season-high of 66% possession but nothing palpable to show for their efforts. They have set up courageously under Graham Potter; so often they have directed traffic and created ample chances, only to spend the game failing to finish them in comical fashion before inevitably conceding. The alarm bells were ringing as they shifted focus to a Wolves team that have made it their job to systematically tear apart teams by exploiting space with their relentless counters, but early on there was little to fear. Wolves had flipped from 3-4-3 to a 3-5-2 after Adama Traoré’s shoulder issues moved him to the bench and ruled him out from terrorising the defence from the start. Both teams were a picture of tentativeness: Brighton’s dampened confidence after winning only one of the previous 14 games perhaps clashing with Wolves’ tendency to start slowly and then gradually move into gear. By the end of the first half, Brighton were responsible for the sole shot on target, neither keeper had much to do and the only moment of quality was one glorious strike from Raúl Jiménez. As a high ball flew towards Jiménez, Adam Webster panicked and headed it directly upwards into the air. The ball flew over Jiménez’s right shoulder and he clocked a beautiful volley into the side netting. For much of the season that would have stood as a warning for what was to come from the striker, but it was to be one of his few bright moments of the day. Brighton returned with much of the ball and, as against Crystal Palace, after another solid performance, Solly March was provided with the biggest chance of the game after a slick moved ended with Leandro Trossard finding him unmarked inside the penalty area in a vast canyon of space. As against Palace, his composure crumbled and he smashed the ball over the bar. As the home crowd buoyed them on, Wolves began to stamp their mark on the game. They finally found space on the counterattack through Jiménez and Diogo Jota and when Traoré came on in the 64th minute, his majestic presence was immediately felt. The winger created Wolves’ clearest opportunity following a piercing run into the penalty area, where he found Daniel Podence whose strike was vitally blocked by Dan Burn. Podence was offered more chances to win the game at the end, but after a season of epic comebacks and late goals for Wolves, this time it wasn’t enough.