1) “Lads, it’s Tottenham,” for Manchester United this weekend in north London. Back in 2001, United went 3-0 down at White Hart Lane, only to hit back with five unanswered goals of their own. Spurs have enjoyed some success against United down the years, though, including this drubbing thanks to having Jimmy Greaves in his pomp. Additionally, there was some fine finishing in 1962 – so good Pathé news kept hold of it. 2) Wales host Scotland in the Six Nations on Saturday. The two clashed in a cracker a decade ago, resulting in a dramatic finish at the Millennium Stadium. In 2014, it was far less exciting as Wales thrashed the visiting Scots. Actually, Wales have dominated the fixture in recent history and they will be hoping for plenty more of this. That's how you start a second half!Wales from one end of Twickenham to the other and Tipuric goes over#ITVRugby pic.twitter.com/8fi6lsvvkN 3) Formula One is back! At the time of writing, at least. Jenson Button has happy memories of winning in Australia in 2010, in a race Lewis Hamilton would rather forget. On-board cameras are all the rage these days but back in 1986 they were somewhat of a novelty. Here Johnny Dumfries, driving for Lotus-Renault, guides you around the Adelaide Circuit in one of the first videos of its kind. And if you want some classic racing from the Australian GP back in the day, what about Ayrton Senna and Nigel Mansell tussling for the lead at Adelaide in 1992? 4) Great goals are still great goals even when they are scored behind closed doors. Here’s a halfway-line belter from Cremonese’s Michele Castagnetti against Frosinone. Paulo Dybala’s sublime finish for Juventus against inter at an empty Allianz Stadium is worth another watch, too. Football is a weird spectacle when it is played without fans. England have even tried to promote it as a unique selling point when hyping their highlights of the 0-0 draw against Croatia in 2018: “Hear every tackle!” Barcelona at least did not try to make out that their match against Camp Nou with Las Palmas in 2017 was anything other than “eerie”. 5) As Ederson failed to use his hands properly at Old Trafford, magician Dynamo was more than making up for it by amusing a child with the sort wizardry that would confuse any defender. 6) Strike: the Greatest Bowling Story ever Told. 1) The many-legged race. 2) This is great from our friends at Copa 90 on Nottingham Forest. 3) One Man winning the Queen Mother Champion Chase. Spotters’ badges: whobroughtoranges, Merson. Guardian YouTube football channel Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.