Sorrow, joy, birth and death, love and hatred – opera covers it all, with a heavy emphasis on love and death. And for the acclaimed British Wagnerian soprano, Catherine Foster, there is no doubt where her understanding of these central human experiences stems from. The singer, who returns to Britain this spring to perform for the first time after a successful career in Germany, will be drawing heavily on her time as a nurse and midwife in her native Nottingham. “We are all a collection of our experiences,” she said this weekend, before a performance of Richard Strauss’s expressionist opera Elektra with the Bournemouth Symphony under conductor Kiril Karabits. “And so, of course, working on the wards affected me.” A sense of both the tragedy and elation of life were just part of daily work, Foster recalled: “I know there is both evil and beauty in the world. You can be looking after a woman who is facing a loss in one room, while in another you are caring for another who is happily having her first child. That has helped me to separate my emotions. I had to be ready to face both of them.” I had never sung Wagner, but I found it was like butter on the voice Foster will perform the lead role of Elektra in Poole and at Birmingham’s Symphony Hall this week. To play the obsessive character, based on Greek myth, she will draw on the behaviour of patients suffering from mental health issues. She said: “I have based my Elektra on three patients I remember. She is a manipulator really, because she cannot move on. She is stuck at the moment of her father’s death. And in fact we know that the opera’s librettist, Hugo von Hoffmanstahl, visited psychiatric wards to witness patients before he wrote his characters.” As a young child in Nottingham, Foster said that, like the Abba song, she “could sing long before I could talk”. But she also wanted to be a nurse. After training as a midwife, her path into operatic theatre opened up to her one day as she looked after a mother-to-be in labour. “Her husband was the head of the local amateur dramatic society and he gave me the names of two singing coaches. That eventually led me to Pamela Cook, who changed everything for me.” The Birmingham Conservatoire coach helped shape a career for Foster. “There was a lot wrong with my voice when I went to her. I had to undo the techniques I had learned.” But when she finished at the conservatoire, British roles proved hard for the newcomer to win: “I applied, but there was only ever one position for a Donna Anna[in Don Giovanni] or for a Mimi[La Boheme]. Then through Pam I heard about the German Fest system.” By cultural convention each major German city has a fully staffed theatre, with an orchestra and ballet dancers as well as singers, Foster explained: “I knew I needed experience and you can’t get better experience than in Germany because they are singing all the time there. I prepared four arias and wrote 100 letters.” She was eventually taken on by an agent, which led to a job in the city of Weimar. “People said, ‘But you don’t speak German!’ and I said ‘So?’” she remembers. “And luckily, because Weimar had been in East Germany, no one spoke much English, so I had to learn quickly.” Foster moved out to Weimar within months of marrying her composer husband, who was working in England. “I couldn’t afford the expensive phone calls. He did come out for our wedding anniversary in August 2001 and then I didnt see him until Christmas.” Trained to sing colaratura soprano, like the late Australian singer Joan Sutherland, the switch to the German repertoire was a pleasant surprise. “I had never sung Wagner, but I found it was like butter on the voice.” Foster’s talent soon took her to the heart of dramatic opera, the Bayreuth festival, where she played Wagner’s heroine Brünnhilde for six consecutive years to standing ovations. Since then she has sung around the world. “I have come from a nursing profession that expected 110% giving, to a profession that expects 110% taking. The only way I have been able to bridge that great gap is by telling myself that singing is at least expressing and sharing emotions,” said Foster, who was awarded an honorary fellowship of the Royal Birmingham Conservatoire six years ago. In 2018 she was also given the London Wagner Society’s Reginald Goodall award. Foster’s triumphant return to Britain this month inevitably reminds her of the fateful moment she once walked up a hospital corridor with a resignation letter in her hand. “At first I walked away, thinking I couldn’t give up a regular job. Then I told myself I did not want to be a could-have-been and so I went back and pushed it under the door.”