Sir Dragonet was beaten at odds of 8-15 as Aidan O’Brien made his customary slow start to the Flat-racing season, which got under way at Naas on Monday. But despite some laboured efforts by runners from Ireland’s most powerful stable, those watching on TV saw a potential star in Poetic Flare, the winner of the opening race. Poetic Flare is a son of Dawn Approach, who made his racecourse debut in the equivalent race eight years ago and went on to land the Guineas, the Dewhurst and the Coventry among other important prizes. Jim Bolger, trainer of both horses, dropped a hint that he hopes Poetic Flare can uphold his father’s reputation. Asked what may come next for his winner, Bolger said: “If you look up the form of Dawn Approach, I’d say that’s the route we’ll go. We think a good bit of him, so it was nice he went and did the business.” Poetic Flare eventually asserted over O’Brien’s well-bred Lipizzaner, who had been odds-on when betting began but was allowed to drift to 2-1 by the off. O’Brien’s Knight Of Malta was a disappointing favourite in the next but punters kept faith in Sir Dragonet, who was a long odds-on shot for the Devoy Stakes. That proved a mistake, as he found little in the closing stages after travelling like a winner, Numerian pulling clear for a first success in 13 months. Sir Dragonet, beaten less than a length in last year’s Derby, will surely be sharper for his next outing, if Irish racing is allowed to continue behind closed doors for long enough. Clonmel 2.00 Rebel Gold 2.30 Elusive Star 3.00 Shantou Sisu (nap) 3.30 Global Fert 4.00 Death Duty 4.30 Robin Deuz Pois (nb) 5.00 Captain Kangaroo Bolger is hopeful that will be permitted. “Everybody’s on tenterhooks,” said the trainer, who was not at Naas and kept in touch with the action remotely. “We have to keep up the security and make sure everybody is staying well apart from one another. It’s working fine for us at the moment. “We’re even at the stage where we quizzed the younger staff where they were last night. I’m amazed how sensible they are. Most of them were at home, nearly all of them. They’re being very responsible and not buying coffees or sandwiches on the way to the races or anything like that. “We would like it to continue the way it is because everybody is keeping their distance and there’s no restaurant or tea-room and they have to leave immediately after they’ve had their runners. It’s being very closely policed and even the jockeys coming back from the race are not chatting. They all seem very conscious of what’s required.”