For Sara Gayoso, and for tens of thousands of other medical staff across Spain, the last few weeks have been an unprecedented blur; an indistinct, urgent succession of days that drain into each other as health workers struggle to do what they can with what they have. But, even by recent standards, the past few days have been bleak. On Monday the defence minister revealed that soldiers drafted in to help tackle the coronavirus outbreak by disinfecting residential homes had found a number of elderly people abandoned and dead in their beds. Then medical unions announced legal action to try to ensure healthcare workers have the equipment they need to protect themselves, their patients and their families against the virus. On Wednesday the death toll in Spain passed that in China, where the disease originated at the end of last year. Two days later, Spain broke another record with 769 deaths in 24 hours. Gayoso’s moment of coronavirus clarity had come a few weeks ago when an older woman was brought into El Escorial hospital outside Madrid, where Gayoso works as a doctor in the A&E department. The patient had pneumonia. “The hardest thing for me so far was having to stand two metres away and tell her daughter that they wouldn’t be able to see her,” Gayoso said. “Her daughter’s face just dropped and she said to me: ‘So, I won’t get to see my mother again?’ She was worried about not being able to say goodbye properly and I couldn’t even move close to her; I couldn’t tell her that of course she’d definitely get to see her mother again, because I had no way of knowing if she would.” Almost 15% of Spain’s 64,059 cases of coronavirus have been health workers. In Madrid and other regions, stocks of basic protective equipment such as face masks are running dangerously low. “The material we have is being very strictly rationed so we don’t run out,” Gayoso said. “You’re careful not to get your gown dirty because you know you’ll have to reuse it, which ups the risk of contagion. We’re having to take very good care of the high-quality material.” It was perhaps a perverse blessing that staff were so busy, Gayoso added. “There’s no time to get angry or to wonder why things have been organised the way they have.” Her colleague Pablo Cereceda, a surgeon and representative for the Amyts medical association, is in precautionary quarantine and has had more time to reflect – and to seethe. “The reality is that this is an epidemic that’s getting the better of us and we need to ask why,” he said. “The only thing you can really compare this with is the situation we saw with the terrorist bombings in Madrid in March 2004. Yes, it was days of furious activity, especially for surgeons and those in ICUs, but it was nothing like this.” Cereceda and many other doctors and nurses argue that the pandemic has shown what happens when you make unprecedented demands on a health service that in many areas is still struggling to recover from the 2008 economic crisis and its deep attendant cuts. “We’ve been warning for years that we don’t have enough nurses to look after patients even in normal circumstances, let alone in a pandemic like the one we’re in,” said María José García, a spokeswoman for the Satse nursing union. “Nurses are being sent in to treat infected patients wearing tattered robes and without masks, goggles and gloves. There’s a massive shortage of protective equipment which means that we’re picking up the virus, infecting our own families and becoming transmitters among the population.” If the number of infected nurses continues to rise, “who’s going to look after all the patients?” wondered García. Cereceda shares the same grievances and said the government and the central and regional health authorities should have acted far sooner than they did. He is especially angry that huge public events three weeks ago – including International Women’s Day marches, a 9,000-person meeting of the far-right Vox party in Madrid, and countless sporting fixtures – were allowed to go ahead despite what was going on elsewhere in the world. “We failed to listen to the alarm bells that were ringing in our sister country Italy and that’s led to a huge, exponential growth in cases,” he said. “There was a tsunami warning that they ignored. Now the wave’s hit and we’re all under water.” It isn’t just hospital staff on the coronavirus frontline. Three residential home workers who are members of the Aetesys nursing association are in hospital after tending infected residents. “Health workers are dropping like flies at the moment,” said the association’s president, Elvira González Santos. “And we’re the ones who are being told to do the job that some nurses don’t have to do; we’re the ones who look after all a resident’s hygiene needs.” González Santos and her fellow workers are horrified by the defence minister’s stories and say they are doing all they can to keep looking after their charges. “People need to remember that residential home workers are like family to the people who live there – we’re the eyes and hands of the residents and we’re the ones who sometimes fight their corner against the management.” And then there are the funeral companies. Alfredo Gosálvez, of the National Funeral Services Association (Panasef), said that on a normal March day undertakers would deal with 80 deaths in Madrid. They are now dealing with about 300. Gosálvez said his members also lacked the protective equipment they need “as the last link in the public health chain” and were struggling to keep up with the demand. “Funeral workers are used to difficult situations and they’re giving it all they’ve got, working double shifts, 18-hour days and running themselves ragged,” he said. “Hundreds of them haven’t rested for days.” Their needs go beyond kit and rest. “We’d like it if funeral workers could be included in the applause we hear around the country each night,” Gosálvez added. Ritual applause, coffee, enduring vocations and the lack of any alternative are the main sustainers of much medical activity across Spain at the moment. Juan Camilo Meza is a “very, very tired but still healthy” anaesthetics resident at Mataró hospital near Barcelona. His intensive care unit has been forced to increase its capacity from 14 beds to 21, and every single one of the hospital’s respirators – new, old, transport models – has been pressed into service. Staff are having to pick up new skills as they double up across different departments and, once more, masks and gowns are in short supply – although gloves and goggles are not. Hospital psychiatrists and psychologists are now helping staff as well as patients but the strains are beginning to show and even the midnight-black humour of the medic is becoming as scarce as face masks. “Everyone’s putting in the same hours; you can see it in the bags under their eyes and in the fact that they’re not making jokes like they used to,” Meza said. “You can feel the tension and the fear in the air. No one was ready for anything like this.”