Thank you for the excellent article by Larry Elliott (Cornwall: ‘Poverty looks different here than in a city’, 4 March). Living in Cornwall, I feel that we are always forgotten by governments who think of us as too far away to think about, unless they want to retire here, or have a holiday or own a holiday cottage. The EU gave us a lot of support over the years as we were considered one of the poorest areas in the UK. It is very concerning that we have left the comfort of funding from the EU for our farming, fishing and industry. The funding from the EU was of great benefit to us. Without it we would never have had the airport at Newquay or the various tourist attractions like the Eden Project and the university in Cornwall. Please may we have more about Cornwall in your paper? It might remind the government that we are still in urgent need of funding, and could do with better transport links too to help our industry and people living and working here, plus tourism. Jo WhitneyWest Looe, Cornwall • While most of your article was good and very much represents Cornwall council’s campaign for fairer funding, I found myself becoming “angry of St Just” when the piece stated that “Penzance is the first and last town in Cornwall”. I suggest Larry Elliott takes a trip to the far west of Cornwall, where he will find a fine town beyond Penzance called St Just-in-Penwith, on the Tin Coast. As he arrives he can park for free in our town car park, opposite the town library, doctor’s surgery and fire station. He can wander around our wonderful independent shops and visit our four pubs, and if he lets me know he is coming I’ll ensure he is welcomed by members of our town council, including our town mayor.Sue JamesCornwall councillor and deputy mayor of St Just • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 