More than anything else, Ori and the Will of the Wisps is an intoxicating feast for the senses. From its hauntingly beautiful visuals to its ambient, responsive music, there is so much to love about the look and feel of this long-awaited sequel. As with 2015’s masterful Ori and the Blind Forest, Will of the Wisps falls into the Metroidvania subgenre of multidirectional scrolling platformers, and its impressive aesthetics are matched by a gripping storyline, bewitching characters and a fully immersive environment in which every nook and cranny pulses with life. This time around Ori, the translucent white guardian spirit, is tasked with navigating through and beyond the dense Nibel forest to a new world shrouded in darkness. Ori begins with zero skills and must learn new abilities to unlock unreachable areas – a requirement that involves travelling back and forth through each level as you figure out exactly what you need and where to find it. The detailed maps are useful but, at several points, you are likely to find yourself hopelessly disorientated and unsure of which path to take next. This is all part of the adventure though, especially as Nibel forest is such a lovely place to get lost in. Although the game is a 2D side-scroller, it frequently reminded me of the open-world adventure Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. As Ori glides effortlessly through the sky on a feather or bounces between mossy hilltops, there’s a similar affection for the natural world and the endless exploration opportunities therein. Skill-building is also a key part of the game; players must learn to time jumps accurately and climb at precise angles. It can take multiple attempts before you hit your stride, but these aspects merely add to the fun and your sense of engagement within the world, not least because Ori just looks so damn graceful whenever he takes flight. Despite the similarities to its predecessor, there are some crucial differences. Developer Moon Studios has ditched the sequential upgrade system used in Blind Forest for a process in which Ori collects glowing health and energy shards to aid him in his mission. The game also has a more traditional autosave function. Combat now plays a much bigger role, allowing for a more expansive range of weapons and special moves – although fighting the more common enemies can feel a little tedious after a while. Many players will relish the challenge of memorising an enemy’s attack pattern in order to bring them down, but I sometimes found myself impatient to quickly move past these frequent scuffles so I could test out my skills on more formidable foes. Still, the controls are intuitive and you are able to combine techniques to develop your own fighting styles. Although the storyline is melancholy at times, it never feels maudlin. The sweet characters perk up the darker moments and have a surprising amount of depth. For example, the tiny owl Ku has a memorable back story, which sets them up to be a charming and versatile playable character in parts of the story. Peppered with devious puzzles, Ori and the Will of the Wisp is an irresistible challenge. There is extraordinary attention to detail – the entire world feels alive with excitement and danger. I struggled to put down the controller as I progressed deeper into the game, unable and unwilling to let anything stand in the way of Ori realising his true destiny. A bold and ambitious sequel.