Wellington player Tim Payne has issued a tearful apology for a joyriding incident during the team’s A-League quarantine period in Sydney which will have legal ramifications. Football Federation Australia and Phoenix management are investigating the alcohol-related incident in which Payne and teammate Oliver Sail drove a golf buggy beyond the team’s remote Sydney facility, where they were undergoing 14 days of self-isolation. All Whites international defender Payne admitted he and Sail broke the team’s strict conditions when they left the facility – believed to be the Sydney Academy of Sport near Narrabeen – in the early hours of Tuesday morning. Payne confirmed he would be facing legal sanctions but rebutted a media report that said he had been arrested. He also quashed reports that members of the public had been involved in any way. An emotional Payne told Radio Sport he had apologised to the club and teammates for his actions and was remorseful. “I just want to say that I’m incredibly sorry and incredibly embarrassed, what I’ve done,” he said. “I take full responsibility for my actions and for what unfolded on that night. I’ve let so many people down, including my partner, my family, the club as a whole, individuals such as Uffie [coach Ufuk Talay], who has given me the chance this season.” Payne confirmed he and several members of the squad had been drinking at the facility. He had spoken to club management and expected to face internal sanctions. “I did something I’m not proud of and I 100% expect there to be repercussions for those actions. It’s one of those things you wish you could take back but I’m fully ready to stand up and face them head on.” FFA said in a statement the matter is being taken very seriously and if any misconduct is found to have occurred, it will take action under the code’s national code of conduct. The team returned home on Tuesday afternoon, hours after the A-League’s suspension had been announced. Phoenix general manager David Dome has told AAP that the players and staff had made the call to return home on Monday afternoon, after the New Zealand government announced the country would undergo a border lockdown this week. Payne has played 17 internationals for the All Whites and in January extended his Phoenix contract for a further two years after cementing his starting XI status. Sail, 24, has played eight games for the Phoenix since signing with the club in 2014.