Flavor Flav is still fighting the power. That includes the commander-in-chief. But he wants to set the record straight on a recent dust-up over a performance at a Bernie Sanders rally that got him removed from Public Enemy, the group he helped form. It’s Chuck D, co-founder and core member of the rap group, who Flav has problems with. Not Bernie Sanders. “I don’t have anything against Bernie. I think he’s a good person and I wish him luck,” Flav told the Guardian in an interview at San Diego international airport on Super Tuesday, as he waited for his flight to Las Vegas. “I think they’re all good people,” he said. “Except Trump. Some people tried to say I did this because I’m a Trump supporter and that’s not true. Fuck Trump!” The recent episode started after Sanders’ campaign announced last week that Public Enemy was slated to perform a set at a rally for the Vermont senator. Flav’s lawyers sent a letter, which said that Flav had not endorsed any presidential candidates and that Sanders was not authorized to use the group’s image without his permission. “Hey Bernie, don’t do this,” Flav added in a handwritten note that appended the letter. In response, the group issued a statement saying it would be “moving forward without Flavor Flav” and thanked him for his years of service. In the interview, Flav said the dispute had nothing to do with Sanders, but with Chuck D for including him in plans for a performance he hadn’t agreed to. “Why try to say I’m a part of something I’m not a part of? That was all Chuck D,” said Flav. Chuck D said on Twitter that Flav’s decision to miss the performance came down to money. “My last straw was long ago,” he wrote on Twitter. “It’s not about Bernie with Flav … he don’t know the difference between [the American football player] Barry Sanders or Bernie Sanders … So I don’t attack Flav on what he don’t know.” ... last final note the last final note was my last straw was long ago. It’s not about BERNIE with Flav... he don’t know the difference between BarrySanders or BernieSanders he don’t know either. FLAV refused to support @Sankofa after @harrybelafonte inducted us. He don’t do that pic.twitter.com/5Ky9dTnzmd Tensions between the two rappers date back years; Flav once sued Chuck D and the group’s management company over unpaid earnings. Despite the recent flare-up, Flav was met with fist bumps and cheers of “Flava Flaaaaav” from TSA agents patting down his pockets at security. Asked by the Guardian about the day’s Democratic primary contest, Flav said he hadn’t spent it waiting in line to cast a ballot. He wasn’t interested. “I don’t deal with politics,” Flav said. “Chuck D, he’s the politician of the group. I’m just the friendly jester.”