Pep Guardiola wondered whether Manchester City’s run of domestic trophies would ever be bettered after he saw them beat Aston Villa 2-1 to win the Carabao Cup for a third season in succession. City hogged 70% of the ball, they dominated in terms of shots and chances, and goals from Sergio Agüero and Rodri gave them a cushion. Mbwana Samatta made it 2-1 with a header for Villa before half-time and City survived a last-gasp scare when Claudio Bravo pushed Björn Engels’ header against the post. The result meant City have won eight of the past nine domestic trophies, including Community Shields – the one that got away was the 2018 FA Cup – and they have their sights set on more this season. They face Sheffield Wednesday in the FA Cup last 16 on Wednesday and hold a 2-1 lead over Real Madrid after the first leg of their Champions League last-16 tie. Guardiola said that since winning his first Carabao Cup against Arsenal in 2018, he had won eight of 11 available trophies, including Champions Leagues, but it was put to him that the numbers looked even more attractive when only domestic silverware was considered. “Definitely,” the City manager said. “I think it’s more remarkable – the last nine titles, you win eight. So it’s difficult for anyone to do it again, not just us but our opponents. “I’ve won all six finals since I’ve been part of this group so I’m very satisfied. It’s not just about winning one – it’s to show in every game that we try to win. That’s the best thing we can give for our club. We have a responsibility to win titles. “There’s no time to rest or celebrate but when you do reflect and remember, it’s because this group of players has something special. I will try to convince them to carry on, in every training session it’s about work. The most beautiful one is the Premier League, that is the most difficult and I think we have the numbers to win it in a normal year but another team has done amazingly. But now we have to finish second and we have the cup and the second leg against Madrid.” Guardiola has won 30 trophies as a manager, also taking in his time at Barcelona and Bayern Munich, and he was asked whether he ever imagined being so successful. “Yeah, yeah,” he replied with a smile and no little sarcasm. “When I was 14 I said I’d be a manager and win 30 titles. I’m so pleased to have been a part of incredible groups of people at Barça, Bayern and City. I’ll always be grateful. They are incredible numbers in a short time. I have a feeling that every time it gets more difficult. Achieving is so nice, so good.” Guardiola talked up three of his players – the man of the match, Phil Foden, together with Claudio Bravo and John Stones. Bravo’s save to deny Engels was crucial and Guardiola felt Stones recovered after being at fault in the buildup to Samatta’s goal. Foden said he had been told that he would start by Guardiola in training on Saturday. “I couldn’t wait to play and it was an unbelievable day,” he added. “When I play, every minute counts, so I try and do my best and I’m very proud of my performance today.” The Villa manager, Dean Smith, said that he was disappointed but proud. “We had a mountain to climb at 2-0 down but I was pleased with the reaction. I was never concerned that the game would get away from us. I thought we asked questions of them. This level of performance is the standard we have to have in the league. The concentration now goes on to that. We can take a lot of heart from this.”