Dave, the Mercury prize-winning British rapper who criticised Boris Johnson for being racist at the Brit awards, has made another searing attack on the Tories, this time for their funding of the NHS. Writing on Instagram, he argued that the government “had the measures to stop an outbreak before it came but decided to prioritise other things”. He added: “How the fuck can a country elect a party that’s cut [the NHS] to a point of no return and in the same breath start talking about how much they’re behind it.” Dave said he was in favour of the support shown for NHS workers last week, when people across the country clapped for healthcare professionals, but added: “Did NHS staff not have rights before this virus? Did our parents not deserve free parking or wages that they could actually live on or support or basic fucking human respect?” The rapper was referring to a decision made by health secretary Matt Hancock, who announced free parking for NHS workers last week. Hancock said: “Our NHS is facing an unprecedented challenge, and I will do everything I can to ensure our dedicated staff have whatever they need during this unprecedented time.” Dave has previously attacked the Conservative party. In his Ivor Novello award-winning track Question Time, he criticised former prime minister David Cameron over failing to take responsibility for bringing the Brexit referendum – “You fucked us, resigned, then sneaked out the firing line” – and Theresa May over her response to the Grenfell Tower fire: “You look like a robot and you don’t speak with any life.” At the 2020 Brit awards, he added a new verse to his track Black, rapping: “The truth is our prime minister’s a real racist.” He also called for reparations for black people following the slave trade, as well as support for the Windrush generation and Grenfell Fire victims. Dave’s album Psychodrama won album of the year at the 2020 Brit awards and reached No 1 in the UK album chart. He has also topped the singles chart with his track Funky Friday, featuring Fredo.