Saracens, Wasps, Worcester and Gloucester on Friday became the first top-flight clubs to agree 25% pay cuts with their players and staff from next month owing to the suspension of the Premiership for at least another month because of the coronavirus pandemic. Seven of the other nine are expected to join them with leaders Exeter the exception in a response not just to a lack of matchday income and the use of grounds for functions but because Premiership Rugby is stopping central funding as significant revenue streams come under threat. It leaves the clubs, 11 of which recorded losses in the last financial year with Exeter again the exception, needing to take immediate and drastic action with sport, because of the government’s social gathering policy, not likely to resume before a paying crowd until the middle of June at the earliest. They, and the Championship leaders Newcastle, each enjoyed a windfall of £12.5m last year when the private equity firm CVC took a 27% stake in the Premiership, but most used the money to pay off overdrafts, reimburse benefactors and for ground improvements. There is not much left and with CVC now taking 27% of the league’s profits, Premiership Rugby is stopping central funding, which makes up between 25-33% of a club’s turnover, more for those who do not own their grounds. “We have also made difficult decisions to ensure we can collectively emerge stronger,” said its chief executive, Darren Childs. Even if the season resumes in the summer, the play-offs are unlikely to take place and broadcasters BT are worried about customers suspending subscriptions because there is no live action. With this campaign’s European Champions Cup under threat, there would be no income from that tournament. The shortfall would mean that what it had paid the clubs so far would probably be the limit of its income. The four clubs revealed their pay cuts on the day when the Rugby Football Union said it was ending the season at all levels below the top flight, with the Welsh Rugby Union following a few hours later. In a statement, it said it was in active discussion with the Premiership but that came as news to the clubs who were not warned about the announcement in advance. A reason the Premiership did not suspend the tournament beyond 24 April was a concern raised at a meeting last week that BT would lose subscriptions if viewers felt they would not see any action until next season and may look to seek a rebate, but the worry now is that there will be no resumption until next season, putting some clubs in a parlous financial position. Not least Wasps who, while generating the greatest turnover in the Premiership,are heavily reliant on income from the Ricoh Arena, which had dropped significantly because of the restrictions on socialising. The club is due to repay a £35m bond in 2022 but lost nearly £10m in 2017-18 and that would have increased to £12m last year but for the CVC payout. “As a club and a business, we are having to make difficult decisions to navigate uncharted waters,” said the Wasps chief executive, Stephen Vaughan. “Businesses throughout the world are being impacted and we are no different. We need to take significant action to reduce costs immediately and the impact of these decisions will be felt across the whole business. I could not be more proud of the response of the players or their understanding and determination to help the club in such testing times. These are extraordinary times which call for extraordinary and robust measures.” Worcester are another club that has been grappling with significant losses. “Among the measures we have put in place is a temporary lockdown of Sixways during the five-week period that Premiership matches are postponed,” said the club in a statement. “That clearly presents challenges for the running of the business, in particular cash-flow. It is important to make decisions now to ensure that when we emerge from this dreadful crisis we still have a sustainable rugby club trio serve as the heart of our local community.” Like Wasps, Worcester will not be cutting the wages of the lowest paid at the club. “We have offered as much support as we can to any member of staff who may suffer particular hardship as a result,” continued the statement. “We appreciate this is not an ideal situation for anyone but we hope that with the support of our loyal and dedicated staff in these challenging times we can manage our way through this period.” The Gloucester chief executive, Luke Bradley, said Kingsholm and the conference and events facilities there would be closed until 20 April. “We have also implemented a 25% salary reduction across everyone at the club to see us through this incredibly challenging time,” he added. This is a fast-moving situation but we would like to repeat that the next four [Premiership] rounds have been postponed only.” The decision of the RFU to cancel the season below Premiership level means Newcastle will have to wait until the middle of next month to learn whether they will be promoted. They had an 18-point lead at the top of the Championship and a panel has been set up to determine the finishing positions in all the leagues run by the union.