Night sweats, mood swings – language around the menopause is all rather negative and even, some might say, derogatory. It implies it’s a time of things “winding down”, “ending”, “drying up”. Well, most things. Because often, along with menopause, comes bladder weakness. And for many women that means that things get decidedly less dry. Unlike when a girl starts her period, which in many cultures is celebrated, and in the UK is now respected with a government campaign to provide sanitary products in schools, when a woman’s periods begin to end, it’s seen as a change towards old age, towards a body that’s “done”. And even for those going through menopause, it has often felt pretty taboo to talk about the daily problems – especially bladder weakness. “Don’t make me laugh, I’ll wet myself!” might seem like an age-old joke, but it’s one that’s true for menopausal women. And when it comes to our sex lives, it’s no laughing matter. There’s fear and shame and women shut down, choosing not to be intimate for fear of leaking urine during a passionate moment. After all, when do you slip “I’d love to have an early night but I’m worried I’ll wet the bed!” into the conversation, whether you’re with a long-term partner or someone new? The good news is this conversation is being reclaimed by women in the spotlight, who are starting to talk about the final menopause taboo of bladder weakness. Well, we talk so much about starting our periods – why would we not talk about stopping them, and how this affects your love life? It seems there has been a realisation that no matter whether you grace the red carpet and TV screens or you’re on the school run with grandchildren or off to the office, menopause will happen to every woman. Take Gwyneth Paltrow, for example, who released a video for her wellbeing site Goop, saying: “I think menopause gets a really bad rap, and needs a bit of rebranding.” Her video Madame Ovary spoke about mood swings and sweats, while British actress Emma Thompson has joked how hot sweats mean she’s not cold on the red carpet. OK, so the conversation is shifting – just like we can now see a tampon string in a TV ad (thanks to Sport England’s This Girl Can campaign), women are no longer sitting quietly while they deal with the side effects of menopause. But there is one subject that still has to work hard to find its way into our vocabulary – bladder weakness. We can talk hot flushes, night sweats, mood swings – all with increasing honesty. But then there’s Nadia Sawalha, who struggled with incontinence in silence. The usually outspoken TV presenter kept quiet about bladder weakness until she was forced to speak about it after having an accident on national TV. Why is it the one part of menopause women can’t talk about? Well, leaking during the day is one thing – the embarrassment of needing to find some alternative underwear, for example – but when it comes to sex, it’s a different matter altogether. Women who have bladder weakness and might have an accident during sex are likely to close off to their partner, so worried they’ll spoil the intimacy that they don’t have sex and even make up excuses, or “blame” menopause. Intimacy is not synonymous with leakage. After all, when you’re not sure whether you might lose control of your bladder, being intimate isn’t always top of the list. Talk about mixed messages! Women are encouraged to embrace their ageing, to love who they are and how they look – to go grey with glamour and grace, or to wear a bikini with pride. Just don’t mention the bladder weakness, right?! As periods end and change, we have to adjust. The problem is, the world doesn’t seem to adjust with us. And women are left in a strange quagmire of going through something so natural and even primal in silence and, often, shame. And with two-thirds of women over 40 affected with bladder weakness, and many revealing it has affected their mental health, it’s time we became more open and honest about how bladder weakness affects us. Meg Matthews, who has been campaigning about the menopause and runs megsmenopause.com, says: “Bladder weakness, also called bladder incontinence, is a very common consequence of menopause. It’s not easy to talk about this topic, and, because women don’t always feel confident talking about it, they can feel alone. We need to understand that having bladder weakness is OK. This is the message we need to spread.” But just like when we’re younger, confidence can come back when we use the right products. Once a girl knows she can use a tampon or pad, she’s less worried about her period affecting her day-to-day life. And for women with bladder issues, it’s about a pad that can help you forget there’s even a problem. Then you’ll feel freer to have those more difficult intimacy conversations that you’ve been putting off – and perhaps that early night … As incontinence affects one in three women over 35, we should all be having more open conversations about this everyday condition that impacts women of all ages. Find out more at tena.co.uk/ageless