For more than 20 years, one retired but indefatigable vicar, the Rev Paul Nicolson, sent thousands of letters for publication to newspapers – just one aspect of his work for two organisations that he set up to campaign against poverty: Z2K (the Zacchaeus 2000 Trust) and Taxpayers Against Poverty (TAP), which was launched by means of a letter in the Guardian. “Rev Paul”, as he was simply known to many, died suddenly at the start of this month. Plans for his funeral – which takes place today, 30 March 2019, in Tottenham, London – had to be scaled back because of the coronavirus outbreak, and so his children have asked those not able to be there to join them virtually on the day by posting online with the hashtag #RevPaul. Here is an extract from the message they sent out via TAP: Possibly the UK’s most social media-literate octogenarian, Dad was actively engaged with his supporters (and detractors) on social platforms, working with allies to improve the lives of those who are now most affected during this time of crisis. Therefore we feel it is fitting to give those not able to be with us at his funeral a voice via these channels.  And you can join us. Do post on Facebook or Tweet or record a short video message answering one or more of these questions:• How should Rev Paul’s community respond to the current crisis?• How will you follow in Rev Paul’s footsteps?• How has Rev Paul touched your life? On Monday 30th March post your text or video tagging Dad’s Facebook and Twitter handles [Twitter: @taxpayers_a_pFacebook: facebook.com/TaxpayersAgainstPovertyUK] with the hashtag #RevPaul. Dad requested that people give to Z2K and TAP rather than buy flowers or cards so please include the https://bitly.com/RevPaul link on all your posts. Later this year we are looking forward to holding a service of thanksgiving and celebration to which everyone will be invited! We hope it will be a great gathering to celebrate his extraordinary life through which the lives of so many others were changed for the better. The things he has been saying for years, that we must provide for the needs of all those in our society, need to be celebrated and broadcast and built upon. And we can all help spread the word.  We look forward to meeting you at the memorial later this year, hugging without reservation, and celebrating the life of our extraordinary father.  With huge thanks for your love and support, Krissie, Claire, Tom, Hugo and Rod As our tribute to Rev Paul, we have collected together, below, many of those that the Guardian published. You refer to the most fundamental welfare principle of all: an adequate income (Leader, July 19). The standards required are those which will provide for essential needs, good health, satisfactory standards of child development, social cohesion and human dignity. To date, all governments stumble about in the dark. They even set levels of minimum incomes without the advice of a dietitian or nutritionist. As a consequence, poor women have low birthweight babies with high morbidity and mortality rates throughout life. Semi-skilled and unskilled workers die, on average, five years younger. The poor experience double the rate of divorce and a higher rate of suicide among young people. Children who grow up in low-income families are more likely to leave school early after a lower attendance and achievement record and to have more contact with the police. Poverty-related crime, ill health and other expensive consequences of poverty may cost the treasury more than ensuring people have adequate incomes. Lord Morris of Manchester’s amendment to the welfare reform and pensions bill this week will address these issues.Paul NicolsonZacchaeus 2000 Trust Nick Davies concludes “there is almost no connection between reality and the easy consensus of distant journalists and politicians” when comparing Roedean and Stanley Deacon schools. This political malaise affects education, health and crime. We help people prepare their means statements for the magistrates. The reality is that poverty is so bad that decent people are propelled into crime, die young, give birth to underweight children, fall ill through stress and inadequate diet, despair of clothing their children adequately for school and have unmanageable debts. The easy consensus fails to take the government to task for grossly underestimating the depth of poverty which has built up. The hole in the middle of the polo mint policies of the “third way” awaits a diagnosis which admits to the reality, expense and social dangers of the extreme poverty of millions of adults in and out of work in Britain.Rev Paul NicolsonZacchaeus 2000 Trust It is not sufficient for governments to formulate health policy on the grounds that the average life expectancy of men and women has increased dramatically since 1901. In 1972 low-paid men could expect to die aged 66.5 and professional men 5.5 years later. By 1999 low paid men could expect to die aged 71 and the gap had increased to 7.4 years. By 1999 low paid women could expect to live to 77.1 while their professional colleagues could enjoy another 5.7 years. This punitive inequality in death is a measure of social injustice that should spur all political parties to tackle the poverty that lies behind it. Giving free TV licences to the 70% of professional workers who will live to 75 years old when 54% of low-paid workers will not is no part of a relevant policy.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust Call centres and IT are being developed for the administrative convenience of government, but are leaving the poor and the vulnerable behind. It is not generally understood in Whitehall that the preferred means of communication of the poorest is now the pay-as-you-go mobile. Once it is paid for, at between £39 and £59, there is no further charge. But a minimum £5 top-up card must be bought to make outgoing calls, none of which is free. 0800 and 0870 calls can cost 10p a minute. Meanwhile, BT has cut off over 1 million landline subscribers and is removing phone boxes. I was recently at the magistrates court in High Wycombe. A young man had no money to pay a fine. He had not signed on for jobseeker’s allowance (JSA). To do that, he had to phone a call centre in Reading, deal with the Jobcentre in High Wycombe and, in the event of a delay in payment, phone the processing centre in Milton Keynes. I phoned the Reading call centre on my mobile to get him started. It took me an expensive 18 minutes to get through and a further five to complete the matter in hand. They were short-staffed in all three centres and it was taking over six weeks to process the benefit applications. Leaving young men on the streets with no money for weeks is dangerous - particularly so when they have just been released from prison. The Jobcentre’s answer was to offer a social fund loan to pay the fine, but repayment would have been deducted from a truly inadequate JSA of £43.25 at £10 a week. The London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine estimates that the bare minimum for healthy living should be £84 a week. The High Wycombe magistrates rightly adjourned the case until it was all sorted out.Rev Paul NicolsonZaccheus 2000 Trust It is necessary to qualify the accolade on the government’s record of reducing child poverty (Letters, January 18). The treatment of housing costs and tax in the statistics used and the damaging effect of the home credit market on poverty incomes call into question the claim that 700,000 children have been “lifted out of poverty”. The number of pensioners, families and working-age adults in poverty increased from 1979 to 1997, and, certainly for pensioners and families, the present government has reversed that trend (Letters, January 18). That is a significant achievement. But there has been no change or policy for working-age adults since 1997. There is a long way to go before Britain returns to lower levels of povertyRev Paul NicolsonZacchaeus 2000 Trust David Brindle is right to ask questions about the social fund. (Opinion, April 13). The problem lies with the inadequacy of unemployment benefits that force households to borrow. In Wycombe magistrates court, where we attend every week to help people who cannot pay their fines prepare their means statements, three young men came in who had no money. It was going to take weeks to process their benefit applications for £44.50 a week; one man faced a two-week wait for the interview at the jobcentre that would decide if he was eligible. Meanwhile the jobcentre offered a crisis loan of £60 from the social fund. When the benefit is ultimately paid, the repayments of the loan will be deducted at source at £10 a week and the fine at £5 a week, leaving £29.50. Budget standards research shows that, as a national average, these men need £91 a week in order to live healthily, but £125 in London and the south-east.The Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust Polly Toynbee is right to call the poverty lobby to account. We are a disparate, disorganised, competing lot that need to get our act together in order to reveal to the public the true and damaging nature of poverty in the UK. There is a powerful coalition of charities, faiths, health professionals and trades unions existing in embryo. It will need organisational drive. Then we could mount a powerful national campaign on the issues that matter most to the poorest citizens.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust Polly Toynbee is right - very many families in steady employment with few changes of circumstances have gained from tax credits. It all falls apart for vulnerable households when a change of circumstances involves fulfilling their duty to inform HMRC about tax credits and child benefit, the local authority about housing and council tax benefits and the jobcentre about jobseeker’s allowance and disability benefits. Cases are entering the courts where those on the lowest incomes are expected to repay around £7,000 or more in overpayments to all agencies. Enforcement is driven by computers that have no means of identifying the illiterate, blind, disabled, pregnant, poor, mentally or chronically ill and in some cases dead. The starting points are threats of eviction for rent arrears or prison for council tax arrears. An overpayment of tax credits can lead to a downward spiral of a family’s fortunes into a morass of debt.Rev Paul NicholsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust While moves to tackle the obesity crisis are welcome, what about the link between nutrition and the mental health super crisis? The health select committee estimated in 2002 that the direct cost of obesity to the NHS was between £990m and £1,225m; the direct cost of mental illness rose from £965m in 1983-84 to £5bn in 2003-04. One of the causes of the rise in mental illness, it has been found by the Institute for Brain Chemistry and Human Nutrition, is poor maternal nutrition before and after conception. It substantially increases the risk of low birthweight and developmental brain disorder. The incidence of low birthweight in the UK has risen from 6.6% in 1953 to 7.6% in 2003 - the highest rate of low birthweight in Europe. The Unicef/WHO 2004 analysis has Britain at 8%, on a par with Romania, Mongolia and Kazakhstan. In some inner-city areas in the UK the incidence reaches developing nations’ rates of 11% to 14%.Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust Collette Marshall is right to emphasise the depth of poverty of the 1 million children suffering the severest income inequalities here. In societies where income differences between rich and poor are smaller not only do the levels of educational attainment among schoolchildren tend to be higher but also community life is stronger and people are much more likely to trust each other. There is less violence - including substantially lower homicide rates - health is better and life expectancy is several years longer. Prison populations are smaller, birth rates among teenagers are lower. Meanwhile, in Britain, unaffordable housing, debt, chronic overcrowding and a complex benefits system massively increase the stress of inequality in poor families.Paul NicolsonZacchaeus 2000 Trust Adam Smith would not only have taxed the rich (Letters, October 19), he also concerned himself with the reasonable needs of the poor. He argued that social necessities were no less important than physical necessities. “By necessaries I understand not only the commodities, which are indispensably necessary for the support of life, but whatever the custom of the country renders it indecent for creditable people, even of the lowest order, to go without”. The government has refused requests to set up a Minimum Income Standards Commission.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust It is not valid to describe the worst poverty in the UK as relative (If Cameron can climb on my caravan, anything is possible, November 23). Until politicians of all colours face the reality of absolute poverty here in Britain, they will not create policies to combat it. For example, around 60,000 young people leave care every year at the age of 16 with no financial or family support. When, or if, weeks later, the local authority gets around to carrying out their duty to assess their needs, they receive £34.60 a week until the age of 18, after rent and council tax, on which to survive independently. They are absolutely poor. The Family Budget Unit estimates that the minimum income standard for childless adults is a very tight £85 a week. Many migrants and UK nationals work in the black economy for much less than the national minimum wage and all statutory minimum incomes are below the government’s poverty thresholds. To have no money anywhere is absolute poverty. To have far too little money in an expensive developed economy also threatens survival and is also absolute poverty. There are well-established truths that the poorest citizens in the UK are more likely to be ill, to die younger and to be disadvantaged in our schools. The prisons are full of people for whom survival became the overriding consideration. The pips are squeaking in the poorest households in the UK. Talk of relative poverty should be replaced by a debate that faces these facts.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust It is not only the residents of private care homes (No human rights for old in private homes, June 20) who are left without the protection of the human rights legislation after the decision of the House of Lords. The same anomaly exists whenever private companies undertake work that is paid for and is identical to that undertaken by public bodies. Public bodies can be challenged in law but private companies cannot. For example, some bailiffs are employed by local authorities to enforce council tax while others are employed by private companies doing identical work. The former can be challenged about irrational decisions against vulnerable debtors but, it seems, not the private companies.Paul NicolsonZacchaeus 2000 Trust The government’s housing policy fails to grasp the nettles of lending and land reform at the heart of the housing crisis (Everyone is entitled to a stake in the nation’s soil and bricks, July 24). Doing as little as possible in order to avoid losing the votes of houseowners, or to win the votes of those who cannot get on to the housing ladder, is not a housing policy. The rising value of land will continue to lead to ever-expanding inequalities in wealth as long as politicians treat it like a market with unlimited supply. The richer the wealthy become, the more they compete for the limited supply of land, squeezing poorer households with ever higher rents and the middle-class taxpayer with ever higher housing benefit, likely to exceed £20bn next year. The taxation of land is back to front. It is taxed with business rates and council tax when in use but never when it lies idle. An annual land-value tax on all land, replacing the deeply regressive council tax, would discourage speculators from leaving property idle while waiting to sell and take the capital gain. Increasing the supply of housing will not catch up with demand or reduce prices for decades, if ever; so the regulation of lending to prevent banks flooding with money a market in short supply should be reintroduced. Finally, such schemes as community land trusts and limited liability partnerships, which remove land from the market in perpetuity, enabling rent and purchase at affordable prices, should be given maximum support by government.Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust All is not as well in Britain as Sigmund Sternberg (Letters, August 30) would have us believe. All of us do not benefit from the way the free market is run by entrepreneurs, who undertake the vital task of managing the creation of wealth. An independent inquiry into inequalities in health reported in 1999 that average incomes in the UK grew in real terms by about 40% between 1979 and 1994-95, but this growth was far greater (60-68%) among the richest 10th of the population. For the poorest 10th, average income increased by only 10% (before housing costs) or fell by 8% (after them). The Institute for Public Policy Research has estimated that the value of personally owned housing has risen from £36bn to £1,525bn in the past 30 years; but the number of people with no assets at all has doubled over the last 20 years from 5% to 10%. Economic inequality continues to increase; it is damaging social cohesion. Neither Sternberg’s rose-tinted spectacles nor the spray-gun approach to condemning the free market, capitalism and City bonuses will create a nation at ease with itself; but much will depend on Sternberg and his colleagues opening their eyes to the poverty they create, alongside the wealth and to reverse the trend. We seek justice, not charity.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust Prosecuting men for buying sex will deprive too many men and women of an income they would not choose to earn but for their extreme poverty. Will the government ensure that the poorest of them, who are paid for sex, have sufficient benefits, tax credits or minimum wage to ensure that prostitution is not a necessary survival strategy?Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust Polly Toynbee asks why nothing has been done about subprime lenders like Provident, who charge lone mothers receiving unemployment benefits £700 on a £1,000 loan. We can tell her. Debt on our Doorstep and ourselves gave evidence to the Competition Commission’s enquiry into home credit and lobbied MPs and peers during the passage of the consumer credit bill calling for a cap on interest rates. We were opposed by academics, the National Consumer Council and the National Association of Citizens’ Advice Bureaux, which all bought Provident’s gigantic bluff that if there were a cap on interest, it would go out of business, leaving the home credit market to loan sharks. None of our opponents worked out the level of interest at which Provident could comfortably stay in business. This trust is currently supporting an unemployed lone mother who was given her first TV, but did not buy a licence for three weeks. She was fined £270. In a panic she borrowed £270 with £150 interest from Provident and paid the fine in cash. But she then faced a claim for bailiff and court costs. They all ignored national standards for enforcement agents covering vulnerable situations, which requires such a case to be returned to court, where the magistrates can remit all or part of the fine. This is what happened when a colleague overheard the distressed woman telling her story in a cafe and referred her to us. The government fails to coordinate the jaws of state; it sinks its teeth into the lowest incomes, while avoiding any limit on eating up poverty incomes.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust There is a strong desire in parliament and among NGOs and some employers to end poverty in the UK; but there are as many policies for doing it as there are government departments and NGO campaigns. The Family Budget Unit and The Centre for Social Policy Research have now provided a focus on the weekly cost of minimum needs for a healthy life and essential participation in the community, in their publication of minimum income standards yesterday. The economy cannot afford to leave statutory minimum incomes so low that costly poverty-related ill health and educational underachievement flood into excellent hospitals and schools, and crime into the courts and prisons; nor to leave those inadequate incomes to reach their beneficiaries through the stressful maze of four statutory agencies. The chaotic housing market adds to the stress of poverty in the UK, with futile attempts to reform the housing benefit system, all of which make poverty worse. The absence of housing supply and the deregulation of lending have combined to lift the cost of housing benefit from £5.4bn in 1988 to £20bn now. The scandal of state-imposed welfare poverty makes people ill and stops their children getting a decent education. It is in the taxpayer’s interest to end poverty with adequate incomes and save billions.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust Whitehall has introduced bureaucratic solutions to fuel poverty by making the vulnerable and impoverished apply for social tariffs and insulation (Lofty ideals, September 12). A minister on TV was telling people to make a phone call, apparently not knowing that BT has cut off 1m land lines, and pay-as-you-go mobile phones quickly run out of credit hanging on to “free-phone” calls at 50p a minute. The winter fuel payment is paid direct into pensioners’ accounts, but 1.8 million are not so lucky because they have not applied for pension credit because it is too intimidating, humiliating and fault prone for many of them. Without a direct and uncomplicated injection of cash through the benefit system it is certain that the utility companies will attend the magistrates’ courts with sheaves of applications to break into the homes of impoverished customers who cannot pay their bills to install pay as you go meters, charging the customer both the court costs, and more for fuel than those who pay by direct debit. Come the winter some people in perfectly insulated houses will not have the money to feed the meters or themselves.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust Polly Toynbee is right to highlight the inadequacy of the unemployment benefit for single adults of £60.50 a week (The prospect of another lost generation is a chilling one, 20 December); it is half the government’s poverty threshold and 42% of the minimum income needed for healthy living as established by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. It will increase to just £64.30 in April 2009. Economists and civil servants have always advised politicians about the moral hazard that people will not go to work if their unemployment benefit is too high, but forget the moral hazard when it is below the minimum needed for healthy survival, which is a powerful motivator pushing decent people over the top into immoral and illegal behaviour. That is the danger of fining the unemployed for a failure to engage with the authorities about work or training; benefits are already far too low in this very expensive economy. There is no justice in the government preaching about rights and responsibilities to its poorest citizens when it has not accepted the responsibility to provide adequate minimum incomes in work or unemployment. The minimum wage is a poverty wage in London and many other areas.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust The Bishop of Durham is not as wrong in claiming the poor have got poorer under New Labour, who have called a halt to the rise in the numbers of pensioners and children in poverty under the Conservatives, but failed the very poor. A report by Save the Children in 2005 found that there has been little or no improvement in the proportion of children living in severe poverty since 1997. The Centre Forum calculated the number of people with incomes below 40% of the median income, rather than the government’s poverty threshold of 60%, and found that it had increased by 250,000 between 1994-05 and 2003-04. On the governments measure, the number of childless adults in poverty increased by 500,000 between 1996-97 and 2005-06. Since 2004 the number of children and adults below the government’s poverty threshold has started to increase and this year the rising prices of food, utilities and transport have hit the 2.5 million pensioners and 3.9 million children below the threshold.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust Polly Toynbee tells of the incredulity of the newly unemployed when they find their benefit is a workhouse rate of £60.50 a week. Incredulity is multiplied by the reply of the government to a debate about increasing it initiated by Julie Jones MP in the third reading of the welfare reform bill. She was told that would fundamentally undermine what the benefits system and the welfare state are there for. The government should re-read the 1942 Beveridge report, which recommended that the benefit scheme should embody principles including unification of administrative responsibility, now shattered into many agencies; and adequacy, totally ignored by all British governments; and added that the aim of the plan for social security is to make want under any circumstances unnecessary.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust The 7.5 million adults of working age living in poverty in the UK, an increase of 800,000 since 1998, are often left out of press comment on government statistics. Many are receiving poverty incomes while unemployed, which are due to be sanctioned should they not seek work. John Mason MP, supported by Paul Rowen MP, tabled amendments to the welfare reform bill designed to ensure sanctions do not leave claimants with an income too low to sustain healthy living and are not applied in ignorance of a claimant’s means. The government replied the amendments missed the basic point because there is a contract between the applicant and the state and, if one obeys the rules, no sanctions will be applied. However, rights and responsibilities apply both ways. Since 1948, successive British governments have been signed up to the right to an adequate standard of living as detailed in the UN’s convention on human rights, but have not honoured their side of the contract by implementing that right in adequate unemployment incomes. We hope peers debating the bill will understand that reducing with sanctions £50.95 a week adult unemployment benefit for 18-25-year-olds, or £64.30 thereafter, which is less than half the poverty threshold, can never be justified by a shallow appeal to an unjust social contract.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust The tragedy is (Jenni Russell, 21 May) that ministers for decades have swallowed hook, line and bath plug the message of their advisers that an unemployment income below subsistence level at £64.30 a week is needed to force the idle into work. European countries pay 53% to 69% of average earnings to a jobless adult, quite low enough to encourage willing human beings to seek employment, while Britain pays 40%. The welfare reform bill will reduce that £64.30 paid to lone mothers if they do not seek work or engage in work-related activity.Rev Paul NicolsonChairman, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust The welfare reform bill ignores one essential principle, which should inform all of the many regulations about job-seeking conditions, work-related activities etc. Lord Northbourne’s amendment, supported in the debate by the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives, but not by the government, requires due consideration to be given to the wellbeing of any child whose life might be affected by the decisions of officials implementing such regulations. The government’s good intentions are marred by an overemphasis on the benefit to a family of parents moving out of unemployment into work. Children become official barriers to work rather than the overriding responsibility of parents. Work is beneficial if it is adequately paid and the children are not harmed because the parental bond is strained or broken when they are put into childcare at crucial stages of their educational and emotional development. The bill has the balance of power wrong at the point where officialdom touches family life. The social security advisory committee questioned the government’s primary analysis that people are unwilling to work and unlikely to work, and need to be coerced into employment. A more socially aware analysis is that parents love their children, want to do their best for them and should have their commitment empowered and encouraged.Rev Paul NicolsonChair, Zacchaeus 2000 Trust The following letter is the one that established Taxpayers Against Poverty. Ministers at the Department of Work and Pensions repeat ad nauseam their mantra: “It is not fair for taxpayers to be asked to pay for the cost of spare bedrooms, or housing benefit which is high in central London because rents are high etc, etc.” Therefore the poorest citizens are thrust into unmanageable debt by caps and cuts in housing benefit, possible eviction, forced migration, undue stress and misery. As a citizen who pays income and council tax, VAT and the excise duty on my evening glass of wine, I steam with indignation each time I am used by ministers to justify such draconian measures making people poorer. I am glad my taxation is used to enable my fellow citizens, both in and out of work, to buy enough food, clothes, fuel, transport and other necessities, to pay council tax and the rent of secure homes, when they have no other means to do so; and bewildered by the short-sightedness of a policy which deliberately reduces the totally inadequate adult JSA of £67.50 a week by creating rent arrears, with debt-related mental health problems and high extra costs for a hard-pressed NHS. The self-evident unfairness is the current policy of dumping national debt and deficit reduction on the incomes of the squeezed middle and poorest citizens, while the higher-paid taxpayers experience no financial inconvenience. Meanwhile the OECD reports that $11.5 trillion, including bonuses, is parked in overseas accounts and the Treasury is aware that £100bn of property in central London alone is registered overseas – both out of reach of the taxman. That really is unfair. I hope thousands will join Taxpayers Against Poverty, TAP, to say so loud and clear. All we need is an email.Rev Paul NicolsontaxpayersagainstpovertyTAP@gmail.com The following letter is the final one by #RevPaul that was published by the Guardian Suzanne Moore got everything else right about the housing crisis but left out land (I’m on the housing ladder but I can’t cheer the rising prices, Journal, 22 February). Throughout the UK, truly affordable council housing was built on public land. The price of borrowing to build and maintain council estates and their communities was recovered over, say, 50 years by low earners paying low rents, which did not include the ever-increasing value of land. Councils are now using the high value of public land to finance developers to demolish council estates and build private housing, which council tenants cannot afford. Hence the 79% increase in homeless families in England to 86,000, including 127,000 children since 2010, some for up to and over 10 years, 1.1 million households on council waiting lists and 4,700 single adults sleeping rough each night. The New Economics Foundation recently reported that the government sold enough public land for developers to build 131,000 homes, but only 2.6% will be for social rent. There is an urgent need for legislation that forbids the sale of public land and requires it to be used for affordable social housing.Rev Paul NicolsonTaxpayers Against Poverty