The first series of Liar (ITV) coasted in on a fairly straightforward if potentially hazardous premise. Ioan Gruffudd and Joanne Froggatt played a doctor and a teacher living on the Kent coast. They went on a date and had a few drinks. The next day, amid hazy, half-snatched memories, Laura (Froggatt) accused Andrew (Gruffudd) of rape. He denied it. Who was the liar? It started as a he said/she said situation and briefly threatened to evolve into something more intriguing, asking questions about vigilantism and the limitations of the police, before settling in to life as a standard thriller. As the mythical idea of rampant false rape accusations by women looms disproportionately large in the public imagination, the series could have felt exploitative, but it recognised, at least, that it could not exonerate Andrew. However, canny viewers may have drawn the same conclusion, which dulled the tension somewhat. Andrew turned out to be a serial rapist, and a prolific one – of course he was guilty – and by the end of series one, he was dead, his throat cut by an unknown assailant and his body left to rot on the saltwater marshes. If Liar was gripping at first, and made the most of its picturesque coastal setting, it didn’t ever quite sustain that early momentum. That turned out not to matter. It was ITV’s biggest new drama in quite some time, averaging an impressive eight million viewers an episode. There was no question, then, of it not returning for a second series. So series two refreshes the formula by turning the cat-and-mouse chase between Andrew and Laura into a whodunnit, as the police begin to investigate Andrew’s murder, and Laura, bogged down in lies, quickly becomes the prime suspect. There is plenty of melodrama to prop up the crime. Until the police suspect she is not quite telling the truth, Laura is happy enough in her new relationship, although she still has the fallout of her sister Katie’s affair to deal with, and Katie is in the “forgetting to pick the kids up” phase of grieving for her marriage. Vanessa, the detective who was also one of Andrew’s victims, is still distant from her partner, Jen, and seems shocked by her callousness about the manner of Andrew’s death, which starts to illuminate Jen as a potential suspect. There is, however, no shortage of people who wanted him gone, given that he drugged, raped and attacked at least 19 women. By establishing potential murderers all over town, if not the county, it is reaching for a Broadchurchy feel. It’s all just a bit too cartoonish to pull it off, though. I love an ITV thriller as much as the next person, but this slides into the ranks of them, rather than elevating itself above. Katherine Kelly joins the cast as DI Karen Renton, a leather-jacket-wearing, nicotine-gum-chewing investigator from the big smoke who is called on to blow this case apart. I’m all for a plain-talking, no-nonsense detective, and Kelly is a quality actor who should bring Renton to life. But she seems hamstrung by a clunky script. She snarls things such as: “We’ll have you by the balls,” and is reduced to a kind of Jane Tennison-lite. She is tactless and sneering, which, given that she’s talking to rape survivors about their rapist, however dead he may be, is a bluntness that stretches belief. The chronology skips around the three weeks between Andrew’s disappearance and the discovery of his body, at one point nipping back to a scene before the events of the first series. The Williams brothers, who wrote and created the series, had fun with a backwards timeline in Rellik, the unpopular BBC One drama that sank when it was pitted against the first series of Liar. Here, the jumbled timeline is seamless enough, and is an easy way of ensuring that Gruffudd still has plenty of screen time, despite Andrew being zipped into a body bag early in the episode. It also allows for the two opponents to continue sparring. After Laura is arrested, she gives a long speech about how much she wanted Andrew to suffer. I’m not sure I’d let that slip in front of police officers if I was being investigated for his murder. Liar will continue to be huge, no doubt. But the Williams brothers were also responsible for The Missing, which was a masterclass in intrigue, tension and mystery. While the shift in focus from rape to murder is an oddly welcome relief, this time around, it feels a little more paint by numbers.