The Scottish government has urged people to stop travelling to the Highlands and Islands in a bid to avoid coronavirus, following reports of an influx of self-isolators and people in camper vans travelling to the area in recent days. In a strongly worded statement issued on Saturday night, Holyrood’s rural economy and tourism secretary, Fergus Ewing, described himself as “furious” at such irresponsible behaviour and warned that he would discuss with ferry operators and other agencies whether further restrictive measures were needed to halt the inundation. Ewing, the MSP for Inverness and Nairn, said: “I am furious at the reckless and irresponsible behaviour of some people travelling to the Highland and Islands. This has to stop now. Let me be crystal clear – people should not be travelling to rural and island communities, full stop. They are endangering lives. Do not travel.” He added: “Panic buying will have a devastating impact on the livelihoods of rural shops and potentially puts unwanted pressure on NHS services in our rural communities. The Scottish government’s advice is that essential travel only should be undertaken.” There have been increasing reports in recent days of people leaving cities further south for second homes in the remote Scottish countryside, or turning up at rural campsites in well-stocked camper vans with the intention of self-isolating there. Earlier on Saturday evening, the SNP’s Westminster leader, Ian Blackford MP, who represents the Highland constituency of Ross, Skye and Lochaber, posted on Twitter: “I have been contacted by the Nevis Range Centre in Fort William who tell me that they have had to turn away around 30 camper vans, which had travelled from various parts of the UK, who were intending to use their car park as a refuge.” Blackford likewise condemned the behaviour as irresponsible, warning that local services were already facing unprecedented pressure because of the global pandemic. He added: “I urge everyone to do the right thing; follow the government advice and please do not travel here. If these warnings are not heeded and people need to be stopped from travelling, then I am afraid that is what will have to happen. Those in camper vans please go home!” The writer and broadcaster Muriel Gray noted on Saturday night: “Been passing unseasonably large numbers of camper vans heading north while driving down the A9 today. Ready yourself, Scottish Highland folk. On the upside, they may be bringing pasta and loo roll.” Been passing unseasonably large numbers of camper vans heading north while driving down the A9 today. Ready yourself Scottish Highland folk. On the upside, they may be bringing pasta and loo roll.