Something strange happened in Major League Baseball last year. Batters on the 30 teams started hitting home runs at an unprecedented rate from opening day in late March and kept it up all the way to the World Series in October. May brought a record for homers in a calendar month. It was broken in June. By the end of the season, MLB’s increasingly traumatised battalions of pitchers had collectively given up 6,776 homers, an advance of nearly 11% on the previous record of 6,106. While professional baseball has more teams now than it did in its early days, the per-game rate of 1.37 was a big step up on the previous record, too. Theories abound as to the reason for the homer boom, including some that sound so loopy that you desperately want them to be true and others that are downright conspiratorial. A personal favourite is that it might be down to mozzies. It was, so the thinking goes, a bumper year for biting insects in the pastures where the cows that provide the leather for around 160,000 MLB baseballs each year like to graze. Millions of tiny proboscises left millions of tiny holes in the hides, which then acted a bit like the dimples on a golf ball when subjected to a whack from a Louisville Slugger. The most popular conspiracy theory, meanwhile, was advanced by Justin Verlander, one of the sport’s greatest pitchers and, without doubt, a future Hall of Famer. The league, he suggested, had covertly ordered some “juicing” of the balls to increase the excitement for spectators. It did just so happen – entirely by coincidence, no doubt – that MLB had been involved in a takeover of Spalding, which makes the balls, in 2018. The idea was vehemently denied by Spalding and MLB and it is also true that 2019 was only the latest step forward in a trend of increasingly heavy hitting with 2017 to 2019 being three of the four highest years for homer-hitting. The fourth was 2000, when the balls were not juiced, but it is generally accepted that many of the batters were. It will be fascinating to see if the pattern continues when the season begins in a month or so. Yet wherever the truth might lie, baseball is mirroring a trend in most major professional team sports. Whatever it is they do to get points – and put bums on seats – teams are doing more of it, often with explicit assistance from the rule‑makers. The number of tries per game in Premiership rugby has increased by 75% in a decade, from 3.2 to 5.6. The rapid expansion of one-day formats in cricket has led to an explosion of big-hitting exploits, while the increasing focus on three-point shots rather than twos has had a similar effect on scoring in the NBA. Football, though, remains resistant to the scoring boom. It is, by some margin, the major team sport in which the main objective is the most difficult to achieve. Through its first 27 seasons, the rate of goals per game in the Premier League has never dropped below 2.45 (in 2006-07), or exceeded 2.81 (in 2011-12). Nothing has shifted it significantly, including the arrival of billions of pounds’ worth of striking talent and plenty of rule tweaks down the years, few of which would have been implemented with the aim of actually making it more difficult to score. It is the same story in La Liga and Serie A. Germany’s Bundesliga is the only major league in Europe that sometimes clambers past three goals a game but even there it’s hardly a habit. For football fans, the goal supply arrives at the same, parsimonious rate that it always has and more often than not it is players and managers who get the blame. Supporters head for home after the latest drab disappointment bewailing their team’s failure to take their chances, their lack of passion and giving up all hope for the useless striker who couldn’t hit a barn door with a banjo. It is even harder to accept as the season approaches its climax and, for many teams, every point becomes more precious. The already yawning gap between the fans’ expectations and actual performance grows wider still, piling extra pressure on to players and managers, and, in all likelihood, making things worse all round. The idea that a lack of passion is the only thing that stops your team scoring three goals a game is one of the more pernicious, and poisonous, of all in a sport where – unlike rugby, American football or baseball – there is only one way to increase your score and achieving it is extremely difficult. Stopping the opposition achieving it is, by extension, a relative stroll in the park. Expected goals (xG) figures for the season as a whole suggest teams are, overall, scoring as many goals as they should given the chances they get. Within a single match, there may be a major disparity between a team’s xG and their actual return. Over the entire campaign, the difference between Premier League totals for xG and actual goals is around 2%. Attackers inevitably vary in quality from team to team, even in the top flight, but they are all exceptionally gifted footballers. Unfortunately for them, the defenders are just as talented and playing with a stronger hand. Even a penalty is no longer a near-guarantee of a goal, as standards of goalkeeping have steadily improved. At the start of the century, one of 66 penalties (1.5%) awarded in the 1999-2000 season was saved. In 2018‑19, it was 16 from 103 (15.5%), below the Premier League record of 26% of penalties saved (21 from 80) a season earlier. To top it all off, in the Premier League at least, attackers now have to contend with VAR, which seems to taketh away a lot more readily than it giveth. Only last week, Bournemouth were denied two goals by VAR in the same match: a potential opener and an apparent equaliser. Instead, VAR simultaneously handed Burnley a penalty which made it 2-0. These are all points that fans should possibly stop to consider before letting out a collective groan at a misplaced pass, booing their team off when they are one down at half-time or accusing them of a collective lack of passion. They won’t, of course, and the Premier League’s goal rate will stay where it is, at around 2.7 per game. Perhaps they should start getting their balls supplied by Spalding.