Tom Hanks says he feels the “blahs” but has no fever as he and wife Rita Wilson remain in isolation in an Australian residence, after being discharged from a hospital following their coronavirus diagnosis. A representative for the Oscar winner confirmed on Tuesday that the pair were no longer hospitalised. Hanks himself said he was doing chores and getting beaten at cards by his wife as they remain self-quarantined. “Hey folks. Good news: One week after testing positive, in self-isolation, the symptoms are much the same. No fever but the blahs. Folding the laundry and doing the dishes leads to a nap on the couch. Bad news: my wife has won six straight hands of gin rummy and now leads by 201 points,” he posted on social media on Tuesday evening. Hey folks. Good News: One week after testing Positive, in self-isolation, the symptoms are much the same. No fever but the blahs. Folding the laundry and doing the dishes leads to a nap on the couch. Bad news: My wife @ritawilson has won 6 straight hands of Gin Rummy and leads by 201 points. But I have learned not to spread my Vegemite so thick. I travelled here with a typewriter, one I used to love. We are all in this together. Flatten the curve. Hanx A post shared by  Tom Hanks (@tomhanks) on Mar 17, 2020 at 2:19pm PDT Instead of a photo of himself or his wife, the post showed an old Corona typewriter that he travelled with “that I used to love”. The actor is pursuing a side career as a writer, publishing his debut short-story collection in 2017. “We are all in this together. Flatten the curve,” he added. Hanks also referred to social media flurry that greeted a picture of toast spread with Vegemite that he posted a few days earlier. After fellow users pointed out he may have used too much, he wrote: “I have learned not to spread my Vegemite so thick.” The couple arrived in Australia in late January on the Gold Coast, where an Elvis Presley biopic directed by Baz Luhrmann was to be shot. Hanks plays Presley’s manager, Colonel Tom Parker. The film, slated for release in October 2021, has suspended production, Warner Bros said. Wilson, a singer-songwriter, has performed in Brisbane and Sydney during the couple’s stay in Australia. Authorities said last week that several contacts Hanks and Wilson had in Australia were being traced, but no other results of those efforts have been made public.