As someone approaching the midpoint of a 14-day quarantine, with a dwindling store cupboard and a fridge that basically now exists as a home for three agoraphobic Mini Babybels, I’ve been awaiting Jamie Oliver’s new daily Channel 4 coronavirus show Keep Cooking and Carry On with a mixture of hope and dread. Hope, because few television chefs are lucky enough to have Oliver’s flair for mass communication. His school dinners campaign changed an entire industry, his 30 Minute Meals inspired a million copycat cookbooks. In short, when Jamie Oliver says something, people listen. So if he’s rattling out an entire cookery series in less than a week, designed to help self-isolators make the most of what they already have in the house, you can believe it’ll have impact. But dread, because, well, TV chefs don’t exactly have their finger on the pulse when it comes to knowing what people actually have in the kitchen. Jamie Oliver is a fan of filo pastry and pine nuts and preserved lemons, in a world currently made up of tinned tomatoes and panic-bought penne. There’s a well-established phenomenon where, whenever a TV chef introduces a new ingredient to the world, viewers instantly rush out to supermarkets and buy it. If Oliver was to get too ostentatious by straying from staples and using, say, quinoa flour in a recipe, there’s a real danger he could cause a stampede that the already-struggling food supply chain couldn’t handle. And, in all honesty, these feelings of dread were borne out during episode one. After greeting us with a surprisingly statesmanlike intro – “We can do this, we can absolutely do this” – Jamie laid out his modus operandi for the series. This was going to be about flexibility, he said. If you don’t have one of the ingredients he suggested, you could always swap it out for something else. Once he got cooking, though, there was a sense that we were just falling back on Default Jamie. The first recipe was chilli. Despite his assurances – “If you haven’t got an onion, use a leek” – he quickly listed a number of ingredients that were nowhere like anything I have in my house. I kept a list as he went along. I don’t have any garlic. I don’t have any peppers. I don’t have any chickpeas or yoghurt or sweet potatoes. I absolutely don’t have any coriander stalks. Were I to attempt this, I would end up with a bowl of hot tomatoes that tasted vaguely of cumin. And I’m a fancypants Guardian writer, for crying out loud. God knows what those in Jamie’s target demographic have got left. The second recipe was possibly a little more helpful. After chiding his viewers for nicking all the pasta from supermarkets, he showed us how to make our own. And, in true Jamie Oliver fashion, he made it look like a piece of cake. Bit of flour, bit of water, bish bash bosh, get the kids involved, lovely stuff. I guarantee you, thousands and thousands of homes will be serving homemade pasta tomorrow night as a direct result of this. Jamie Oliver could do this sort of thing in his sleep. It’s nice to see him in crisis mode, too. There’s no twonking about on a pier with his farmer pal. It’s just Jamie Oliver cooking in a kitchen, which always makes for good telly. And the sheer pace in which this show has been made is massively impressive. There weren’t even any credits at the end of episode one. Between Jamie on dinners and Joe Wicks on PE, you can’t help but feel that the world will be saved by men who are twenty percent too chirpy for normal life. And yet, despite this, there was still an element of Keep Cooking and Carry On that felt a little too much like Boris Johnson’s coronavirus press briefings. It was enthusiastic, but also quite vague in places, and it assumed a lot of knowledge that the public might not necessarily have. Luckily, like the briefings, this series is being made on the fly. There’s every possibility that he’ll respond to feedback and alter his recipes down the line. On the whole, then, pretty good and really well intentioned. If ITV had any sense, it’d snap up Jack Monroe and get her version on the air as quickly as possible.