The old adage about writing what you know has fallen out of fashion as advice for new writers, but it’s served Jessica Moor well in her first novel, Keeper, the story of a murder investigation that centres on a women’s refuge. Moor was inspired to write about her experiences of working with victims of domestic violence, and Keeper explores how abuse can rob women of their lives in more ways than one. Katie Straw, a young worker at a refuge in the north-western town of Widringham, is found dead in the river after apparently jumping from the bridge. DS Daniel Whitworth had hoped to reach his imminent retirement “without having to deal with another corpse”, though at least this one looks like an open-and-shut suicide, since Katie’s boyfriend – the obvious suspect – has an alibi. It’s only when Whitworth discovers that Katie was living under a false identity that he realises he might have to start paying attention to the women at the refuge, none of whom – with good reason – has much faith in the law’s ability to listen. The novel unfolds using several voices, and across two time frames, which is occasionally confusing. Moor follows the individual stories of the women in the refuge, so different from one another in age and background, but thrown together in uneasy solidarity by the experience that binds them – the violence of a man close to them. There are also flashbacks to Katie’s earlier life and her previous relationship with a seemingly perfect man called Jamie. These strands are intercut with chapters following Whitworth’s investigation, which are the weakest elements of the novel; the author is less certain of her material here, and Whitworth never quite achieves more than two dimensions as a character. But the novel really comes to life when she tells the women’s stories. Katie’s relationship with Jamie is chilling in its creep towards coercive control, a form of abuse only recently recognised in law but familiar in fiction and drama, from the 1938 play Gas Light to Louise Doughty’s recent novel Platform Seven. Moor skilfully avoids the danger of making the novel too didactic and allows her female characters to speak for themselves. She presents a spectrum of male violence, from a Twitter trolling campaign of violent rape threats against the refuge, to the male detectives’ dismissive response, through the various instances of physical and emotional control and ultimately murder. “Every day a hundred and fifty women in this country are turned away from refuges. Two hundred children too.” It’s an almost off-hand comment made by Val, the director of the women’s shelter, but it stayed with me as one of the most frightening moments in this atmospheric, timely debut. • Keeper by Jessica Moor is published by Penguin (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15