On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah recapped last weekend’s South Carolina primary, in which Joe Biden’s flagging campaign surged to a blowout victory after disappointing turns in Iowa, New Hampshire and Nevada. “Just days ago, the press and the pundits declared my candidacy dead,” Biden said in his victory speech. “Now, thanks to the heart of the Democratic party in South Carolina, I’m very much alive.” Pete and Amy drop out, while Joe Biden lives to gaffe another day. pic.twitter.com/lYsoqjczm0 “Yes, Joe Biden is very much alive – which isn’t something candidates usually need to remind people, but that’s still OK,” said Noah. “It’s a great campaign slogan — take it, man.” Biden’s victory in South Carolina – propelled by overwhelming support from African-American voters – was significant for several reasons, said Noah. First, for demonstrating that “black people can make anything popular again”. And second, for triggering the end of three other candidates. “First, Tom Steyer dropped out,” Noah said. “Then, Pete Buttigieg ended his historic run as the first openly robot candidate. And we all know that once a gay guy sets a trend, white women aren’t going to be far behind, so then Klobuchar dropped out too.” “Things might be looking up for Biden,” Noah continued, “but that doesn’t mean it’s a done deal. He still has opponents in this race: Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, and billionaire in a booster seat Mike Bloomberg. But the most difficult opponent Joe Biden has to overcome is himself.” Biden followed his South Carolina victory with several public gaffes. He called Fox New Sunday host Chris Matthews Chuck by the wrong name in an interview, referred to Super Tuesday as “Super Thursday” and garbled a quote from the Declaration of Independence. “The name thing on its own is bad, because interviews are sort of like sex,” said Noah. “It doesn’t matter how well it goes, if you call the person the wrong name at the end, the whole thing is ruined.” On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert also addressed Joe Biden’s win in the South Carolina primary, after which he called for unity within the Democratic party and declared himself the candidate for “real Democrats” as an “Obama-Biden Democrat”. “Yeah, that’s right, he’s an Obama-Biden Democrat – and his best hope is that you don’t remember which one of those he was,” said Colbert, who impersonated Biden and his oft-seen aviator sunglasses: “I mean at this point, who can remember? Folks, who can remember which one of us was Barack? It was Obama-Biden, I’ve got a 50-50 shot.” Given Biden’s blowout, billionaire investor Tom Steyer, who bet his whole campaign on winning in South Carolina, dropped out of the race. Colbert speculated he knew the end was near before the primary, because Steyer got on stage Friday night with the rapper Juvenile to dance, as well as you would imagine a white 62-year-old hedge fund manager to dance, to the song Back That Ass Up. “A white billionaire … dancing with Juvenile … to a song about … butts. The 2020 campaign is officially a MadLib,” said Colbert. Pete Buttigieg also dropped out, telling supporters in his hometown of South Bend, Indiana, “sometimes the longest way around really is the shortest way home.” “Pete, buddy, campaign’s over – you can start talking like a human again,” said Colbert. Finally, there’s Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar, who “made the decision to drop out when it became clear she wouldn’t win the nomination, but kept running for over a year anyway,” said Colbert “This was yet another weekend in our manic, head-spinning political era,” said Seth Meyers on Late Night. “The Trump era has turned all of us into cats trying to follow multiple laser pointers at once – stock market! Democratic primary! Eclipse!” The news was so packed with stories this weekend that there wasn’t time, according to Meyers, to discuss Trump’s latest flag routine at the Conservative Political Action conference. “Trump not only hugged but also kissed the American flag while mouthing the words I love you baby,” said Meyers. “Believe me, we could spend a whole ten years on that … if Trump’s not careful, he’s gonna have to pay hush money to Betsy Ross.” Meyers pivoted to Trump’s blasé response to the spread of coronavirus, and his claim that he’s consulted all the experts. “I can’t even begin to imagine the conversation between the scientists and Donald Trump,” said Meyers. “It would be like watching Bill Gates explain the internet to a dog.” It’s also “not reassuring in the midst of a crisis to hear the powerful man in the world say nobody knows what will happen. It’s like hearing your captain say, ‘We’re going through some turbulence, we might make it to our destination but nobody really knows.’” There are some unknowns, “but there are also experts studying the situation right now and learning things,” said Meyers. But instead of consulting them, “the administration has been busy with other, less urgent tasks.” Vice President Mike Pence spent Friday at a fundraiser for Republicans in Florida, and Trump spent 45 minutes this weekend talking to actors from a low-budget conservative play about the so-called Deep State. “This is the kind of crisis management situation where you want competent, apolitical people in charge,” Meyers concluded. “Instead, you have an administration that would rather spend its time raising money, meeting with the actors in a right-wing play, and cuddling with American flags.”