Sitting at a table at an east London gay bar, American comedian Jaboukie Young-White is making some last-minute tweaks to his standup material. It’s a Wednesday afternoon in November and later he’ll appear onstage for a solo show at the Soho Theatre. This is his first time in the UK; the first time he’ll perform outside North America. And while his act is well-rehearsed for audiences at home, he’s determined to make sure it translates. “You guys don’t have Popeyes here, right?” he asks, referring to the American fried-chicken chain. “But you have these things called Tories?” Young-White is 25. Last year, the New York Times described him as “a comic prodigy with a veteran’s killer moves”, and various American magazines, including Rolling Stone and Variety, have labelled him a “comic to watch”. Over the past five years he has amassed a substantial online following by sharing memes, shitposts, and quickfire political and social commentary – a kind of comic stream of consciousness. As is the way in modern comedy, that following has translated into IRL jobs writing for television. In 2018 he was hired by the Daily Show with Trevor Noah – a prestigious, high-profile gig for which he mostly delivers skits on politics as the show’s “Senior Youth Correspondent”. (“Why do we still use paper to vote?” Young-White asked in his first appearance on the show, addressing poor turnout figures among the young. “Paper is over!”) He later recorded a half-hour solo show for Comedy Central in which he recalled getting distracted by a statue during a sex-education lesson and lusting after a topless Jesus looking “cute as fuck on the cross”. For many, Young-White represents a new generation of US comics: he is black, queer, non-apologetic and huge on social media. Often his jokes zero in on gender, race, sex and sexuality, but, in the millennial way, they do so without taking aim at minorities – without making his community the punchline. His bits aren’t jokes about, say, gay people for the enjoyment of others; they are jokes for gay people who happen to be watching mainstream TV. “You used to have to take the piss out of yourself just to be able to perform,” he says. “But that’s something I was always reluctant to get into. Sometimes I do just want to send up the gays. But it can be tricky. You have to ask: who is this for? Who’s going to be consuming this?” Take a report he made for the Daily Show at Pittsburgh’s Pride festival last summer. Wearing rainbow-coloured Speedos, he explored the politics of the city’s queer celebration and came away with a segment that explored the topic of pink-washing – the tumultuous relationships between corporate sponsors and Pride events – a subject that is generally confined to conversations within the LGBTQ+ community. “EQT doesn’t just shoot hot liquid deep into holes in the ground,” he said of the fracking company-cum-Pride sponsor. “They also swing both ways by supporting pride and various anti-gay politicians.” Young-White’s comedy isn’t standard mainstream fare. “One thing I found interesting was that, by doing late-night TV, I was being put in front of people who aren’t used to seeing something in mainstream culture that wasn’t for them,” he says. “I grew up being so familiar with that feeling. So much shit wasn’t for me, so I’d just go elsewhere. But I find that for a lot of people that feeling is very foreign.” He thinks that young comics like him have had to disabuse themselves of the idea that they have to appeal to everyone, as older comics once had to. “I know I have my audience,” he says. “It’s them I’m here for.” Pint in hand, Young-White is in full swing now, venting about the brigade of comedians, usually older, who think “PC culture” has gone too far. These people aren’t freedom fighters, he says. They’re upset because their particular brand of comedy, which gets laughs at the expense of others, has all of a sudden become less profitable. “That’s one thing everyone should understand,” he says. “These people aren’t Rosa Parks on the bus. They are millionaires who want money. The nobility of it needs to be deflated immediately. Some comedians were built for the monoculture. They thrived when everyone was watching the same things, doing the same things. Culture is fragmented now. And they can’t handle the idea that not everyone likes them. And that, in the digital age, people can actually talk back to them.” A good joke will make you think, but it won’t change who you are Young-White was raised in Harvey, Illinois, by Jamaican immigrants. Like many comedians growing up, he thought of himself as something of an outsider. He was sent to white Catholic schools, for instance, while living in a predominantly black neighbourhood. “I know it’s a cliché of mixed people,” he says. “The tragic mulatto archetype. But that was my experience. At school I was bullied for being black and in my neighbourhood for being white.” Experiences like this made Young-White perceptive. He learned quickly that what might feel extremely normal in one place is not normal somewhere else. He began to think comedically about those differences, aware of the absurdities and intricacies of the different communities in which he spent time. Because he lived a distance from his classmates, Young-White relied on social media to keep in contact with them, and began to chase the dopamine hits that come with getting “likes”. “I started to post really bad jokes on Facebook,” he says. “And I’d message my friends saying, ‘Yo, go like my status on Facebook, I just posted a new joke.’” He’s laughing now. “I was so fucking obnoxious. They used to call me a Facebook slut in high school. Like, people hated me.” At 17, he auditioned for a part in a class production of Miracle Worker – a play about the life of deaf-blind American writer and activist Helen Keller – to give being a “theatre kid” a try, and landed the role of the protagonist’s brother. “There’s this one scene right before the interval where Keller is trying to learn how to eat at the dinner table and she keeps throwing the fork and smashing plates and shit like that,” he says, grinning. On opening night, one student actor went too hard and broke a chair on stage. Cast and audience began to freak out, unsure how to respond. It’s hardly fertile ground for comedic inspiration, but Young-White spotted an opportunity. He told everyone backstage he had a plan, then walked on to the set to survey the damage. Looking at the wreckage, he hammily gasped, “Oh no, my favourite chair!” “It was a five-minute laugh break,” he says. “The audience died, everyone on stage broke, nobody could stop laughing.” The drama teacher was forced to cut to black. “It was so fucking stupid,” Young-White says. “But in that moment I knew I had to chase that feeling. The director yelled at me, saying I had made the show about me instead of Helen Keller. I just smiled and said it was very in character, very in the moment. I wasn’t sorry at all.” When he graduated, Young-White thought film school might be a good fit for his talents, but it was expensive, and a writing course at Chicago’s Second City school of improvisation was so pricey it felt like a scam. “That was for finance bros and rich kids,” he says. “Why would I pay $600 to have someone teach me how to be funny?” So he turned his hand to standup, a “more egalitarian” way of getting his ideas out in the world. Slowly, he climbed Chicago’s standup ranks. He performed at open mics across the city, then graduated to five-, 10- and 15-minute billings. He moved to New York City, where he now lives, as soon as he began to consistently bank 30-minute slots. But Young-White has his brother Javaughn to thank for his burgeoning career. Three years ago Javaughn posted a bunch of Young-White’s Instagram posts to Twitter. BuzzFeed interviewed him after the posts went viral. “That truly was the beginning of my career,” he says. “I got, like, 25,000 Instagram followers. And all I was trying to do was annoy my friends.” But being funny and famous in the digital world is not free of its own specific challenges. He is aware that members of his own generation often scroll through joke after joke online, which can make an audience desensitised. When the amount of humour being consumed is at unprecedented levels, writing material that makes a mark takes more thought than ever before. There’s also the risk that, on platforms like Twitter, jokes get stolen. “Every month, someone with a big account will post [one of my jokes] as their own. I’ve done it in sets before and people afterwards have said they’ve heard it before. I’m like, ‘Yes! Because it’s my fucking tweet!’” Still, he appreciates the way spending time on social media informs his work. If tweets don’t get traction, he knows the joke will need rehashing. Young-White has a unique audience. A lot of people who find him online and come to a show might never have been to one before. “That’s a really exciting place to be in,” he says. “I can do a lot of shit and they won’t think it’s weird as they’ll have never seen standup before.” As much as he can, he brings the energy he shows online to his standup shows, using screengrabs of tweets and PowerPoints. He respects the power of social media, he says, as well as that of the more traditional one-person-and-a-mic comedy, and loves bridging the gap between the two. Comedy is important in the way it creates communities that are visceral and immediate, Young-White says. Getting a room of people all experiencing the same thing and laughing at the same time is “gorgeous”. But he knows that, at the end of the day, it’s just comedy. It’s not going to change the world, no matter what some comedians might think. “We’re products of our environments,” he says. “And that is so entrenched in what makes us who we are that a five-minute comedy set isn’t going to change it. A joke might make you think about things a little differently, but it won’t change who you are. That gives comedy too much credit.” Still, Young-White is very much a Bernie Sanders supporter. (In a recent Instagram selfie, he posed in front of a mirror, completely naked except for the word “Lit” covering his genitalia, and tagged it #hotboysforbernie.) And much of his comedy remains political, too. But before the 2016 presidential election he wanted all his comedy to be incisive and cutting – the sort that speaks truth to power, but since Trump entered the White House, that has changed. Creating effective satire is much harder now, he says, because “we’ve been taken to absurd extremes already”. But it’s more than that. Young-White now wants to offer an escape from bad news – to make people laugh at things he calls stupid and fun. “We have to have moments of transcendence,” he says, “where we get to just shut our brains off. Right now I think that’s what feels most subversive. We’re so plugged in, so informed and aware of injustices that any moment we can get to just be our unfiltered, dumb, pure selves and get excited about something totally meaningless… They’re the most beautiful.” Jaboukie Young-White is a correspondent on The Daily Show with Trevor Noah