Mark Carney has said the Bank of England will take all necessary steps to support the UK economy through the worst of the global coronavirus outbreak, while warning of potentially severe damage for Britain. Speaking as the G7 group of wealthy nations ramp up their response to the spread of the disease, the Bank’s governor warned the UK could face an “economic shock that could prove large but will ultimately be temporary”. “The Bank will take all necessary steps to support the UK economy and the financial system,” he said. In his final appearance before MPs on the Treasury select committee before standing down on 15 March, when he will be replaced by Andrew Bailey, Carney said the central bank had been holding emergency meetings for the past month to coordinate its response to Covid-19. Hopes of decisive and coordinated action from the world’s top central banker and finance ministers pushed European markets higher on Tuesday. The FTSE 100 was up 2.2% or 147 points at 6,802, while all other major indices were up more than 2% ahead of a call between G7 finance ministers and central bankers to discuss a coordinated emergency response to the global outbreak. On Monday, the US Dow Jones closed up 1,293 points – its biggest ever one-day points rise. Carney said the Bank was still assessing how severe the “large” shock for the economy would be, but added that the coronavirus outbreak would not have the same lasting damage for Britain as caused by the financial crisis in 2008. “The prospect with this situation is disruption not destruction,” he said. Hinting that interest rate cuts could be used to support households and businesses, the governor said that three of the Bank’s most senior committees met on Monday, including the rate-setting monetary policy committee which is “assessing the economic impacts and considering the policy implications of various different scenarios”. With interest rates at 0.75% still among the lowest levels in the Bank’s 325-year history, Carney said the Bank would not use negative interest rates. The Bank had several tools at its disposal, including supporting banks to increase their lending. “We don’t want viable businesses to go out of business because of the very necessary steps that need to be taken to protect and serve the British public over the course of the near future. The effort needs to be to figure out how we bridge from where we are today to the end of this process,” he said. The US Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan have also pledged to take action if necessary, stoking expectations that they will cut borrowing costs as a stimulus measure. The International Monetary Fund and World Bank issued a joint statement on Monday saying they stood ready to help the worst affected countries by providing “emergency financing, policy advice, and technical assistance”. The mounting response comes as the coronavirus outbreak causes widespread alarm. The Paris-based Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development has warned global growth could be cut in half. Twitter told its staff to work from home in response to the outbreak. It has made remote working mandatory for employees in in Hong Kong, Japan and South Korea and said it was “strongly encouraging” its global workforce of 5,000 employees to do the same. In the UK, the impact of the outbreak was reflected in company statements and updates on consumer behaviour. Kantar, the data company, said consumers are stockpiling hand sanitiser, with sales up 225% in February. The FTSE 100 product-testing company Intertek warned that its performance this year would be hit by the temporary disruption to the supply chains of its clients in China and any impact the epidemic might have on global trade. The tour operator Tui has suffered weaker bookings due to the coronavirus and set out plans to cut its administrative budget, freeze hiring and postpone non-essential projects. Car industry executives had been due to meet in Geneva on Tuesday, but the annual motor show to showcase new models, which usually attracts more than 600,000 people, was cancelled. Instead, many carmakers are holding conference calls to discuss their prospects. The virus has had wide-ranging impacts on the industry, shutting car plants in China and pressuring global supply chains – as well as wiping out customer demand in affected areas.