In Mumbai, up to 200,000 dabbas, or containers of home-cooked food, are delivered from people’s homes to workplaces every day by dabbawalas, who travel on foot or by bike. It’s an epic story of India’s love of home cooking, and of sustainability. Now, thanks to Anshu Ahuja and her company, Dabba Drop, Londoners can eat her Indian home cooking delivered by bike. This erriseri – a sweet, rich and sour stew – is a go-to recipe for Anshu’s family: it’s what her grandmother used to make for Sunday lunch, it’s what her mother makes if guests turn up and it’s what Anshu now makes for friends and family. There might seem to be a lot of chillies in this, but it’s not a hot dish, because the natural sweetness of the squash and sweetcorn, combined with the rich coconut milk and spiky lime, balance things out. Fresh curry leaves are now sold in most major supermarkets. Prep 10 minCook 45 minServes 4 1 butternut squash (1kg), washedSunflower oil – I like Mr OrganicFine sea salt1 x 340g tin sweetcorn, drained2 tsp black mustard seeds12 curry leaves1 large onion, peeled and finely chopped4 garlic cloves, peeled and minced3 green finger chillies, finely chopped2 tsp turmeric1 x 400ml tin coconut milk2 tbsp fresh lemon juice (ie, from 1 lemon)Coriander leaves, to garnish Cut the squash in half (no need to peel), scoop out and discard the seeds, then cut it into 2cm cubes. Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/gas 6. Tip the squash pieces on to an oven tray, pour over two tablespoons of oil and a good sprinkling of salt, and toss to coat. Bake for 25-30 minutes, until the squash chunks are tender and their edges caramelised. Add two tablespoons of water to the drained sweetcorn kernels and blend to a smooth paste (I use a stick blender). In a large frying pan, heat two tablespoons of oil and, when hot, add the mustard seeds and curry leaves, and leave them to crackle and pop for a minute. Now add the onion and cook, stirring occasionally, for about 10 minutes, until translucent and turning golden, then add the garlic and chillies, and cook for two minutes. Stir in the sweetcorn paste, turmeric and a teaspoon and a half of salt, cook for a minute, then add the coconut milk (keep the tin) and whisk so everything is combined and the curry sauce is a vibrant yellow. Half-fill the coconut milk tin with water and add to the pot to loosen the curry – you may need a little more or less water than this, depending on the thickness of your coconut milk – bring to a boil and simmer for five minutes, until it starts to thicken. Stir in the roast squash and lemon juice, and check the seasoning. Garnish with coriander and serve immediately.