The national living wage will rise to more than £10.50 an hour in 2024 compared with £8.21 at present, as the government set a target for the wage to reach two-thirds of median earnings. The new rate will apply to everyone aged over 21, not the current threshold of 25, although it is not guaranteed, as the chancellor cautioned that the increases will only happen “as long as economic conditions allow”. While the new rates will be welcomed by the low-paid, they will not apply to Britain’s growing army of self-employed and gig economy” workers. The TUC estimates that half of self-employed adults aged 25 and over are currently earning less than minimum wage – a total of 2 million people. The current £8.21 rate for the over-25s will rise to £8.72 an hour next month, while for 21-to-24-year-olds it rises to £8.20. The rate for 18-to-20-year-olds will be £6.45. In his speech, Rishi Sunak said: “It was a Conservative government that in 2016 introduced the national living wage, giving Britain’s lowest-paid workers the biggest pay rise in 20 years. “And in just three weeks’ time, about 2 million workers will see their wage rise again by 6.2% – for a full-time worker, that’s a pay rise of almost £1,000. That is the biggest cash increase ever.” He added: “As long as economic conditions allow, by 2024 the national living wage will reach two-thirds of median earnings. We promised to end low pay – we’re getting it done.” Economists said the increases were ambitious, while some business groups warned that employers in sectors such as social care could be hit hard. Johnny Runge of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research said: “The proposed change is large, with an ambitious timescale, which would take the UK into uncharted waters. It is therefore important that the employment prospects of low-paid workers are monitored carefully, so any negative impacts on jobs can be detected in time, and if necessary be reversed.” Mayfair Capital, an investor in the social care sector, said: “While the proposed increase on the national living wage is to be welcomed as a means of helping the low-paid, in the absence of further funding for social care, a number of operators will be squeezed.” In large parts of the north of England the living wage has already reached two-thirds of local median earnings, said Professor Len Shackleton at the rightwing Institute for Economic Affairs.“Big increases in minimum wages will raise employer costs disproportionately in those poorer regions of the country the prime minister wants to help,” he said. “Already, the ratio of minimum wages in Northern Ireland, Yorkshire and Humber, the East Midlands and Wales is higher than the 66% target the Conservatives have set.” The chancellor said the low-paid would receive a double boost, with cuts to national insurance that were initially promised in the Conservative election manifesto. The starting point for national insurance, the lower earnings threshold, will rise from £8,632 a year to £9,500. This is worth £105 to employees, as they will no longer have to pay 12% NI on an additional £868 of their income. Nimesh Shah of accountancy firm Blick Rothenberg said: “The only notable tax change for workers was the increase to the national insurance threshold. For the first time in 10 years, there was no increase to the personal allowance, which remained at £12,500. In fact, there were no changes to the majority of the personal tax thresholds with the basic rate band, inheritance tax nil-rate band and the high-income child benefit threshold all untouched.”