Bodies hacked to pieces, brains dribbling out of skulls, tongues sliced out of screaming mouths … Theatre has long been filled with the most macabre visions of guts and gore. But it is a tricky business to make such scenes work for today’s audiences, who are acclimatised to screen violence and perhaps even numbed by it. Production teams make decisions on what to stage and what to leave to the imagination. If it is to be shown, special effects departments think through the mechanics, from the consistency and shade of blood to the sounds of metal entering flesh. Every detail must be considered, such as how many litres of fake blood a production requires and the flavour preferred by an actor (Tom Bateman, playing Coriolanus at the Crucible in Sheffield, likes mint). Then there is the question of how to depict battles and torture scenes in a way that will keep the audience’s disbelief suspended. There are those who think that offstage violence is where the horror lies, and those who believe it must be shown. Declan Donnellan, joint artistic director of Cheek by Jowl alongside Nick Ormerod, aims to conjure a dread on stage which, like ancient Greek theatre, touches deep, unconscious parts of the psyche. Thomas Middleton’s Jacobean play The Revenger’s Tragedy brims with wounded bodies, but in Cheek by Jowl’s new co-production with Piccolo Teatro di Milano, most of the brutality is stylised non-violence, such as the last scene in which a deathly pile-up becomes a choreographed disco dance. There is one central bloody scene, though, in which the Duke is tortured. Blood erupts graphically on stage, an effect created by tubes and pumps hidden by the actors’ bodies and behind props. As his throat is cut, fake blood is piped up the chair in which he sits, and the effect is heightened by a magnet in the actor’s shirt collar and a foot pump, which he controls. A bowl with a fake is hidden behind his chair for when his tongue is sliced and thrown on to the floor. Ormerod says the production team assessed various options: “We tried a latex substitute but nothing had the right effect of a tongue falling on the floor, so we bought fresh meat, which we keep in the fridge. Its weight as it falls to the ground has a genuine sound.” Special effects companies such as Pigs Might Fly deliver ready-made fake blood at different colours and consistencies, but some productions teams choose to make their own. Ormerod’s design team used a Kryolan product, and rehearsed with liquid of different consistencies to find the right effect. Some productions choose to accentuate graphic violence, such as Martin McDonagh’s The Lieutenant of Inishmore, an Irish black comedy about a violent member of a Republican splinter group and his missing cat. The drama deals in such eye-watering detail as spilling cat’s brains and the hacking of human limbs. Lorna Cobbold, company stage manager of the RSC’s 2001 production and Michael Grandage’s 2018 revival starring Aidan Turner, says a host of special effects had to be deployed. “There is a scene when a cat gets shot and a man’s head is pushed into the cat basket. He comes up with blood all over his face.” They used gas to create a splatter effect and “to get it just right, I rehearsed it on myself first”. Cobbold’s team also assessed how best to replicate the effect of a cat’s brain falling to the floor. “We needed a thump sound to be made, so we used prunes in the original staging and then jelly mixed with blood and a hard base in 2018, so that it would both thud and dribble on the stage floor.” When a man is shot in front of you and you see his blood spurting on a wall, it's shocking. It has to look real. When the central character, Padraic, gets shot in the head, the audience is shown its impact by the blood spraying on to the wall behind him. “There was gasping and shrieking from the audience when that happened,” she says. “When you are three feet away at the Garrick theatre and a man is not just shot in front of you but you see his blood spurting on a wall, it has a shocking effect. It has to look real for that to happen.” It is sometimes a challenge to turn a scripted stage instruction into reality, she adds. Some effects come with imagined props (daggers that emit blood, for example) while others must be made. As stage manager of The Antipodes at the National Theatre last year, Cobbold had to think laterally when the script stated that a character vomits a sea creature that then moves. “You think, ‘How can we create that?’ In the end, we used an oatmeal bubble that the character hid in his mouth. It had a nylon string that he could pull to make the creature move in the vomit.” While some productions can amp up the gore for darkly comic or surreal effect, naturalistic plays need special effects that create a life-like semblance for the drama to stay convincing, says Robert Hastie, artistic director of the Crucible in Sheffield, who is directing Coriolanus. “We set it within a naturalistic, recognisable world – therefore the blood needs to seem real. You need to see it.” But there are some navigations off stage, too: “You hear a lot about Coriolanus single-handedly detonating the city, but it all happens off stage. So when he walks on stage covered in blood, it’s an incredibly powerful moment. That’s when he will have a lot of blood on him. We had to make the decision on how to do this with his clothes on. We had makeup tests and asked ourselves, ‘Should we stick his head in a bucket or fire him with blood as he comes off stage?’” Hastie used a different strategy for his production of Macbeth. “The horror is in the imagination and you hear rather than see it. The play talks a lot about knocking and much of its violence comes through sound, so we added a soundscape of knocks at odd points throughout the play to create unease among the audience.” In Cheek by Jowl’s production of Macbeth, too, there was no blood or violence but only its suggestion through the sound of a screaming violin. There is a wider moral and political dimension to showing blood and violence on stage, or choosing not to, particularly in the context of violence against women in the era of #MeToo. Dan Palmer, the production manager at the Almeida in London who worked on Rebecca Frecknall’s The Duchess of Malfi, said it was one of the first conversations that took place among the production team. The play shows the Duchess’s garrotting in a prolonged scene that is shocking in its realism. That decision to have a protracted death was purposeful, says Palmer. “Rebecca was keen for parts to feel very real. The strangling [of the duchess] was pretty brutal and it should have felt uncomfortable for the audience. That was the point.” Nine litres of fake blood were used for every performance (the blood was bought at £130 per 10 litres) so it was an expensive element to the production. There are a host of practicalities to such a heavy use of blood, adds Palmer. “Five people spent an hour and a half cleaning the set every evening and again the following morning.” Some years ago, Palmer worked on a dance-theatre version of Kafka’s Metamorphosis at the Royal Opera House, for which his team made its own blood for a dramatic scene that featured it seeping out of the floors and walls. “We used glycerine, Lyle’s black treacle, golden syrup and food colouring to make the blood,” he says. It worked to good effect but unfortunately congealed quickly and left the floors sticky, noisy and a hazard for dancers. Just sometimes, accidents pay off. On the first night of Donnellan and Ormerod’s 1993 production of Stephen Sondheim’s Sweeney Todd at the National Theatre, a nozzle that was to release blood dropped off before the final victim’s throat was slashed by the demon barber. Donnellan saw what had happened and “waited aghast … A huge jet of blood spurted out towards the audience who all screamed and laughed. A delighted Sondheim [sitting next to Donnellan in the audience] hugged me. So we kept the mistake in for the run!” The Revenger’s Tragedy is at the Barbican, London, 4-7 March. Coriolanus is at the Crucible, Sheffield, 6-28 March.