Elliot Daly Tested out aerially early on but seemed much happier when moved to the wing. Took his try well. 7 Anthony Watson An impressive finish on his first appearance of the season. Will be delighted to put injury problems behind him. 7 Manu Tuilagi Can have no complaints with red card. Shame as it spoiled another impressive performance with a try to boot. 6 Owen Farrell (capt) Not a classic performance, giving away a few penalties. Cranked things up when Wales fought back. 6 Jonny May  Had touched the ball just once before an accidental elbow to the head from Leigh Halfpenny ended his match after eight minutes. - George Ford Has quietly had an excellent tournament and again exerted a calm authority. Put both Daly and Tuilagi away for tries. 8 Ben Youngs Lovely inside pass for Watson’s try and a vintage performance to silence those who think it is time for him to be put out to pasture. 9 Joe Marler  Quickly went viral after getting too familiar with Alun Wyn Jones but played a pivotal part in England’s scrum dominance. 7 Jamie George Set-piece solid but hard to shake the feeling that he is staying in the side because of his leadership more than anything else. 7 Kyle Sinckler Quietly impressive throughout rather than going from one extreme to the other as he did against Wales last year. 8 Maro Itoje A constant thorn in Wales’s side. Allowed to get away with a lot at the breakdown but he was at his destructive best. 9 George Kruis A trademark performance on what may prove to be his last appearance for England. Lots of hard graft. 8 Courtney Lawes Has not always enjoyed playing at blindside but he excelled against Ireland and was similarly effective here. 9 Mark Wilson A relentless performance which was astounding given how little he has played this season. Ended with a remarkable 22 tackles. 9 Tom Curry He and Wilson dovetail together so well. Even in the closing stages, still flying into tackles with staggering commitment. 8 Leigh Halfpenny Kicked his goals but did not offer much in the way of an attacking threat. 6 George North Far too many handling errors. An early knock-on set Itoje away and another denied Wales a try in the first half. 5 Nick Tompkins Spooked by Tuilagi opposite him early on but drastically improved in the second half, playing a crucial role in Tipuric’s try. 8 Hadleigh Parkes Shanked an early kick, gave away a high tackle for which he might have seen yellow and handling left plenty to be desired. 4 Liam Williams A few signs of rust after such a long lay-off but occasionally threatened. Was not able to prise open England’s robust defence. 6 Dan Biggar Thumped by Curry and Tuilagi early on. Clever crossfield kick to Tipuric and always looking to create something. 8 Tomos Williams He will be disappointed with the way he slipped off Watson for the opening try but stayed cool to time pass to Tipuric perfectly. 6 Rob Evans rought in to shore up the scrum but Sinckler came off the better in their battle. Could not make his presence felt in the loose. 4 Ken Owens Got through plenty of work but had some wobbles at the lineout, understandably given England’s prowess in that area. 5 Dillon Lewis Went down with an injury early in the first half and did not come back out for the second. Is yet to truly convince at this level. 5 Jake Ball Made way in the second half with an arm injury. Does not quite have the heft in terms of carrying that Wales clearly need. 5 Alun Wyn Jones (capt) Conceded an early penalty and his attempts to wind up Itoje failed. His presence ensured Wales kept going till the last. 6 Ross Moriarty Attempts to ruffle Itoje’s feathers did not work. Still a way off the sort of form that earned him a place on last Lions tour. 5 Justin Tipuric Finished off what is surely the try of the championship. Did his utmost to effect things at the breakdown. 8 Josh Navidi Had a hand in Tipuric’s try and got through plenty of work. The decision to select him ahead of Faletau did not backfire. 7