“There’s four things in life I hate: scroungers, foreigners, doctors and posh people.” These aren’t the words of 1970s National Front supporters; this is Kate Abbott, the prejudiced protagonist of the new ITV sitcom Kate & Koji, a show so distasteful and dated that watching it is like looking into a time-capsule montage of Britain’s finest moments of racial prejudice. The storyline is simple: Abbott, a seaside cafe owner played by Brenda Blethyn, likes her England and her customers “traditional”, but her world is disrupted with the sudden arrival of asylum-seeking doctor Koji, a besuited Jimmy Akingbola, speaking in a thick Nigerian-referencing accent (although he is only referred to as being “from Africa”). In the two episodes made available for critics to view in advance, the pair get off to a rocky start as Koji uses the cafe as a haven from his temporary accommodation, nursing a single cup of tea in his pristine three-piece, while Kate laments his status as a “scrounger”, living off her hard-earned wages. When it becomes apparent that Koji is a trained doctor but cannot work here while he is seeking asylum, the pair strike up an agreement of free food for Koji in return for informal consultations, which bring in more cafe customers. Happy days: Koji gets to eat and Kate gets to have her icy prejudices slowly thawed by his unwavering good nature and illegal practice. It’s as if the Good Immigrant had never been published. Filmed in front of a live audience on a cafe stage set, the show’s claustrophobic aesthetics, kitsch slapstick and jarringly loud laughter hark back to the likes of Open All Hours and Dad’s Army, as well as more recent iterations of the multi-camera format in Mrs Brown’s Boys or Miranda. Even the Baker Street-style saxophone melody and panning opening credits feel like a throwback to Only Fools and Horses. Of course, the retro references are intentional, even tongue-in-cheek, yet if the premise and setting feel dated, the writing should surely serve to cannily subvert this. Instead, the the script is more stale than the cafe’s beige wallpaper; a bland pastiche leaning so heavily on stereotypes as to make every character a caricature: the prejudiced old-timer, the good immigrant, the village idiots. The groan-worthy jokes include jibes at Meera Syal’s doctor ordering a flat white with oat milk (only the metropolitan liberal elite drink coffee); a (presumably foreign) call-centre worker mispronouncing Kate’s name; and a particularly egregious one-liner on multi-gendered toilets that gets one of the loudest laughs of the second episode. In fact, both sides lose in this sloppy writing; Kate’s character is so poorly drawn as to make her a personification of a progressive’s nightmares, while Koji is so formal and austere as to make him a version of Morgan Freeman’s Hoke in Driving Miss Daisy. There is little space for Bleythyn’s formidable talent to shine, nor are there nuances enough for Akingbola to humanise his portrayal of Koji. Created by the writing team behind the deft family comedy Outnumbered – Andy Hamilton and Guy Jenkin – it seems that tackling anything beyond middle-class domestic life has proved too much for them. At best, Kate & Koji scrapes close to Channel 4’s toothless take on the Syrian refugee influx, Home. At worst, it brings to mind the offensive stereotyping of Love Thy Neighbour and Mind Your Language, two 1970s sitcoms that tried to tackle racial culture-clash with unsympathetic, clumsily racist, overtones. Why is ITV funding a modern-day rehash of shows that, even in their prime half a century ago, were noted for their insensitivity and narrow-sightedness? There have been far better, more nuanced portrayals recently on our screens. Take Ramy, an ingenious look at being a young Muslim in America, written by one – Ramy Youssef – or Don’t Forget the Driver, a BBC Two tragicomedy where Toby Jones plays a coach driver who comes upon a Calais stowaway. In these shows, diversity is a human, tangible part of the fabric of everyday life, even if it is contested and difficult. It is not an exotic occurrence that magically lands on the doorstep of your cafe, asking to be let in. • Kate and Koji is on tonight, 8pm, ITV