I am writing to commend Zoe Williams for her thoughtful column (Why we need feminist solidarity more than ever, G2, 11 March). The trans “debate” – a term I use loosely, as I don’t believe trans people’s rights should be up for debate – has focused largely on the voices of those decrying the right of trans women to be considered at all. As a cisgender woman, I am unequivocally supportive of the view that empowering trans women in no way disenfranchises or endangers cis women, and that in fact we are stronger united. The enemy is misogyny; our trans sisters are our allies in this fight, and history bears out their role in both this and in the equally important fight for LGBT+ liberation. I am wary of the proclamation that gender-critical feminists are “being silenced”; an argument as specious as the oft-repeated claim that “we can’t talk about immigration”. The claim that women are being silenced holds no water, not least when those allegedly doing the “silencing” are frequently also cisgender women (and many prolific “gender-critical” commentators are male). Women are not a monolith, and a great many of us welcome our trans sisters (and brothers) with open arms. I therefore wholeheartedly welcome Zoe Williams’ measured view on this subject.Laura MauroBasildon, Essex • At last an article about what I believe feminism to be, to be inclusive, to fight for the oppressed, to offer solidarity to all minorities. We must stop the infighting and join together, as together we are stronger – together we can change the world and eventually make everyone free to be themselves in safety. It is what being civilised is all about. Thank you, Zoe, for an article which says eloquently what I feel. Angela PriceDorchester, Dorset • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition