The Royal Ballet has said it will no longer work with its star choreographer Liam Scarlett, who had been accused of sexual misconduct with students. The company said on Monday that Scarlett’s position as artist-in-residence at Covent Garden had ended and, as he would no longer work with the Royal Ballet, performances of his production Symphonic Dances would not go ahead. It also said, however, that an independent investigation into his behaviour had concluded and “found there were no matters to pursue in relation to alleged contact with students of the Royal Ballet School”. Scarlett, once described by the New York Times as the “new choreographic wonder boy of British ballet”, was initially suspended by the Royal Ballet in August after the allegations of sexual misconduct were made. Rehearsals for a production of Oklahoma!, which Scarlett was to have choreographed, were delayed at the same time. The company said it was to do with problems with work schedules. News of the allegations emerged publicly in January. The Times reported that the employment company Linda Harvey Associates was conducting an investigation into claims he had behaved inappropriately with students. Queensland Ballet in Australia responded by suspending Scarlett as an artistic associate and cancelled productions planned for April of his show Dangerous Liaisons. The Australian company’s artistic director, Li Cunxin, said this month it had not cut ties with Scarlett sooner because they were unaware the allegations against him were sexual in nature. Cunxin told the Sydney Morning Herald: “It was very vague. We really learned from second and third sources [later on]. We are as eager to learn the facts as anyone. Because his ballet is widely performed all around the world, everybody is waiting.” The artistic director said Queensland Ballet had conducted its own investigation and found no evidence of improper behaviour by Scarlett in Australia. A spokesperson said: “The Royal Ballet Company has a code of conduct in place to ensure staff and visiting artists are always supported. To preserve the anonymity of the individuals concerned and as a duty of care to staff and artists, we are unable to comment further on the specifics of this case.” Ipswich-born Scarlett, who has not responded to the allegations, was one of the Royal Ballet’s star dancers until his retirement in 2012. He was appointed as the company’s first artist-in-residence the same year. His productions at the Royal Ballet included Vayamos al Diablo, Consolations and Liebestraum, Asphodel Meadows, Hansel and Gretel and Frankenstein. Representatives of Scarlett have been approached for comment.