It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals. The virus can cause pneumonia. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. In severe cases there can be organ failure. As this is viral pneumonia, antibiotics are of no use. The antiviral drugs we have against flu will not work. Recovery depends on the strength of the immune system. Many of those who have died were already in poor health. No. In the UK, the medical advice is now that anyone with a cough or high temperature should stay at home for seven days, keeping away from other people, including those in your home if you can. This applies to everyone, regardless of whether they have travelled abroad. You should look on the dedicated coronavirus NHS 111 website for information. If you get worse or your symptoms last longer than seven days, you should call NHS 111. People will no longer be tested for the virus unless they are in hospital. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. There is now extensive human to human transmission across the world. As of 15 March, more than 156,000 people have been infected in more than 80 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering. There have been over 5,800 deaths globally. Just over 3,000 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. More than 73,000 people have recovered from the coronavirus. We don’t yet know how dangerous the new coronavirus is, and we won’t know until more data comes in, but estimates have ranged from well below 1% in the young to over 3% among those who are elderly or have underlying health conditions. Seasonal flu typically has a mortality rate below 1% and is thought to cause about 400,000 deaths each year globally. Sars had a death rate of more than 10%. Another key unknown is how contagious the coronavirus is. A crucial difference is that unlike flu, there is no vaccine for the new coronavirus, which means it is more difficult for vulnerable members of the population – elderly people or those with existing respiratory or immune problems – to protect themselves. Hand-washing and avoiding other people if you feel unwell are important. One sensible step is to get the flu vaccine, which will reduce the burden on health services if the outbreak turns into a wider epidemic. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars) and Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (Mers) are both caused by coronaviruses that came from animals. In 2002, Sars spread virtually unchecked to 37 countries, causing global panic, infecting more than 8,000 people and killing more than 750. Mers appears to be less easily passed from human to human, but has greater lethality, killing 35% of about 2,500 people who have been infected.