There has been much coverage of the Covid-19 epidemic and the efforts of key workers and the government in addressing the many issues in a rapidly developing situation. However, I have not seen much about the preparedness of the Department for Work and Pensions to meet the expected increase in volumes of claims. It was reported on Wednesday that there were over 100,000 applications for universal credit (UC) in 24 hours (Universal credit claims ‘almost impossible’ as more than 500,000 apply, 26 March). This is a heavy additional workload on a system that is creaking in normal circumstances. My daughter is a designated key worker at one of the UC processing centres, and she tells me that more than two-thirds of her team have been allowed to go home as they have underlying health issues. I suppose this could be seen as a welcome move by an understanding and caring employer. There is no facility for these staff to work from home and none are isolating because they are displaying any symptoms. This is a great loss of productive resource at such a critical time and puts an even greater strain on the remaining staff. She returned from work on Wednesday evening highly stressed and tearful because of the strain she is working under. This includes long working hours and instances of abuse from some of the claimants who eventually manage to get through on the phone. And, of course, the worry of catching the virus as well.Name and address supplied • A significant part of Boris Johnson’s announcement on Monday evening, which permits travel to work “only if you cannot work from home” (UK lockdown: what are the new coronavirus restrictions?, 23 March) is smoke and mirrors. Johnson has not told employers that “you must not make people come to work if they can work from home”. His wording puts the onus on workers. He doesn’t stop employers from firing them if they fail to turn up. How does this protect people whose employer insists they come to work, even when the job is non-essential or could be done from home? This is happening to someone I know. He could work from home, but like his colleagues has been told to attend the office or face the sack. With each day he continues to go in, this young and vulnerable employee risks his own and his partner’s lives, the lives of NHS staff and perhaps the life of a sick older person who may be taken off a ventilator if he falls ill and is hospitalised. What mechanisms has Johnson put in place to prevent such abuses? None. Are any of his police enforcement measures targeted at employers? No. His words have been carefully chosen. As with many of his announcements, he puts workers in an impossible position and lets businesses off the hook. Many more people will die of this virus as a result.Lin ClarkBristol • The care home cleaner who would like to be better valued is voicing the thoughts of many (‘I’m full of dread’: Doctors, nurses and cleaners on risking their lives for their job, 24 March). My own Damascene moment came many years ago while watching Dragons’ Den. The innovation in question was a water-saving device for toilets, and the “dragon” in question, still on the panel today, was horrified at the thought of checking that the toilet pan he had just used was indeed clean. A perfect example of the entitled assuming that someone else should clear up their mess. After this is all over, let’s not forget who the true key workers are, and vote accordingly.Deirdre BurrellMortimer, Berkshire