Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: Figures collected by Johns Hopkins University suggest 407,485 have been infected and, since the data is based partially on official releases, the true extent could be even greater. The institution says 18,227 people have died, while 104,234 have recovered. A further 87 people are confirmed to have died in the UK, the health secretary, Matt Hancock, says, taking the total death toll to 422. According to the latest Department of Health and Social Care figures, 8,077 people have tested positive, while 82,359 people have tested negative. Hancock says the country is recruiting 250,000 volunteers in good health to help the health services. He confirms a new 4,000-capacity hospital will open at the ExCeL Centre in east London. And the UK’s health secretary says the government has got hold of 3.5m antibody tests and moved 7.5m pieces of protective equipment. Poland, India and Egypt all implemented lockdown measures, while South Africans prepare to do the same after the number of confirmed cases increased by more than a third in a day. The Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, announced that gatherings of more than two people were prohibited. In India, the prime minister, Narendra Modi, declared the country’s 1.3bn population were to be placed in lockdown for 21 days. And, in Egypt, a curfew running from 7pm to 6am will be put in place for two weeks. While much of the rest of the world deals with the new reality of tighter restrictions aimed at controlling the scale and speed of the outbreak, the US president Donald Trump is arguing against shutdown measures. He says such steps are not normally taken to control seasonal influenza outbreaks. Experts have said Covid-19 appears significantly more deadly than influenza and there is neither a treatment nor a vaccine for it. The WHO has also has said the US risks becoming the next centre of the coronavirus outbreak as the country is seeing a “very large acceleration” in cases. The state’s governor, Andrew Cuomo, says authorities have procured 7,000 ventilators – but will still need as many as 30,000 ventilators. The problem is finding them, he says. “You cannot get them. Every state is trying to get them, other countries are trying to get them.” Cuomo, whose state is facing thousands of cases, is pleading for more federal help. After a conference call between the Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, Tokyo’s governor, Yuriko Koike, and the International Olympic Committee president, Thomas Bach, the Olympics will be postponed for 12 months. Abe said a postponement was unavoidable if the 2020 Games could not be held in a complete manner amid the coronavirus pandemic. The European Union has been urged to evacuate asylum seekers from overcrowded camps on the Greek islands in order to save lives. The European parliament’s civil liberties, justice and home affairs committee has called for the evacuation of 42,000 people on the Greek islands as “an urgent preventive” measure to avoid “many deaths” from coronavirus. The first case was confirmed earlier this month when a Greek woman on Lesbos tested positive. Medics are complaining of a lack of basic protective equipment as 514 people died from the virus in the country in a single day and the latest figures revealed that Spanish healthcare workers accounted for more than 13% of the country’s 39,673 cases. Spain, the second most affected country in Europe after Italy, has been in lockdown since 14 March but is struggling to slow the spread of the disease, which has so far claimed 2,696 lives. The environmental campaigner, Greta Thunberg, says she believes it “extremely likely” she has had Covid-19. In an Instagram post, she writes that she has been staying inside for the past two weeks. “Around 10 days ago I started feeling some symptoms, exactly the same time as my father – who travelled with me from Brussels. I was feeling tired, had shivers, a sore throat and coughed. My dad experienced the same symptoms, but much more intense and with a fever.” She adds that she has “basically recovered.”