Elizabeth Warren, the liberal Massachusetts senator whose sweeping economic plans shaped the Democratic policy debate and the last, is dropping out of the presidential race on Thursday after struggling to regain the momentum that briefly lifted her to the top of the field. In a field that began as the most diverse in history, Warren was the last major female Democratic presidential candidate. Her departure sets up what is effectively a race between two, white, male septuagenarians – Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders. Warren’s departure from the race followed a series of lackluster finishes in the early contests, including a demoralizing third place finish in her home state of Massachusetts on Super Tuesday. After surging to the front of the field last summer with an urgent call for “big structural change” in the US, she began to slide, squeezed from the left by Sanders and from the center by more moderate alternatives. Warren informed staff of her decision during a meeting on Thursday morning, after taking a day to consider her options. She will hold a press conference at 12.30pm ET in Boston. In the final weeks of her campaign, Warren, 70, attempted to reset her campaign this winter by recasting herself as the “unity candidate” best positioned to unify the Democratic party after a competitive primary, even as she sharpened her criticisms of Sanders, Biden and multi-billionaire Mike Bloomberg, who she essentially drove out of the race with a devastating attack during a debate in Nevada last month. He ended his bid on Wednesday. While her campaign was widely praised for its organization, early investment in states like Iowa failed to translate into wins. She placed third in the Hawkeye state, a comparatively respectable finish that was overshadowed by the disastrous debacle over the reporting of the results. That was followed by a fourth place finish in New Hampshire. She slipped to fifth place in South Carolina. And on Super Tuesday, where her team predicted she would have a “strong performance” she did not win a single state, not even Massachusetts, where liberals split between her and Sanders while moderates broke heavily for Biden, who hardly campaigned in the state. It was blow from which she unable to recover despite a fundraising surge last month and field organizations in more than 30 states. Trump immediately seized on her exit, referring to her by the racial slur “Pocahontas” he said she was “going nowhere except into Mini Mike’s head.” “She cost Crazy Bernie, at least, Massachusetts, Minnesota and Texas,” Trump gloated. “Probably cost him the nomination!” In recent weeks, Warren has come under pressure from progressives backing Sanders to drop out and endorse him, the way moderate contenders Pete Buttigieg and Amy Klobuchar aligned behind Biden after losing South Carolina. But Warren remained defiant, sharpening her attacks on Sanders, who she said was too polarizing, and Biden, whose vision she criticized as “small”. Both candidates are aggressively pursuing her endorsement. Liberal supporters may gravitate to Sanders, but Warren also ran strong among educated women, including those who had supported Hillary Clinton in 2016 and were eager to see a woman elevated to the White House. Supporters saw a double standard: despite finishing ahead of Biden and Senator Amy Klobuchar in Iowa, Warren faded from the political conversation. When a national poll testing Democratic candidates against the president left out Warren, her supporters seethed online that she was being intentionally erased from media coverage. Warren, a former Harvard professor who specialized in bankruptcy law, entered the primary as a “fighter” with a mission to root out corruption in Washington. Her expansive economic proposals – from universal child care to student loan debt relief to free college – became her trademark. “I have a plan for that,” became her tagline, appearing on T-shirts and coffee mugs. Her plans were underwritten by a wealth tax on the richest Americans. The idea was so popular among her supporters that chants of “two cents” would break out at rallies, a reference to the amount per dollar that Warren promised to tax on wealth over $50m. She was also known for spending hours after campaign events taking photos with supporters in what became known as her “selfie line”. The tactic was intended to highlight the time the candidate was able to dedicate to voters because she had eschewed high-dollar donor events. Her rapidly expanding portfolio of policy proposals dominated the early contest of ideas. In polling last summer, Warren rose inexorably, even edging past Biden, then the frontrunner in some surveys. Despite receiving broad support among prominent black leaders and activists who were drawn to Warren’s sharp analysis of the connection between racial and economic inequality, she was never able to make inroads with the party’s most loyal constituency. In South Carolina, where African Americans make up more than 60% of the Democratic electorate, she won support from just 5% of black voters. She became a target for her rivals, who criticized Warren for not having a plan to implement Medicare for all, as envisioned by Sanders. But unlike Sanders, Warren insisted she would not raise taxes on middle class Americans to pay for it. Under pressure to square the two, she released a funding proposal for a single-payer, government-run insurance system. Instead of placating critics, moderates called it “magical thinking” while Sanders’s supporters decried the incremental approach to passing Medicare for all. Slowly Warren began to slip, as Sanders, rebounding from a heart attack, moved to consolidate support on the left. Democrats’ desperation to beat Trump resulted in an intense focus on “electability”, a calculation that can include gender and racial biases. Supporters believe voter obsession with electability hampered Warren’s candidacy as it had for other women and candidates of color who ran for the nomination, like Kamala Harris, Cory Booker and Julian Castro. Asked during a debate to respond to Barack Obama’s assertion that more women should lead, the moderator noted that Warren would be the “oldest president ever inaugurated”. She shot back: “I’d also be the youngest woman ever inaugurated.”