Welcome to our weekly roundup of the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic, which is continuing to pose unprecedented challenges around the world. By Friday morning the outbreak had grown to more than half a million confirmed infections – more than double the figure a week ago – with the US, China, Italy and Spain accounting for more than half of these, according to trackers at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. The true number is certain to be far higher since many countries are not aiming to test all cases. Addressing world leaders at a virtual summit on Thursday, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, World Health Organization director general, described the pandemic as “the defining health crisis of our time”, warning that millions of people could die without decisive action from leaders. “We are at war with a virus that threatens to tear us apart,” he said. On Thursday the US overtook China as the country with the most cases. The US death toll surpassed 1,000, doctors at New York hospitals complained of nightmarish conditions and it was revealed that 3.3 million Americans filed for unemployment last week – the biggest single-week jump in history. Donald Trump put the escalation in cases down to the US doing more testing than other countries. Get all the latest updates for the US here China began loosening restrictions, with residents of Wuhan being allowed to leave their homes for the first time in weeks and some returning to work. The country is now working to prevent imported cases. The death toll in Italy, at the centre of Europe’s outbreak, continued to rise, reaching more than 8,000 by Thursday, including 41 healthcare workers who caught the virus while working on the frontlines and an increasing number of cases sweeping through the poorer southern regions. Spain overtook Italy in recording the world’s highest single-day number of deaths, with 738 dying over 24 hours on Wednesday, prompting criticism of the government’s management of the crisis. Germany’s low mortality rate – 0.3% compared, with 9% in Italy and 4.6% in the UK – offered a glimmer of hope, and the head of the country’s public health institute said on Monday there were signs that the increase in infections was levelling off for the first time owing to the strict physical distancing measures in force. Get a quick guide to the latest developments from around the world with our daily at-a-glance guides The Olympics became the biggest sporting event yet to be claimed by the pandemic, with Japan’s prime minister conceding to the inevitable and postponing until next year (it will still be called Japan 2020) – the first time the Games will not go ahead on schedule since 1945. The odds of Wimbledon going ahead at the end of June look increasingly slim. The internet has been awash with celebrity posts aimed at keeping public spirits high, or perhaps simply a reflection of them going slightly eccentric in self-isolation like the rest of us. Here’s Madonna singing with a hairbrush microphone. Living in Special Times............thank GOD for imagination and fried fish! 🐠🐠🐠 #quarantine #covid_19 #staysafe #becreative pic.twitter.com/AsStqQObOO Financial markets had another volatile week, although European markets rallied and are up overall since the start of the week. Economists suggested China’s economy could be showing signs of recovery after a slump in production in the past few months. Housing sales in the UK and elsewhere have been put on hold due to uncertainty over valuations. In the UK, military planners began converting London’s ExCel centre into a 4,000-bed field hospital, in the most ambitious medical project since the second world war. NHS Nightingale will rely on nurses transferred from other parts of the UK to cope with the tsunami of patients that will require hospital treatment in the capital within days. On Wednesday, parliament was shut early for Easter and police were given powers to use force and impose fines to send people home if they refuse to obey lockdown measures. Community spirit rallied, with more than 500,000 people signing up to be NHS volunteers and millions coming out on to doorsteps, leaning out of windows and over balconies in a nationwide round of applause for NHS staff at 8pm on Thursday. In Australia, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced that all new arrivals would be quarantined in hotels for 14 days and the government said it was putting together a third stimulus package that would allow businesses to “hibernate” for the next six months. Australia’s drug regulator is looking into prominent advertisements paid for by the former federal politician Clive Palmer that promote an unproven malaria drug, chloroquine, as a potential “cure” for Covid-19. New geographical data show that Sydney and Melbourne’s affluent suburbs are hotspots for the virus. Queensland is pushing on with elections on Saturday, in what experts described as a “lethal risk”. Get all the latest updates for Australia here As the pandemic rolls on, scientists are working at unprecedented speed to understand the nature of the virus and develop cures and trial vaccines. Antibody testing, which can reveal who has had the virus, appears to be on the horizon with governments buying millions of home-testing kits. A European trial is recruiting thousands of patients in Belgium, the UK, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Spain and the Netherlands to test four of the most promising drugs. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/03/25-66482-gnl.swe.20200326.ms.cv_19_ibuprofen.mp3 Ian Bailey, of the University of Surrey, joined our Science Weekly podcast to discuss guidance on taking ibuprofen and why there was concern about whether these medications could make symptoms of the disease worse, while our video team talked to our political correspondent Peter Walker about the dos and don’ts of lockdown in the UK. Finally, courtesy of the self-described genius, icon and legend Liam Gallagher, a new soundtrack to keep washing those hands to. New tune WONDERWASH c’mon you know LG x pic.twitter.com/gGB1LyipB4