Peel 3 medium-sized onions, cut them in half from root end to tip, then slice each half into 6. Heat 2 tbsp of olive oil in a deep pan over a moderate heat. Add the onions and let them cook, stirring regularly for 12-15 minutes, until they start to soften. Peel 35g of ginger, slice lengthwise into thin pieces, then slice each into matchsticks. Add the ginger to the onions, then stir in 2 tsp each of ground cumin and turmeric, and continue cooking for a minute or so, then stir in 50ml of water. Finely chop a large, moderately hot red chilli. Halve 300g of cherry tomatoes and stir them and the chilli into the onions. Continue cooking for 5 minutes. Stir in 200ml of thick coconut cream. Leave to simmer for 5 minutes. Put 150g of brown basmati rice in a small pan covered by 3cm of water. Add 6 cardamom pods, 4 cloves, ½ tsp of salt and 6 black peppercorns and bring to the boil. As soon as the water starts to boil, cover tightly with a lid, turn the heat down to a simmer and leave to steam over a moderate heat for 15 minutes. Remove from the heat and leave for 5 minutes before lifting the lid. Wash 200g of young spinach leaves and stir them into the tomato sauce. Cover with a lid and leave for a couple of minutes, then turn them over in the sauce, cover again and leave to simmer for a further 2-3 minutes until the leaves have softened and relaxed. Divide the rice between 2 plates and spoon over the spinach and coconut sauce. Serves 2 Use small, delicate spinach leaves and don’t be tempted to skip washing them. You wouldn’t believe the amount of grit that can turn up in a bag of “washed” spinach. Make the sauce first, then cook the rice. The sauce will stay warm in its pan, covered by a lid. Give it a final blast of heat before serving, if necessary. You could take advantage of the other greens around at the moment, using them to replace the spinach. Purple kale, cavolo nero, spring cabbage or mustard greens, should be lightly cooked before being drained and added to the tomato sauce. Rather than basmati, you could use quinoa or couscous, the latter forked through with chopped coriander. Follow Nigel on Twitter @NigelSlater