Stacey Solomon and Amanda Holden were among the celebrities who paid tribute to Caroline Flack on the day of her funeral. Friends and relatives gathered for a private funeral on Tuesday to remember the former Love Island host, who killed herself at her home in east London on 15 February. Solomon paid tribute on Instagram and said she would be avoiding social media for the day as a mark of respect. “Today it doesn’t feel right to be on social media. So from me and the boys, we hope you have a good day,” said the Loose Women panellist. “Hold your loved ones close, give them all of the cuddles you have in you and let them know how much you need them in your life. “You never know when they really might need to know. Love you all. If you’re struggling with today, yesterday, the thought of tomorrow, please let someone know. Anyone.” Holden, a judge on Britain’s Got Talent, appeared to mark the day by wearing a black and white T-shirt featuring an image of Flack and the words “Be kind”, a photo of which she posted on Instagram. Flack’s friend Keith Lemon created the T-shirt to raise money for the Samaritans charity. Its words refer to a social media post in which Flack told fans: “In a world where you can be anything, be kind.” The TV personality Donna Air shared a photo of herself wearing the T-shirt, writing: “Until we meet again beautiful girl.” The Love Island contestant Maura Higgins said on Instagram she had postponed her Ann Summers swimwear launch “out of respect” for Flack. The former “grid girl” was due to meet customers at the Brunswick Centre in London to launch her range. The broadcaster and mental health campaigner Matt Johnson posted the hashtag #BeKind and urged his followers to consider the effects of their words on social media. Flack, 40, stepped down from presenting the 2020 winter series of Love Island after an alleged assault on her boyfriend Lewis Burton. She pleaded not guilty at a court hearing in December and was released on bail, but was ordered to stop having any contact with Burton before the trial, which had been due to begin in March. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.