Amid all the cancellations and chaos caused by the coronavirus this week, Tanya Moodie received one piece of news worth celebrating. She won the Royal Television Society breakthrough award for her performance in the BBC Two sitcom Motherland, in which she plays Meg, a dynamo of alpha-female energy who gives slummy-mummy Julia (Anna Maxwell Martin) some life-changing – and, for us, newly apt – advice on working from home. Moodie may be only just breaking through in television, but she’s had a wide experience on stage. Indeed, when we met – before the RTA awards, and while Daddy, her now-postponed show at the Almeida, was still in rehearsals – Moodie relayed a recent conversation she’d had with one of her fellow actors at the theatre. “I said to him today, very frankly, ‘You need to develop a ritual to leave the character in the dressing room. Don’t take them home.’” For Moodie, these rituals can be “something really banal, like, ‘I take off my costume, I hang it on the hangers’, but you do it with that mindfulness”. This has been part of Moodie’s practice ever since her Medea got a bit out of hand in the early 2000s. “Yeah man, that was weirrrrd! There was supernatural stuff happening all around. I’d leave the theatre and Medea was following me everywhere! I’d be in my flat and, like, the radio would turn on!” Daddy: A Melodrama also has its supernatural moments, including a gospel choir that emerges from an infinity pool built into the stage. “Hashtag wear waterproofs!” says Moodie with a mischievous cackle. It’s about the owner of that infinity pool, an older, white art collector. The other characters include a young black artist he picks up and that artist’s mother, Zora, played by Moodie. The play is the latest exploration of sex, race and power from Jeremy O Harris, the 30-year-old American writer with a red-hot Broadway reputation. His devoted fanbase includes Rihanna, who ignited a theatre etiquette Twitter row when she was caught texting Harris her congratulations from the audience of his controversial 2019 smash-hit, Slave Play. Moodie isn’t immune to Harris’s star charisma: “I mean, I’m literally old enough to be his mum, and like a good mum, I keep abreast of what he’s doing on Twitter! When I first met him, I thought, ‘What a charming young man!’ And with a mind like quicksilver, just a vast intellect.” Should Harris ever need any guidance on how to handle his success, he’ll find a great resource in Moodie: “Say, for example, I go to the RTS awards, even if I win, you don’t know what happens next … In Buddhism, we call it ichinen, which means the kind of focus that you have in each moment of life … how you deal with the vicissitudes.” She did win, of course. The RTS award is just the latest recognition Moodie has received since arriving from Canada to take up her Rada place in the early 90s. Her notable roles include Rose in August Wilson’s Fences and Gertrude in the RSC’s 2016 Hamlet. Getting an award for Motherland is particularly meaningful, however. As the working mother of a 12-year-old, she can relate to the material, but it’s more than that: “A couple of years ago, I was in a sort of ‘chrysalis phase’ – as my lovely agent calls it – and every time I went for a TV audition it just wouldn’t work out.” On the advice of that agent she did some sessions with a specialist acting coach, which clearly did work out. “My agent got very teary about it, actually.” Still, theatre remains the driving passion. As a child, she remembers her father – whose voice she likens to a “Jamaican Brian Blessed” – regularly urging her to read Shakespeare. At high school, she understood why: “The teacher would put an LP on – I think it was an RSC production of Hamlet – then he would leave the room and go for a fag … I was getting all the jokes, and then with the ghost, I was like …” She gasps in amazement. In the years since, Moodie’s work has sometimes taken her away from the stage. She currently has two TV projects in development with her friend and co-producer, the writer Sarah Rutherford, and is proud to be a founding member of the Women’s Equality party. Has she ever been tempted to go the full “Glenda Jackson”? “I made a conscious decision to pull back … Again, that word ichinen. [Glenda] had to have that focus and drive so that she could 100% represent her constituency as an MP, with the same passion she would have in a rehearsal room.” Focus. Mindfulness. Passion. These ideas all have one root: “Everything I do, my darling, is based on my faith. If you cut me in half you would just see ‘Buddhism’ down the middle.” So it’s no coincidence that Moodie first started practising in 1994, around the same time her stage career took off. “Yes, and I’m so grateful for that, because, this profession! … I guess I was ready for the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune.” • Daddy: A Melodrama has been postponed while the Almeida theatre is temporarily closed.