Fans of Steven Appleby’s brilliant cartoons know already of their unique energy; what Posy Simmonds calls his “nimble, nubbly line” seems almost to vibrate at times. All the same, his first long-form graphic novel, Dragman, will surely bring him massed armies of new admirers. Funny, sweet and emotionally true, it doesn’t so much tiptoe on to fraught cultural territory as dance wildly across it. In this sense, at least, it has the added virtue of being at once both wildly transgressive and powerfully reassuring. Dragman tells the story of August Crimp, a husband and father whose transvestism, when the book begins, is a long-held secret. August discovered his passion for wearing women’s clothes as a teenager when he found a stocking down the back of a sofa and instinctively pulled it on, his nerve endings tingling excitingly as he did so. But that wasn’t all he discovered. Moments later, his head collided unexpectedly with a ceiling. Dressed as a man, you see, August is just an ordinary bloke. Dressed as a woman, however, he is Dragman, a superhero whose sequined frock allows him to fly through the sky like some glamorous, jet-powered mannequin. August is about to come out of superhero retirement. The long and short of it is that he and his old sidekick Dog Girl – her superpower is, you guessed it, her sense of smell – are going to have to save the world. Along the way, he must also save his marriage; his wife, Mary-Mary, having recently discovered his dress collection in a box in the attic, is furious at having been lied to. Both tasks necessarily involve his coming to terms with his transvestism, something that, it’s probably important to say, his creator also once went through (in a lovely postscript, Appleby, also a husband and father, reveals that though he is content still to be called Steven, he has also been living full-time as a transwoman since 2007). It’s a journey that is sometimes fraught and sometimes joyful; it’s also one that involves quite a lot of jumping from high buildings and whizzing across streets and valleys at great speed. Appleby has torn up all the rules, and not only those that dictate, at this point in the 21st century, that a person’s identity must be clearly labelled, pinned down like some dead butterfly. In his version of suburban Britain, superheroes are so ordinary (there’s practically one on every corner), people take out special insurance to be able to pay them when they step in and save a life. Meanwhile, a scientist called Shulman Fripp has been awarded the Nobel prize for discovering the existence of the soul, with the result that the hard-up are sometimes tempted to sell theirs for hard cash. It’s all marvellous fun; there’s no preaching here, though Dragman effectively skewers the cult of celebrity and the everyday avarice that makes us all complicit in the dubious activities of multinational companies. Appleby’s world is a pragmatic, warmly flexible sphere in which even superheroes are allowed to be complicatedly human. For him, the social media thought police do not, thank God, exist. They seem to have been laughed – or perhaps embraced – out of all existence. • Dragman by Steven Appleby is published by Vintage (£18.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15