A hotel in south-eastern China used as a quarantine centre for holding people who have arrived from Coronavirus-hit regions has collapsed, trapping dozens, according to the local government. As of 00.16am local time on Sunday, 43 people had been rescued from the wreckage of the Xinjia Express Hotel in the city of Quanzhou, Fujian province, according to a post on the Twitter-like microblog of the Fujian provincial fire services rescue team. A video in the post shows a fireman walking away from the wreckage carrying an infant. A statement from the Licheng district government earlier on Saturday said that people who came from other regions badly hit by coronavirus were required to stay at this hotel for observation, and that more than 700 medics and rescuers have been mobilised to help. “Intensive rescue work is being carried out at the moment,” said the late-night statement. In an earlier dispatch, the district government said 70 people were trapped after the building collapsed at about 7.30pm local time, but in the latest statement, it did not mention how many remained trapped. There were no immediate reports of deaths. A report on Beijing News quoted a government worker as saying that Xinjia Express Hotel was one of two quarantine centres in the area. The report said it was unclear how many people were at the hotel at the time and how many remained trapped. Witnesses said they heard a loud bang while having dinner and thought it was an explosion, before realising the six-storey hotel building opposite them had collapsed, Hong Kong’s public broadcaster RTHK reported. They said there were many shops in the lower floors of the building. After the building collapsed, rubble scattered around the area and large numbers of firefighters and medics were at the scene searching for people trapped, said the report. “After hearing the loud bang, I ran out of the store and could only see dust on the street. When the dust settled, I found the building had collapsed,” an employee at a bakery next to the hotel told Caixin.com. He said “the building collapsed like a chopstick falling slantwise to the ground” and that it had happened very suddenly. #Updated By 9:55 pm, 34 had been rescued, according to Quanzhou municipal government.Xinjia Hotel was used as a quarantine site for isolating people that had close contacts with infected patients. pic.twitter.com/2zA0SbS7zB Efforts were being made to minimise casualties and prevent secondary accidents, Global Times quoted officials at the Ministry of Emergency Management as saying. The newspaper reported that the collapsed hotel had opened in June 2018 with 80 guest rooms. China, where the new virus first emerged in December, has confirmed more than 80,000 cases, by far the most in the world. China reported 99 new cases on Saturday, its first daily increase of less than 100 since 20 January. The government reported 28 new fatalities, raising the mainland death toll to 3,070.