You might have heard this story before. Back in the 1960s some town planners and local politicians decide to build a vast and ambitious new settlement that will later be described as “utopian”. Architects give these plans the bold concrete forms of the period. Working-class residents move in, many of them pleased to have central heating and indoor bathrooms for the first time. They may or may not like the architecture. Their tolerance of deficiencies in the planning – too few shops or pubs, poor public transport – decreases over the years. Then the factories close that gave the residents jobs. Local authorities fail to take care of buildings which, in truth, were designed with insufficient thought to future maintenance. The original plans are left incomplete, omitting some vital element that might have helped it work. Problem tenants are moved in. The place gets called a “sink estate”, or similar. Theorists scatter blame, especially on the architects. Successive decades are spent with different attempts to remediate what is by then seen as a catastrophe. It only becomes more fragmented in the process. This is the tale, with knobs on, of Thamesmead, created by the Greater London council on the eastern edge of London, on the south side of the Thames. It was essentially a new town within the boundary of the capital, in an area the size of that part of central London that is enclosed by the Circle line, but so cut off by the broad river and inadequate railways that it might as well have been in another county. Now, though, its prospects have been transformed by the arrival of the Elizabeth line, formerly known as Crossrail, on which – once its much-delayed opening actually happens – you will be able to get to the West End in 25 minutes. On this basis, the Peabody housing association, which has owned most of Thamesmead’s large area since 2014, is planning to double the number of homes there. It aims to lay a new town, in other words, on top of the new town. As London has a well-known housing shortage, and as the original Thamesmead was built to low densities, there’s a logic to this idea. The first of these new developments, a 66-home block called the Reach, has just been completed. A sturdy, confident, red-brick affair, it puts down a marker for the future. Whatever urban fairy dishes out blessings and curses to neighbourhoods gave Thamesmead a decidedly mixed bag. It is in a downriver, downwind zone to which the city has sent its undesired elements, home of Belmarsh prison and close to Crossness sewage works. A sharp wind tends to whip across it. On the other hand its planners were wise enough to create lakes out of this formerly marshy land, and the Thames at this point has an untamed beauty. There is more green space per inhabitant than anywhere else in London. Horses can be seen in muddy paddocks and seals on the river foreshore. Some of its planning is arrant idiocy, the mistakes of the 60s being compounded by those of later decades. No amount of nostalgic mist about brutalism should obscure the fact that a passion for dispatching pedestrians on to podiums and elevated walkways was misplaced. Oversized roads – their sweep and width dictated by monomaniac transport engineers – eat space and blight adjoining sites. An area called the “Town Centre” is actually a retail park, an expanse of tarmac edged with outlets for Morrisons, Argos and Next. The 80s and 90s gave Thamesmead the polar opposite of 60s municipal modernism, winding drives of private housebuilders’ standard brick houses. They favour cars over pedestrians. They could be anywhere, making no effort to respond to their location: by the river, for example, they don’t bother to face the view. To all of which Peabody is responding with an armoury of contemporary good practice. Artists have been invited to occupy studios in a former club. A “landscape activation manager” has been appointed, whose job is to encourage people – in what is an area with high rates of obesity – to make more active use of the parks. A “place manual” is being drawn up that describes a bright future of dredged lakes, cycleways, sustainable drainage, biodiversity and cultural programmes. Peabody is helping develop skills, supporting business and encouraging voluntary forums. The idea is to “help people become more prosperous”. There are cooking programmes designed to improve people’s diets. A new town centre is planned – one that will, among other things, be congenial to old people, around a hoped-for extension to the Docklands Light Railway, to be built in partnership with the developers Lendlease. Much of the old concrete housing has been swept away, or will be in the future, but the bones of the original landscaping and some of the architecture will remain. Peabody has the sense to see that complete obliteration is not the best option for a place where two generations have by now grown up. The Reach, built on an unpromising site near Belmarsh, next to a dual carriageway, introduces an architecture new to Thamesmead. It is neither brutalist slab nor brick noddy box, but rather draws on the 20th-century mansion blocks that you find in more central parts of London. Designed by the architects Pitman Tozer, it is a civilised way of housing people at higher densities, offering a gentle concave curve on its outer face, its wings embracing a communal garden on the inner side. Peabody, in short, is combining ambition of exceptional scale with unimpeachable intentions. “It is phenomenal,” says an architect who has worked on Thamesmead, “how much territory they control.” The housing association is, almost, acting like a local government. It can do this, says Peabody, because it is big: founded by the American philanthropist George Peabody in the 19th century, it now owns 66,000 homes across London and can afford to take the long view. With which I wish them all good luck. Peabody’s approach is certainly the most promising Thamesmead has yet seen. But the challenge is to rise to the immense task it has set itself, unlike any that any housing association has previously undertaken. The signs are mixed that Peabody will do this. Its admirable principles and guidelines are on the general side, which may make the housing association vulnerable to compromise. The new new town will need, among other things, creativity. Thamesmead throws up singular situations: the margins of too-wide roads made into residential sites; the odd offcuts of space left by concrete decks; the strange encounters of wilderness and infrastructure; the jumbling of private and public spaces – in which garden fences, for example, might back on to a putative town square – caused by its motley history. Generic solutions won’t always work, and will miss the opportunities offered by the unique spirit of the place. Peabody’s proud record of commissioning architecture well got its work shortlisted for the Stirling prize a few years back. It has commissioned, for example, two previous outstanding projects from Pitman Tozer in inner London. It is a less encouraging sign that last year it removed two architects from a housing project, and handed responsibility for the detailed design to a contractor. The danger is that, overcome by the scale and complexity of the endeavour, the project slides towards the not-bad but not-special solutions of competent property developers. I hope not, as both Peabody and Thamesmead can do better than that.