The AFL will play games behind closed doors if medical experts advise the shutdown of mass public gatherings due to the spread of the coronavirus in Australia, while the league has formed a working group to coordinate a response to the outbreak if necessary. Gillon McLachlan said on Tuesday it remains the intention to play every game this season, which starts next week, but the AFL is prepared to heed advice from health experts and exclude the public from matches should the outbreak worsen. “If mass gatherings are suspended then we will play games in stadiums with no crowds. We are also working on other protocols to protect not only players and staff but our members and supporters,” McLachlan said. “At an AFL club level, our football departments are elite sporting environments. Club doctors and medical staff are well equipped to work through any precautionary measures and manage any player health concerns – this is something they continue to do on a daily basis as they prepare for the season.” The AFL CEO faced the media as Fremantle issued a statement about a Dockers player who had been placed in isolation after presenting with flu-like symptoms. The player, who was not named by the club, was given the all-clear. “Given the club’s position in the community, we made a decision on Monday afternoon to take a very conservative approach even though the player did not fit all the WA Health Department criteria for Covid-19 testing,” the Fremantle chief executive, Simon Garlick, said. “We understand the high level of interest surrounding one of our players being sent for precautionary testing for Covid-19. The facts are that the player presented with flu-like symptoms after being in contact with a friend who had visited China, even though that person had self-isolated for 14 days following his return to the country and hadn’t displayed any symptoms of the virus. “It was another two weeks after the isolation period that the friend visited the player late last month. We felt it was important to be proactive and diligent to ensure the safety of our players, staff and broader community.” The coronavirus continues to impact the world of sport. The round 11 match between St Kilda and Port Adelaide in China has already been moved to Marvel Stadium because of the spread of the virus while the NRL season kicks off this week with the possibility of games being played behind closed doors at some stage. The Sydney Roosters, whose players have swapped handshakes for fistbumps at training this week, are maintaining a watching brief for now. “We will see what happens regarding crowds and what happens if it gets into a team – what that means for a team,” co-captain Jake Friend said. “We sort of have to wait and see.” Meanwhile, the Matildas’ Olympic qualifier in Vietnam on Wednesday will be played without fans, while the Socceroos’ upcoming World Cup qualifiers have been postponed. Perth Glory’s Asian Champions League match against Ulsan Hyundai was also postponed due to travel restrictions imposed between Korea and Australia, while Hockey Australia has suspended all international travel for its teams until further notice. The Formula One season-opening Australian Grand Prix, however, will go ahead in Melbourne later this week.