If Chelsea needed this, then Ross Barkley certainly did. And the boyhood Evertonian could hardly have chosen better opponents to punish. The midfielder’s Chelsea career since his move from Goodison Park in January 2018 can be best described as stop-start. Nobody doubts Barkley’s ability when it is his day. It is just that those days have been too scarce. Everything came together for him in a performance of touch and influence and the goal he scored to smooth Chelsea’s passage into the FA Cup quarter-finals was the defining moment. Seizing on a loose ball 10 yards inside his own half, he sprinted away from the Liverpool midfielder Fabinho and, when he reached the edge of the area, with Joe Gomez backing off, he unfurled a venomous drive that ripped past Adrián. It was the first time in 12 games he had scored against Liverpool. Chelsea’s form has been poor since late November and they entered the tie having won only one of their previous six in the Premier League – and that is not to mention the Champions League hammering against Bayern Munich. This was better from them, a keeping alive of their final realistic shot at silverware this season but, from a Liverpool point of view, it was another strangely ineffective performance to follow Saturday’s shock 3-0 league defeat at Watford. The pre-match talk had taken in the need to show a reaction to the sudden end of their epic 44-match unbeaten league run. Instead they slipped to a third away defeat in a row – the first was not necessarily terminal, the 1-0 against Atlético Madrid in the Champions League. It was a match when Klopp could not only lament what he described as bad concessions but his team could get little going in attack. There was intensity to the performance but not enough by way of incision. The tone was set for Liverpool when Adrián allowed a Willian shot to slip through his fingers for 1-0 – a horrible mistake – and, although Kepa Arrizabalaga, who was restored by Frank Lampard to the Chelsea team, made fine saves, Chelsea might have scored more. For Lampard, the positives were plentiful, with the recall of Arrizabalaga not the only selection decision to pay off. Playing at the base of a three-man midfield, Billy Gilmour was the star turn. The 18-year-old read the game superbly, he won tackles, his passing was simple but effective and the sight of him stepping away from red shirts with the ball at his feet became a feature of the match. There was also the moment when he tricked Fabinho with a wonderful piece of skill. Lampard described him as “immaculate”. This was the first time Klopp had been in the FA Cup fifth round, his record in the competition having been decidedly patchy in his previous four attempts, and he went stronger than expected with his lineup. He prioritised experience over youth, although he did start the teenagers Neco Williams and Curtis Jones. The latter showed tremendous confidence in possession but he did lose out to the impressive Pedro in the buildup to Barkley’s goal. Errors were a theme; a by-product, perhaps, of the game’s break-neck pace. Kurt Zouma and Antonio Rüdiger almost let in Liverpool during the early running, with Arrizabalaga bailing out his team with a decent stop to deny Sadio Mané on the second occasion. The biggest slip, though, came from Adrián. It followed a risky sequence of Liverpool passes out from the back – into the Chelsea press – with Gomez putting Fabinho into trouble, him losing out and Willian taking aim from the edge of the area. Seconds earlier, after a Pedro shot had deflected kindly, Willian put his laces through the ball and was denied by Adrián’s strong hands. It was an eye-catching save. But this time, although the shot was straight at him, Adrián lost his concentration and fumbled it into the net. Pedro and César Azpilicueta had earlier had chances for Chelsea and, after Adrián’s lapse, the spotlight picked out Arrizabalaga. It has been a testing time for the Spaniard, with Euro 2020 in sight. How can he push his claim to start with his national team from the sidelines at Stamford Bridge? Arrizabalaga needed a big performance and he stood tall before the interval, his high point being the triple save to deny Mané, Divock Origi and Jones, a celebration of bravery, positioning and reflexes. There would also be another to thwart Mané after a quicksilver burst from the forward. Lampard has had reason to bemoan injuries, with Andreas Christensen, N’Golo Kanté, Christian Pulisic, Callum Hudson-Odoi and Tammy Abraham already out of action. The situation became worse when Mateo Kovacic limped off after 42 minutes and Willian did likewise early in the second half. Both suffered achilles damage, with Lampard reporting the latter “did not feel too bad”. Kovacic was “slightly worse”and in addition Lampard will be without Jorginho for the next three matches because of suspension. Chelsea pressed on and they thought they had the second goal when Mason Mount bent a free-kick he had won himself over the wall only for it to catch the top of the crossbar. Barkley brought the ruthlessness and Liverpool’s pain would have been more acute had Pedro not shot weakly at Adrián when one on one after a mix-up between Williams and Gomez or if the goalkeeper had not tipped a shot from Olivier Giroud against the crossbar.