Tjinder Singh, the frontman of Cornershop, hasn’t been home for nearly a decade. To get to Wednesfield in the West Midlands, you drive east out of Wolverhampton past the Slade Rooms, named after the town’s beloved glam-rock band; along the dual carriageways that were never fully completed in the 1980s; then to a dilapidated high street, kept quiet by austerity and out-of-town retail barns. “My mother worked there,” Singh says from the passenger seat, pointing out a rusty factory gate behind a scrappy field. “Me and the other Asian kids used to play cricket there too – that’s how everybody knew us.” Then we’re on the street where Singh lived with his late parents and three siblings in a simple, 1960s semi. Today a blue van is parked outside the garage where Singh and his bandmate Ben Ayres used to rehearse when visiting Singh’s family (Ayres, driving our hire car, is also on the trip today). My father once said to me, 'They’ll not always want you here in this country.' That’s always stuck with me. The house next door to Singh’s, however, is a more arresting sight. An enormous George Cross flag hangs from the upstairs window, huge capitals in the middle of it, spelling out “England”. Singh gets out of the car, and takes a photo of it. “Bloody hell. Well, there we are then,” he says, as we head down the road. With eight albums of genre-skipping, pop history-foraging beauty behind them, Cornershop are one of Britain’s most inventive bands of the past 30 years. Their best-known song remains the glorious, once-ubiquitous Brimful of Asha, which entered the charts at No 1 in February 1998, knocking off Celine Dion’s Titanic theme song, My Heart Will Go On. Propelled by Norman Cook’s sped-up remix, its success felt like a victory for the little guys in Cool Britannia, especially as it eventually went double platinum. Cornershop’s ninth LP, England Is a Garden, comes out next week. It’s a glorious affair, 10 years in the making, some songs inspired by Singh’s Black Country upbringing, others driven, as always, by his and Ayres’s love of glam rock, psychedelia and Punjabi folk and pop music. It’s deeply political too, as all Cornershop’s music has been. Take St Marie Under Canon, their new single and the album’s opener. To a bouncy Hammond organ riff and four-to-the-floor Motown beat, the lyrics reference armies approaching (“the march of black boots”), the effects of Indian colonialism, and how the modern world further amplifies the echo chambers of opinion. The Observer’s photographer takes pictures of Singh and Ayres outside an atmospheric old garage at the end of Singh’s road – a tree grows through its middle; old signs rust on the walls. It’s near the cornershop where Singh used to buy bubblegum with his siblings. “Anglo Bubblies, they were called. The shop’s got a new front, but that’s about it. I feel properly weirded out. It hasn’t changed much at all around here since my childhood.” We decamp to the Dog and Partridge, where Singh used to drink in his late teens. (Elder Asians never did: “We were stepping out.”) This Tuesday afternoon, it’s full of silent white men cradling pints; a mid-80s pop compilation plays Sinitta’s Toy Boy and Samantha Fox’s Touch Me. We sit by the dartboard, and Singh orders a tuna jacket potato with chips. He’s still reeling from seeing the flag. “Everything goes back to Enoch Powell – that’s Brexit stage one,” he says. Powell was MP for Wolverhampton South West in 1968, the year of his “rivers of blood” speech, and the year that Singh was born. (Singh’s father, a headmaster back in India, had moved to Britain in 1965, working on the buses in London while retraining to become a teacher; Singh’s mother followed with his older brother, before having him.) “My uncle was in Wolverhampton before us, and he’d said to my dad, come here, it’s all right. But my father said to me once: they’ll not always want you here in this country. That’s always stuck with me. And that’s why our songs have always reflected that right from the start.” Cornershop’s story as a band begins at Lancashire Polytechnic in 1987, when Singh and Ayres were put in a house-share together. They formed a band called General Havoc (“as a distraction to our very cold and damp living conditions,” Singh says) before forming Cornershop with Singh’s brother Avtar and drummer David Chambers in 1991 (they scaled down to a two-piece in 1997). Singh had grown up listening to Punjabi folk music (the Bhujhangy Group, a popular bhangra band from nearby Handsworth, were a favourite) before being exposed to bands like the Smiths and the Stooges. Ayres’s family had emigrated to the UK from Canada when he was nine. He fondly remembers a British uncle introducing him to Beatles’ songs, as well as Otis Redding, Pink Floyd and Bob Dylan. By his teens, Singh was becoming aware of the Black Country’s particular contributions to rock music too. England Is a Garden’s first single, No Rock: Save in Roll (released in November), was a tribute to it, its bluesy stomp recalling West Bromwich’s favourite son, Robert Plant. “People forget he married an Indian woman from Birmingham,” says Singh, “which says a lot about where his music was going, and continues to go.” Then there was the heavy rock that biker gangs from the Black Country adored: Singh remembers a neighbour being friends with biker types including Led Zeppelin’s John Bonham. “Black Country music was stripped down; it was harder. All of these notes per second in music today doesn’t make it any better. I mean, listen to Black Sabbath. They were so laid-back it was unbelievable!” On No Rock: Save in Roll you’ll also hear a discreet sitar; this musical synthesis is everywhere in Cornershop’s back catalogue, a musical response, perhaps, to how difficult assimilation has been for them in other ways. In 1993 their first EP’s lead track, England’s Dreaming, injected indie with the spirit of protest, fusing lyrics from the Smiths’ Heaven Knows I’m Miserable Now and Public Enemy (“I was happy in the haze of a drunken hour/Fight the Power!”). This protest was about Morrissey, who had draped himself in a union jack at a Madness gig in summer 1992, when the flag was very much a symbol of the far right. He had also released controversial songs such as The National Front Disco and Bengali in Platforms, the latter addressing an immigrant to Britain wanting to assimilate (“shelve your western plans/and understand/That life is hard enough when you belong here”). Cornershop had also set fire to pictures of Morrissey outside his record company offices around their EP’s release. This was dismissed as a press stunt by some at the time, but given Morrissey’s ramping up of anti-immigrant statements over the years – including wearing a badge celebrating the far-right For Britain party on America’s Jimmy Fallon show last May – it now seems on the money. “What’s changed now is people have this phrase, and I think it’s a lovely phrase, called ‘white privilege’,” Singh says, looking back. “That’s what Morrissey had, that ability to just continue regardless – Clapton had it too.” He’s referring to Clapton’s drunken on-stage rant in 1976, saying that Britain was “overcrowded”, and that his fans should vote for Enoch Powell. That action prompted the creation of Rock Against Racism (Clapton has since said he feels “shame” about those remarks). “Clapton then surrounded himself with black people, and now Morrissey’s doing the same,” says Singh, meaning Motown singer Thelma Houston, with whom Morrissey duetted on his recent single, Bobby, Don’t You Think They Know? “It was hard for Cornershop to make our stand then, because we were pulling a lot of disparate things together. We couldn’t just say, look at his badge. Look at his support of Tommy Robinson.” By the mid-90s, however, the idea of British music was changing. Birmingham’s Apache Indian was blending bhangra and ragga and getting hits. London’s Asian Dub Foundation were music-paper regulars. The Asian underground scene was building (Talvin Singh’s debut album OK would go on to win the 1999 Mercury prize) and the BBC’s Asian Network became a full-time station in 1996. Brimful of Asha’s success still felt like a pivotal moment. Blending big beat, guitar-pop and tambouras, it propelled the names of Hindi film singers into the non-Asian British mainstream (Lata Mangeshkar and Mohammed Rafi are mentioned on the A-side, as well as Asha Bhosle). It spoke of pop culture’s potential to lift people away from the false promises of politics, and about national projects in India that displaced people (“we don’t care about no government warnings/About their promotion of a simple life/And the dams they’re building”). It did not pass Cornershop by that the name Asha also meant hope. Today, Singh and Ayres hate how the rewriting of the 90s has become so rockist and white. The albums that most influenced them at the time included the Beastie Boys’ Ill Communication and Daft Punk’s Homework, they say. “And Britpop wasn’t half as big as what they make it out to be now,” Singh says. “I mean, what group would say that they were Britpop? Not many. Like Pulp, who were seen as a great Britpop band – they would run away from it. In fact, they did run away from it.” They don’t think Britpop was partly responsible for Brexit, as critics including Jon Savage and John Harris have suggested; they agree that the 90s were a fertile time. “But it’s very strange that that era has been redefined and rejigged as it has been,” Singh sighs. The time immediately after Brimful of Asha harbours different memories for them. Ayres had two young children back then; he considers the band’s 1998 Blue Peter performance as a career highlight (both him and his daughter, Molly, then five, got Blue Peter badges). Singh had a tougher time. His mother had died suddenly in 1996, which he wrote about obliquely on Cornershop’s top 30 single, Sleep on the Left Side; he was still grappling with that loss. In 1998 he told Select magazine that the song was about “trying to be optimistic when you’re facing that… nothingness”. His father then died in 2001, a month before Singh’s partner gave birth to their son (they now also have a daughter). Singh has lived largely in north London ever since, apart from a few years in his wife’s native France. He thinks often about how different his children’s early lives have been to his. He also worries about how politics will affect their futures. His main worry when we meet is Donald Trump’s impeachment trial which has yet to conclude. “It looks like he’s going to get away with it. If that happens, that means he can’t be accountable to anything. Blatantly twisting his own ambitions for re-election, coercing foreign nations… if we can’t get him for that, then we’re fucked. And if that happens in America, then I can only see England going the same way.” Singh and Ayres were big Labour party supporters; in the 90s, Jeremy Corbyn was Singh’s local MP. “As a constituency MP he seemed very good. Then he wooed people after Ed Miliband… but he didn’t really say anything, and he did nothing.” Singh has fewer hopes for Labour today. “They do fuck all. Forget Brexit: they couldn’t even fight against austerity. It’s a dead party, I’m afraid. Really dead. And also the leadership campaign – my God!” Ayres is shaking his head, in agreement. “It’s turning into a joke that will see them out of power for ever.” The 21st century has seen Cornershop make albums in their own time. Singh suffered periods of stress and anxiety in its early years, he says. Setting up a label, Ample Play, in 2009, has been helpful (it releases Cornershop’s albums, as well other artists they love). Their last non-collaborative, original album was 2009’s Judy Sucks a Lemon for Breakfast; England Is a Garden has been in genesis for over a decade. They named it that, Singh says, obliquely, “because to look at things from a garden point of view is quite nice”. We discuss the brilliant cover art – a neon-coloured, androgynous crusader staring out at us – and how the title suggests the growth and rebirth of disparate cultures. It’s a fascinatingly multi-layered mix, designed to provoke thought and curiosity while the feet tap along, and the earworms wriggle in your head. All Cornershop’s albums are designed to provide gateways into the rest of their catalogue too, Singh enthuses. Songs like gorgeous Highly Amplified (which blends Punjabi and dancing flutes) and the T Rex rush of I’m a Wooden Soldier underline common musical themes. The rhythm of the opening riff of Cash Money, with delicious irony, recalls Brimful of Asha. Another song’s title might make some listeners baulk. Every Time That Wog Army Roam, a radio-friendly romp about British-Asian people being followed by the police, follows five previous songs in Cornershop’s back catalogue featuring the three-letter-word. “What’s so interesting about that word is when it’s broken down, it’s much more genteel: western oriental gentleman,” Singh says. “But it’s an anachronism. And it’s loaded. By repeating it, we’re reminding people about it. It’s something that should be remembered.” He’s smiling, defiantly. “It shouldn’t just go away.” Cornershop, brilliantly, also aren’t going away. They did think about it a few years ago, then they realised something important. “It’s not about being proficient, it’s about what you can do with it, and it’s the attitude.” “And the ideas,” Ayres adds. “The ideas,” Singh repeats. “You know, there’s no real cupboard we can be put in. We’re constantly misfiled. That makes it harder for us. But isn’t there something brilliant in that too?” Cornershop’s England Is a Garden is out on Friday on Ample Play