Noodles: the perfect lunch or dinner via Italy, Spain and China. All the best recipes are here, from Marcella’s spaghetti aio e oio to Nigella’s drunken noodles. There are delicious fragrant dishes from Indonesia, Korea and Vietnam; Mandy Yin’s Malaysian curry laksa, MiMi Aye’s Burmese fish soup. Quicker and closer to home there is Anja Dunk’s spätzle and Florence Knight’s tagliatelle. Some may take time and a visit to an Asian or online store but our experts will hold your hand. A wonderful world of food from our recipe hoard to yours. A dish that is better cold than hot, and flavoured with citrussy spicy yuzu kosho. These luscious soy-coated egg noodles are eaten in Indonesia for breakfast, lunch and dinner. This meaty fideuà is made with the fatter fideu pasta (sometimes called perla) and is rich with hearty stock. Vigorously stir each bowl before eating for the full flavour of this dish’s lightly numbing chilli. A version of Germany’s favourite noodle with chard and a smoky cheese sauce. Like any good curry, this soup develops in flavour if left overnight. Perfect for special occasions. This dish appears innocent, but mix the noodles into the sauce and they come alive with spice and tingliness. A simplified version of a traditional pad kee mao made mostly from store-cupboard ingredients. Sticky onions combine with miso, stock and sake to make a ramen inspired by French onion soup. The breakfast of choice wherever you go in Burma, it is considered the country’s national dish. A simple Roman dish that is as easy to make as it is delicious. A good pad Thai is all about the preparation – none of it is especially difficult, just time consuming. My version of ash reshteh, a deeply consoling Iranian soup thick with beans, flat noodles and chickpeas. The ultimate comfort of satisfying rice noodles in a soothing, thick gravy. Homemade pasta ribbons with a deliciously toasty hazelnut and watercress sauce. There might only be three key ingredients, but this dish is as sophisticated as it is simple to make. A simple but intense bowl of broth that is popular all over Vietnam. A spicy, nutty easy-to-make dish that originates in the back streets of Chengdu. A Korean reimagining of a Chinese dish that is delicious with a side of kimchi. A quintessential Pakistani Eid dessert, which is served as a welcoming sweetness to visitors.