Justin Trudeau, the Canadian prime minister, is in self-isolation as his wife undergoes tests for Covid-19 following a trip to the United Kingdom. The prime minister’s office said on Thursday that Sophie Grégoire Trudeau began showing mild flu-like symptoms – including a minor fever – after returning from London. She has been tested for the coronavirus and along with the prime minister, plans to work from home until the results are available. “The doctor’s advice to the prime minister is to continue daily activities while self-monitoring, given he is exhibiting no symptoms himself,” the prime minister’s office said in a statement. “Out of an abundance of caution, the prime minister is opting to self-isolate and work from home until receiving Sophie’s results.” Trudeau has been forced to postpone a planned meeting with premiers to discuss the economic fallout from the coronavirus, as well as the recent plunge in oil prices that have pushed Canada – whose economy relies on fossil fuel exports – to the brink of a recession. On Wednesday, his government announced a $1bn dollar coronavirus plan, including additional funding for medical research. He and the deputy prime minister, Chrystia Freeland, plan to speak with provincial leaders by phone on Thursday. Two members of Trudeau’s cabinet have also chosen to self-isolate in recent days. The trade minister, Mary Ng, and the natural resources minister, Seamus O’Regan, both recently attended a large mining conference in Toronto where one person was subsequently diagnosed with Covid-19. Health officials have asked all 25,000 attendees to monitor for any symptoms of the coronavirus. Jagmeet Singh, the Opposition New Democratic party leader, has also chosen to self-isolate after becoming ill. “I have been in contact with a doctor and they do not believe I have symptoms consistent with Covid-19. But their advice is for me to limit contact with the public until I am feeling better,” he tweeted. Canada has seen 140 confirmed coronavirus cases and one death. Seventeen new cases were announced in Ontario, the most populous province, on Thursday. None of the new cases appear to have been spread through the community, said officials, and instead were found in people who recently returned from abroad.