The outbreak of homeschooling caused by the coronavirus has found many of us playing the role of teacher while still in our dressing gowns. And here’s one unexpected tutor who really commands your attention: Jude Owusu, clad in a dirty bathrobe, with a pen behind his ear and a notepad dangling around his neck. Owusu is Cinna, the poet from Julius Caesar, in this film of Tim Crouch’s monologue, part of his series magnifying the experiences of minor characters from Shakespeare. Originally commissioned for the 2012 World Shakespeare festival and produced by the Royal Shakespeare Company, it was performed last month by Crouch at the Unicorn theatre in London. But the film version from 2012 is on YouTube and I decided to watch it with my 10-year-old, Aggie, who tells me she would usually have maths about now. I’d imagined it would provide an hour of escapism and a bit of a sideways look at history but by the end, Aggie is furiously scribbling her own poem inspired by Cinna’s call for creativity. There are two Cinnas in Julius Caesar – our poet host is fatally mistaken for a conspirator with the same name. We share his final moments while he is holed up at home and the roar of the crowd swells outside as Caesar is assassinated. Glitchy CCTV footage of riots punctuates the scenes. The city outside is holding its breath amid terror and confusion, says Cinna, sheltering in his bolthole with blasted brick walls. I look through our lounge window at the street outside, emptied of people; sometimes watching a performance in your own home can strike a chord it wouldn’t in a theatre. Cinna is here to teach us about love in a time of war, whether the foe can be seen or not. “We’ll imagine ourselves peaceful,” he says, and Crouch’s writing has this crystalline beauty throughout. Line after line perfectly hymns the purpose and joy of the shared word, while underlining the forces that threaten the freedom of both speech and people. Urging the audience to grab their own notepads, Cinna takes us through a series of relaxed creative writing tasks. Aggie is initially reluctant. She has a half-opened Lemony Snicket book in her lap but I notice she hasn’t been turning the pages. Before long it’s been thrown on the floor. Her only knowledge of Julius Caesar comes from Horrible Histories, but Crouch asks us to consider difficult concepts such as government and how a republic works. He is an expert at making things fit together: explaining how individuals relate to the state, for example. In one dazzling sequence he even imagines words as a republic, with adjectives as politicians and nouns as citizens. Owusu is a magnetic performer: Aggie is horrified by the augury he performs with a dead chicken but can’t stop watching. (Out comes the gizzard and “eww!” she grimaces.) That’s the only blood we see spilled: the assassination is off stage, watched by Cinna on TV and described in haunting detail. Words, Crouch knows, can both conceal and reveal and can be used to provoke and silence. And this superb film, crisply directed by Robert McGroary, achieves great drama from two challenges set to the young audience. Cinna puts the kettle on and tells us to write down what we would die for and what we would kill for. Aggie considers the difference as the water boils. Climactically, we are asked to fill a sheet of paper by imagining Cinna’s last thoughts. (“Is it too late?” goes Aggie’s. “I’ve got a lot on my plate!”) There’s no shortage of Shakespeare and other live drama to watch online during this period when we are shut out of theatres. But Crouch and Owusu don’t just deliver spellbinding poetry: they urge us to create our own and, most importantly, assure us that we can’t fail.