I have just spent a few days in LA, a city that seems as obsessed as I am about brussels sprouts. I am not sure at what point I began to dissociate sprouts from Christmas and realised you could cook them myriad different ways. Perhaps it was at my local market, which stocks them all the way through into March, or maybe it was just having my nose glued to Instagram. No matter. Nowadays we eat them all the time at home: pan-fried, roasted, shredded in salads or sauteed as I’ve done here. All hail the brussels! This is a rich and delicately flavoured dish with bursts of chilli and fennel in the soothing, creamy sauce. Prep 15 minCook 45 minServes 4 6 tbsp olive oil4 garlic cloves, peeled and finely sliced2 x 400g tin cannellini beans, drained and rinsedSalt and pepper2 red onions, peeled and finely sliced1 big pinch dried chilli flakes1 tsp fennel seeds4 pork sausages, skin discarded and each sausage made into roughly 4 meatballs400g brussels sprouts, tired leaves discarded, the remainder shredded in a food processor or on a mandoline200ml double creamZest and juice of 1 lemon Make the beans first. Warm half the oil in a medium pan over a medium-low heat and add half the garlic. Cook slowly for a few minutes, until the garlic begins to colour at the edges, then add the beans, half a tin’s worth of water and season generously. Leave to simmer very gently while you make the rest of the dish, adding water if the beans begin to look dry. In a large frying pan over a medium heat, warm the rest of the oil and fry the onion and remaining garlic for eight minutes, until the onions begin to soften and colour slightly. Add the chilli and fennel seeds, season well, cook for another minute, then turn up the heat to medium-high and add the sausage. Cook, stirring, until the balls begin to colour, then add the sprouts and saute for another few minutes, until they begin to wilt and turn opaque. Pour in the cream and 75ml water, and simmer for five minutes, until the cream reduces and you have a nice, thick sauce. Taste and adjust for seasoning, and check that the sausages are cooked through. Add the lemon zest to the beans and squeeze over one to two teaspoons of lemon juice. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Serve the warm beans alongside the creamy sprouts mix. If you have a really good extra-virgin olive oil, pour one to two tablespoons over the beans as you serve them – they will be even more delicious. I like to add leftover shredded sprouts to salads, or roast them whole with honey and balsamic vinegar, and serve with toasted walnuts and fresh herbs.