Your story (Woman is first UK victim to die of coronavirus caught in hospital, 24 March) raises valid concerns about the iatrogenic spread of Covid-19. My surgical team is a regional unit serving three trusts. Rapid reorganisation and staff redeployment are under way to contend with the storm about to break. But there is immense variation in the behavioural adjustments made so far by individuals working in hospital settings, regardless of their role. We may yet pay a costly price for the UK (and the US) having deviated from the strategy of testing and containment implemented by countries such as South Korea and espoused by the Word Health Organization. We can’t promote physical distancing in the community without the same in our work environments. This is especially true for hospitals. There are a few clinical situations where it is incumbent for us to work shoulder to shoulder, such as when scrubbed in the operating room. Trusts are mostly eschewing all avoidable consultations and procedures; we are curtailing hospital visits by older people to the absolute necessities; and we are converting entire hospitals into wards for treating pneumonia. I agree that we must also adopt stringent internal measures to limit the spread of the virus. These include greater availability of handwashing facilities and sanitiser, directives to maintain a two-metre distance whenever possible and emphatic communication to bring about the cultural changes needed. We are preparing at full tilt as we brace for impact.Sean MatheikenConsultant vascular surgeon, Bedford • It is essential that we have as many doctors battling Covid-19 as possible. So you may be surprised to read that locum doctors, around 20,000 in the UK, are reluctant to put themselves on the line due to the NHS’s pension policy. If a doctor dies, their family receives a payout from their NHS pension fund. But locum doctors, despite contributing more to their pensions than most other doctors, don’t have this protection. So it is understandable that some are reluctant to be part of the high-risk Covid-19 situation, as they fear their family will not be protected if they die while doing this work. At this time of crisis, the government should change the policy of NHS pensions discrimination to enable as many doctors as possible to be available.Dr Richard JohnsonSwindon • It is right and proper that we heartily thank NHS staff for all their efforts during these strange and frightening times. However, as the husband of a dedicated care worker who is working every hour under the sun acting-up as a de facto manager of a chronically understaffed dementia unit for little more than minimum wage, with no special protective equipment other than standard-issue gloves and aprons, I feel her and her colleagues are being forgotten. Let the public, care providers and, more importantly, the government not forget the sterling efforts of care workers and start to value them more.Name and address supplied • I am a junior doctor. I am also an “extremely vulnerable” patient who has to shield for 12 weeks. Every fibre of my body aches to help on the frontline, but I cannot. I could be redeployed if it wasn’t for my underlying health condition. I feel helpless watching the WhatsApp groups flood with constant updates as my colleagues and friends tackle the unimaginable. The only way I can help is to stay home, limit my chance of infection and reduce the risk of becoming a burden to an increasingly burdened NHS. I implore anyone who is thinking of going outside to stay indoors. Every journey potentially condemns someone to a ventilator or worse. This really is life and death.Dr Christopher R SmithLondon