The National Theatre of Scotland (NTS) and Home in Manchester are among the first theatres to commission major online programmes of work in response to the coronavirus, as theatres around the UK face months of closure caused by the outbreak. The commissions signal how arts venues are swiftly adapting in order to continue bringing new work to audiences. Brian Cox, Alan Cumming, Adura Onashile and Cora Bissett will all star in short digital artworks “created from isolation” for the NTS’s Scenes for Survival season, launched in association with BBC Scotland and BBC Arts’ Culture in Quarantine project. Jackie Wylie, artistic director of NTS, said that Scotland has “always turned to our storytellers to offer connectivity, solace and joy. We want to bring audiences together online despite our collective isolation.” The writers Jenni Fagan, Val McDermid and Ian Rankin will contribute to the season of work, which will offer new stories as well as reworking classic ones. The programme will be available to view for free online. “Stories are what bring us together and hold us together,” said McDermid. “There will be an ‘afterwards’ and our stories will prepare us for that.” NTS is also launching a callout opportunity for other writers to be commissioned to write short new pieces for the project. Wylie said that the programme would raise money for the many freelancers who are “experiencing drastic economic and emotional hardship” and would provide crucial paid opportunities for artists. Those higher-profile artists involved will be given the opportunity to donate their artistic fee on a pay it forward basis to enable further artists to be involved and paid over the next few months. The season is being produced in association with some of the many Scottish companies and theatres who have been forced to shut their doors. The Manchester arts venue Home has also commissioned a new programme of work created by artists in isolation, with the first results to be available next month. The Homemakers project will feature pieces created by Bryony Kimmings, Javaad Alipoor, Ad Infinitum and Plaster Cast Theatre. The resulting work could be a live-streamed performance, an online game or a piece of video, audio or text. They will be available to audiences on Home’s website on a “pay-what-you-decide” basis. Contributions will be divided equally, with half paid to the commissioned artist and half reinvested into Home’s “response fund”, designed to protect Home’s financial stability and enable them to support artists and colleagues across the industry. Home’s associate director Jude Christian said the venue is currently facing “an unpredictable situation, and our resources are severely limited. However, Homemakers is designed to evolve, and we’ll be collaborating with our colleagues across the industry to expand the project”. Christian said they wanted to provide artists with a platform to “keep making the kind of brilliant, groundbreaking work that venues like Home exist to programme, and to keep bringing our audiences the best of theatre and live art while our doors are closed.” Kimmings said she was excited to see “how I make work digitally, I’ve always focused on human bodies living, breathing and feeling all together in a room. What happens when you take that away. Is it possible to still create that connection remotely?! Who knows! We’ll have a bash.” Several playwriting initiatives have been launched in the last week, including an open callout for Papatango’s Isolated But Open Commissions - Voices From Across the Shutdown. The company will commission 10 five-minute monologues and cast actors to self-film them, then share the results online. The deadline for submissions is 31 March. New monologues by Rachel De-Lahay and Anders Lustgarten, performed by Susan Wokoma and Danny Kirrane respectively, will be released on 27 March to inspire writers.