Square Chapel Arts Centre, the West Yorkshire theatre and cultural institution, has entered into administration a week after closing its doors because of the coronavirus outbreak. The centre, which is based in Halifax in a Grade-II listed building, originally closed on 17 March over concerns about the spread of the Covid-19 virus. A statement said that all Square Chapel staff had been advised to self-isolate if showing symptoms and work from home where possible, and that the situation would be monitored. But less than a week later Square Chapel Trust, a registered charity, and its subsidiary Square Trading Ltd went into administration, meaning the centre – which attracts around 100,000 visitors a year and offered film, theatre, live music, comedy, family shows and workshops – needs to find a new owner willing to take it over. One of its joint administrators told the Halifax Courier that the Trust suffered a funding shortfall in the current financial year which caused “significant cash flow difficulties”, leaving it with no option but to enter administration. “Our priority is to try to establish whether there are any parties interested in taking forward the Trust’s important ongoing programmes in the community and/or taking over and utilising its facilities,” Patrick Lannagan, the joint administrator, said. The centre, which underwent a £6.6m refurbishment before reopening in 2017 was part of a glut of cultural offerings in Halifax which earned it the divisive “Shoreditch of the north” tag given to it by BBC 6 Music. Sitting adjacent to the Piece Hall, the centre – which was built in 1772 – was awarded £624,204 in the last round of Arts Council funding in 2017 and was part of its National Portfolio. Announcing the funding at the time, the centre’s director David McQuillan said that it would play a significant role in changing the town, and create a unique destination that will draw visitors and add to the vibrant night-time economy. The centre was also supported by Calderdale Council, partners and patrons.