Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: In all, 20,499 people have died as a result of the pandemic, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. The institution says there have been at least 451,355 cases around the world, while 112,982 people have recovered. The response to a UK government call for volunteers to help the National Health Service has far exceeded Whitehall’s hopes as 405,000 people come forward. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, says the government had hoped 250,000 people would volunteer to help those in isolation by delivering medicines, driving patients to and from hospital appointments and making regular phone calls to check up on them. Britain’s deputy ambassador to Hungary, Steven Dick, died after contracting coronavirus, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office confirms. The 37-year-old died in hospital in Budapest on Tuesday. Experts say antibody tests that show whether or not a person has had the virus will first be used to work out how many people contract the virus but remain asymptomatic, before being given to NHS workers. Public Health England has said thousands of 15-minute home tests will eventually be available to people with symptoms. The infection is still spreading in Italy but, for the third consecutive day, its rate has slowed. The World Health Organization says the country could reach its peak number of coronavirus cases on Sunday. The death toll rose by 743 to 6,820 on Tuesday and, on Wednesday, the national federation of doctors said another four Italian doctors had died, bringing the total to 29. According to local media reports, officials in the country say the latest figures show 86 new cases in 24 hours – the highest daily figure of the pandemic to date. The health ministry says 387 people have been infected, and two more deaths take the toll to seven people. Belgium has recorded a significant rise in the number of people being admitted to hospital, with experts warning the disease has not yet reached its peak. The country’s federal crisis centre says 434 people have been admitted to hospital in 24 hours; an increase of 50% on the previous day. Belgium now counts 4,937 people with a coronavirus diagnosis, up 668 in the last 24 hours, while 178 people have died. Carmen Calvo tested positive after being treated in hospital on Sunday for a respiratory infection. She is doing well and receiving medical treatment, according to the Spanish government. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, launched the plan and called on governments to work together to combat the pandemic. The plan “will save many lives” and arm humanitarian agencies and NGOs with laboratory supplies for testing, and with medical equipment to treat the sick while protecting healthcare workers, Guterres says. The UN’s high commissioner for human rights, Michelle Bachelet, also called on national governments to take urgent action to protect the health and safety of people in prison and other closed facilities. The state’s governor, Andrew Cuomo, has warned that more shutdowns to curb public gatherings may be imminent. New York City will begin closing streets to traffic, while parks and playgrounds could yet see mandatory closures if New Yorkers continue to ignore calls to self-quarantine.