As England prepare to face India in the semi-final of the Twenty20 World Cup in Sydney on Thursday, the leg-spinner Sarah Glenn says that the team are feeling confident after triumphing by margins of 98 runs, 42 runs and 46 runs in their last three group stage matches. “We didn’t get off to a great start against South Africa, so to then punch back against Thailand and carry the momentum into every game since then, and then to finish off with a win in the group stages was really nice”, Glenn said. “And we didn’t just scrape a win against West Indies – we were quite dominating. So we’re all buzzing really.” Glenn, who at 20 is playing in her first ever World Cup, has been one of the success stories of the tournament so far for England, with six wickets across the group stages including a return of three for 15 in their must-win fixture against Pakistan in Canberra. She is now gearing up for the biggest match of her fledgling international career, which began only three months ago against Pakistan in Malaysia, and says that the tournament has helped confirm that she made the right decision to quit hockey – which she played internationally at junior level – in favour of cricket. “I’m very happy with my decision. I’m really excited to be part of this team,” she said. “The expectation of playing in a semi-final is quite daunting, but I’m just excited to be here. We’re prepared for whatever is thrown at us.” Semi-finalsEngland v India, Sydney, 4am GMT/3pm AEDT ThursdayAustralia v South Africa, Sydney, 8am GMT/7pm AEDT Thursday FinalMelbourne, 7am GMT, Sunday The match will be a repeat of the 2018 tournament semi-final, which England won by eight wickets courtesy of half-centuries from Nat Sciver and Amy Jones. Sciver, who has hit three half-centuries in this tournament and is the overall leading run-scorer with 202 to her name, looks likely to again play a key role. Jones, meanwhile, is relishing her newly-adopted “finisher” position, having dropped down from the opener spot to bat at No 6 against West Indies, against whom she contributed 23 from 13 balls. For England, the biggest call for the captain, Heather Knight, will be whether to continue with a three-pronged spin attack, as they did against West Indies on Sunday, or to omit the off-spinner Mady Villiers in favour of an extra batter, Lauren Winfield, who played in the first three group matches but faced only five balls. Though the SCG has a reputation for producing slow wickets, England’s decision will likely not be made until the last minute, given that rain is forecast. “The weather’s quite unpredictable at the moment, so we’ve just got to see on the day what we think it will play like,” Glenn said. India have already shown themselves a force to be reckoned with in the tournament, finishing top of their group after a shock 17-run win against reigning champions Australia in the opening match. The star of that performance was the leg-spinner Poonam Yadav, who is also the tournament’s leading wicket-taker to date. She is likely to prove a formidable threat to the England batting lineup, who aside from Sciver and Knight have generally under-performed across the tournament. India’s 16-year-old opening batter Shafali Verma, whose 161 runs in the tournament have come at the phenomenal strike rate of 161, will also threaten England’s chances of progressing to the final, which takes place at the MCG on Sunday 8 March. Glenn says England are taking heart from their most recent encounter against India, in February during their tri-series with Australia. On that occasion England restricted them to 123 for six and chased down the runs with an over and four wickets to spare. “They’re a top team with a lot of talent but the fact that we got to play them in the tri-series and win a match against them really helps our confidence,” Glenn said. One concern for England will be the poor weather, which on Tuesday completely wiped out the final game of Group B, between South Africa and West Indies. There is no reserve day in place for either semi-final, which means that England – who finished second in their group – would be automatically knocked out should the encounter be a wash out.