A woman has accused a housing association of saddling her late mother’s estate with a £25,000-plus debt that is growing by more than £1,000 a month. When Penny Ashcroft’s mother Lois Plowman died of cancer aged 69 in 2018, she owned a 25% share of a shared ownership flat in London – all she had to leave to her children. Plowman, a retired NHS radiographer, had been convinced shared ownership was a good investment. But, says Ashcroft, she would be horrified if she had known what a huge headache she had effectively bequeathed to her daughter, involving vast numbers of emails and phone calls, an ever-increasing debt and threats of repossession. She says that what her mother did not know was that after her death, her housing association landlord would effectively leave her with a five-figure debt. “My poor mum would be howling in her grave,” says Ashcroft. She says restrictions on the lease have made selling the flat extremely difficult, and she has not been allowed to sublet it. More than two years on, the flat remains unsold, despite the price being cut. “I’ve accepted a new offer, the fourth since we began marketing it. Even if this one goes through, the debt will likely stand at £30,000 by the time the deeds are transferred,” she says. Plowman worked for the NHS until her retirement in 2013. Four years earlier, she had been able to buy a 25% share in what was then a new flat in a social block at a development near Chelsea Bridge, close to Pimlico. On the 75% that she did not own, rent was payable to housing association A2Dominion. She died in January 2018, two days shy of her 70th birthday, triggering the start of a lengthy correspondence between her daughter – the administrator of her estate – and the housing association. Faced at that point with paying almost £1,000 a month to cover the rent and service charge, and with no money in the estate other than the equity in the flat, Ashcroft asked if she could sublet the property in order to help meet the costs until it could be sold. But she was told this was not permitted as it would be a breach of the lease. “I was told it was not possible for someone to live in the flat and cover the rent, even while it was being sold. I was not able to find that sort of money and had no option but to allow an unauthorised debt to accrue,” says Ashcroft, who lives in south-east London. By April 2018 the housing association was contacting her about “the high level of arrears” – at that point the debt stood at £2,850. Early that autumn, A2Dominion conceded that, “unfortunately”, it had not been able to find a buyer for the flat, so Ashcroft had the right to take it to the open market. She signed up with an online estate agent, though little interest was shown in the flat. “It was overvalued, and I was not permitted to accept low offers without a penalty,” she claims. By November 2018 the amount owed had grown to more than £10,000, and then in March 2019 A2Dominion wrote to say that a “notice of seeking possession” would be served on her. Ashcroft appointed a solicitor who, she says, was successful in fighting the repossession, but the housing association still would not allow the flat to be down-valued, let out or brought back into its ownership. Last summer, it looked like there might be a breakthrough. “A memorandum of agreement to sublet was issued by A2Dominion on 13 August, to which we responded on 5 September, but no further response has been received,” says Ashcroft. More than two years after her mother’s death, with the debt standing at £25,157 in January, she is hopeful that the latest offer will work out. But she adds: “If they had allowed it to be sublet or bought it back, no debt need have built up. As it is, when the £25,000 and growing debt is cleared and the legal costs paid, what mum was told would be a good investment will have turned out to be nothing but a sinkhole.” In response, Nicki Morrison, A2Dominion’s director of residential services, told us: “We would like to extend our condolences to Ms Ashcroft, and we are sorry this has added to her stress at a very difficult time.” She adds: “As a form of affordable housing, shared-ownership homes are bound by restrictions on subletting so that they are used by the people who need them. “However, given the circumstances, we extended an offer that would have allowed Ms Ashcroft to sublet the property. We regret that we have not progressed this offer since then, and we are working with her to find a resolution. “Shared ownership is a great option for many people and helps them to buy a place of their own. We are sorry that on this occasion it has not been a positive experience for Ms Ashcroft.”