It was said to be the moment when the European Union lost its political innocence. Nearly four years ago, in March 2016, EU leaders signed a deal with Turkey aimed at preventing asylum seekers from travelling to Europe. The pact was “celebrated by people who are dancing on the grave of refugee protection”, said the Europe boss of Amnesty International. But the realpolitik worked: the number of people arriving on the Greek islands from Turkey dropped drastically from a peak of 7,000 a day to a few hundred, although numbers began creeping up again in 2019. Now that Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Turkey’s president, claims to have opened the gates to Europe, the EU’s failure to agree a common migration policy during the intervening four years threatens to be exposed. Brussels officials say the EU is in a much stronger position than it was in 2015 when a million people made life-threatening journeys in boats or squeezed through gaps in fences. A report from the European commission in October 2019 said the EU had “stronger systems to control its borders and can now quickly bring the necessary financial and operational support to member states under pressure”. The EU is setting up a European border and coastguard, which is meant to have 10,000 officers by 2027. Officials argue they have delivered on their bargain with Erdoğan. The EU has allocated nearly all the promised €6bn fund for Syrian refugees in Turkey, although only €3.2bn has been spent on projects, which have included building schools and health centres. Turkey says the money is inadequate and claims to have spent more than $30bn helping 3.6 million Syrian refugees living in its territory. It is also sheltering 360,000 other people who have fled repression and war, mostly from Afghanistan, Iraq and Iran. The EU has made much less progress on the exchange of people. At the heart of the EU-Turkey deal was a one-for-one offer: a Syrian refugee on the Greek islands would be returned to Turkey, while another Syrian refugee in Turkey would be found a home in Europe. Greek authorities, buckling under years of public sector cuts, have managed to send 1,908 asylum seekers back to Turkey – a policy heavily criticised by human rights lawyers who argue that Turkey is not a safe country of return. The EU found a home for about 25,000 Syrians who were in Turkey, but this falls well short of the 72,000 upper limit in the original deal and the 108,000 that international aid agencies said would be a fair contribution by some of the world’s richest countries. (The EU says it has resettled a total of 63,000 refugees since 2015 from the Middle East and Africa.) As the EU declared the migration crisis over, the Greek islands became a dumping ground for asylum seekers who were marooned in filthy camps such as Moria on Lesbos or the Vathy reception centre on Samos. Vathy last October had eight times more residents than it was designed for. Refugees were left to contend with broken toilets and showers, inadequate drinking water and rats feeding on piles of rubbish. With migration out of the headlines, the blame game went on. Brussels officials complained that Greek authorities seemed incapable of spending EU funds to improve conditions for asylum seekers. Greek governments blamed the rest of the EU for ignoring their daily humanitarian emergency. Distracted by Brexit, the drawn-out process of choosing new EU leaders and agreeing a long-term budget, EU leaders had moved on. Governments were unable to agree on a new asylum system that would ease the burden on frontline states – Greece, but also Italy and Spain. Before the 2019 European elections, an overhaul of European asylum rules – seven laws – was postponed over deep divisions on a permanent system to share the burden of supporting asylum seekers. The new European commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, has yet to reveal how she plans to handle the issue. Fours years since the EU-Turkey deal was signed, the EU seems even further away from a new asylum system.