The “complete ban” on evictions promised by the government has been widely criticised after it emerged that the coronavirus bill merely extends the notice required for possession, from two months to three. The communities secretary, Robert Jenrick, said last week: “The government is clear – no renter who has lost income due to coronavirus will be forced out of their home, nor will any landlord face unmanageable debts.” But the shadow housing secretary, John Healey, said the new coronavirus bill goes back on that vow. He tweeted: “We’ve finally had the government’s amendment to the coronavirus bill spelling out its proposals on evictions, and I’m afraid it’s now clear Boris Johnson has broken his promise to the country’s 20 million renters. “This is not an evictions ban, as Labour argued for, and renters were eventually promised by Boris Johnson. This legislation does not stop people losing their homes as a result of coronavirus, just gives them some extra time to pack their bags.” The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government said the claim that it was rowing back on promises was “absolute nonsense”. A spokesman said: “As soon as legislation is passed, no new possession proceedings will begin – in either the social sector or the private rented sector – for at least the next three months. We have the power to extend this notice period if necessary.” Advice groups called on the government to implement a stronger ban. Dame Gillian Guy, chief executive of Citizens Advice, said: “Simply extending notice periods to three months cannot be seen as ‘job done’. It means that people dealing with unimaginable financial uncertainty still face the prospect of being served with an eviction notice. “Over the coming days, the government must keep their promise and add to these changes to make sure no one loses the roof over their head as a result of coronavirus.” Tenants fear they will be left with huge debts, after they lose their jobs, are chased for arrears on rent, and then forced out of their homes with eviction notices. Caitlin Wilkinson, of Generation Rent, said: “This legislation fails to deliver on these promises in every respect. All these measures do is extend the notice period for evictions to three months, which will provide little comfort to those faced with losing their homes in the midst of a pandemic. “Equally worrying is the lack of provision made for rent arrears, which will stack up in the three-month period. Many renters will end up with thousands of pounds worth of debt and no means of paying it off. Landlords and tenants are expected to ‘work together’ to find a solution to suit both parties from June onwards – but there’s absolutely nothing to stop landlords from evicting tenants if they can’t pay.”