The Guardian is British and writes in English, so its following in mainland Europe must be insignificant, right? Wrong! Every month, more than 23m non-UK European browsers access our site, a number that has doubled in the past four years. We looked at data from 2016 and compared it with 2019, and were delighted to find that the numbers had grown in every country apart from one – Vatican City, where two of our 336 regular readers decided to kick their Guardian, erm, habits … In carrying out this research, we uncovered some fascinating statistics: Outside of the UK, the biggest audience is in Germany with around 3m visits each month, followed closely by Ireland. France is reading 110% more Guardian articles than it was three years ago. The Guardian website gets 1.8m monthly visits from the Netherlands. The average number of Swiss page views has almost exactly doubled since the pre-Brexit referendum days of 2016. In Turkey, the average number of Guardian page views per month has increased by a fifth in the last three years. Of the Scandinavian countries, we have our greatest number of monthly browsers in Sweden, but are seeing growth in Finland too. “Responsible, investigative journalism is the safe-keeper of our free society. It is in danger of disappearing. Thank you for what you do!”Phyllis, France “I feel the Guardian’s work is incredibly important in today’s world. I rely on you as a credible, respectable source of information – something that’s becoming ever more scarce these days.” Yannick, Belgium “Someone somewhere once said – or perhaps was quoted, probably in the pages of the Guardian – that what’s been lost in today’s mediascape is less the truth than our trust. Amidst the bewildering array of potential news sources on offer, I turn to the Guardian on a daily basis as a trusted, nuanced, critical journalistic voice that cuts to the core, inspires and informs.”Daniel, Germany “I want to support you, out of gratitude and appreciation for your superb journalism, which is available for everyone.”Dorota, Poland “I decided to support the Guardian because I think good journalism and free independent press have never been more important. Being a Swede I find it really useful to read it, to broaden my perspectives.”Johan, Sweden “I trust the Guardian to provide me with the news and opinion I need to be up to speed with current affairs in the UK. On top of this, I believe we need rigorous investigative journalism now more than ever to hold our leaders to account.” Genevieve, Portugal “The Guardian is my most trustworthy news source. I appreciate your work, especially covering the climate crisis.”Audrius, Lithuania “Your paper is a very important, balanced, and fair voice that is so badly needed in the world and offers a huge amount of insight.”Fergus, Ireland “Thanks for keeping me updated on Brexit development and politics throughout the past year. Reading the Guardian articles and comments has provided me valuable insight into politicians’ moves and backgrounds.” Roland, Germany “It’s essential to have free and brave and honest journalism to counter today’s tsunami of fake news. That’s why I read the Guardian.” Diane, Switzerland “These are troubled times and a free press, that is making a clear distinction between opinions and facts, is more important than ever. The Guardian stands that ground and holds those values high. I appreciate that you give free access to your content and instead of a paywall, depend on voluntary contributions. That gives you more integrity and it gives me the feeling of contributing to something important instead of just paying another bill, when I send my money.”Sofia, Norway “The thoughts and ideas, the quality of writing are so inspiring! You speak straight to my heart!”Katerina, Greece “If I’m looking for information online and one of your articles comes up, I always choose it over most other options as I know it’ll be well-researched information. I also just enjoy reading your articles, which are always well written.” Lotte, Denmark “I am pleased that the Guardian is taking action on the climate crisis. I respect its reporting and agree with its values.”Carolyn, Slovakia “The need for journalism that takes independence and speaking the truth seriously has never been greater.”Elin, Sweden “The Guardian has brilliant, brilliant football writers. I love reading your live coverage of matches. I have read your paper so many years for free, and felt obliged to give you something in return.”A reader, Norway “In many ways I’m a usual Guardian reader, and I’ve been so for a long time. I decided to contribute to your work because it’s about time I did. Besides, you don’t ask for much, and let me give according to my own budget.”Jaume, Spain “Now more than ever, we need independent journalism that tells the truth. We need your help to build a society capable of taking a stand against injustice and corruption!”A reader, Spain “The current disastrous turn of events in Britain means that the honest and balanced coverage of the Guardian will bring a dim light in the darkness.”Florent, France ”I contributed because I am worried about the future of good investigative journalism that will hold our leaders and authorities to account. Also, I’m trying to wean myself off Twitter as my primary news source!”Michael, Ireland ”I like the way you write about topics. Easy and without the sensationalist attitude that is often found with other news websites.”Sabine, Germany “You guys are amazing and it’s about time I give away for all the years of great journalism you have shared with the world.”Ivana, Germany “The Guardian’s reporting helps me to better understand what is going on in the world.”A reader, Austria “As Brexit becomes a reality, a voice like the Guardian’s will be all the more relevant, and not just for the UK.”Konrad, Austria “The Guardian provides reliable, fact-based information and opinions.”Yvonne, Italy