“Yir main man. Alan Williams. Azzy, A git called. Rangers daft. YT legend in the makin.” So swaggers the hero of Graeme Armstrong’s incendiary Airdrie-set debut. Based on the real-life experiences of its author, this near-400-page blast of a book follows Azzy from age 14, when he joins the gang that gives the novel its name, through his first sexual experiences, to drug addiction, and finally to rehabilitation at 21, and the promise of a better life – an escape from bleak post-industrial North Lanarkshire. With its descriptions of violence, drug use and chronic poverty, the novel portrays lives rarely seen in fiction. Through the prism of this world, Armstrong explores universal themes of adolescent confusion and the value of community, even if the latter is found within the camaraderie of gang culture, and nights spent fighting, “tannin cans” and getting “right oot our barnets”. Azzy is as vulnerable as any young man, suffering in silence when asked to express his feelings: “A’m a young Scottish male n A’m supposed tae be hard as nails.” When he falls for the “subtle n feminine” Monica, he’s confronted by adult emotions for the first time and the insurmountable barrier of class. Meeting Monica’s university mates, he feels them judging “ma family, ma prospects, ma financial status n ma intelligence”. By the end, the non-standard English forges a dazzling poetry of its own While the story of fighting a growing dependence on drink and drugs is compelling, the novel’s great strength is its use of the distinctive North Lanarkshire dialect, with its almost Northern Irish twang. Armstrong makes the language slam-dance and pirouette, using an endless variety of relishable words and phrases. “A grab him by the tracky tap n header fuck oot his beak” describes a Glasgow kiss. A Saturday night holds “residual sufferin ae deathly roughnesses, eckto-weekender re-burns where we hunted fur more Class As”. The non-standard English forges a dazzling poetry of its own. Armstrong has stated he wanted his novel to be “an up-to-date rendering of youth culture in Scotland”, and while Irvine Welsh’s depiction of 80s Leith smack addicts undoubtedly informs the book, new substances bring new problems. Azzy observes: “Trainspotting wis a different generation … heroin hud made its mark and is fuckin hated in the schemes … If any yir troops take it, yi huv tae leather them n banish them.” As with Welsh’s debut, ultimately there is no glamorisation of drugs, just the raw reality of addiction: “It’s only when yi try tae stop,” Azzy muses, “that the monster reveals itself.” Sharp yet tender and mischievously funny, The Young Team pitches Armstrong straight into the first division of Scottish writers. • Jude Cook’s novel Jacob’s Advice is published in August. The Young Team is published by Picador (RRP £14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.