Good to learn about Drake’s Island developments (Mysterious Drake’s Island opens to visitors after 30 years, 14 March), but a little correction is needed about the “bunch of schoolboys” invading in 1957. And some extras about Plymouth history. We had recently formed Plymouth Young Socialists, upsetting the national Labour party, which had closed down the Labour League of Youth. Plymouth politics was starting to stir a bit. My father, Reg Scott, a local socialist politician and journalist, had just started a speakers’ corner on Saturday mornings at Frankfort Gate, the ordinary end of the splendid new city centre. Our “invasion” of Drake’s Island was to reclaim it from the military for the people of Plymouth. We set out in comrade John Duffin’s small, leaky boat, with its spluttering outboard motor, only to be intercepted by a fast naval launch out of the dockyard. We got halfway, were “arraigned”, lectured about dangerous currents, and then kindly taken to the island, awaiting our fate on the beach. I don’t recall breakfast, but maybe there was a spare sandwich from the patrol boat crew, and nor did we get double maths. I was a schoolboy, but our skipper, John Duffin, was nearer 20 than 16, and among the organising group was June Langon, who featured with John in our next radical escapade: burying a cardboard coffin in the sea to protest against the government’s new immigration bill. Our group also included members from the local feepaying school, the rival to my Devonport High. We didn’t get into trouble, and can claim to have started the movement for a people’s Drake’s Island. The history lesson is that the island featured in the 1642 English civil war, remembered locally by the annual Freedom Fields marches celebrating the Cromwellian period in Plymouth and started up by Sir Isaac Foot. So maybe it was an “invasion” after all, in the sense that it fitted in with the little understood, longstanding – if sporadic – radical history of Plymouth.Regan ScottGreat Bealings, Suffolk • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition