Picture the scene: the curtain rises as the orchestra strikes up the opening bars of Puccini’s La Bohème or Tchaikovsky’s Eugene Onegin. And in the 850-person auditorium of a storied Russian theatre sits just one lucky viewer, a lottery winner whose prize is the personal performance of a lifetime. Barred from hosting audiences due to the coronavirus outbreak, a theatre in Perm, a city near Russia’s Ural mountains, plans to host a unique experiment – private viewings of the theatre’s ballets and operas for the price of just a normal ticket. The project, called One on One, is the creation of Marat Gatsalov, the principle stage director of the Perm Opera and Ballet theatre. The idea, he said, predated the coronavirus pandemic that has shut theatres, museums and other cultural institutions around the world as audiences practise physical distancing and hunker down in their homes. But when the local government in Perm, an industrial city that also has a reputation as a cultural powerhouse, declared that events with large audiences should be cancelled, he realised the time for the experiment had arrived. “We’d been told that we can’t let viewers into the theatre hall,” Gatsalov said. “But that doesn’t mean we can’t let just one viewer in.” The plan for private performances has captured national media attention and personal support from local cultural officials, Gatsalov said, as a novel way to keep the theatre performing before live audiences. “I thought about how I often sit alone in the theatre and watch a play,” said Gatsalov. “I understand that it’s a fairly special feeling … it’s a really important experience for the viewer and the people on the stage.” Russia’s coronavirus outbreak has accelerated in the last week and the government has passed tougher measures to prevent its spread. One on One had been scheduled to open with Puccini at the end of March, but the theatre has said that it will begin holding shows only when the rules for the country’s theatres are clearer. “We’re going to do this project regardless of what ends up happening with coronavirus,” said Gatsalov. “Even when this story with coronavirus ends, we’re planning to perform [these shows].” The lottery will work like this: 850 people will register for each show, whether it’s an opera, ballet or concert, and a winner will be selected and invited to buy a ticket at the theatre for the normal price. Nobody else will be charged, although the theatre could use the funds. Financially, Gatsalov said, the coronavirus crisis has been “catastrophic”. Asked about how planned to keep performers safe, Gatsalov said he was trying to follow safety rules “as much as possible” and said the theatre regularly checked people’s temperatures and disinfected the premises. But it was clear that plans were in flux. “Of course the theatre can’t be operating as normal at the moment,” he said.