As of 23 March, the FCO is advising UK nationals who are travelling abroad to return home immediately if commercial flights are still available. This article was first published 28 February and is being updated daily. It was last updated at 7pm (GMT), 23 March If UK nationals are usually based in the UK, the FCO advises returning if possible: “International travel is becoming very limited as air routes close, land borders close and new restrictions are put in place that prevent flights from leaving.” “We are working with airlines to keep routes open, and calling for international action to keep routes open to enable British people [to] return home on commercial flights. We are also working around the clock to support those British travellers who are already finding difficulties in coming back to the UK. If you are a permanent resident overseas, you should stay and follow the advice of the local authorities in the country you live in.” In cases where UK nationals are unable to return home, travellers should follow the advice of local authorities, including local measures to help minimise exposure. This may include remaining in a hotel room or accommodation for 14 days; being moved to quarantine facilities; being tested for coronavirus and, if positive, in some cases, hospitalisation abroad. For travellers who have visa enquiries or visas that may soon be expiring, they should contact local immigration authorities in the country or the UK-based embassy. The Foreign Office (FCO) is advising UK nationals against all but essential international travel. This advice took effect on 17 March, for an initial period of 30 days. Border closures and other travel restrictions are increasing globally. Within the UK, the government is calling on people to avoid travelling at all unless essential. “Essential travel does not include visits to second homes, campsites, caravan parks or similar, whether for isolation purposes or holidays. People should remain in their primary residence. Not taking these steps puts additional pressure on communities and services that are already at risk.” The following countries have travel restrictions in place that may affect UK nationals (who do not have residencies in other countries). This includes quarantine measures, border closures, flight suspensions, health screenings and other measures. Restrictions are constantly changing and we are updating as quickly as possible: * EU proposes suspension of non-essential travel The EU has proposed that all non-essential travel should be suspended to the European Union for 30 days, the president of the EU commission has announced. This would affect travel from outside the EU, but the UK would be exempt. Albania and SloveniaAll flights suspended. AustriaNo direct flights between Austria and the UK, or direct air or rail connections from Austria to Italy, France, Spain or Switzerland. Travellers coming from Italy by road will be stopped at the border and must present a health certificate stating that they are not affected by coronavirus. Ski resorts closed on 15 March in Tirol, Salzburg and Vorarlberg. Andorra, Monaco and the NetherlandsCultural and sporting activities are prohibited; large gatherings restricted; restaurants and bars are closed; shops likely to be open at limited hours; public transport limited; health screenings on arrival likely. Some flights suspended. AzerbaijanMandatory quarantine for 14 days. E-visas suspended. Flight schedules reduced. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult. BelgiumFlights from outside the EU are suspended. Restrictions on non-essential movement (ie except food shopping, medical care). Cultural and sporting activities are prohibited; large gatherings restricted; restaurants and bars are closed; shops likely to be open at limited hours; public transport limited. Some flights suspended. Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia and UkraineBan on entry to UK travellers. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving these countries as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult. Some countries have reduced flight schedules, land/sea border restrictions and restrictions on non-essential movement. Bosnia-HerzegovinaSelf-quarantine for 14 days. Some borders are closed and some flights suspended. Travellers may be asked for proof of accommodation booking. Under 18s and over 65s must self-isolate until 31 March. CroatiaBan on entry to UK travellers. Borders closed form 19 March for 30 days. CyprusBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended until 4 April at least. DenmarkBan on entry to UK travellers. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving these countries as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult. Some flights suspended. Flights suspended from Greenland from 21 March to at least 4 April. Flights to Faroe Islands severely reduced. Borders with Sweden closed to travellers from 14 March. FranceSome flights suspended. Cross-Channel train and ferry services reduced. Restrictions on non-essential movement from 17 March for 15 days (ie food shopping, medical care, exercise of up to 20 minutes running or walking). Cultural and sporting activities are prohibited; large gatherings restricted; restaurants and bars are closed; shops likely to be open at limited hours and public transport limited. Greece and IrelandSelf-quarantine for 14 days. Cultural and sporting activities are prohibited; large gatherings restricted; restaurants and bars are closed; shops likely to be open at limited hours and public transport limited; health screenings on arrival likely. Isle of ManSelf-quarantine for 14 days. LuxembourgAll passenger flights suspended from 23 March. Restrictions on non-essential movement (ie except food shopping, medical care). Cultural and sporting activities are prohibited; large gatherings restricted; restaurants and bars are closed; shops likely to be open at limited hours; public transport limited. MaltaTravellers in Malta are advised by the Maltese government to leave as soon as possible. MoldovaNo direct flights to the rest of Europe. Ban on entry to travellers who have been in China, Hong Kong, Iran, Italy, Japan, Macao, South Korea or Taiwan in the 14 days before arrival. MontenegroBan on entry to travellers who have recently been in Japan, France, Germany, Switzerland, Denmark, Austria, Italy, Spain, South Korea, Iran and Hubei province of China. Self-quarantine for 14 days for travellers who have recently been in Japan, France, Germany, Switzerland, Denmark, Slovenia or Austria. PortugalLand border restrictions with Spain (ie cross-border commuters and deliveries only). Flights from outside the EU suspended (not including UK, US, Canada, Venezuela, South Africa and Portuguese-speaking countries). Self-quarantine for 14 days for anyone arriving in Azores, Madeira and and Porto Santo. Restrictions to non-essential movement are likely to be imposed soon. RomaniaSelf-quarantine for 14 days. Travellers in Romania advised by the FCO to leave as soon as possible. SpainUK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. Hotels and short-stay accommodation must close by Tuesday 24 March (measures do not apply to long-term accommodation, such as long-stay campsites, provided travellers can cater for themselves and do not rely on communal facilities, which will be closed). Some flights suspended. Land-border restrictions (ie cross-border commuters and deliveries only). Restrictions on non-essential movement (ie except food shopping, medical care). SwedenAll Scandinavian Airlines flights suspended. Other travel options are limited. SwitzerlandLand border restrictions (ie no non-residents, and cross-border commuters and deliveries only) and some flights restricted (residents only) and suspended. Restrictions on non-essential movement (ie food shopping, medical care, exercise, those that can’t work from home only). Cultural and sporting activities prohibited; ski resorts closed; large gatherings restricted; restaurants and bars closed; grocery shops likely to be open at limited hours and public transport limited. TurkeyFlights to the UK suspended from 17 March. Land borders closed. Travellers who test positive on arrival will be quarantined in a government facility for 14 days, and negative test results in 14 days self-quarantine. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult BahrainSuspension of visa-on-arrival scheme. Self-quarantine for 14 days. BangladeshSuspension of visa-on-arrival scheme. Self-quarantine for 14 days. All travellers must present a health certificate within three days stating that they are not affected by coronavirus. Some flights suspended. Ban on entry to travellers who have recently been in Europe (not including UK). Bhutan, Indonesia, Israel, Kuwait, Qatar, Macao, Maldives, Mongolia, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Taiwan, Turkmenistan and UAEBan on entry to UK travellers. Some flights suspended. BruneiBan on entry to UK travellers. Royal Brunei Airlines has suspended direct flight from Brunei to London – currently it is the only airline flying from Brunei, with twice-weekly flights to Hong Kong, Manila, Melbourne, and Singapore. CambodiaBan on entry to travellers who have recently been in France, Germany, Iran, Italy, Spain or the US. Hong KongBan on entry and transit to UK travellers. Some flights suspended. IndiaBan on entry to all travellers from the UK, EU, and Turkey from 18 March. Commercial flights suspended until 31 March. All visas and e-visas invalid until 15 April. JapanBan on entry to travellers who have been in China, Iran or Italy in the 14 days before arrival. JordanNo commercial flights in or out of Jordan, and all land and sea borders closed. Restrictions on large gatherings and non-essential movement (ie except food shopping, medical care). LaosBorders closed with Thailand. Thai Airlines and Thai Smile have suspended flights between Vientiane and Bangkok. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, as onward travel could become more difficult. Lebanon All borders closed and flights suspended – a decision that will be reviewed on 29 March. Restrictions on non-essential movement (ie except food shopping, medical care) and violators could face imprisonment; public and private gatherings banned; two people per car only; public transport suspended. MalaysiaBan on entry to UK travellers. Transit permitted through Kuala Lumpur airport, but not between terminals, so travellers should confirm before travelling. Some flights suspended. MyanmarUK travellers are advised to leave as soon as possible. UK travellers must present a health certificate stating that they are not affected by coronavirus, or self-quarantine for 14 days. NepalSuspension of visa-on-arrival scheme. All land borders closed. All mountaineering expeditions for spring 2020 have been suspended. All travellers require a health certificate stating that they do not have coronavirus PakistanAll flights suspended until 4 April. Some borders closed. Large gatherings prohibited. Travellers must present a health certificate stating that they are not affected by coronavirus, issued in the 24 hours prior to arrival. PhilippinesBan on entry to all UK travellers. Public transportation suspended, limited flights until 13 April. SingaporeBan on entry and transit. UK travellers that wish to leave are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. Sri LankaNo new visas being issued, but those currently in the country can extend visas until 12 April. Most flights suspended from 19 March, and Emirates suspending flights out of Colombo by 25 March. National curfew in place – some areas lifting this curfew on 23 or 24 March and then imposing it again. There is a national helpline for tourists: +94 11 244 4480 / +94 11 244 4481 / +94 11 597 8730 / +94 11 597 8734 / +94 11 597 8720. TajikistanAll flights suspended from 20 March. Ban on entry to travellers who have been in or transited through, China, Iran, Italy or South Korea in the 14 days before arrival. ThailandTravellers who have recently been in affected countries require a health certificate stating that they are not affected by coronavirus. Self-monitor for 14 days. Songkran celebrations postponed and other large gatherings likely to be cancelled or postponed. UzbekistanSelf-quarantine for 14 days. Ban on entry to travellers who have recently been in China, Italy, Iran, France, Spain and South Korea. VietnamBan on entry to UK travellers. No new visas being issued for 15-30 days, and 14-day quarantine for all travellers entering Vietnam. Some flights suspended. AnguillaSea and airports closed for 14 days from 20 March (11:59pm local time). Self-quarantine for travellers who have been outside the Caribbean Region within the 14 days prior to arrival.ArgentinaBan on entry to UK travellers. Borders closed and suspension of all flights for 30 days from 12 March. Nationwide quarantine until 31 March. ArubaBan on entry to UK travellers. Flights suspended until 31 March 2020.Aruba, Bahamas, Belize, Costa Rica, Jamaica, Honduras, Saint Helena, Saint Lucia and Trinidad & Tobago Ban on entry to UK travellers. Some flights suspended. UK travellers that wish to leave are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, to ensure travel plans can be met. Antigua & Barbuda and MontserratBan on entry to travellers who have recently been in China, Iran, Italy, Japan, South Korea or Singapore. BarbadosMandatory quarantine for 14 days. BermudaBan on entry to UK travellers from 20 March (11.59 local time). No incoming passenger flights from LF Wade international airport for two weeks. BoliviaBan on entry to all travellers from 20 March. All flights suspended from 21 March. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. CanadaBan on entry to UK travellers. US border closed to non-essential travel from 20 March (midnight EST). Some flights suspended. UK travellers that wish to leave are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, to ensure travel plans can be met. Cayman IslandsBan on entry to UK travellers. International passenger flights suspended for three weeks from 22 March. UK travellers that wish to leave are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible.ChileLand and sea borders closed and all flights suspended for all travellers from 18 March. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. ColombiaBan on entry to UK travellers. Airports will close from 23 March. Flights are still departing, but cancellations and disruption likely. Land and sea borders closed. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. CubaSelf-quarantine for 14 days. Travellers staying in casas particulares may be moved to hotels. Restaurants and bars will be restricting services and hours; public transport likely to be affected. Dominican RepublicClosure of all air, land and sea borders from 19 March. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. Restrictions on non-essential movement (ie food shopping, medical care, exercise. Cultural and sporting activities prohibited; large gatherings restricted; restaurants and bars closed; shops likely to be open at limited hours and public transport limited. El SalvadorBan on entry to UK travellers. International flights suspended. EcuadorSuspension of all flights until at least 5 April. All travel to Galapagos has been suspended from 16 March and all national parks have been closed until further notice. Restrictions on non-essential movement from 16 March for 15 days (ie food shopping and medical care). GuatemalaSome flight suspensions. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. GrenadaBan on entry to traveller who have been in the 14 days before arrival (and on also on travellers who have been to Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iran, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland or US) GuyanaAll international flights suspended from the Cheddi Jagan airport at Timehri and the Eugene Correia airport at Ogle for 14 days from 17 March. Land border restrictions with Brazil. Self-quarantine for 14 days for travellers who have recently been in Brazil, China, Dominican Republic, Iran, Italy, Japan, Jamaica, Malaysia, Panama, Thailand, St Vincent & the Grenadines, Singapore, South Korea or US. MexicoSome flights suspended. Large gatherings restricted. Land border with US closed from 21 March (midnight local time) to all non-essential traffic for 30 days. PanamaBan on entry to UK travellers. National curfew between 9pm and 5am – travellers should not leave their accommodation outside of these hours. Some flights suspended. UK travellers that wish to leave are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, to ensure travel plans can be met. Closure of commercial and leisure establishments, restrictions on entry to supermarkets. ParaguayBan on entry to UK travellers. International flights suspended from 21 March. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. Restrictions on non-essential movement (ie food shopping and medical care only). Closure of commercial and leisure establishments, restrictions on entry to supermarkets. PeruBan on entry to UK travellers. Land and sea borders closed and air travel limited. Travellers should get in touch with the embassy to register for repatriation. Send a full name, location and contact details to belima@fco.gov.uk. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. All borders closed and restrictions on non-essential movement from 16 March for 15 days (ie food shopping and medical care only). Saint Vincent & the GrenadinesSelf-quarantine for 14 days. Ban on entry to travellers who have been in China, Italy or Iran in the 14 days before arrival. Saint Kitts and NevisScreening and possible quarantine for 14 days for travellers who have recently been in affected countries. Turks & CaicosBan on entry to travellers who have been in affected countries in the 21 days before arrival – a list of countries that is subject to change frequently. UruguayAll flights suspended with Europe from 20 March. Large commercial premises closed until further notice. UK travellers are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible. USBan on entry to UK travellers. Border with Canada closed to non-essential travel from 20 March (midnight EST). Some flights suspended. UK travellers that wish to leave are advised to consider leaving as soon as possible, to ensure travel plans can be met. AustraliaBan on entry to UK travellers. All borders closing on 20 March (9pm local time) and could be closed for at least six months (to non-citizens and residents). Self-quarantine for 14 days. Large gatherings restricted. Transit permitted to travellers departing from New Zealand with a confirmed onward ticket on the same calendar day to return home up to 14 March (11.59pm local time), but must not have been in China, Iran, Italy or South Korea in the 14 days prior to transit. FijiBan on entry to travellers who have recently been in China, Iran, Italy or South Korea. No connections through Australia or New Zealand. French PolynesiaAll travellers require a health certificate stating that they do not have coronavirus. Kiribati and MicronesiaMust have been spent 14 days in a country without any cases prior to arrival. NauruBan on entry to travellers who have been in or transited through China, Hong Kong, Iran, Italy, Macao or South Korea in the 21 days before arrival. New Zealand Ban on entry to all UK travellers from 19 March (11.59pm local time). Self-quarantine for 14 days. Large gatherings restricted. PalauBan on entry to travellers who have been in China, Hong Kong or Macao in the 14 days before arrival. SamoaNo connections through Australia or New Zealand. Travellers must present a health certificate stating that they are not affected by coronavirus. Ban on entry to travellers who have recently been in Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Canada, China, Czechia, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong (SAR China), Iceland, Italy, Iran, Japan, Kuwait, Luxembourg, Macao, Malaysia, Netherlands, Norway, Qatar, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Taiwan, United Arab Emirates or USA. Solomon IslandsQuarantine for 14 days for travellers who have recently been in affected countries. TongaBan on entry to all UK travellers. VanuatuAll borders and airports closed until further notice. Ban on entry to travellers who have been in China, Hong Kong Japan, Macao, South Korea, Singapore or Taiwan in the 14 days before arrival.  Algeria, Congo, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau and UgandaBorders closed and flights suspended. AngolaFlights suspended. Ban on entry to travellers who have visited China, South Korea, Iran, France, Spain, Portugal or Italy since December. BeninQuarantine in allocated hotels for all travellers arriving by air. Entry and exit at border crossings will be limited to “extreme necessity”. BotswanaTemporary ban on visas for nationals from affected countries affected. Some land border restrictions. Cape VerdeAll sea borders closed and restricted flights from 18 March. ComorosAll airports closed. Must have spent 14 days in a country without any cases prior to arrival. Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia,Gambia, Malawi and MozambiqueSelf-quarantine for 14 days for travellers who have recently been in affected countries. Some flights suspended. EgyptBan on entry to UK travellers until 31 March. All air traffic suspended from 19 to 31 March. EritreaQuarantine of 14 days for travellers who have recently been in China, South Korea, Italy, Germany or US. EswatiniLand borders closed with South Africa. UK travellers can transit through Tambo International Airport in Johannesburg GuineaVisitors must submit their passports for a 14-day monitoring period. KenyaBan on entry to UK travellers. All flights suspended fro 25 March (11.59pm). Namibia, Mauritius and SeychellesBan on entry to UK travellers. Some flights suspended. LiberiaAll flights suspended. Restrictions on movement and social distancing enforced. Quarantine of 14 days likely, for travellers who have recently been in affected countries. MadagascarNo commercial passenger flights with Europe for 30 days from 20 March. Self-quarantine for 14 days for travellers who have recently been in affected countries. Air France will be commissioning flights for European citizens from Antananarivo to Paris on Monday 23 March (1:45am) – contact Air France to buy tickets by phone or at the Air France desk at Ivato airport. MoroccoFlights suspended with the UK from 16 March (return flights from 19 March). Restaurants, bars and other public spaces closed. RwandaAll flights suspended from 20 March for initial period of 30 days. Borders closed and and restrictions on non-essential movement outside of residences, including travel between cities and districts from 21 March for two weeks. SenegalAll commercial flights suspended from 20 March. Large gatherings restricted South AfricaBan on entry to travellers who have been in UK, US, Italy, Iran, South Korea, Spain, Germany in the 20 days before arrival. Suspension of visa on arrival scheme, and no entry without a visa. Some flights suspended form 21 March. Travellers in the country who received a stamp on arrival allowing them to stay for 90 days do not need to apply for a visa. UK travellers only permitted entry if transiting home, but there is a ban on both entry and transit to travellers who have been in China, France, Germany, Iran, Italy, South Korea, Spain, Switzerland, USA or United Kingdom, since 15 March. TanzaniaQuarantine for 14 days for anyone coming from an affected country. TunisiaFlights suspended and sea borders closed. Curfew 6am to 6pm and restrictions on non-essential movement (ie except food shopping, medical care). Cultural and sporting activities are prohibited.ZambiaQuarantine for 14 days for anyone coming from an affected country. The FCO is advising against all travel on cruise ships for passengers aged 70 years and over or those with high-risk conditions. Some destinations are placing bans on cruise ships docking or passengers disembarking, including Australia, Chile, Colombia, Greece, Italy, Montenegro and Portugal.