Sunny, colourful Spain, with its fabulous food and hugely varied regions, is the favourite holiday destination for the British. And many of us have chosen to live here too – I’ve been in Seville for 16 happy years, writing articles about my adopted city, a vibrant and joyous place. But now the country has a fast growing rate of coronavirus infection – at the time of writing, almost 20,000 confirmed infections including over 1,000 dead. Most tourists have already headed home, and as hotels must close by Thursday, the remaining holidaymakers will have to make their way back to their own countries. The effect on tourism, upon which our economy is so reliant – €176bn and 2.8 million jobs – doesn’t bear thinking about. Those visitors who are confined to their flat or hotel room will be finding life more than a little strange. Under the state of emergency declared last Saturday, we are only allowed to leave our house, one person at a time, to buy food, medicines or petrol, to go to the doctor or hospital, or for a very specific reason. Supermarkets are generally well-stocked, with shoppers keeping their (social) distance. Music plays on the loudspeakers, and for a second it feels normal, until you see the masks and gloves. You can’t even go running or cycling – if the police see you, they may fine you, and will certainly send you home. You don’t need a signed document to be outside as in France (yet), but you do need to hold on to your supermarket or chemist bill, to prove you’re out for a justifiable reason, and to carry your ID card or passport. One legitimate reason to be outside on foot is to walk the dog – some enterprising Spaniards are even renting their canine companions to those desperate for an excuse to leave the house. Venture too far from home and you may be reprimanded – a friend was told off by police for being more than 250 metres from her residence. She was let off with a warning – next time they’ll fine her. Thankfully, our incarceration is being made more bearable by a full school day’s schedule of classes, though this is not without its complications – it took a while for myself and my two children to get used to the new online learning systems, fathoming out when to log in to classrooms, where to post comments, and how to submit assignments. And then there are the endless questions – “Mum, what does this mean?” “Mum, can you help me with this?” Chemistry equations? No clue, sorry. My daughter has adapted well to distance learning, following her timetable strictly and remaining motivated; her teenage brother, less so. Patience is already wearing thin, since I work from home and am used to having quiet space for my writing and translation. On the upside, we live in a house with a garden, so the kids can go outside, which is a huge relief for everyone. Plus we have two dogs – we’re lucky to have the perfect reason to walk in the nearby countryside, sneaking a child out too. Ironically, spring is the best time of the year here in Andalucia, with the orange trees in blossom, and the air warm enough for alfresco meals. We usually come across fellow dogwalkers, with whom we exchange a cautious, socially-distanced hola or buenas tardes. However the majority of the population in cities lives in apartment blocks. The Spanish are by nature incredibly social and gregarious, and love being together. They spend most of their time outside their small apartments, so this is a massive shift for them. The next best thing to chatting in the street or over coffee – now off-limits – is socialising from the balcony. As you may have seen in videos circulating on social media, residents have been on their balconies singing, dancing, and playing in a band with their neighbours. Kids play I-spy with their friends in the building opposite, and bingo games keep everyone entertained. The next best thing to chatting in the street or over coffee – now off-limits – is socialising from the balcony. My favourite was a man singing a saeta (a heartfelt flamenco-religious lament addressed to statues of the Virgin Mary in Holy Week processions) to a woman who was walking her dog in the street below. “Peeerrrooooo!” he wailed. What’s more, the Spanish never miss a chance to show their collective approval or protestation. Every night at 8pm people all around Spain take to their balconies to applaud the efforts of the Spanish health service, stretched more thinly each day. Last night, kids sang Hola Don Pepito, Hola Don Jose in a call and response for (Spanish) Father’s Day. We’re all trying hard to hold on to some degree of normality: tomorrow I’m going to a virtual dinner party on Zoom, organised by friends in Barcelona. We may be locked down, but Saturday night in Spain is still rocking. Fiona Flores Watson is a journalist, translator and guide