It is four days since a family court found that Sheikh Mohammed had probably ordered the abduction of two of his daughters, one of whom was in Britain at the time she was taken. It seems fairly clear that the British Horseracing Authority does not intend to say anything in response. Officials apparently see the government’s silence as justifying their own but, while deferring to government is a responsible way to deal with the coronavirus, it looks like a convenient cop-out in this case. Saying and doing nothing reduces the risk of the Maktoum money tap being turned off. No executive wants to be known as the one who chased away the sport’s greatest benefactor and thereby impoverished Newmarket. But silence will also have a cost. What will it look like to racing’s casual followers, to marketing managers in charge of sponsorship budgets or to the world at large, the next time one of the Sheikh’s horses wins a major prize in this country? We may very well find out in a couple of months, with the running of the 2,000 Guineas, the first Classic of the year. Pinatubo, an exhilarating beast who rocketed through his juvenile season unbeaten, has long been the hot favourite. He will carry the blue colours of Sheikh Mohammed’s Godolphin operation. We have seen the scene many times before, as the Sheikh is fawned over by racing’s most senior figures in the winner’s enclosure, while the jockey profusely thanks His Highness for the opportunity. Surely it will have a different aspect this time, seen through the prism of last week’s judgment. What will they make of it, racing’s future audience, watching on television? Imagine some horse-mad teenager who might have been the next Hayley Turner or Hollie Doyle, now thinking to herself what it must be like to be snatched off the streets of Cambridge by armed men, sedated and smuggled overseas. Will horse racing still be the right sport for her? The ruling body should now open a conversation about how to limit the importance of one investor in the sport. It should consider limits on the number of horses one owner can have in training, on how much they can spend at British auctions in a single year, on how many racing stables they can own. Such thoughts are anathema to most insiders, who have a hard enough time finding sufficient investors as it is. But perhaps limiting the impact of a single big-hitter may make the sport more attractive to other owners. The aim must be to avoid, in future, the crushing moral shame of the present situation, with racing so beholden to one individual that it dare utter no criticism or hint at taking action against them, even in a case as appalling as the one described in court last week. Kempton1.55 Latent Heat 2.30 Artillery 3.05 Furqaan 3.40 Broughton Sunpearl 4.15 Enthaar 4.50 Gold Standard Plumpton2.00 Annual Invictus 2.35 Vicenzo Mio 3.10 Minella Daddy 3.45 River Arrow 4.20 Midnight Calamity 4.55 Champion Chase Stratford2.10 Elysian Flame 2.45 Darling Alko 3.20 Looks Like Power 3.55 Tidal Flow 4.30 Rootless Tree 5.05 Fixe Le Kap 5.35 Staithes Taunton2.20 Glajou 2.55 Grand Slam 3.30 Peterborough 4.05 Nineohtwooneoh (nap) 4.40 Seaston Spirit 5.15 Ballybreen (nb) 5.50 Kilmington Rose Wolverhampton5.40 Dragon Sun 6.10 Daafr 6.40 Night Voyager 7.10 Mooharreeba 7.40 Queen Aya 8.10 Effronte