My kids watch my old pop videos and say, “Now you’re 45, you’ll have to keep your clothes on.” I’m like, “In the next one, I’m going to have five male models and wear less!” They think it’s disgusting. My 15-year-old refuses to tell me what his friends say. He’s very protective. He’s begun to play the role of my husband. I didn’t come from a privileged background. I came from a one-parent family in Lewisham with my mum. I won a scholarship to stage school and fell into Eternal. Suddenly we were selling millions of records, touring the world, and I was just miserable. Everyone thinks it’s all showbiz parties, but I was 20, sitting in hotel rooms on my own. All I knew was that I couldn’t carry on being so unhappy and homesick. My passion for singing and music was dying. So I left. I had no idea who Jamie [Redknapp] was when I met him. A few weeks later, I was watching England on TV and I said to my friends: “I know that guy! He asked me out!” They said: “Don’t you know who he is?” I just thought every man you meet says they play football. I’m the shabbiest mum on the school run. When I’m not working, I love not making an effort. So I turn up in tracksuit bottoms and an over-sized sweatshirt, my hair in a pony. I was well aware it wasn’t true when I was voted Sexiest Woman of the Decade by FHM. Thank God they don’t still do polls like that. Do you think my 15-year-old would allow me to put my old FHM covers on the wall? No. They’re all in a box in the garage. I’m tired of getting asked about Strictly. It was years ago. I do think it’s a weird programme – it’s all-engulfing, and I hate the circus that comes with it. But I don’t regret it. I think it was good for me on a personal level, getting back out there and working. Some days, fame is great. I’ve made a new album. How great is that? If people weren’t interested, I wouldn’t be doing what I’m doing, and I’m still doing what I love. But other days, it’s really tough. You don’t feel like wanting to defend yourself and your choices. I’m quite private, but I suppose I come with quite a lot of baggage. Any future boyfriend is going to get their life pulled apart. I think it would take someone pretty strong and together. I’d love for no one to ask me about divorce and my relationships. It’s just unrealistic. Louise Redknapp is on tour and this week plays Glasgow, Newcastle and Cambridge, finishing in London at the Shepherds Bush Empire (louiseofficial.co.uk)