The commitments in all the main UK parties’ manifestos to set up an assembly, convention or commission to review our democracy was a rare and welcome piece of political unity. The government has now pledged to bring forward its commission on the constitution, democracy and rights (Report, 14 February). There will be some whose default position will be to blindly oppose the commission as partisan and elitist. Others will say the government should use its new majority to impose whatever it likes. Both ends of this bell curve are wrong. Most of us know that our democracy desperately needs a review, and it needs to be a review where citizens themselves can engage, deliberate and be heard. This balance can be simply achieved by government beginning its review process by using the globally tried-and-tested tools of deliberative democracy. These are online and offline, including scientifically selected microcosms of the UK to populate citizens’ assemblies and a well-resourced and independently refereed national conversation. These techniques would carefully discover and distil people’s practical proposals to be then sent to the commission. The government would then use its electoral legitimacy to take forward recommendations through the normal parliamentary procedures of acceptance, rejection or amendment. Having a citizens’ contribution using the sensible and thoughtful deliberative processes that are now on offer, there would be a real chance that the outcome would not only be reforming, respected and sustainable, but also widely discussed, understood and accepted across our many false divides. We and the government should not waste this unique opportunity.Graham AllenConvener, Citizens’ Convention on UK Democracy; chair, parliamentary select committee on political and constitutional reform 2010-15; visiting professor of politics, King’s College London • Your article on the north-south divide (‘Go big or go home’ to heal UK divide, report tells No 10, 27 February) could have provided a historical perspective. For example, previous UK governments lost the “colonies” of Ireland in the 20th century and the USA in the 18th century largely because they refused to take heed of legitimate grievances and failed to empower the people being governed. This UK government needs to listen to the “colonies” within England, as well as Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland; otherwise history may repeat itself. It needs to reform parliament, which is a largely 19th-century institution, operating 20th-century procedures in a 21st-century society. It should change our “winner takes all” voting system, because it is unfair and undemocratic. It must decentralise power to the “colonies”, because Westminster is too London-centric. Sadly, power is a very addictive drug, and very few politicians seem able to kick the habit.Tony LeatherSouth Shields, Tyne and Wear • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 