During the recent Storm Ciara, winds blew a tree over, which crashed on to my car parked in my driveway in south-east London. The vehicle is a write-off. I don’t have buildings insurance, just car (third-party, fire and theft), but thankfully my house did not get damaged. The tree is on a patch of grass on the corner of the street which is owned and maintained by Greenwich council. My insurance company is saying that because no one else was involved, I am to blame, but I don’t think this is fair. Surely the council is at fault as it is its responsibility to maintain and make sure the trees on public streets are safe. It could have fallen on my house or someone in the street. SB, London This is actually less straightforward than it seems, and we are sorry to disappoint you with our answer. Claims for so-called “natural hazards”, such as storms, are only possible with a fully comprehensive motor insurance policy, while those with more basic third-party, fire and theft cover, like you, will find it hard to make a claim. That said, even with comprehensive cover, it would impact on the holder’s premium on renewal, and any no-claims bonus. The Association of British Insurers says that, as a general rule, if you want to claim against the other party – the local authority in your case – then you would need to establish very clearly that they were responsible, and that the damage resulted from their negligence. “For example, if you were aware that, say, a tree had been unstable for some time, and had warned of the danger (including taking photographs), then you might have a stronger case than if it came down in very strong winds, with no obvious indication it was vulnerable. “It is going to be a case of proving that the owner of whatever caused the damage to you or your property was negligent and therefore liable.” We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions