The sound of a top-flight stadium reverberating to “We’ve got super Nigel Pearson, he knows exactly what we need” (tune: Bad Moon Rising) can be filed among the things few envisaged in August. But Watford’s win against Liverpool was a measure of the uplift one of the season’s less likely appointments has contrived. “He is always about feet on the floor, he [has] never overreacted and you have to stay focused,” said Abdoulaye Doucouré. “He showed us videos and said we can do it. Nigel is a great, great manager, a great lad, and now he will keep everyone on the floor to make sure we keep our goal to stay up.” Pearson’s tactical acumen can be underrated – as he showed with his setup against the leaders, stretching Liverpool yet managing to stay compact – but his man-management is getting crucial extra percentages out of his players. Nick Ames • Match report: Watford 3-0 Liverpool Long tipped as the future of Manchester City, Phil Foden has been a largely peripheral figure in their glittering present. A regular in early cup rounds, he had played only one minute across City’s two previous League Cup finals. His selection ahead of Kevin De Bruyne, Bernardo Silva and Riyad Mahrez on Sunday felt significant, and was just reward for a player who has seized the opportunities he has been given. Foden played the full 90 minutes and was the game’s outstanding performer, setting up Sergio Agüero’s opener with an instinctive header back across goal. It is no mean feat to slot into Pep Guardiola’s team, surrounded by big names playing to a metronomic rhythm. To look like he belongs, as he did at Wembley, shows a mental fortitude to match his immense natural ability. Foden has had to balance patience and self-belief to avoid getting lost in the Manchester City machine; now he is set to become a crucial cog. Niall McVeigh • Match report: Aston Villa 1-2 Manchester City The first thing to understand about a frantic finish at Goodison is that it was not merely another VAR controversy. Because Gylfi Sigurdsson was clearly offside the Harry Maguire deflection that beat David de Gea was checked and, though the verdict that the Everton player was interfering aggrieved the home side, it was a reasonable conclusion to draw even if the goalkeeper was never going to reach the ball. The VAR story was moved on a little though, for the reason the whole stadium was booing at the end was not just Carlo Ancelotti’s red card but because the whole incident had just been replayed on the big screen. Spectators do not normally get to view disputed footage, but someone must have decided the paying customers deserved to see what Stockley Park officials and an armchair television audience were seeing. About time, too. This might just be the future. Paul Wilson • Match report: Everton 1-1 Manchester United It did not take long to get to the heart of Frank Lampard’s irritations after Marcos Alonso got Chelsea out of jail at Bournemouth. Lampard criticised his players’ game management after conceding two goals in three second‑half minutes and acknowledged there is significant room for improvement on Tuesday night against Liverpool in the FA Cup fifth round after Eddie Howe’s side exposed a recurring soft centre. Ruben Loftus-Cheek could step up his comeback with the under-23s on Monday and Callum Hudson‑Odoi is expected to return against Everton on Sunday but, in the meantime, Chelsea have defensive frailties to remedy. “Every game is different but you have to have a mindset within the group on the pitch,” Lampard said. “Sometimes you have to dig in and concentrate that little bit more as a group – that we have been tested with a lot. We have talked about it a lot. The players have to find that solution on the pitch.” Ben Fisher • Match report: Bournemouth 2-2 Chelsea Leicester need a fit and firing Jamie Vardy in double-quick time if their season is not to turn from outstanding to merely very good. Vardy missed the flat defeat at Carrow Road with a calf injury and has struggled with a series of niggles since Christmas. “It is a concern,” Brendan Rodgers said. “We’ve spoken about that with him and the medical team.” Rodgers hopes he will be back to face Aston Villa on 9 March, with Kelechi Iheanacho not the most convincing of deputies. In the short term Vardy is required to see Leicester over the line to the Champions League spots but his recent spate of absences may have longer-term implications: his injury record in recent years has been exemplary, but he has just turned 33 and cannot go at full tilt for ever. How Rodgers can address that reality in the summer may depend on where Leicester finish. Nick Ames • Match report: Norwich 1-0 Leicester If we were not already, it is probably time to bracket Diogo Jota among the best and most intelligent all‑round forwards in England. His goal at Spurs was his sixth in three games but his all-round display, culminating in a marvellous run to set up Raúl Jiménez’s winner, was exceptional and the 23-year-old just keeps getting better. Jota is quick, difficult to knock off the ball and deft when releasing it – and on Sunday he also posed a threat in the air, a leap and flex of the neck muscles producing a header that almost flew in after half-time. Jiménez and Adama Traoré have taken most of Wolves’ headlines, and the former looked typically imperious in their latest win, but Jota belongs in that company too. Nuno Espírito Santo demands extreme tactical rigour from his front men in order that their flourishes have foundation; Jota fits the bill in both senses. Nick Ames• Match report: Tottenham 2-3 Wolves Entering the final straight of the season with Premier League survival still in doubt is a familiar feeling for Glenn Murray. The veteran striker has been through his fair share of relegation battles since being promoted to the top flight in 2013 with Crystal Palace before moving to Bournemouth and then back to Brighton. But despite this damaging home defeat against their arch rivals on Saturday – a result that left Graham Potter’s side sitting precariously above the drop zone by one point – the 36-year-old knows they must end a run of just one win from their past 18 Premier League fixtures soon to avoid being dragged under. “It’s nothing new to us,” Murray said. “We don’t think we are better than this. We aim to improve all the time but this is the scenario we are in and we’ve got to deal with it.” Ed Aarons • Match report: Brighton 0-1 Crystal Palace Burnley’s Chris Wood has scored 10 goals in 25 league appearances this season. The New Zealand striker began on the bench but made a big difference once he stepped off it, worrying Steve Bruce’s experimental back four. Wood’s movement and ability to make his physical presence felt prompted memories of Bruce’s predecessor, Rafael Benítez, regularly extolling his virtues. Considering Wood would probably have cost around half the £40m Newcastle invested in Joelinton – the scorer of one goal in 28 league games – it would surely have been worth Bruce trying to buy him last summer. But such an attempt would have been vetoed; Wood is 28 and Mike Ashley, Newcastle’s owner, has a policy of buying only players younger than 25 with high resale potential. Should the club suffer a third relegation on Ashley’s watch that will look like a shockingly false economy. Louise Taylor • Match report: Newcastle 0-0 Burnley While the focus was on West Ham’s forwards after their 3-1 win over Southampton, David Moyes still wants more balance between defence and attack. West Ham have not kept a clean sheet in the league since 1 January and Moyes knows better defending will increase his side’s survival hopes. “If you are going to lose lots of goals you will always be in trouble,” he said. “If we want really good attacking players we have to have good defenders.” There were some encouraging signs against Southampton. Issa Diop and Angela Ogbonna impressed in central defence, while Jeremy Ngakia had another promising game at right-back. “I am working with them,” Moyes said. “Diop has incredible potential but he also has the mistakes of a young centre-half that we have seen over recent weeks. I have a 19-year-old right‑back playing his third game. We have to make sure we are strong defensively.” Jacob Steinberg • Match report: West Ham 3-1 Southampton The list of stars who have faded in the wake of Lionel Messi at Barcelona is long and illustrious. Cesc Fàbregas, Thierry Henry, Alexis Sánchez and Zlatan Ibrahimovic come readily to mind. With Luis Suárez and Ousmane Dembélé long-term absentees, Antoine Griezmann is adapting to the role of superdomestique assistant to the master. The evidence of Sunday’s defeat at the Bernabéu is that the Frenchman and Argentinian do not operate on the same wavelength. Griezmann’s early glaring miss from from Jordi Alba’s pass – a favourite Messi supply line – passed up a golden chance to buy himself some credibility with doubtful Barça fans. Griezmann is unfortunate not to be playing with the peak Messi of the Pep Guardiola years, a player prepared to exert himself, and so must link with someone who flits in and out. And that makes establishing a connection even more difficult. John Brewin• Match report: Real Madrid 2-0 Barcelona