“It’s a good night and it seems to be getting better,” Joe Biden said during his election night speech in Los Angeles. Biden’s campaign had been teetering on the edge of disaster before his decisive victory in South Carolina on Saturday, when black voters turned out for the former vice-president. That victory appears to have reinvigorated Biden’s campaign, and propelled him to wins in all of the southern states that held contests Tuesday night – in Texas, Virginia, Alabama, North Carolina, Tennessee, Arkansas and Oklahoma. Going into Super Tuesday, the Vermont senator Bernie Sanders was considered the frontrunner, with an early lead in the delegate count. Though Sanders won California, according to projections by the Associated Press, Biden’s wins in nine states showed he was still very much in contention for the nomination. Suddenly, the Democratic party’s presidential field, which featured more than half a dozen candidates a week ago, had transformed into a two-man contest. The Biden campaign’s internal polling had showed him with safe leads in some of those states going into Super Tuesday, according to a Democrat with knowledge of that information. But the margins were just the best-case scenario for projections, and having trailed his rivals in the early voting states of Iowa, New Hampshire and Nevada last month, Biden had been vulnerable before the South Carolina win. Biden’s success also extended to states where he had not even campaigned. He won Elizabeth Warren’s home state, and Minnesota, the home state of the former presidential candidate Amy Klobuchar, who dropped out of the race and endorsed Biden on Monday. Sanders had won both Oklahoma and Minnesota in his 2016 primary race against Hillary Clinton. The billionaire and former New York mayor staked his entire campaign strategy on dominating the Super Tuesday states. He poured almost $500m into advertising and field staff in these states. But as the night drew on Bloomberg’s only victory came in … the US territory of American Samoa, where just six delegates were up for grabs (compared with California’s 415). Even before the night ended, Bloomberg and his team were reportedly planning to reassess his options on Wednesday and weigh whether to drop out in the coming days. Biden’s momentum began early in the night with victories in southern states. In those states he dominated among minorities, according to exit polls. In North Carolina, Biden got 62% of the African American vote and 43% of the Hispanic vote – a plurality among the candidates. In Virginia Biden got a whopping 71% of the black vote. Biden’s victories were powered by Democratic voters who went his way just days before casting their ballots a wave of late momentum. In some states, the late-deciders made up roughly half of all voters, according to AP VoteCast, surveys of voters in several state primaries. In addition to African Americans, he also drew support from a coalition of moderates and conservatives, and voters older than 45. But Sanders had better numbers among young voters in key states. In California, 72% of voters between 18 and 29 supported the Vermont senator compared with just 5% for Biden. Among voters between 30 and 44, Sanders beat every other candidate with 57% support. But he was unable to sufficiently widen his appeal to older voters and college graduates who make up a sizeable share of Democratic voters, according to AP VoteCast. The results were more mixed in Texas. Biden won the majority of votes among African Americans, according to projections, but Sanders dominated among Hispanics. It was a bad night for Warren. The Massachusetts senator lost her home state and barely registered in most other states. Warren’s campaign manager, Roger Lau, authored a memo days before Super Tuesday where he suggested the campaign would continue regardless of how Warren did on Super Tuesday. “Super Tuesday is the first test in March to amass delegates, but a week later we will be competing in six states, and a week after that another four that represent over 500 delegates up for grabs,” Lau wrote in the memo. “By the time all of California’s votes from mail-in ballots are counted, likely in mid-March, we will still only be halfway to the overall number of pledged delegates up for grabs.” But Warren’s poor performance sparked a new round of questions from Democratic strategists of just how many more days she could stay in the race. Biden and Sanders seemed to tacitly accept that they would be fighting each other in the immediate future. Sanders, meanwhile, vowed to aggressively contrast his legislative record on key policy points such as social security. Biden reiterated in his speech that if Sanders won the nomination he could not beat Trump and might imperil the chances of other Democratic candidates running in down-ticket races. “We want a nominee who’ll beat Donald Trump but also keep Nancy Pelosi as speaker of the House,” Biden said. “And we want a nominee who’s a Democrat. A lifelong Democrat. A proud Democrat. An Obama-Biden Democrat.” The balance of Super Tuesday’s battlefield, with Biden winning at least nine states and Sanders four, raised questions about whether the Democratic primary contest would stretch all the way to the July convention or be decided much sooner. The Associated Press contributed to this report