These stories are designed to offer practical advice, provide some entertainment, foster a sense of social cohesion, and remind people of the good in the world during these strange and isolating times. When William Shakespeare was quarantined by the plague, according to Shakespearean scholar James Shapiro, he wrote a few things. Antony and Cleopatra. King Lear. Macbeth. Sure. Good for him! Some of us are now also in quarantine, and we, too, are doing our best work: sitting in our tracksuit pants, munching on toast and grasping with unfounded desperation for good memes that will age terribly. Please enjoy, and add your own in the comments. remember to wash your hands xox pic.twitter.com/YB7GH6zPtW - “How’s nationwide self-quarantine going?” pic.twitter.com/oP7sdQiUPA - Stay safe friends x pic.twitter.com/krUBYLoewn - QUARANTINE DIARYDay 1: I have stocked up on enough non-perishable food and supplies to last me for months, maybe years, so that I can remain in isolation for as long as it takes to see out this pandemicDay 1 + 45 minutes: I am in the supermarket because I wanted a Twix - "CDC does not recommend that people who are well wear a facemask to protect themselves from respiratory diseases, including COVID-19"#stewardmeme pic.twitter.com/7rD7PfqY9a - MGMT have advice for times of crisis:•Control yourself•Take only what you need from it•A family of trees wanted to be haunted - me, partying with all my swords at the swords festivalme, social distancing alone with my swords pic.twitter.com/8nlfVlD5Bf - self quarantine at my bosses house so far so good pic.twitter.com/CeEceDrXsg - Mastering the art of social distancing since forever. Srsly tho follow public health advice and if you can: self-isolate, work from home, cancel gatherings. A post shared by  Keeping Up with the KPIs (@kuwtkpis) on Mar 15, 2020 at 2:30pm PDT - oh nowwww everyone wanna know what introverts do for fun - a guide to paper-free hand dryers pic.twitter.com/rBJoS7wI5f - Not now, Neil https://t.co/dnuDeIpkXO - Wash your hands to scatman pic.twitter.com/SH4jHsld2p - Your grandparents were called to war. You’re being called to sit on your couch. You can do this. #QuarantineLife Did we miss your favourite? Please add it in the comments below: