“Oh, you British, always crying about Europe. It’s time to grow up,” my Greek friend said as we dined on Sophialaan, Amsterdam. The woman has no truck with my moist-eyed lament for the beloved bloc and the financial joys of the Eurozone. Fittingly, we’re eating in Ron Gastrobar, where the owner also turned his back on an important institution. Ron Blaauw closed his fancy, two-Michelin-starred, eponymously titled restaurant in 2013, then reinvented it as a more relaxed and groovy affair. Ron is all about fun these days. Think gastropub, but in a wine bar. It’s a gastrobar! The website shows him chipping about on his moped, stubble-strewn and crumpled-looking, like an unrested Peter Hook. This is not a man pinned down by formality. Just eat your crisp veal brain with jerusalem artichoke and hang loose. Or your cream of cod liver with sea vegetables. Or kale gnocchi with smoked oyster. Yes, I know none of these sounds remotely chilled out. Sadly for Blaauw – or happily; I’m not really sure which at this stage – Michelin gave his new, cosier place a star, so even on a wet Wednesday night in February, the place is so noisy, I can barely hear myself mewling about the patchy quality of the UK’s Eurovision entry. “Pah! No one ever votes for you at Eurovision anyway,” the Greek laughs while fishing very good chilli-infused cornichons out of a jar and slathering warm bread with whipped butter. I am finding all this unfettered truth less than gentle on the stomach. An irrefutable truth: Amsterdam is lots of fun to eat around right now. Over the past year, I’ve been to Mr Porter, part chic cocktail lounge, part rustic steakhouse, and I’ve returned a few times to The Duchess, a giddily elegant dining hall within the former KAS Bank, which I recommend highly. The bento boxes at Momo are fantastic. I’ve even fallen a little in love with Albert Heijn supermarkets (a sort of hybrid of Planet Organic and your local Spar) and their bars of Tony’s Chocolonely chocolate and bizarrely realistic vegan fish sandwiches. Even the Eurostar that goes direct from St Pancras to Centraal station has a menu by Raymond Blanc. Whether I’d return to Ron Gastrobar, however, is debatable. We ride roughshod through the small plates menu, eating one of those dinners where the next morning my most resounding memory is of foams, broths, quenelles and perilously small portions. All romantically lit and with bright, pleasant service, true, but we leave hungry. A minuscule cubic stack of duck liver and smoked eel is certainly earthy, as well as pretty to look at, but really not for sharing, as our servers insist. The same goes for “The Original” spare ribs, topped with crispy sauerkraut and a good, jammy sambol, which are the size of a child’s hand. Dutch cauliflower pleases me greatly – fine-quality florets sauteed to golden in brown butter and slathered with Pierre Robert cheese and winter truffle. OK, it’s millionaire’s cauliflower cheese, and at €25 for a few forkfuls, you might find yourself hoping for a lottery win. One single king crab taco to share, intricately assembled with jalapeño and shellfish butter, sits in a taco stand looking as easy to negotiate as frictionless trade outside a customs union. We order a large, delicious, barbecued turbot that comes with a bowl of “Frietboutique” fries, a namecheck for a chain of Instagram-generation chip shops owned by two sylph-like blondes called Sammy and Pebbles. These women have never eaten a bag of batter scraps in their life. In eschewing formality, the Ron Gastrobar concept is hilariously lopsided. “Anjou pigeon royal” for €42.50 sits on the menu beside a dessert called – and the idea still makes me shriek – “Ron’s Ice Cream Bucket”. It’s a bucket of ice-cream! The menu really does use exclamation marks! The menu suggests you order a delicate glass of sauternes to sip with your trough; I order a cheese plate: some Stichelton, Bleu des Causses and Petit Livarot that were clearly portioned up by someone from a catering college in Lilliput. The Breton cake, kouign-amann, is as wonderful as layer after layer of the fattiest, buttery, sugary pastry drenched in pineapple caramel with salted caramel ice-cream sounds. Still, I fell out of dinner feeling that I’d turned up full of good will, spent a fortune and not had much for my money. “Exactly like Brussels,” the Greek said. I was hungry, far from home and wriggling in the grip of reason. • Ron Gastrobar Sophialaan 55, 1075 BP Amsterdam, 020 496 1943. Open all week, noon-2.30pm, 5.30-10.30pm. About €70 a head plus drinks and service. Food 7/10 Atmosphere 7/10 Service 7/10