Prep 20 minChill 30 minCook 1 hr 30 minServes 10-12 For the pastry250g wholegrain rye flour1 tsp flaky salt1 tbsp fennel seeds1 tbsp caraway seeds50g mixed seeds, such as pumpkin, sunflower, sesame and linseed125g cold unsalted butter, cut into cubes, plus extra for greasing 1 egg, plus 1 egg yolk to seal the pastry1 tbsp whole milk For the filling3 tbsp rapeseed oil (I like cold-pressed)2 bunches spring onions(about 220g), washed and finely chopped300g whole milk300g creme fraiche6 eggs2 tsp chopped thyme, optionalSalt and black pepper300g purple sprouting broccoli, boiled for 1-2 minutes until just tender, then strained and patted dry400g hot smoked trout (or salmon, if you prefer) Heat the oven to 190C (180C fan)/gas 6. Butter the base and sides of a 24cm, wide, 5cm deep tart tin and line the base with baking paper. Mix the flour, salt and seeds, rub in the butter with your fingertips, or use a freestanding mixer fitted with a paddle, to form a breadcrumb consistency. Add the egg and milk, and mix to form a dough. Roll out the dough between two pieces of baking paper, roll on to a the rolling pin, unfurl over the tin, press the pastry into the edges of the tin, and rest for 30 minutes in the freezer. Heat the rapeseed oil in a frying pan. Add the spring onions and ½ tsp salt, cook until soft, then set aside to cool. Mix the milk, creme fraiche, eggs, thyme, 1½ tsp salt and some pepper, then add the cooled spring onions. Fill the tart case with baking beans or dry rice, and blind bake for 10 minutes, then remove the baking beans, and bake for 10-15 minutes more, until golden brown. Finally, turn down the oven to 160C (150C fan)/gas 3, brush the case with the egg yolk and bake for two minutes more. Fill the baked case with layers of fish and broccoli, alternating between the two in ayers. Top with the creme fraiche and egg mix, and bake for about an hour, turning the tart halfway through baking, or until just set with a little wobble. Set aside to cool a little, then serve with extra steamed broccoli or lightly dressed watercress. Prep 30 minChill 30 minCook 45 minServes 8-10 For the pastry245g wholegrain spelt flour, plus more to dust2 tbsp finely chopped parsley1 tbsp finely chopped sage1 tbsp chopped chives1 tsp flaky salt160g cold unsalted butter, cut into cubes85g creme fraiche1 egg yolk, for glazing For the leek and shallot filling400g banana shallots, peeled and quartered5 tbsp rapeseed oil (I like cold-pressed)Salt and black pepper8 garlic cloves, unpeeled 400g leeks, washed and cut into 1cm rounds60g double cream160g Colston Basset stilton, plus 100g to finish, rind removed and crumbled2 tbsp chopped parsley, plus extra to finish1 tbsp chopped chives, plus extra to finish1 tsp thyme leaves, plus extra to finish1 tbsp apple cider vinegarHeat the oven to 190C (180C fan)/gas 6. Combine the flour, herbs and salt. Add the butter and rub in with your fingers, or use a freestanding mixer fitted with a paddle attachment, until the mix resembles to breadcrumbs. Add the creme fraiche, and mix until just combined into a dough. Roll the pastry between two pieces of lightly floured baking paper to form a roughly a 3mm-thick, 30cm diameter disc; the pastry shouldn’t be thicker than about 3mm. Rest in the fridge. Toss the shallots in four tablespoons of rapeseed oil, season and roast for 15-20 minutes, or until caramel brown and soft. Roast the garlic cloves in the remaining rapeseed oil until soft and, when just cool, squeeze the flesh out of the skins and chop roughly. Bring a large saucepan of water to a boil and cook the leeks for a few minutes until just soft, strain through a colander, and set aside to cool. Mix the cooked leeks, shallots and garlic with the cream, cheese, herbs and vinegar, and season well. Take the pastry disc out of the fridge, to soften it a little, then fill with the leek mix, leaving a 5cm edge free. Fold up these edges carefully, glaze with an egg yolk mixed with a pinch of salt, and bake for 20-25 minutes, turning halfway through cooking, until golden brown. Slice and serve with a mixed-leaf and russet apple salad; crumble over the last bit of stilton, and add some extra mixed herbs. Prep 30 minChill 30 minCook 1 hr 10 minServes 8-12 For the pastry95g cold unsalted butter, cubed, plus extra to grease150g wholegrain wheat flour (I like Hodmedod’s YQ wheat flour)1 pinch flaky salt30g golden caster sugar2 egg yolks (keep the whites for the meringue) For the rhubarb400g rhubarb, cut into 4cm pieces50g golden caster sugarZest and juice of 1 orange For the blood orange curd90g golden caster sugar4 eggs; 2 yolks, 2 whole 40g creme fraicheZest and juice of 2 blood oranges (80g juice) For the meringue5 egg whites300g golden caster sugar Heat the oven to 190C (180C fan)/gas 6. Butter the insides and base of a 24cm wide, 2cm deep tart tin with butter, and line the base with baking paper. For the pastry, mix the flour, salt and sugar, add the butter, and rub in with your fingertips, or mix with a freestanding mixer fitted with a paddle to a breadcrumb consistency. Mix in an egg yolk, and knead to combine. Roll out the dough between two pieces of baking paper to about 3mm thick, press into the tin, trim the edges (make the trimmings into biscuits if you like) and rest in the freezer for 30 minutes. Meanwhile, mix the rhubarb on a small tray with the sugar, 120g water, the orange zest and juice, and bake for 10-15 minutes, or until just soft. For the curd, mix the sugar, yolk and eggs in a bowl. Put the creme fraiche and orange juice in a pan, bring to a boil, then pour on to the eggs. Pour back into the saucepan, and stir on a low heat until thickened enough to coat the back of a wooden spoon, or until it reaches 82C. Pass through a sieve, grate in the zest and leave to cool. Take the pastry shell out of the freezer, cover with baking paper, fill with baking beans and blind-bake for 10 minutes. Remove the beans, bake for five to 10 minutes more, or until golden brown, then remove from the oven. Brush the base and sides with the remaining egg yolk, bake for a further two minutes, then cool slightly. Arrange the rhubarb in the case, and pour over the curd. Turn down the oven to 130C (120C fan) gas low, and bake for 10-15 minutes, until just set. Remove and set aside to cool a little. For the meringue, whip the egg whites until firm, then whip in the sugar until just combined. Spoon over the top of the slightly cooled tart and bake for 20 minutes, until just set. If you want, put the tart under the grill for a few minutes, or blowtorch the top for a little colour. To cut, heat a sharp knife in hot water. Prep 20 minChill 30 minCook 45 minServes 8-10 For the oat walnut pastry80g cold unsalted butter, cubed, plus extra for greasing80g rolled oats80g wholegrain wheat or spelt flour40g light brown muscovado sugar70g toasted walnuts, roughly chopped½ tsp salt1 egg yolk For the filling500g honeyJuice and finely grated zest of 2 lemons200g breadcrumbs (preferably sourdough)30g ginger, finely grated80g stem ginger, roughly chopped, syrup from the jar to finish Heat the oven to 190C (180C fan)/gas 6. Butter the sides and base of a 24cm-wide, 2cm-deep tart tin, and line the base with baking paper. For the pastry, combine the oats, flour, sugar, walnuts and salt, add the cubes of butter then rub in with your fingertips or mix with a freestanding mixer fitted with a paddle to breadcrumb consistency. Mix in the egg yolk, knead together, then roll out the dough between two pieces of baking paper or on a floured surface to about 3mm thick and just wider than the tin. Roll into the tin, pressing into the edges, and pressing over any overhanging pastry into the tin. Rest in the freezer for 30 minutes. Bring the honey, lemon juice and zest to a boil, then remove from the heat. Add the remaining ingredients and mix well. Take the pastry shell out of the freezer, cover with baking paper, fill with baking beans and blind-bake from frozen for 10 minutes. Remove the beans, bake for 10 minutes more, or until golden brown, then remove from the oven. Pour in the honey-breadcrumb mix, level out the top, and bake for 10 minutes. Turn the tart around halfway, and bake for a further 10 minutes, or until just set. Remove from the oven, brush with some of the stem ginger syrup, leave to cool slightly, and serve with double cream or vanilla ice-cream and extra ginger syrup. * The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US. • Recipes by Henrietta Inman, head chef, and Alex Hely-Hutchinson, founder, at Stoney Street @henriettainman @stoneystreet26 