Seven Democratic candidates have caught the eye of progressive champion Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and her recently launched political action committee Courage to Change. Six of these candidates – all women of color – are running for Congress. But one – Cristina Tzintzún Ramirez – has her eyes on a bigger prize. She is running for a chance to represent the party in a vital Texas Senate seat, and to try and defeat Republican incumbent John Cornyn in what would be a remarkable victory. Tzintzún Ramirez, and the other AOC-backed candidates, are hoping to replicate the New York congresswoman’s success by running against more centrist and establishment Democrats. By doing so they want to pull the party leftwards and at the same time energize the progressive base and bring in new voters in a way that will allow them to effectively beat Republicans. “One of my gifts is seeing a pathway to change where other people might not see one. I see that Texas is ready and poised for change. It’s going to take a dynamic candidate like myself that’s ready to fight. I’m not a party insider,” Tzintzún Ramirez told the Guardian. Originally from Ohio, Tzintzún Ramirez has called Texas home since 2000. One of her first roles in politics was organizing Latino immigrant workers. She eventually served as executive director of the Workers Defense Project, which provided aid and representation to construction workers. This is the first attempt at running for office for Tzintzún Ramirez, a working mom who hopes to articulate what it means to be a progressive and deliver real change for marginalized communities in Texas and the US. “I’ve spent my career and life in Texas facing what has often felt like insurmountable odds to change legislation and take on corporations and industries on the behalf of working people, young people, and undocumented workers. I’m proud that every time someone has underestimated myself or the communities I represent, we’ve proved them wrong,” she said. It was Ocasio-Cortez who inspired Tzintzún Ramirez to run in the first place. Today @CouragetoChange is announcing its first endorsements of newcomers to Congress:SENATECristina Tzintzún Ramirez (TX)HOUSETeresa Fernandez (NM)Kara Eastman (NE)Georgette Gomez (CA)Marie Newman (IL)Jessica Cisneros (TX)Samelys Lopez (NY)https://t.co/sbSKTipijm “AOC’s endorsement matters greatly to the diverse electorate and young voters across Texas. I’m proud to have her backing,” she said. Tzintzún Ramirez shares a similar origin story with Ocasio-Cortez. The child of an immigrant, and an underdog in an important race, she is no stranger to difficult odds, having fought for construction workers and immigrants through organizations she founded like the Austin Immigrant Rights Coalition (AIRC) and the Better Builder Program. “A person like me felt like I could run based on what [AOC] and other progressives and women of color have been doing which is standing up to both political parties to demand representation and real systemic change on the issues that matter to working people,” she said. Democrats are hoping to flip the once deep red state of Texas, specifically within the Senate. Cornyn is up for re-election this year. His Democratic opponent in the November general election will be decided on Super Tuesday. There are currently 12 candidates seeking the Democratic nomination to take on the senator. Texas has been here before when it comes to senate races and outsider candidates. The rise and fall of Beto O’Rourke after his unsuccessful run against Ted Cruz left the state rattled, but significantly changed its political landscape with spikes in Democratic voter turnout and a renewed spotlight on the Texas Democratic party. O’Rourke, who has decided to sit this election out, has yet to vocalize his support for any of the 12 candidates vying for the nomination. Also noticeably absent from this election are high-profile Texans such as the Castro brothers, Julián and Joaquin. Joaquin Castro did, however, endorse Tzintzún Ramirez. He said: “With her extensive track record working on behalf of Texans to secure living wages, protect immigrant communities, and engage our young and diverse electorate, I’m proud to support Cristina Tzintzún Ramirez.” But even with support from the likes of Castro, Ocasio-Cortez, and even the actor Alec Baldwin, Tzintzún Ramirez has is far from a clear path to victory. The state’s Democratic establishment is placing its bet on MJ Hegar – a retired air force veteran and the more centrist candidate. Hegar received support from the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee (DSCC). Tzintzún Ramirez is hoping her powerful support among Latinos will help her. She founded Jolt in 2017, a not-for-profit organization with the singular goal of increasing civic participation within the Latino community. Now she’s counting on them to show up to the polls. “Young Latinos are a key, key demographic. Nobody in Texas flips Texas without driving turnout among young people and Latinos, and yet we have consistently failed to invest in those voting blocs,” she said. Dr Brandon Rottinghaus, a political science professor at the University of Houston, said the Texas Democratic party is currently split between the left and moderates – but that could change on Super Tuesday. “The party is definitely moving in a more progressive direction, because it’s fueled by younger and racially diverse candidates and voters who are attempting to push the party in that direction. But it’s not clear yet. Winning Texas for Democrats is tough statewide,” Rottinghaus said. That may be true. But Cornyn, who has long been a close ally of Trump, has himself admitted: “Texas is no longer, I believe, a reliably red state.”For Tzintzún Ramirez, her run against Cornyn is also personal. “Cornyn has blinded himself with the president. That is very unpopular here in Texas. He’s demonized and targeted Mexicans, immigrants and their children. I fit into all of those categories,” she said.