It’s hard to know what to do at a time like this. It feels like so many of us are falling into a deep sense of despair as we’re bombarded with apocalyptic news on our social media feeds and on the radio. The UK was already ill equipped for a crisis like this – a decade of austerity left us with a cash-strapped and understaffed health service, and a shaky economy built on precarious work. Now, with the number of new cases of coronavirus increasing rapidly, alongside the confusion brought on by the government’s response, it’s starting to feel as if we must also take community action to look after each other. That’s why a handful of community organisers and activists have set up a nationwide network of Mutual Aid groups, which are providing resources and connecting people to willing volunteers and those in need. In this time of uncertainty, we’re coming together to lend each other a hand. While many are practising “social isolation”, the 300+ groups that have sprung up in the past week are showing it’s possible, and indeed necessary, for us to connect and communicate with our neighbourhoods in response to the outbreak. This is a global crisis, with terrible, widespread consequences that are still unfolding. But, in many ways, it calls for local responses. No matter what we look like, where we live, or how much money we have, getting sick reminds us that we are all human and our bodies are fragile. Simultaneously, in every community it’s still the old, the sick and those who are most structurally disadvantaged that will be most affected. The thousands of people who have signed up to our network, who are self-organising on Facebook and WhatsApp, have been out on the streets handing out leaflets that detail the kind of help we can give to those who need it. We’re offering to deliver to people in self-isolation the basic things they need – from prescriptions to the weekly food shop. We’re also offering a chat on the phone to the many, many people who are feeling more isolated than ever, as the walls of their homes become the temporary borders of their lives. With thousands of people already self-isolating, and those over 70 being told to stay indoors within weeks, it’s crucial we make these connections now. Through our networks, some amazing actions have already taken place. From packed lunches being delivered to isolated families in North Tyneside to the topping up of food bank provisions in Hackney, east London, these first few days have seen a flurry of urgent and important activity. While we want to highlight the importance of community organising, local action alone isn’t enough. The truth is that we are trying to plug gaps left by the government, which is why we’re calling on it to match the community spirit and solidarity of our network by quickly pushing ahead with measures such as guaranteed sick pay for all, expanding free wifi to those without an internet connection, support for renters and the release of immigration detainees. In conjunction with local work, these government decisions would protect people at the sharpest end of inequality in the UK. These are going to be some of the hardest weeks this country has faced in many years – a time of strain when some will undoubtedly try to turn our communities against each other. Our network is an explicit rejection of that kind of division – a sign that solidarity between people won’t be broken, no matter how harsh the conditions we find ourselves in. Our hope is that by the end of this challenging period we will have fostered lasting connections within our communities – that begin to overturn the deep separation and inequity that is so prevalent in our country. • Farzana Khan is a writer and community organiser, and a founding director of Healing Justice London