The Croft is a haunted house story that has a strange resonance with current, real-world horrors. It takes place on a contemporary Scottish Highland outpost whose 19th-century community of crofters was wiped out by tubercular contagion. At the height of that plague, there were rumblings of witchcraft and an acute shortage of food. Fast-forward to the present and the croft has turned into a holiday home that offers welcome isolation for its owners: the nearest shop is 45 minutes away and there is no phone signal for miles. This sets the stage for various hauntings in Philip Franks’s touring production for the Original Theatre Company, which is now available online. The play moves between three timelines and several women whose lives become intertwined inside the croft. Enid (Gwen Taylor) is a spectre from the 19th century who was deemed a witch and dared to shelter the pregnant, outcast daughter of the Laird. Ruth (Caroline Harker) is a 21st-century ghost. Ruth died from cancer and her marriage was strained by her affair with a local man. In the present day is her grieving daughter, Laura (Lucy Doyle), who turns up at the croft for a romantic break with her older lesbian partner, Suzanne (also played by Harker), and is sucked into the hut’s dark past. The three worlds collide on stage and the sense of the uncanny is amplified by the actors doubling up in roles. There is an interesting exploration of women who dare to go against the grain in the supernaturalism of Ali Milles’s script, but some parallels made between renegade women of the past and present do not hold. Enid, as the croft’s most powerful haunting, appears ultimately to be a negative force, even towards the women around her, and her motivations are under-explained. As a psychodrama about fractured relationships, there are powerful moments between Laura and her parents, although the central lesbian relationship lacks spark. The horror itself is signposted with switches in light, plumes of smoke and suddenly startled characters who begin to say: “What was that?” a little too early in proceedings. Enid’s recurring blood-covered apparition feels hokey rather than horrifying. But as a haunted house story, it succeeds in creating tension and then cranking it up. Adrian Linford’s set, which features the inside and outside of the hut, and Chris Davey’s lighting, help the raising of dread with a sky that changes colours from daytime-blue to dusk-black and blood-red as the horror escalates. The most chilling moments, in the end, are those that hint at otherworldly horrors rather than show them outright. • The Croft is available for pre-order at originaltheatre and will be available to watch online from 7.30pm on 27 March until 2 June at originaltheatreonline.