‘I’m here for two years, tops, so don’t get attached to me,” says DCI Lauren McDonald (Tala Gouveia) at the start of McDonald and Dodds (ITV). Which is no way to launch a TV cop franchise, but still. “But, while I’m here, I’m gonna solve cases in half the time with half the manpower.” Talking about it won’t make it happen. Imagine Simon Pegg from Hot Fuzz as a crime-solving woman of colour with sarcastic eyebrows and you’ll get the picture. McDonald has been transferred from south London’s mean streets to Bath, a city where the worst crimes are usually the prices for cream teas. Well, not quite. There’s a corpse at a millionaire’s mansion, plugged with two slugs from a military-issue sidearm. Despite the panama hat and expensive shirt, the vic had prison tats and a rap sheet as long as the elegant Regency staircase down which he fell to his death. The mansion is owned by Robert Lindsay’s oleaginous entrepreneur, Max Crockett. He made a £30m fortune from making steam irons which, as one cop puts it, are “the best things to come out of Bath since Plasticine”. Plasticine was indeed invented in Bath by William Harbutt. No, not William Hardbutt. He invented chair cushions. Crockett is planning to retire. But to which of his three daughters will he leave his fortune? If the premise sounds like King Lear or Succession, let me say this: Brian Cox didn’t give anything away in Succession. And is Crockett’s artisanal-baker daughter, Ellie, who does such a good Cordelia impression all she seems? Not if I know my crime dramas she isn’t. Whodunnit? “Most murder victims are killed by a member of their own family,” McDonald tells the Crocketts. “Maybe where you come from. But not here,” scoffs Crockett’s Goneril-like daughter, Megan, who is not only vice-chair of Bath’s police oversight committee, but the answer to the question: “Who ate all the lemons?” “We’re nice, middle-class people who go glamping,” says her no-less-citrus-filled barrister husband. “We play boules at the weekend. Where are we going to get a firearm?” McDonald rightly figures she has a family of suspects, all with motives, but no alibis. But how is she going to prove some or all of them are guilty before the sixth and final ad break? Step forward her new partner, DS Dodds. Like Morse, if he has a first name no one has used it for decades. Dodds hasn’t been deployed in a non-desk-related crime scenario for 11 years. The brass so want him to take early retirement that they have put his desk under the air-conditioning, which means he has to wear a scarf. Monsters. I don’t want to endorse the stereotype that Dodds is pale, male and stale, but he wears a tie under a tank top, which is so wrong I don’t know where to start. He may have eyebrows, but they are sneaky ones, so blond that they pass unnoticed on his pasty face. As a result, Jason Watkins, who plays Dodds, has to use not his eyebrows but minimal eye movement to suggest his character’s default mode of existential bewilderment. Watkins was so adorable as W1A’s floral-shirted BBC drone who was literally good for nothing but folding Hugh Bonneville’s Brompton (not a euphemism) that he surprises here as someone with unexpected professional gifts. Dodds breaks the case by spotting a peregrine falcon near the Crockett mansion. Its nest in a nearby church tower, he realises, will be ringed with RSPB-installed cameras, which will show who broke in to the Crocketts’ mansion and offed the stiff. “Good work with the penguin falcon,” says McDonald, still not convinced her new partner isn’t a chump. “Peregrine,” he corrects, saddened by her ignorance of local fauna. The writer, Robert Murphy, has created a lovely double act. Not since Felix Unger tried to vacuum Oscar Madison’s drapes (again, not a euphemism) have I enjoyed the venerable trope of the odd couple so much. Don’t get attached? Too late, ma’am. I already am.