If Leicester end up qualifying for the Champions League next season then Brendan Rodgers may be tempted to send his regards to Pepe Reina. The Aston Villa goalkeeper fell out spectacularly with Rodgers when he took over at Liverpool before being shown the door, but on Monday night it was the veteran’s rush of blood to the head at the end of the first half that gifted his former manager a priceless first league victory since the end of January. A second-half double from Jamie Vardy – his first goals since December – after he came off the bench and a second for the superb Harvey Barnes wrapped up the points to leave Villa’s Dean Smith cutting a disconsolate figure at full-time. “Disappointed is an understatement,” he said. “We’ve made a big mistake for their first goal and we are getting punished massively for that at the moment. It was a tough last 15 minutes.” The defeat leaves Villa mired in the bottom three and facing the daunting prospect of forthcoming fixtures against Chelsea, Wolves, Liverpool and Manchester United. Smith will know they need to reproduce the form that kick-started an unlikely promotion last season if they are to stand a chance of avoiding an immediate return. Those kind of concerns used to be a staple among Leicester supporters but the yo-yo years are long gone in the east Midlands. There had been a sense of urgency among them before kick-off having seen their team’s lead over the chasing pack whittled down to five points following Manchester United’s victory on Sunday. “You want to hear that special music next season, don’t you,” asked the stadium announcer in reference to the competition they contested in 2016-17, reaching the quarter-finals. Yet they could have been forgiven for fearing the worst against opponents who had already denied them a place in the Carabao Cup final. Villa’s last-gasp home victory in the second leg of the semi-final at the end of January preceded a run of four successive defeats which culminated in their valiant loss to Manchester City at Wembley, during which time their relegation rivals have stolen a march on them. Smith restored Reina in goal despite Ørjan Nyland’s performance against City and it was a decision he would come to regret. The visitors should really taken the lead inside the first 10 minutes but neither Conor Hourihane nor Mbwana Samatta could take chances provided by the dazzling feet of Jack Grealish. James Maddison – a potential rival for a place in England’s Euro 2020 squad – responded to the cat-calls from the visiting fans as he prepared to take Leicester’s first corner by delivering a perfect cross that was met by the head of Jonny Evans. This time, Reina came to Villa’s rescue with an instinctive save. Caglar Soyuncu then wasted another brilliant corner from Maddison before the referee waved away appeals for a penalty after Frédéric Guilbert challenged Ricardo Pereira. But the miss of the half was reserved for Kelechi Iheanacho, who headed wide from Pereira’s glorious deep cross after a short corner when it seemed easier to score. Down on the touchline, Rodgers was not amused. But it was soon Smith’s turn to kick the ground in frustration as Reina charged out of his goal in an attempt to intercept Marc Albrighton’s speculative long ball ahead of Barnes only to see the Leicester winger easily win the race before taking his chance with aplomb. “After the first goal we got our intensity back,” said a delighted Rodgers, who also singled out the returning Wilfred Ndidi’s influence on his side’s performance. The former Spain goalkeeper’s heart must have been in his mouth again two minutes after the restart when his clearance was headed into the onrushing Iheanacho’s path by the impressive James Justin, although this time the 37-year-old stayed on his line and made a comfortable save. Villa mustered no shots on target in the first half and appeared no closer to threatening Kasper Schmeichel’s goal after the interval, as Grealish’s influence waned. Vardy’s introduction to replace Iheanacho was greeted with a roar almost as loud as that for the opening goal and it did not take long for him to make his presence felt. Lurking at the back post to convert a cross from Barnes, the ball was diverted out of his path by the shoulder of Tyrone Mings and the referee pointed immediately to the penalty spot. “It was a big gamble to give a penalty,” said Smith. Vardy did not make the cleanest connection but it was enough to extend Leicester’s lead. His second was another moment Reina will not want to see again as Vardy lashed the ball home at the near post after Villa had once again failed to clear from a Barnes through-ball. The 22-year-old youth team product – himself surely a candidate for an England call-up next week – rounded things off with a sharp finish from Albrighton’s cross five minutes from time to complete a miserable night for Smith’s side. “Going down, going down, going down,” sang the Leicester fans. On this evidence, it is hard to disagree.