Members of Congress are racing back to Washington, despite social isolation guidelines, out of fear that a lawmaker could delay a Friday vote on the $2.2tn economic stimulus package designed to rush federal aid to workers, businesses and a healthcare system ravaged by the coronavirus. The desire by House leaders was to pass the bill with a “voice vote” – when everyone in the chamber shouts “aye” or “no” and the loudest group prevails. But any member of Congress can demand a rollcall vote and require a quorum, forcing at least 216 lawmakers to return to Washington in the midst of a pandemic to ensure the bill passes. There is no doubt the law has enough support to pass. The Senate approved the bill in a unanimous vote on Wednesday night. House speaker Nancy Pelosi said she expected broad bipartisan support and Donald Trump has said he would sign it into law. “There could be one vote – one vote. There could be one grandstander maybe,” Trump said on Thursday. “And for that, we will have to come back and take a little more time. “Let’s see whether or not we have a grandstander.” Trump declined to point the finger at any one lawmaker, but all eyes are on Republican congressman Thomas Massie, a libertarian from Kentucky with little loyalty to party leadership. On Capitol Hill, Massie dismissed concerns about legislators having to fly back to Washington, noting that he chose to drive and suggesting stranded colleagues might “hitch a ride with a trucker”. Massie has left a trail of hints about his intentions – but has not said definitively whether he will object to a voice vote. “They’re trying to convince us it should be a voice vote. It shouldn’t be recorded,” Massie told a radio station on Thursday. “I’m struggling with this.” His colleagues are furious. At least two House members have tested positive for coronavirus, while a number of others are awaiting test results or in quarantine after coming into contact with an infected person. “Dear @RepThomasMassie: If you intend to delay passage of the #coronavirus relief bill tomorrow morning, please advise your 428 colleagues RIGHT NOW so we can book flights and expend ~$200,000 in taxpayer money to counter your principled but terribly misguided stunt,” Minnesota congressman Dean Phillips tweeted on Thursday night. Republican congressman Fred Upton of Michigan said he was “driving back to DC to help get this thing over the finish line” while several lawmakers from western states said they were jumping on red-eye flights to make it back in time. “I am jumping on the red eye tonight. Thanks Massie,” Arizona congressman Ruben Gallego, a Democrat, tweeted. “Getting on a red eye,” California congressman Mike Levin, tweeted. “Too much is at stake and Americans can’t afford to wait any longer.” The House will convened at 9am ET. There will be three hours of debate on the legislation before they attempt to pass the bill by voice vote. “Members are advised that it is possible this measure will not pass by voice vote,” House majority leader Steny Hoyer wrote in an advisory to members on Thursday night. “Members are encouraged to follow the guidance of their local and state health officials, however if they are able and willing to be in Washington DC by 10am [Friday]. Members are encouraged to do so with caution.” If a recorded vote is required, the House is planning to enforce strict social distancing guidelines, allowing members on the floor to vote in small groups to avoid crowding. A memo from the sergeant-at-arms, Paul Irving, and the House attending physician, Brian Monahan, not so subtly suggested members of the chamber, where the age range spans from 30 to 86, consider staying home. In bolded and underlined text, they wrote: “Members should use extreme care and deliberation when making the determination to travel to Washington DC.” “We will be monitoring the number of members in the Capitol and on the floor to ensure we maintain safe social distancing at all times,” they added. “Members who are ill with respiratory symptoms or fever are discouraged from attending.”