Nora Fingscheidt’s System Crasher – one of Germany’s most talked-about films since its premiere at last year’s Berlin film festival – starts with a doctor asking nine-year-old Benni what she wants to be when she grows up. “A carer,” she says, flashing a disarming, snaggle-toothed smile. But Fingscheidt only briefly warms our hearts before her unflinchingly realistic drama about Germany’s child protection services shows why Benni spends a lot of time in hospitals. The pre-teen punches, kicks and spits at kids in the playground of a children’s home until the care workers evacuate the inner courtyard and retreat indoors. “Assholes! Piss off!” screams the raging Benni as she hurls go-karts at the adults hiding behind shatterproof glass: a performance worthy of Goodfellas-era Joe Pesci from 11-year-old Berlin actor Helena Zengel. The term “system crasher” has its roots in academia but is nowadays commonly used all over the German care system. According to Menno Baumann, a specialist who wrote a book that coined the term and who was consulted by Fingscheidt in the making of the film, system crashers are “high-risk clientele who are caught in a spiral of negative interactions with the care system, educational establishments and society as a whole”. In Benni’s case, it means a girl who has ended up in child protection services because her mother, now in a new relationship with new children, says she cannot cope with her high-energy firstborn. There are hints of a traumatic early childhood – one of her care workers mentions used nappies being thrust in her face as a baby. But equally unsettling are her mother’s promises, always withdrawn at the 11th hour, that Benni might be able to live with the family again after all. As a result, she gets bounced between various institutions: foster families, living groups, a special needs school. Whenever an emotional bond starts to form, Benni lashes out, for fear of reliving the painful rejection she experienced from her parents. Fingscheidt, who had only directed shorts and documentaries before making System Crasher, spent five years researching conditions for “problem children” in Germany, staying at care homes and psychiatric wards around the country for two to three weeks at a time. “I wanted to know: how do people speak to each other in these places? How do they speak to children?” she says on the phone from Canada, where she is currently filming a remake of Sally Wainwright’s 2009 drama series, Unforgiven, with Sandra Bullock. During one of these visits, she met an 11-year-old boy who had already lived in 52 different care institutions. “That made me stop and think,” says Fingscheidt. “What does it do to people? What does it do to their souls? If I had to move home twice in a year that would be enough to make me feel I am losing a grip on my life. “Benni isn’t a boy, she’s not in puberty, she doesn’t have a migration background, she didn’t grow up in a Berlin high-rise. Benni is a German girl with blond hair from a medium-sized city like Hanover. I wanted to take away the social factors that might be used to explain her behaviour,” says Fingscheidt. She used the term “system crasher” as the title even though she wasn’t convinced it quite captured the problem: “The child doesn’t break the system, because the system continues to exist. It’s more the fact that the system cannot protect some children, and that they fall into bad ways as a result.” “The system” is, to an extent, a specifically German one. Unlike in the UK, where residential care is usually seen as the last resort for looked-after children, in Germany around 70% of children in care live in charity-run residential homes or supported housing. Social workers are usually graduates trained in pedagogy, in the expectation that they can transform young people’s lives for the better. “System breakers are a German problem in as far as the state in our country keeps on trying to come up with new strategies for helping young people like Benni,” says Baumann. “All democratic countries with a welfare state struggle with people like Benni, but it’s probably fair to say that in countries like Britain or the US she would have ended up in a psychiatric hospital or a prison much sooner.” Germany has one of the highest rates for reintegrating problematic young people, and educational attainment and employment rates among care leavers are higher than in the UK – and crime rates significantly lower. “But the helplessness of the helpers that we see in this film is also a sign that Germany’s very ambitious system has developed its own problems,” says Baumann. In System Crasher, there is a moment of hope when Micha, a young anger-management trainer for troubled young people, takes over as Benni’s school escort. During a three-week stay in a forest hut without electricity and running water, the pair begin to gel and Benni slowly lets down her guard. When they return to civilisation, Benni clings to Micha and asks why he can’t be her father. As a man with his own young family, he realises he is losing his professional distance. “I am developing saviour fantasies,” he tells the case worker in charge of Benni’s zigzagging path through the institutions. Ahead of the film’s UK release, at the end of this month, the Association of Child Protection Professionals has held two screenings for an invited audience of policymakers. Wendy Thorogood, chair of the association, says despite the differences between the British and German systems, there are lessons for health workers, the police, social workers and volunteers working with children in the UK. “We clearly see the professionals asking the wrong questions. The film is a non-threatening way to explore issues around where we are going wrong and how we can improve. “We are seeing more and more complex cases at an earlier age, like Benni, badged as mental health when there are also social problems,” says Thorogood. “We do try to keep children with families or near to their families, but we don’t always have foster carers and have been increasingly using unregulated placements or hugely expensive private providers, when if we invested more in early intervention we could save money in the long term.” “There’s a very German dimension to the film in the obsession with bureaucracy, with rules that need to be adhered to,” says Fingscheidt. “Rules like, ‘this child cannot stay in this home because they are getting too emotionally attached’, when that institution may be the first place where a child has begun to open up.” The positive reception the film has received at festivals around the world, garnering 45 international prizes, has made the director consider whether System Crasher was always about a universal question. “What happens to people when they are being denied the right to unconditional love?” System Crasher is released in UK cinemas on 27 March