We welcome the government’s commitment to level up disadvantaged areas of the UK in this week’s budget. We also welcome suggestions that the chancellor is considering including spending on social infrastructure such as health, education or care as a form of infrastructure investment. Most of the time when we think of infrastructure we think of physical infrastructure like roads, railways and hospital buildings, but a broader definition of it would include social infrastructure like NHS salaries, training, personal assistants for those with disabilities and childcare workers. The government has promised to spend in these areas, but is restricted by its own rules about what it can and can’t borrow money for. It can borrow to invest but not to “just spend”. As with physical infrastructure, spending on health, care and education have benefits for wider society that continue into the future. Such spending should therefore be seen as a form of infrastructure investment. Changing the rules to reflect the multiplying effect of investment in the NHS, schools, policing and care would enable the chancellor to truly boost productivity and wellbeing. Research by the Women’s Budget Group has shown that investment in care services would create millions of jobs and that much of the initial investment is recovered by increases in tax revenue and consumption from direct and indirect job creation. Investment in care would also address the social care crisis and the shortage of affordable childcare, and free up people with caring responsibilities to enter the paid workforce. For those most in need of levelling up – including women, ethnic minorities and other marginalised groups – changing the spending rules for next week’s budget would be a step in the right direction. Sophie Walker Young Women’s Trust, Patrick Allen Progressive Economy Forum, Alison Garnham Child Poverty Action Group, Christina McAnea Unison, Ali Harris Equally Ours, Sam Smethers Fawcett Society, Kamran Mallik Disability Rights UK, Robert Palmer Tax Justice UK, Ann Pettifor Prime Economics, Laurence Jones-Williams Rethinking Economics, Wanda Wyporska Equality Trust, Neal Lawson Compass, Zubaida Haque Runnymede Trust, Sarah McKinley Democracy Collaborative, Sarah Bedford New Economics Foundation, Miriam Brett Common Wealth, Eleanor Lisney Sisters of Frida, Helen Walker Carers UK • There is another area to be added to the list requiring investment cited in your editorial on the budget (9 March): local government, which has for 10 years suffered draconian cuts in funding now running at billions of pounds per year, with dire effects on local services and the local economy.Jeremy BeechamLabour, House of Lords • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 