Nous sommes en guerre: we are at war. With those words, President Macron put France on notice yesterday that everything had changed, promising hundreds of billions of euros to ensure that no business would go bust because of the virus. Yet here in Britain, where the government has only just realised that its strategy of keeping calm and carrying on is no longer sustainable, we’re scrabbling to catch up. Boris Johnson raised more questions than answers with Monday’s instructions to start social distancing with a vengeance: how are all those people whose jobs effectively vanished overnight, when the nation was told to avoid pubs and clubs and restaurants and theatres, supposed to live? What about the next wave of businesses that will be hit – in manufacturing as factories start shutting down, in shops and services that sell anything that people don’t actively need in order to stay at home? The hospitality trade is already warning it will be wiped out without state assistance (ministers didn’t actually order them to close, merely telling their customers to stay away, therefore many won’t be able to claim on insurance). We don’t even have answers yet on how people working freelance or in the gig economy are supposed to cope, and already the crisis is moving on to those in supposedly secure jobs. People whose jobs have vanished from beneath their feet need money to live on but soon they’ll also need a purpose The new chancellor, Rishi Sunak, is expected to unveil some kind of financial rescue package later today which should answer some of these questions. But that’s just the beginning. There’s something genuinely surreal about being told to ban visitors from your home and stay away from the office, while sending the children off every morning to mingle freely with hundreds of others. Schools are staying open for now for good reason – parents working in the NHS need them – but it’s hard to see that being sustainable for long. Even if the government doesn’t close them, they’re likely to be overtaken by events as teachers go off sick or parents start withdrawing their kids. We need to know the contingency plans for what happens next in schools: everything from children due to sit GCSEs and A-levels this summer to the small but intensely vulnerable group of children who are safer in the classroom or nursery than at home; children whose only square meal a day is in the school canteen; children who come back with suspicious bruises after every summer holiday; teenagers suddenly on the streets all day in parts of our major cities where gang and knife crime is already at epidemic levels. It’s not just small children in need of looking after who will be vulnerable. Only then can we move on to the stage France is reaching, which is accepting that this is not going to be over by summer. The updated modelling from Imperial College London, reflecting what is now known about death and critical illness rates in Italy, shows clearly why Britain must change course, but also suggests drastic measures could be needed for a year or more. (In the worst-case scenario, if it turns out that getting Covid-19 doesn’t actually make you immune to getting it again for long, we could need to hold out until a vaccine is available.) People whose jobs have vanished from beneath their feet need money to live on but soon they’ll also need a purpose, something to do for months on end. We will have a vast reservoir of bored, frustrated, depressed citizens whose jobs weren’t essential to survival on one hand, and on the other, a shortage of people to do essential work from social care to food production as others go down sick. Ministers should be thinking now about how to match them up, in ways that don’t spread infection – if those who have had it do turn out to be immune, should they be trained or organised to fill the sinkholes that will open up in society? During the second world war, factories were turned over to essential war supplies from munitions to uniform fabric, and women or men who weren’t medically fit to fight were drafted into everything from working on the land to fighting fires. We might need a similar voluntary effort now, except that it will also have to plug the very different gaps a flu epidemic opens up: more delivery drivers if older people can’t go out shopping, or resources for home education. But above all, we’ll need the financial and emotional resilience to cope with a world where everything is changing all the time. As we learn more about how this disease works in practice rather than in theory, the assumptions underpinning the scientific modelling will keep shifting, and so too will the scientific advice. As in wartime, we may all have to learn to live with events moving faster than the best of us can control. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist 