A snakeskin jacket, silk kaftan smoking gown and chunky golden rings once sported by the fictional television writer turned sleuth Jason King are being put up for auction. The items are among a trove of memorabilia that belonged to the late cult star Peter Wyngarde, who played the bushily moustached King from 1969 to 1971. In 1970 Wyngarde was declared Britain’s best-dressed male personality and new parents across the nation named their children Jason after his character. His look became something of a national joke as fashions changed and Wyngarde’s star wane. Mike Myers has said King was an inspiration for Austin Powers. Wyngarde died in 2018 aged approximately 90 – his life story is shrouded in mystery – and more than 250 items are being auctioned online by East Bristol Auctions. A number of vintage scarves that Wyngarde wore as King are on offer on Thursday, as were plenty of sunglasses and a pair of cowboy boots crafted by the century-old Mallorcan company Tony Mora. An original vintage Medico Medalist smoking tobacco pipe, which the catalogue says is “very likely a prop that Wyngarde used”, is also up for grabs. A signed photo from Vivien Leigh is going under the hammer as is a costume necklace he wore in The Lenny Henry Show blaxploitation movie sketch Nathan Gunn in the 1990s. He also gathered some rare Beatles memorabilia, including an original poster from the band’s Abergavenny Town Hall Ballroom performance in 1963. Another intriguing item is described as “an incredible set of believed unheard Robin Gibb song lyrics, presumed to have been written for actor Peter Wyngarde”. The song in question, I Will Surrender, comes with the note: “Words and music by Robin Gibb, 1970.” Wyngarde went on to play the chief of the secret police, Klytus, in the 1980 movie Flash Gordon and the silk neck scarf he wore at the New York premiere is up for sale as is a guitar apparently signed by Freddie Mercury, whose band, Queen, performed the film’s title track. By time he appeared in Flash Gordon, Wyngarde had been through difficult times. In 1975, he was found guilty of gross indecency in a bus station toilet. Newspapers reported that he was summoned under his real name of Cyril Louis Goldbert. A tabloid later reported that his mop of hair was thinning and covered in a flat cap. Poignantly an “original vintage Ray Marston Wig Studio-made wig/toupee” is on sale. The catalogue adds: “The toupee of usual form, with a fine mesh base. Supplied within its original box, addressed to Wyngarde at his personal residence. A rare item from the Peter Wyngarde estate.”