As rare as hens’ teeth, Gutenburg’s Bible and a mint condition Honus Wagner baseball card, happy Arsenal fans are exceptionally hard to find. Feared to have gone extinct towards the tail end of the Arséne Wenger-era, one beaming, devil-may-care Gooner discovered by an elderly widow during a Bath loft clearance featured on The Antiques Roadshow, where his tearful owner was left openmouthed in amazement upon being advised to insure her find for not a penny less than £400,000. It is a value that would have plummeted over the weekend when, years after frothing at the mouth over everything that is wrong with their club, habitually miserable Arsenal fans could be seen celebrating and cracking smiles. The reason for their joie de vivre? The Saturday night smiting of Liverpool at the hands of Watford, which means Arsenal’s 2003-04 “Invincibles” remain the only English league champions in history to go unbeaten through a top-flight season, if like many of the club’s fans you overlook the fact that Preston did it first and slightly more impressively, as they also doubled up by winning the FA Cup. While Arsenal don’t actually get a trophy because Watford beat Liverpool, you wouldn’t know it from the reaction of their followers on various social media disgraces following the eyebrow-raising upset at Vicarage Road. They will, however, be less enthused by the prospect of another surprise result on Monday night, when their team take on League One Portsmouth in the first of this season’s FA Cup fifth round ties. “It is really special,” cheered Arsenal boss Mikel Arteta, when asked for his thoughts on the FA Cup. “It’s probably one of the nicest games and days of the season when you play the final day in England, at Wembley in nice weather and an incredible atmosphere. And you know, it’s a trophy that’s been very much linked with our history.” Of course to get to the final Arsenal will have to remain invincible for another three games before the final on 23 May. While the weather won’t be as pleasant in Portsmouth, the atmosphere is almost certain to be incredible, a state of affairs which may make it difficult for this famously brittle team to cope. Join Nick Ames at 7.45pm GMT for red-hot minute-by-minute coverage of Portsmouth 1-3 Arsenal in the FA Cup fifth round. “It was something we worked on and it paid off with the finish” – Dundalk boss Vinny Perth tries to make out that Jordan Flores’s gloriously abstract, physiologically outrageous goal of the year contender against Shamrock Rovers was somehow plucked straight off the training ground. The latest Football Weekly podcast is right here. Meanwhile, tickets are also on sale for the next live show in London. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/03/02-59790-gnl.fw.20200302.jf.cushion.mp3 “Did anyone else have that the feeling that it was a low-grade clásico, two expensively assembled collections of inconsistent misfits unable to keep the ball without even the passion and intensity of a proper clásico, no pig’s head flying around and not even a reckless challenge from Sergio Ramos to get himself sent off (especially after a dry run in midweek against Man City)? Still, it’s still el clásico and it’s better than wasting the entire evening scrolling through Netflix trying to find something vaguely interesting to watch (again)“ – Noble Francis. “People who say that football’s become too predictable in the super-club era are greatly mistaken. No one could have foreseen which strip Manchester City would wear for this year’s inevitable Rumbelows Cup final win” – Adam Uncamus. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’the day is … Adam Uncamus, who bags a copy of Premier League Nuggets, by Richard Foster. We’ve got more prizes to give away, so get scribbling. Pep Guardiola gave himself a big pat on the back after Manchester City’s Milk Cup final win over Aston Villa. “I think it’s more remarkable – the last nine titles, you win eight,” he cooed, while massaging his own ego. Daniel Sturridge has been banned from all footballing activity until 18 June 2020 after his betting ban was extended by four months, leading to Trabzonspor terminating his three-year contract after just six months. Jürgen Klopp has thrown himself in front of the bullets fired the way of Dejan Lovren after Liverpool’s 3-0 thumping at Watford. “It’s not fair, but that’s the world,” yelped Klopp. “If anybody gave Dejan Lovren the blame for our defeat then I can’t help these people.” While Klopp was yapping away Blackpool made off with his Under-23s manager. “I can’t wait to get started,” cheered Neil Critchley. “I’m really looking forward to meeting the players, working on the grass, developing the team.” The “Netflix of sport” is coming – and it’s hungry for lukewarm Premier League action. And Carlo Ancelotti has been charged by the FA with improper conduct following his VAR-related sending off by Chris Kavanagh in Everton’s 1-1 draw with Manchester United. “I never disrespected him,” insisted Carlo. “It can happen. At the end of the game I was a little bit nervous.” Ten talking points from the Premier League, Fizzy Cup final and clásico. Why is one owner so despised by rival fans? Why are games being suspended because of banners? And why did Bayern and Hoffenheim stop trying to score for 15 minutes? Andy Brassell attempts to explain the Bundesliga’s weird weekend. Sid Lowe on el clásico? Yes please. It’s chaos in Italy too, reports Nicky Bandini, where only Lazio, Atalanta and fans of The Fiver’s Stop Football campaign will be content with the current situation in Serie A. The future is Phil Foden-coloured, croons Barney Ronay. David Beckham looked resplendent in a dashing suit with an Inter Miami club crest on his blazer, reports Steve Brenner, and his team looked almost as sharp despite an opening-game defeat. Clowns, threats, flares and Claude Puel on the brink. The Lyon v St Étienne derby did not disappoint, say the Ligue 1 raconteurs from Get French Football News. Renaissance man, a dogfight and Messi feature in a particularly diverse set of talking points from this weekend’s action. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!