The music business is full of kneejerk hyperbole, but XL Recordings, the independent London label run by Richard Russell, remains the most extraordinary enterprise. You’ll have heard of Adele, whose albums 19 and 21 came out on XL, and the Prodigy, the company’s first major international success. Dizzee Rascal made his first three groundbreaking albums there, back when grime was an entirely underground, non-album phenomenon. In various ways – discovery, collaboration or licensing – the label Russell came to run has abetted the careers of MIA, the rapper Giggs, the White Stripes and Vampire Weekend. And that’s before you count the XL-associated label Young Turks, with the xx, Sampha and FKA twigs, the more recent arrival of Thom Yorke and Radiohead, and XL’s more recherche acts: the fluid electronic composer Arca, or the Cuban-French duo Ibeyi. The records Russell himself produced for poet Gil Scott-Heron and soul singer Bobby Womack remain landmark late-career highs for both the departed vocalists. The success here has familiar elements – doggedness, kismet, sound financials. But much of XL’s less conventional modus operandi is down to Russell, a benign auteur-svengali who makes his own beats and once spent 20 hours in Switzerland hand-painting record sleeves with eccentric dub pioneer Lee “Scratch” Perry. These records were not sold, but bartered for other creations sent in by like-minded souls. Russell’s obsessive zeal for the craft of music-making – and his respect for musicians – is laid bare in this book, which mainly covers 30 years of business decisions, good and bad, interleaved with his own backstory. Much as XL is not your average label, Russell’s is not your usual memoir, full of glitz, excess or scandalous anecdotes. He is a former raver uninterested in telling anyone how large he once had it. If Liberation Through Hearing were not the story of one of the most interesting cultural endeavours of the past 30 years, you might call it a dry read. Unengaged at school, Russell started out as a hip-hop obsessive and then became a rave entrepreneur, going so far as to have his own novelty hit (The Bouncer) as Kicks Like a Mule, and spending a pivotal time in New York serving apprenticeships in record shops and DJing. But although he is clearly an intense guy who’s seen interesting times, Russell under-emotes throughout these adventures in sound. His knowledge of, and love for, music is deep, but somehow these passions often read flat on the page – somewhere between understatement and a matter-of-factness better suited to explaining why one took the A10 north-east rather than the M11. It’s left to the reader to meet Russell halfway with the emojis. He recounts being at Adele’s 31st birthday party in Los Angeles, at the house where The Godfather was filmed. Russell meets Jay-Z and is stunned into silence when the dealer turned rapper turned mogul starts talking to him intensely about XL’s roster. You get the feeling that all of Russell’s words have been weighed very carefully throughout, so as not to reveal too much about the many, many musicians that fill these pages. Stick with him, though, because the insights into some of the most important records of the last 30 years are illuminating. He’s apologetic, but still a little bewildered at the furore over the Prodigy’s Smack My Bitch Up, in which producer Liam Howlett lifted an Ultramagnetic MCs sample that appeared to condone violence towards women. One infamous XL plot twist gets a remix. It turns out that Russell’s young children were ill – impetigo, teething – when Operation Trident warned XL off releasing records by Giggs, a threat Russell shrugs off as less important than the squalling at home. He is happiest recollecting the spiritual connections he made with Scott-Heron and Womack; the coincidences and “endless threads” – samples, influences – that make up his life’s work. A number of deaths stalk this book: Scott-Heron’s, Womack’s and the Prodigy’s Keith Flint in the epilogue. And whatever Russell’s nature prior to 2013, when he contracted the life-threatening neurological condition Guillain-Barré syndrome, his writing is imbued with a survivor’s intensity. Russell has done, as they say, work on himself; he contextualises his own previous actions in the light of who he is now – restored to health, less full-on, and happy to leave the day-to-day of XL to trusted consiglieri while he pursues his own music. His second album, Everything Is Recorded, is scheduled to coincide with the book. The final chapters about Russell’s illness are actually riveting, taking in myelin sheaths, bleeding penises and Damon Albarn’s gift of soup. By the end, a Buddhist monk is teasing Russell about his reluctance to call himself a Buddhist, despite Russell falling quite hard for The Tibetan Book of the Dead. Russell reasons that he didn’t intend to exchange one organised religious ecosystem – his parent’s Judaism – for another. The monk counters that Russell’s sounds like “a spiritual ego-system”. If anything, this book is a refreshing account of how a tremendously successful record aficionado gradually worked his way round to a kind of Zen humility. • Liberation Through Hearing: Rap, Rave and the Rise of XL Recordings by Richard Russell is published by White Rabbit (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15