Aubrey Beardsley, at Tate Britain, is elegant, biting and smart as a whip. He pits burning black shapes against the empty white space of a page with coruscating zip and register. He is master of the flowing robes, psychedelic hair and ever lengthening lines that end in swaying tassels or sharp thorns. His graphic art is nervous yet assured, morbid but witty, frequently crude yet decisively suave. Born into genteel poverty in Brighton, Beardsley (1872-98) left school at 16 and worked as a clerk in the City before studying at Westminster School of Art. He was exceptionally industrious, producing more than a thousand prints and designs in a dragonfly career that has become synonymous with fin-de-siècle decadence. A photograph of the artist – one of several in this enormous show, the first full-scale survey since 1923 – shows Beardsley not long before he died of tuberculosis in a hotel in Menton, France. He is still upright and dapper, book in hand, as if contemplating his next illustration. He was just 25. Beardsley’s long absence from our museums may be partly to do with these literary associations. To some, he is known mainly as the illustrator of Malory’s Le Morte d’Arthur, Wilde’s Salomé or Pope’s The Rape of the Lock, with different downsides in each case. The drawings for Malory made Beardsley’s name at the age of 20. But to modern eyes, they arrive out of an early aesthetic so influenced by Edward Burne-Jones, and other knight and nymph-infested pre-Raph mawkishness, as to be an obvious and weak pastiche. Even at the time, William Morris angrily remarked: “Damn it, a man should do his own work.” Beardsley referred to his (comparatively late) Pope illustrations as “embroideries”, and so they are. It is almost impossible to get your eye into these dense petit-points of dots and whirls, beauty spots and powdered curls. Pope’s mock-heroic epic is lost in an excess of style. But Beardsley’s connection to Oscar Wilde nearly lost him a livelihood. The illustrations to Salomé had already baffled or horrified the critics in any case. When Wilde was arrested at the Cadogan hotel in 1895, after losing his libel trial against the Marquess of Queensberry, he was thought to have been in possession of an edition of the Yellow Book. Beardsley, the magazine’s art editor, was sacked. The images for Salomé are startling, first to last. Corpses appear to levitate; the moon has a bizarre female face; androgynous figures appear naked beneath Japanese kimonos and trailing peacock cloaks. It is nearly impossible to distinguish between the face of Salomé and the severed head of John the Baptist, blood dripping from his luxurious tendrils. At the beautician’s, in picture hat and daring décolletage, Salomé has been reading Zola and the Marquis de Sade. When she dies, two satirical imps bury her bare corpse in a gigantic powder box. The beautician has a tiny pair of scissors tucked into his-her pocket, and this could be the artist’s own motif. Beardsley is cutting in his wit. Look at his lampoon of Whistler – from whom he took so much – as a mincing aesthete with a teensy hat perched on a thicket of coiffed curls, puppeting his signature butterfly like Disney’s Tinkerbell. The caricature is savage, but no less than Beardsley’s “portrait” of Mrs Whistler as The Fat Woman, her enormous bust measured side to side with the dotted line of a ribbon threaded through her bodice. But look, too, at the drawing of her glove as seen through an empty wine glass. The illusion is astonishingly subtle. And sly jokes are tucked in everywhere: the nipple or vulva, hidden in a supple outline; the phallic candle and the slackly deflated bookmark. Beardsley was as prolific as any daily cartoonist, and it is comic to see the succession of possible cover designs he made for his next employer, the editor of the Savoy magazine. These feature one John Bull after another, more or less human or substantial, including one with a tiny but distinctly erect penis described in the outline of the breeches. You would scarcely notice it, and the editor did not. The edition had to be scrapped. Beardsley’s wild visions of sex, wrote Kenneth Clark, proved “catmint to adolescents”. He invented a kind of neverland of fauns, satyrs and androgynous beauties, including a manly Venus and a female Apollo; of fleshy dandies with teensy feet, masturbating matrons and young heroes who have to carry their own colossal members just to walk. Tate Britain has a side room for the most obscene prints, which include a vicious image of a middle-aged woman, bound, whipped and impaled on a classical column. This is an illustration to Lysistrata, but nothing justifies its unbridled nastiness. And nor is it so easy to elevate Beardsley as a pioneer of psychedelic art (despite a final gallery of 60s homages, including Procol Harum albums). As this show thoroughly demonstrates, his art conflates hints of everything from Dürer, Mantegna and Japanese woodblocks to heavy borrowings from continental art nouveau. But so much of what Beardsley made, at speed, against death, shows his later originality. It is not just the paradoxical combination of languid figures and highly disciplined drawing – ramrod verticals, cutting arabesques. Or even his weird lexicon of characters, from furious hominids to thunder-faced dames. It is in his uniquely dramatic interplay of black against white. Half of Sarah Bernhardt, in a telling jibe, is simply blank space. Whiteness may take over a scene, as if screening another world behind. And in Ave Atque Vale, a youth raises his hand in farewell into an empty white void: the difference between being and nothingness. Among the Trees is exactly what it feels like in this beautiful, stirring forest of art at the Hayward Gallery. There are lifesize ink drawings of delicate maples, eerie paintings of dense pine woods and a colossal multiscreen film of a tree, shot sideways, majestically swaying like an ocean. A marvellous wood, into which you peer, is made entirely out of cardboard – tree to paper to tree once again. Twilight glows through the immersed trees in Mariele Neudecker’s vitrine, like a Romantic painting come to life. George Shaw’s meticulous Humbrol paintings of suburban woods are everywhere marked by human traces: a bleak white heart daubed on a solitary trunk. There are political pieces – photographs of 7,000-year-old trees that look brand new and of trees where slaves were once hanged; there are glowing sculpted tableaux of charred forests and photographs of woods that grow underground. Tree-trunk sculptures by the Italian artist Giuseppe Penone very purely celebrate the fact that a tree, in his wise words, “memorialises the feats of its own existence in its very form”. But though there is a Peter Doig thicket, painted on canvas, one of Tacita Dean’s photographs of ancient uprooted cedars and a huge anthropomorphic lightbox by Jeff Wall, in which olive groves seem to shelter migrant workers, what is so extraordinary is the way the trees cease to belong to the individual artists. They rise above art, in the end, creating an atmosphere of serene reverie very rarely experienced in a gallery. Star ratings (out of five) Aubrey Beardsley ★★★★Among the Trees ★★★★ • Aubrey Beardsley is at Tate Britain, London, until 25 May• Among the Trees is at the Hayward Gallery, London, until 17 May