We start with news that Mikel Arteta may be set for a summer spent wrestling with clubs in La Liga who want to make off with his strikers. Not only will the Arsenal manager have to fend off burly folk from Barcelona who intend to woo Pierre Emerick-Aubameyang, but reports in Spain suggest Atlético Madrid suits will try to whisk away Alexandre Lacazette, too. Diego Simeone has unfinished business with the Gunners’ French striker, you see. But don’t worry, he doesn’t mean Lacazette any harm. No, he just really, really likes him and still hasn’t got over a move for the striker collapsing in 2017 because of a transfer ban at Atlético. He could also do with a few goals. Atlético have scored only 31 in the league this season, less than half of Barcelona’s tally, and even they haven’t been very good. Barcelona also have an eye on Mill favourite Timo Werner, who has half of Europe chasing him, but a warm hug from Jürgen Klopp could still convince the Leipzig striker that his future lies not in Catalonia but with Liverpool. Sir Alex Ferguson is using his pulling power to try and convince Birmingham City’s Jude Bellingham that everything he wants and more can be found at Manchester United. Ferguson met the 16-year-old midfielder and his parents on Monday when they visited Carrington. We’re guessing he spoke highly of the ample parking spaces, luxury hot showers and the whiff of Ryan Giggs that still lingers around the place in an attempt to make a move to Manchester seem more alluring than Borussia Dortmund. Another teenage sensation who could be set for a move to England’s north-west is Jérémy Doku. The Anderlecht forward has been on Liverpool’s radar for the past year and his two goals in the 7-0 win over Waregem last weekend have got antennae twitching furiously again at Anfield HQ. While we’re on the subject of Belgian forwards who could be on the move, Michy Batshuayi looks likely to leave Chelsea for Crystal Palace, where he will finally try to fulfil the potential he has been hiding for the past decade. Leicester City have the hots for Leeds United’s on-loan centre-back Ben White. The bad news for Brendan Rodgers is that Mikel Arteta, Ole Gunnar Solskjær and Klopp have also been getting giddy while watching the 22-year-old’s rock-solid performances at the Championship table-toppers. His parent club, Brighton, may not be overly keen on letting White leave, though. Bournemouth, Norwich, Leeds and West Brom would like a bit of backbone in their midfield and will try to beat each other to the punch for West Ham’s Josh Cullen. The defensive midfielder has impressed on loan at Charlton and with Declan Rice ahead of him in the pecking order, he will likely be available at a reasonable price. And Real Madrid are planning on thanking Zinedine Zidane for his hard work at the end of the season by telling him to take a permanent holiday. The word is that they want Mauricio Pochettino or Massimiliano Allegri to replace him.