The Italian media is continuing to play a key role in covering the coronavirus crisis under challenging conditions as the pandemic takes hold of the country. Several journalists have tested positive for the virus, with La Stampa closing its headquarters in Turin on Thursday for a “deep clean” after one of its staff was confirmed to have the illness. The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine. The UN agency advises people to: Despite a surge in sales of face masks in the aftermath of the coronavirus outbreak, experts are divided over whether they can prevent transmission and infection. There is some evidence to suggest that masks can help prevent hand-to-mouth transmissions, given the large number of times people touch their faces. The consensus appears to be that wearing a mask can limit – but not eliminate – the risks, provided it is used correctly. Justin McCurry Journalists at the newspaper are now working from home after calls to bosses last week to adopt the policy. Other major dailies, including Corriere della Sera and La Repubblica, implemented home-working policies earlier. Journalists working for the state broadcaster, Rai, are continuing to report from northern regions worst-hit by the virus. A Rai journalist tested positive for the virus earlier this month, as have staff at Sky TG24 and Mediaset. “We’re continuing to work, with shift and break patterns,” said Angelo Amelio, a journalist at Rai News 24. “Journalists who have been on the frontline have to put themselves in self-isolation. In the office, we continue to work, even if the shifts are a bit tougher. We’re maintaining precautions, such as wearing facemasks and gloves, and keeping a metre distance between each other – for example, we have a meeting room that has space for a maximum of six people and now only three can enter.” As with other media across the world, the Italian industry is highly dependent on staff working on precarious, freelance-style contracts that do not guarantee sick pay or health insurance. An industry source said the problem could get “critical”. “There is a big insecurity regarding the treatment of journalists who are not fully employed by outlets,” they said. Italy, which has had the worst coronavirus outbreak outside China, tightened quarantine restrictions on Thursday, with the prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, repeating his call for Italians to stay at home. The total number of people infected in the country since the epidemic began, including the deaths and those who have recovered, exceeded 15,000 on Thursday. The latest death toll is 1,016. Newsstands and shops selling newspapers are among the “basic necessities” allowed to remain open across Italy. As people hunker down until at least 25 March, they are reading more papers and watching the news. “People like me all appreciate and encourage the journalists who are taking this seriously,” said Sabina Colombo, who lives in Rome. “I am glued to watching the news, more so than ever. The whole country now, and every journalist, has a responsibility.”