As I sit here, in between homeschooling the child (after tearing him down from whatever curtains he has been climbing in animal frustration), throwing painkillers and bad vibes at a husband bedbound with what is merely some coronavirus wannabe (nothing else counts! Pick up thy bed and walk!) and keeping one foot at all times pressed firmly on the throat of the gibbering terror that threatens to rear up and consume me throughout the day, I am very grateful for anything that makes me laugh. It’s a short list, but to it may be added the new Sky One comedy Hitmen, starring Mel and Sue in – if we skip lightly over the briefly rebooted Generation Game misfire – their first post-Bake Off venture together. They play the eponymous assassins, Fran and Jamie (and if you write in saying it should be called Hitwomen, so help me God I will come round and shoot you myself), who approach the job with – well, about as much competence and enthusiasm as you would expect Mel and Sue to approach it. It plays into and off their natural and long-established dynamic so naturally that if you have come across them before and not found them to your taste, you will probably be unlikely to laugh at their semi-murdery misadventures here. I would – respectfully! With only your long-term health and contentment in mind! – suggest you find another, more conducive spot in the fertile land of TV scheduling to dig in for your furlough. But for fans, there’s a lot to enjoy. Fran (Sue, ever the detached, cerebral wit of the pair) is, as you might expect, the brains; Jamie (Mel) is … not. Giedroyc’s innate warmth and eagerness and the joyful embrace of her inner simpleton should put her, in a very few years’ time, in contention for national treasure status. Until then, we may continue to enjoy it unofficially. Each half hour is a slightly plotted caper. The first revolves around Fran and Jamie trying to arrange the former’s birthday dinner while awaiting the command from their boss, Mr K, to kill the lawyer (Jason Watkins) who has been defrauding him and who has been sitting in the back of their battered van with a bag over his head and his hands tied since they kidnapped him. He’s eager to help: “Now that the adrenaline’s worn off I’m actually pretty bored in here.” He’s also a bit uncomfortable. “Any chance of a bigger bag? I mean, not silly-big.” It’s fun and daft – unsophisticated enough to give it an enjoyably homely feel (excepting the occasional shock when one or other of our former patisserie-pluggers has to level a gun and at last get a job done), but never descending into idiocy. I even had to think for a second to get the Captain Birdseye joke, but that may be the blunting effects of ongoing self-isolation at work. I have lost all ability to imagine how I might have reacted in the Before Times. In addition, the first two episodes have great guest appearances. One is by Sian Clifford (most famous for playing Fleabag’s terrifyingly brittle sister, Claire), who plays the head of a wealth-fund management as a magnificent virago. She scoffs at the duo’s reluctant plan to torture her for an account’s password (“My personal trainer,” she snarls, “says I have the pain threshold of someone in a medically induced coma”) before ultimately being undone by a soy allergy. The other appearance is by Nick Mohammed (writer and star of another Sky sitcom, Intelligence) as a spider man – sent by the agency instead of the stripper Jamie booked for Fran’s birthday. “Not Spider-Man,” he notes, the pain of a man doomed to eternal misunderstanding etched on his face. “God. Every time.” Honestly, his few minutes on camera cheered me up like nothing else. (Is self-isolation really getting to me? Or is it just freeing me from the shackles of social restraint and enabling me to speak sooth? I will gladly discuss this on the online social medium of your choice while cooking the ninth meal of the day.) Hitmen may be just a bit too woolly and broadbrush to make a hit in the grander scheme of things. But it finds its target often enough to be more than worth your while. Although a special retrofitted Bake-Off series to get us through viral lockdown wouldn’t go amiss either.