I believe good digital kitchen scales are the way to better baking. By using scales that are accurate and measuring in grams you can liberate your baking from inconsistencies. Here are a few guiding principles that underpin all I bake. I never use the top speed on a mixer, even for whipping. It flings strands of the mix up the side of the bowl and away from the main mass of the batter or mix you are trying to build structure into. Beating a little slower allows more air in over the extra time it takes to beat the mix. Make speed eight (under high) your new top speed. Resting is usually reserved for the realm of meat cookery, but cakes and custards can soar to perfection in exactly the same way. Brown butter and caramels benefit from this technique; they heat up so quickly they can accelerate alarmingly fast, past the optimal temperature. The best technique to melt chocolate is to bring a saucepan of water to the boil, turn it off, then nest the bowl of chocolate on top. It’s like paddling hard to catch a wave and then gliding into shore. Cakes, too, will keep cooking when taken from the oven, so I like to have a few moist crumbs (not wet or raw batter) on my testing skewer. Resting also refers to the bakes that are left to set or ripen overnight. Cake develops a better flavour if rested for at least five hours before icing. The crust softens and the crumb is less fragile (yet still tender). And rest is best (up to 72 hours) for chocolate-chip cookie dough before baking, to fully hydrate the dough and deepen the flavour. If you sense the cake or cookie is colouring too fast, listen to your inner baking genius and turn the oven temperature down a smidge. If you feel the raw pastry becoming sticky and warm under your rolling pin, respond and get the pastry in the fridge to chill. You will almost always be right about the perfect adjustment required. You don’t need to sift the flour for doughs, unless you are incorporating lots of spices that can be prone to lumpiness. For cake making, in batters and foams, sifting is a form of combining and adding the ingredients in a more delicate way. If you just tip flour into a sponge foam, it will sink. Use a flexible plastic spatula to scrape as much as you can out of a bowl. When you have bought lovely ingredients and spent precious time baking, you want to incorporate every last spoonful everywhere you can! Always keep in mind the temperatures – not just of your ingredients but your room, your utensils and bowls, and your hands. A mixer bowl freshly run under hot water will accelerate the softening of the butter while creaming in it, while a cheesecake filling made in advance and chilled will take longer to bake than a mix freshly made from room-temperature ingredients. Dough rolled in a hot kitchen may need intermittent resting in the fridge. Ingredients stored at ambient temperature, such as flour and sugar, will be hotter in your summertime kitchen, so I use butter at a cooler temperature (or chill the flour) to balance the overall batter or dough temperature. Conversely in winter, use slightly warmer butter and eggs when the flour and sugar are colder at room temperature. Choose the most efficient bowl for the task. If you are mixing in a bowl and it looks like there’s not enough room to add all those whipped egg whites, you are probably 100% right and it’s time to upsize. It’s great to visualise a recipe to determine which size is the right one from the start, as it can be a pain to switch bowls mid-preparation. Get to know your bowls and which work best for which techniques, like mixing or dunking. Find the best bowl and saucepan combination for a double boiler in your kitchen and stick to it. Make sure the bowl fits snugly on the top of the pan and that the bottom of the bowl isn’t touching the water. Watch, listen, smell and touch. Listen to the baking instincts inside you. This is an edited extract from Beatrix Bakes by Natalie Paull published by Hardie Grant Books $45.00 and is available where all good books are sold.