What were you hoping for? A great date, or at least an amusing story. First impressions? Well dressed, great smile, pretty cute. What did you talk about? Supermarkets, our respective drunken public transport mishaps, politics (!), our families, and whether being an accountant is a juicy enough job to warrant a This Is Going To Hurt-style book (we concluded possibly not). Any awkward moments? Realising he must have received, word for word, the long and rambling description of myself I had to send in before the date. Good table manners? Excellent. And he let me try his whisky sour, which I appreciated. Best thing about Jack? Great conversationalist across a range of serious and silly topics. Would you introduce him to your friends? Sure. Describe Jack in three words? Warm, friendly, interesting. What do you think he made of you? Jack announced he was going to recommend the Blind Date experience to his male friends – I reckon I must have been at least partially responsible for that. Did you go on somewhere? No, Monday night got the better of us. And... did you kiss?A peck goodbye. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? Not giving the waiter a “death stare” (apparently) when he insisted I taste the wine. Marks out of 10? 7. Would you meet again? We exchanged numbers. What were you hoping for?The first day of the rest of my life. Failing that, some good pasta. First impressions?Tall, beautiful and immediately chatty. Good start. What did you talk about?Ice climbing, Dolly Parton, free brownies at work and Scotland being generally bad at sports. Any awkward moments?My life is a roller coaster of awkwardness but I think we survived the night. Good table manners?Impeccable. Although I was more focused on not covering myself in ragu. Best thing about Fiona?She knew something interesting about everything we talked about. Would you introduce her to your friends?Absolutely. She was effortless, and would get on with them instantly. Describe Fiona in three words?Relaxed, engaging and attractive. What do you think she made of you?I think I had my work cut out after admitting I was an accountant, but she continued to be chatty until the end, which I took as a good sign. Did you go on somewhere?No, but we were among the last to leave the restaurant. And... did you kiss?Yes. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?That I had finished my tiramisu. I’m still thinking about it now. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again?I hope so. ● Fiona and Jack ate at Bocconcino, London W1. *This date took place before the UK government’s latest advice on social distancing. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com