The absence of a previous winner makes this feel like a low-quality Champion Hurdle but, with plenty of youth in the line-up, it would be early to jump to that conclusion. Epatante (3.30) appears on a steep upward curve and can prove it by giving Nicky Henderson his eighth success in the race. Henderson did not seem enthused when it was suggested to him in late November that this mare would be a championship contender. But just a month later she quickened clear of the field in the Christmas Hurdle, which has been the best trial for this. Her only defeat since joining the Lambourn trainer came on her only previous visit to Cheltenham, so the risk exists that she is not as good on an undulating circuit. But there are alternative explanations, including a troubled preparation and the presence of a hood that day. With the 7lb mares allowance to help her, she ought to be good enough. The progressive Darver Star offers each-way possibilities. His third in the Royal Bond looks strong and he was best at the weights in the Irish Champion, when giving Honeysuckle half a stone. Darasso has been forgotten at 50-1 but excuses can be made for his abortive season. He was just a quarter of a point bigger than Pentland Hills in the betting when they met at Haydock but is now seven times the price. He has a 7lb pull for a nine-length defeat by Cilaos Emery, the third-favourite. A place could be achievable. 1.30 Supreme Novice A Willie Mullins-trained Grade One winner is, historically, ideal for this, so Asterion Forlonge jumps off the page. But he may lack the raw pace of the very promising Shishkin, who rocketed up the Newbury run-in two starts ago. As with his stablemate Epatante, he must prove he is not just a flat-track bully. Abacadabras also has plenty of pace and may be the main danger. 2.10 Arkle Trophy Easily the strongest form belongs to Notebook, who can hopefully get the week off to a flyer for the Henry de Bromhead/Rachael Blackmore team. It was impressive that he was able to win the Irish Arkle despite misbehaving on the way to the start and Blackmore says she has a plan to keep him calmer this time. Esprit Du Large is a threat if he has been quietly continuing to improve since we last saw him in December but it is unusual for this race to be won off a 94-day absence. 2.50 Ultima Chase The eye goes first to Elwood, a Gordon Elliott-trained half-brother to Delta Work and surely well treated. But he has an alarming habit of putting down when he meets a fence on a long stride that could be expensive here. Who Dares Wins is more trustworthy and, as a stout stayer on the flat, ought to do well for this step up in distance. For all his good form, he is 2lb below the rating he had when fifth in the Pertemps two years ago. 4.10 Mares Hurdle An enjoyable head-to-head should fall the way of Benie Des Dieux. Honeysuckle is tough and game but her rival is classier. 4.50 Northern Trust Chase The stunning progress made by Espoir De Guye in the autumn puts him bang in the reckoning. The ground should be just about wet enough for this neat little jumper whose cruising speed can take him a long way into the argument.5.30 National Hunt Chase Carefully Selected’s jumping last time makes him look risky at such a short price, while Lord Du Mesnil has put a lot of hard work into this season already. The tall, powerful Newtide appeals most, for all that his latest win was a touch fortuitous. Cheltenham1.30 Shishkin (nb) 2.10 Notebook 2.50 Who Dares Wins (nap) 3.30 Epatante 4.10 Benie Des Dieux 4.50 Espoir De Guye 5.30 NewtideSouthwell1.45 Mukha Magic 2.25 De Bruyne Horse 3.05 Sweet Talked 3.45 Puchita 4.25 Badayel 5.00 Going NativeSedgefield1.55 Lugg River 2.35 Lastofthecosmics 3.15 Cobra Commander 3.55 Meteorite 4.35 Lough Legend 5.10 Legendary RhythmNewcastle4.40 Urban Spirit 5.15 Merry Vale 5.45 Jm Jackson 6.15 Mutabaahy 6.45 Paddyplex 7.15 Dragons Will Rise 7.45 Olivia R 8.15 Bawaader