Boris Johnson has defended the UK’s handling of the coronavirus crisis, as officials warned that anyone with a minor fever or respiratory tract infection was likely to be asked to self-isolate for seven days within the next fortnight. Speaking at a press conference, Johnson said the government was making extensive preparations to move to the “delay” phase of dealing with the virus, but the best advice so far was still simply for people to wash their hands. “Containment is very unlikely to work on its own and that is why we are making preparations for a move to the delay phase,” he said. He rejected the idea that mass gatherings should be banned, schools shut or harsher quarantine measures put in place at this stage, as it was important for people not become fatigued by restrictions. However, Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, said it was soon coming to the time – within the next 10 to 14 days – that all people with minor fevers or respiratory tract infection symptoms, such as flu or cold, would have to self-isolate. At that next stage, he said “asking those with symptoms, however mild, to stay at home for seven days afterwards” would be the best way of protecting other members of the public, including older people. He said the UK would also be screening more people in hospital with respiratory problems for coronavirus, rather than just those in intensive care. Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, also set out the UK’s strategy of trying to reduce the mortality rate and push the peak of the outbreak to later in the year when the NHS is better able to cope. He said lots of measures that “seem intuitive turn out to have very little effect” and one of those was screening travellers from high-risk areas at the airport. Johnson, Whitty and Vallance all rejected the idea that the government was failing to do enough to counter the outbreak and argued it was right that the UK responded in a different way from other countries, some of which have brought in more draconian quarantine and social distancing measures. “We are doing everything we can to combat this outbreak based on the very latest scientific advice,” the prime minister said. “We mustn’t do things with no or limited benefits.” He said the government was “considering absolutely all measures” being suggested but timing of measures was crucial. The prime minister said the coronavirus outbreak was a “great national challenge” but the experts “know how to defeat it”. Johnson spoke after the health secretary, Matt Hancock, came under increasing pressure over the coronavirus response, with MPs questioning why more action was not being taken to quarantine travellers from high-risk areas and protect older people. Hancock insisted the government was taking all appropriate action on the basis of scientific advice but he was hit by a barrage of questions from MPs asking for better explanations of the government’s strategy. The rising pressure from MPs came as Rory Stewart, the former Conservative cabinet minister and independent London mayoral candidate, accused the government of “half-hearted efforts” to stop the spread of the virus. “They should be acting much more aggressively to contain coronavirus. Schools should be shut now,” Stewart said. “If the government are not prepared to shut them now, they should – at the very least – state clearly and transparently what their triggers will be for closing schools over the next few days. “All medium and large gatherings should be cancelled. All passengers coming from hotspots should be tested and quarantined. There is no justification for half-hearted measures.” Hancock has said any more draconian measures such as closing schools or banning large gatherings needs to be taken at an appropriate time. A government source said there was a risk that moving too early could lead to quarantine “fatigue”, with people flouting measures after several weeks. Speaking in the House of Commons on Monday, he also rejected calls from the Tory MP Felicity Buchan for him to consider temperature testing at airports for high-risk travellers, and mandatory quarantining for those returning from northern Italy. “The evidence from other countries that have tried temperature testing is not effective and because it leads to so many false positives it can be counterproductive,” he said. The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the Wuhan coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine. The UN agency advises people to: Despite a surge in sales of face masks in the aftermath of the coronavirus outbreak, experts are divided over whether they can prevent transmission and infection. There is some evidence to suggest that masks can help prevent hand-to-mouth transmissions, given the large number of times people touch their faces. The consensus appears to be that wearing a mask can limit – but not eliminate – the risks, provided it is used correctly. Justin McCurry Hancock also said school trips should be cancelled only if they were going to quarantined areas such as northern Italy. The Tory MP Philip Hollobone said his constituents were struggling to understand why flights from quarantined areas of Italy were not being banned. “The reason is that there are many UK citizens in that area who may want to come home and also crucially the evidence shows banning flights from affected areas does very little to protect you,” Hancock said. Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, said many MPs had worried constituents and wanted to know: • How many ventilators and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation machines the UK had. • When GPs would get personal protective equipment. • What advice social care providers had been given to protect the elderly. • Why the UK was not considering more home working, why mass gatherings were not being banned and whether over-65s should be told to avoid public places. • Why those returning from northern Italy were not being sent straight into quarantine. • Why statutory sick pay was not available to all from day one instead of the government suggesting universal credit as an alternative. Hancock said the government was taking “necessary and proportionate” actions to tackle the outbreak. He said the NHS had record numbers of nurses and doctors, and the government was “scaling up intensive care beds” as well as increasing availability of ventilators, trained operators and oxygen. On GP protections, Hancock said they would have access to stockpiles that would be released “at the right time” and said guidance for social care would be updated this week. Several MPs questioned Hancock about whether it was the time for increased social distancing measures. He said: “We are not at this stage proposing the cancellation of mass events because we are following the scientific advice. Home working and flexible working is in many cases advocated anyway and people will make their own decisions. What we are saying from a government point of view is that if you have returned from a high-risk area and have symptoms you should stay at home.” The former health secretary Jeremy Hunt pressed Hancock for a central estimate of how much of the population would contract coronavirus beyond the prediction of 80% for a reasonable worst-case scenario. Hancock said he would “take away the point” but argued there were still unknowns.