A First Nation in Canada has demanded climate activists at Extinction Rebellion apologize for trespassing on Indigenous territory during a protest last month, calling the group’s actions “disturbing” and in violation of traditional protocol. While Extinction Rebellion has often drawn criticism for its disruptive protests, the letter marks a rare public rebuke of the group from Indigenous leadership. On 18 February, amid nationwide unrest over a contentious pipeline project, members of Extinction Rebellion arrived at the house of British Columbia premier to execute a citizen’s arrest – a move police called a “a gross invasion” of privacy. Premier John Horgan wasn’t at home when protestors arrived, but his wife Ellie Horgan was. Police arrived, cordoned off the area and arrested three protestors. But members of the Sc’ianew First Nation, also known as Beecher Bay, say that during the protest, Extinction Rebellion entered their lands without permission. “We find it disturbing that you would ignore our rights and titles over our traditional territory and not follow protocol and ask permission to enter our territory to carry on your political business,” chief Russ Chipp and two band councillors wrote in a letter provided to the Guardian. “You’ve come into our territory without permission, putting yourselves above our traditional protocols and have insulted our community and terrorized a private citizen in our neighbouring community.” The letter, dated 28 February, also makes clear that unlike other Indigenous groups, Sc’ianew First Nation was not taking a position on protests in support of the Wet’suewet’en nation who have been fighting the Coastal GasLink pipeline through their traditional lands and the Tyendinaga rail blockades erected by Mohawk groups. Instead, Sc’ianew First Nation is demanding Extinction Rebellion apologize to the chief, council, community – and to Ellie Horgan. Extinction Rebellion, which began in the United Kingdom in October 2018, launched in Canada later that year. Sources in the group have admitted that Indigenous outreach has been a challenge. “We take the issues raised very seriously. We will be responding publicly on Friday this week, addressing all the concerns voiced in the letter,” said Don Goodeve, a member of Extinction Rebellion’s Vancouver Island chapter who was present during the February protest. The letter comes amid fierce debate in Canada over the development and financing of resource extraction projects. Thousands have protested the C$6.6bn (US$5bn) project Coastal GasLink pipeline which crosses through Wet’suwet’en lands in north-western British Columbia.