What were you hoping for?Someone sparky and able to take the conversation anywhere. First impressions?Dressed far better than me. I realised halfway through that I had not ironed my shirt properly. Sorry, Mum. What did you talk about?Our love for our godchildren, nieces and nephews, her decision to get ordained as a minister next year, how she loves war films “because of the male-on-male bonding”, hot priests. Any awkward moments?When the waitress serving us said what a good idea this date was, and another waiter tried and dramatically failed to ask her out. You had to see it. Good table manners?Yes. Best thing about Laura?She loves It’s Always Sunny In Philadelphia, too – she compared me to Mac, even though I’m definitely Charlie. Would you introduce her to your friends?Yes. I would also like to introduce her to the ghosts in my house for an exorcism. Describe Laura in three words?Genuine, kind, sparkly. What do you think she made of you?Probably high on his own supply of nonsense. Did you go on somewhere?No, we both scuttled home because of Covid-19. This must be what dating in 1939 was like. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I wished we’d talked more about hot priests. Laura clearly had a lot to say on this topic. Marks out of 10?7 (would be 8, but she ate my bit of lamb chop). Would you meet again?Too wonderful not to. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?Good food, good wine, good conversation and, hopefully, to meet someone I’d like to see again. First impressions?Friendly, well-dressed and very much my type! What did you talk about?Identity, hopes for the future and the fact that we would probably never drink wine this expensive again. Any awkward moments?I probably said some awkward things, but he was great about it. Good table manners?Yes. He wasn’t afraid to share finger food with me. Best thing about Lucjan?He’s super easy to talk to – there was never a quiet moment. Would you introduce him to your friends?Sure! He seems like he’d be fun at a party. Describe Lucjan in three words?Honest, lively, attractive. What do you think he made of you?He probably thought I was funny, talkative, maybe a little eccentric. Did you go on somewhere?No, it was a Monday night and he needed his sleep. And... did you kiss?Nah, I’m a second date kinda gal. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Nothing comes to mind. Marks out of 10?Do I have to? Maybe a 9? Would you meet again?Sure! • Laura and Lucjan ate at Barrafina in London. * This date took place before the UK government’s latest advice on physical distancing. Self-isolation doesn’t mean you have to stop looking for love, and Blind Date will continue with online video dates. If you’re single and would like to be set up (with a takeaway on us), email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like‑minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com.