Zlatan Ibrahimovic has set up an online fundraiser to help fight the coronavirus pandemic – and pledged €100,000 (£91,000) to the cause himself. The Milan striker has set a target of €1million to support hospitals and medical staff in Italy, which is the centre of the pandemic in Europe, and is imploring fellow footballers and sport stars to “together kick the coronavirus away”. The 38-year-old former Sweden striker rejoined Milan in January from the Los Angeles Galaxy, and has also played for Internazionale and Juventus in his adopted homeland. “Italy has always given me so much and, in this dramatic moment, I want to give back even more to this country that I love,” he said in a video message to launch the fundraiser. “I count on the generosity of my colleagues, of all professional athletes and of those who want to make a small or large donation according to their possibilities, to kick this virus away. Together we can really help hospitals and doctors and nurses who selflessly work every day to save our lives. Because today we are the ones cheering for them!” The site states that all the money raised will be directly donated to Humanitas to help strengthen the intensive care and emergency units of Milan, Bergamo, Castellanza and Torino’s hospitals. Italy has been the world’s second hardest hit country with more than 31,500 cases of the virus and 2,503 deaths. Ibrahimovic, known for his brash personality and outspoken comments, ended his message in typical style: “If the virus don’t go to Zlatan, Zlatan goes to the virus.” The German national team have launched their own fundraising initiative to tackle coronavirus by donating €2.5million to social causes. The Germany captain, Manuel Neuer, said: “We have to look at each other in such times.” Italy has always given me so much and, in this dramatic moment, I want to give back even more to this country that I love. I decided, together with the people who are working with me, to create a fundraiser for Humanitas hospitals and to use my communication power to spread the message wider. It’s a serious issue and we need a concrete help that’s not just about a video. I count on the generosity of my colleagues, of all professional athletes and of those who want to make a small or large donation according to their possibilities, to kick this virus away. Together we can really help hospitals and doctors and nurses who selflessly work every day to save our lives. Because today we are the ones cheering for them! Let’s together kick the CoronaVirus away and win this match! And remember: if the virus don’t go to Zlatan, Zlatan goes to the virus! Link in bio A post shared by  Zlatan Ibrahimović (@iamzlatanibrahimovic) on Mar 18, 2020 at 5:31am PDT