Billy Joe Saunders has had his boxing licence suspended following a social media post in which he seemingly advocated domestic violence. Action was taken by the British Boxing Board of Control after a video appeared online in which the world super-middleweight champion demonstrated how to hit a woman “on the chin” if she was “giving you mouth” during the coronavirus lockdown. With fears widespread that domestic violence will spike in the coming weeks of quarantine, Saunders’ behaviour has been met with widespread condemnation. “Having considered comments made by Billy Joe Saunders on social media,” the BBBofC said in a statement, “we have suspended his boxer’s licence pending a hearing under the board’s misconduct regulation, at a time and venue to be confirmed as soon as possible.” Saunders apologised for the video at the weekend but, speaking on TalkSport radio on Monday, he claimed it was a joke which had been taken out of context. “I said it as a bit of a joke at first. I wasn’t obviously thinking. It was a silly mistake but I didn’t mean to cause any harm to anyone and I certainly wouldn’t promote domestic violence. “I think if it is took out of the gesture of what it was meant to be and out into something else then yeah I can clearly see [the offence] but when someone is only looking at it as a joke when we are all locked away. “I thought I would make a few people laugh but obviously it has flipped on the other side with people.” Eddie Hearn, who acts as Saunders’ promoter, said his client’s behaviour had been “unacceptable”. “I was appalled really,” he said. “It was so idiotic, it was so frustrating because I know Billy well. He’s a really good kid, with a really good heart … but every now and again he does the most stupid things. “It’s unacceptable for Joe Bloggs down the street to do it. It’s much more unacceptable for a world champion boxer to be doing it. “People who are in abusive relationships are watching that video. You cannot do it, it’s unacceptable,” the promoter told TalkSport. Saunders said he would be making a donation to a domestic violence charity following the controversy, but Adina Claire, acting Co-Chief Executive of Women’s Aid, said his actions had already sent out a “dangerous message”. “Domestic abuse is never a joking matter,” she said, “but when thousands of women are trapped in their homes with a perpetrator and are fearing for their lives, whether it is supposed to be a joke or not, the Billy Joe Saunders video sends out a dangerous message. “Before the pandemic, an average of three women every fortnight were murdered by their male partner or ex-partner. Now that we are experiencing a nationwide lockdown, those living with domestic abuse who know that their home is not a safe place are even more exposed to danger than before. In the last two weeks, Avon and Somerset police have reported a 20.9% increase in domestic abuse incidents. “We want women to know that we believe them, we are here for them and support is available, even when they cannot safely leave their home. Our digital services are open as usual and will be ready to support women during this crisis.”