Love doesn’t figure highly in the Serpentine Gallery’s critical lexicon – too sentimental perhaps, too old-fashioned. But it pulses, unmentioned, beneath the surface of Cao Fei’s Blueprints. Love is evidence that we are recognised as individuals, as significant. Love is what we are asked to set aside in the name of progress under a revolutionary regime. Love, too, is imperilled by automation, given how it minimises human contact. Two great loves sit at the heart of Cao Fei’s feature-length film Nova from last year: a romance between two computer scientists – one Russian, one Chinese – and the relationship between the latter and his son. Both loves fall foul of Sino-Soviet progress. The Russian scientist, part of a delegation dispatched to help construct China’s earliest computer system in the 1950s, is forced to leave Beijing when her work is done. In her absence, the Chinese scientist submits his son to an experiment that locks him in virtual limbo between the past and future. What do we do to those we love – our children in particular – when we keep our sights trained on the future? On a simple level, the parent-child relationship in Nova is a metaphor for blinkered adherence to ideology: a future the parent believes in so fervently they we will commit their only child to purgatory. But this immaculately crafted exhibition reveals a dense network of references and ideas that take this central idea – sacrifice to progress – into territories historic, geographic, political and fantastical. The opening gallery is transformed into the lobby of Hongxia Theatre in Beijing, a building that now serves as the artist’s own studio. Hong Xia means “red dawn”: the theatre was built for workers at the nearby computer factory in the 50s with support from the Soviet Union. The area is currently scheduled for demolition: for the past three years, Cao Fei has interviewed residents and gathered memories and ephemera relating not only to the Sino-Soviet relationship, but to neighbourhood life, movies screened at the theatre, and the influence of Soviet sci-fi. Vintage cinema tickets, magazines and filmed interviews displayed discreetly around the lobby tell the story for those who take time to explore it. To either side, Cao Fei has reproduced the original Hongxia Theatre kitchen. Here, the witchery extends to a deft and rather unexpected piece of VR: The Eternal Wave, set in 1950s Beijing, permitting a first person cruise through the territory of Nova. Portals in the virtual kitchen transport us both to the Nova computer lab and to Hongxia Theatre where the idealistic 1958 thriller The Eternal Wave is screening. Virtual reality of various kinds is an abiding interest. Cao Fei’s early work Cosplayers explored the use of fantastical alter egos to escape stultifying reality. Later her own avatar – China Tracy – was deployed to construct RMB City (2008-) a complex artist colony in the online world Second Life. In The Eternal Wave, the artist plays with the very idea of virtual reality: by the end of this immersive experience, the “real” territory of the kitchen, with its working TV and fan, is revealed as a comforting facade, suspended within the vast disorienting time and space of a digital world. Looking past the flapping curtains, we see nothing around us but hurtling meteorites. Two further video works explore other aspects of the virtual. La Town is a ridiculous animation using miniature dioramas modified to postapocalyptic effect. The little shelves of a plastic supermarket are besieged by slavering zombies, and a giant octopus crawls from the floor of an art museum (it must be the end of days – Gangnam Style is broadcasting from giant screens.) The voiceover is an impenetrable dialogue based on Marguerite Duras’s screenplay for the new wave film Hiroshima Mon Amour, another 1950s cross-cultural romance. Asia One is set in an automated warehouse the size of a city, its robot mechanisms tended by two voiceless loners apparently unable to communicate. Rather than controlling the artificial intelligence, they are, to use James Bridle’s revolting term, its “flesh avatars”. The entire mechanism, human and machine, serves unceasing, banal acquisition. As in Cao Fei’s other works, the pervading melancholy is punctured by moments of surreal beauty and humour: the system is confounded by a cascade of pomelos; a 1970s style dance troupe engages in choreography in the style of old propaganda films celebrating technological progress. This latest in the Serpentine’s exploration of VR and AI is exceptional both in engaging so critically with the “century of progress” that precedes it, and in suggesting that redemption lies not in new technology, but human contact. • Cao Fei: Blueprints is at Serpentine Gallery, London, until 17 May.