New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern has brushed off criticism from Australia’s home affairs minister Peter Dutton, saying his policy decisions are “regrettable”. At her weekly news conference in Wellington on Monday, Ardern was scathing about Dutton’s criticism of her recent meeting with Scott Morrison, saying it was not her plain-talking that was to blame for increasing tensions between the neighbours – but Australia’s policy decisions on immigration matters which were hurting Kiwis. “I’d describe his policy as regrettable. More than that, I’d describe it as corrosive and I have for well over a year,” Ardern said. “I’ve been raising this consistently with every Australian prime minister I’ve met with and I will continue to do so.” “I wouldn’t describe it as a swipe. I would describe it as defence of New Zealand’s position, defence of New Zealand’s principled position on this issue … yes this is testing our relationship, and when it comes to politics that is where we’re being tested.” Earlier on Monday, Dutton rebuked Ardern for challenging Australia’s controversial deportation laws during a bilateral meeting with the Australian prime minister in Sydney last week. Ardern used a media conference alongside Morrison to attack the policy of deporting New Zealand citizens, no matter how long they had spent in Australia, if they had committed a crime. “Do not deport your people and your problems,” she said. Dutton desccribed her comments were “regrettable” but he did not resile from the policy. “New Zealand obviously is in an electoral cycle at the moment,” he told Sky News on Monday. “It is, I think, regrettable that she made the comments but that would have played well domestically for her.” Australia’s policy of deporting foreign-born criminals has placed deep strain on trans-Tasman relations for several years. “I think for Australia we act in our national interest and her job is to act in the national interest of New Zealanders, so I don’t think there is any surprise there,” Dutton said. “But I don’t have any regrets about the numbers of visas we’ve cancelled, particularly the people who have committed sexual offences against women and children.” Ardern raised the example of a woman who had left New Zealand at the age of one but had been deported from Australia. Morrison said last week Australia had no plans to abandon the policy. “The Australian government’s policy is very clear,” he said.