It was no shock to read that the BBC is considering bringing back BBC Three to TV screens after its online-only move (Report, 7 March). During the campaign to save the channel in 2015, it was clear that the audience opposed the proposals; the BBC’s own research demonstrated why it was such a bad move. With individuals behind the decision leaving, and the BBC Trust now defunct, it is a convenient time for the BBC to reconsider, but it is welcome nonetheless. I just hope the next director general is more of a listener than the last.Jono Read(Formerly of the Save BBC Three campaign), Norwich • Does the BBC not realise that the audience for BBC Four comprises the majority of its most enthusiastic consumers, and the bulk of those who pay a licence fee? It is my experience that older viewers find little to interest them on BBC One these days, and less on BBC Two than before. There are just too many trashy reality shows. The only programmes much watched by me and my husband, aged 72, are cultural programmes and foreign drama series on BBC Four, and foreign series on Channel 4’s Walter Presents. Even without BBC Three on TV it seems that more and more programmes are targeted at young people, although few of them actually watch TV these days it seems. Cutting BBC Four in favour of BBC Three would seem a suicidal move for the corporation, and a great loss to many older faithful viewers.Margaret McGregorAberdeen • As one of millions of people contemplating the possibility of self-isolation, I know I could not face this prospect without the reassurance of being able to listen to the radio programmes provided by the BBC. In my case I will be channel hopping between Radio 4 and Radio 3, where every day as one of the so-called vulnerable group of listeners I am impressed and enthused by the quality and range of programmes. So, to the government, if they are listening: please lay off the BBC and stop undermining one of the outstanding institutions of this country.Jacqueline LittleWinchester, Hampshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition