The head of ITV has described the death of Caroline Flack as “unbelievably tragic”, saying people can never know the reasons behind suicide. ITV’s chief executive, Carolyn McCall, addressed the death of the former Love Island host Flack, who took her own life last month aged 40, at a conference in London. The broadcasting chief said ITV staff had been “absolutely devastated” by the news. She told the Enders and Deloitte’s media and telecoms conference: “I think the thing about Caroline Flack is that ITV are absolutely devastated by what happened to her. “So many people at ITV knew Caroline, including me, and it was unbelievably tragic. “I think that we can never know what is behind suicide. It is not in any way simple. It is a very, very complex thing. We take advice from Samaritans and Mind and we will continue to do that.” Flack died at her east London home while awaiting trial on an assault charge. McCall reaffirmed the channel’s commitment to duty of care, highlighting its work with Dr Paul Litchfield. The deaths of former Love Island contestants Sophie Gradon and Mike Thalassitis, and the Jeremy Kyle Show guest Steve Dymond, prompted increased scrutiny of ITV over its aftercare. Mccall said: “As far as duty of care is concerned, we are absolutely focused on making sure our duty of care is, for both our participants and for our talent, world-class. We want to be best in class for that. “I think because we reviewed Love Island last summer, so a few months before last summer’s series, Paul Litchfield, who is the former CMO [chief medical officer], works with us, and he made a whole load of recommendations which we have implemented, which is about aftercare, which is about casting, which is about a whole range of things – financial management, social media management. “Social media is the thing that has gone absolutely ballistic. It has actually only happened in the last three years, because in the first two years [of Love Island] was too small. “It wasn’t really a successful programme. It has only really made a big difference in the regionals three years ago on social media. “We take that very seriously and we are actually working with the industry on how we can share all of that and how we can learn and pool our resources, so we can learn from each other. So that is what we are doing.” After earlier ruling herself out of the race to succeed Tony Hall as the BBC’s director general, she said it would be “fantastic” if the corporation was led by a woman. “I think the BBC genuinely needs the best person for the job and if that is a woman that would be fantastic,” she said. “But I think the BBC has a huge amount of work cut out for it and needs the very best person for the job.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.