Ronan Farrow has distanced himself from the publisher of his latest book after the company announced plans to publish a memoir by his father, Woody Allen, saying the move “shows a lack of ethics and compassion for victims of sexual abuse”. The journalist, best known for his groundbreaking investigations into claims of sexual abuse and misconduct against powerful men, issued a scathing statement in response to Hachette’s announcement on Monday that it would release Allen’s memoir, Apropos of Nothing, on 7 April. Ronan Farrow’s sister, Dylan Farrow, has repeatedly alleged Allen sexually abused her as a child, allegations that Allen has strongly denied. Catch and Kill was released by Hachette in October and tracked the reporting process behind allegations against Matt Lauer, Harvey Weinstein and Leslie Moonves. Ronan’s statement read: “I was disappointed to learn through press reports that Hachette, my publisher, acquired Woody Allen’s memoir after other major publishers refused to do so and concealed the decision from me and its own employees while we were working on Catch and Kill – a book about how powerful men, including Woody Allen, avoid accountability for sexual abuse.” Ronan suggested that he would no longer work with Hachette, saying: “I’ve also told Hachette that a publisher that would conduct itself in this way is one I can’t work with in good conscience.” Hey, just wanted to share my thoughts on some recent news: pic.twitter.com/ovPczgx8pB Dylan Farrow issued her own statement on Monday, saying: “Hachette’s publishing of Woody Allen’s memoir is deeply upsetting to me personally and an utter betrayal of my brother whose brave reporting, capitalized on by Hachette, gave voice to numerous survivors of sexual assault by powerful men.” Dylan Farrow added that she had never been contacted by factcheckers for the memoir: “This provides yet another example of the profound privilege that power, money and notoriety affords. Hachette’s complicity in this should be called out for what it is and they should have to answer for it.” In 2003, Allen signed a deal with Penguin to release a memoir. However, the book was never released, for unknown reasons. Last year, it was reported Allen was again shopping around a memoir but that multiple publishers had turned it down in the wake of the #MeToo movement.In an interview with the New York Times on Tuesday, Michael Pietsch, the chief executive of Hachette, defended the company’s actions. He clarified that Allen’s memoir would be published by Grand Central, an imprint within Hachette that is separate from the one that worked on Catch and Kill. “We do not allow anyone’s publishing program to interfere with anyone else’s,” Pietsch said.The Times also shared emails it obtained between Ronan and Pietsch. Ronan wrote: “Your policy of editorial independence among your imprints does not relieve you of your moral and professional obligations as the publisher of Catch and Kill, and as the leader of a company being asked to assist in efforts by abusive men to whitewash their crimes.” Ronan later made a plea to Pietsch’s conscience, writing, “Imagine this were your sister.” Agencies contributed reporting