Jacinda Ardern has urged New Zealanders to adopt the “east coast wave” instead of the traditional handshake, and has demonstrated the greeting on national television to ensure citizens are onboard. Eight people have been infected with coronavirus in New Zealand and the government has responded with decisive action in containing the disease, banning mass gatherings of more than 500 people and requiring overseas arrivals to self-isolate for 14 days. Until last week the prime minister continued to offer a handshake – or hug – throughout the course of her day, but she has now transitioned to what she describes as the “east coast wave”, a meeting of the eyes, raising of the eyebrows and a subtle, upward movement of the head. Ardern grew up on the central and east coast of the North Island, where the greeting is particularly common. “If you don’t need to travel overseas, then don’t. Enjoy your own backyard for a time. Stop handshakes, hugs and hongi,” Ardern told reporters on Monday, asking them to demonstrate the east coast wave, after she did so herself, followed by her sign language interpreter, Alan Wendt. “The best thing we can do right now to show love and affection to one another is to switch to the east coast wave.” Ardern’s fiance, Clarke Gayford, also from the east coast of the North Island, posted on Twitter that Ardern’s preference for the east coast wave made him “proud”. in a rare fleeting moment of light, proof eternal that you can take the gurlz guy out of Gizzy......... but you can't stop some of that rubbing off.Proud.#Gizzy4lyf https://t.co/jbbn4NMGXA Alan Wendt, Ardern’s sign language interpreter, also demonstrated the east coast wave while on live TV, and earned a lot of love on social media for his effort, with many saying his efforts were better than the PMs. “Alan Wendt is so great,” wrote Gayford. Arguably the greatest moment in New Zealand Sign Language history https://t.co/sfGeUiLh5i The Australian National Dictionary Centre, run by the Australian National University, said Australians should consider adopting the Kiwi greeting. On social media Kiwis debated the origins of the east coast wave, with most suggesting it originated among Māori and Pasifika communities. No handshakes or hugs? Perhaps Aussies should adopt the East Coast wave from NZ, as demonstrated by PM Ardern. https://t.co/b6nIRChhze