Two Republican senators have faced demands to resign after it was reported they sold off millions of dollars worth of stocks just before the market dropped amid fears of the coronavirus pandemic. Richard Burr of North Carolina, chairman of the Senate intelligence committee, and Kelly Loeffler of Georgia, whose husband is chairman of the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), denied that they kept the public in the dark about the scale of the threat. Burr and his wife sold between around $628,000 and $1.7m in more than 30 separate transactions in late January and mid-February, ProPublica and the Center for Responsive Politics reported. Several of the stocks were in companies that own hotels. It was reported that most of the sales took place on 13 February. Two weeks later on 27 February Burr made a speech in Washington in which he predicted dire consequences from the coronavirus, including school closures and cutbacks in company travel. Burr told a small audience that the respiratory infection was “much more aggressive in its transmission than anything that we have seen in recent history” and “probably more akin to the 1918 pandemic”, an audio recording obtained by National Public Radio revealed. Burr responded on Twitter, accusing NPR of “a tabloid-style hit piece” that misrepresented his speech and claiming that Americans were already being warned about the effects of the virus at the time. “The message I shared with my constituents is the one public health officials urged all of us to heed as coronavirus spread increased,” Burr wrote. “Be prepared.” There is no evidence that Burr had any inside information as he sold the stocks or spoke to the audience in North Carolina. The Senate intelligence committee did not have any briefings on the pandemic the week when most of the stocks were sold, a source told the Associated Press. It was also reported on Thursday that Loeffler, the newest member of the Senate, sold off stocks worth seven figures, starting on the day she and other senators received a private briefing about the coronavirus from administration officials and Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. The Daily Beast website said Loeffler and her husband, Jeffrey Sprecher, the chairman of the NYSE, made 29 transactions up to mid-February, all but two of which were sales. “One of Loeffler’s two purchases was stock worth between $100,000 and $250,000 in Citrix, a technology company that offers teleworking software and which has seen a small bump in its stock price since Loeffler bought in as a result of coronavirus-induced market turmoil,” the site reported. Loeffler responded forcefully to deny any wrongdoing. At 12.25am on Friday she tweeted: “This is a ridiculous and baseless attack. I do not make investment decisions for my portfolio. Investment decisions are made by multiple third-party advisors without my or my husband’s knowledge or involvement.” Loeffler, a finance executive appointed to the Senate in January to succeed the retiring Johnny Isakson, added: “As confirmed in the periodic transaction report to Senate Ethics, I was informed of these purchases and sales on February 16, 2020 — three weeks after they were made.” Burr and Loeffler sat side by side on the Senate floor during the impeachment trial of Donald Trump. Both voted to acquit. On 22 January Burr posted an artist’s sketch of himself and Loeffler at their desks and wrote: “New profile pic.” On Thursday Susan Hennessey, executive editor of the Lawfare blog, linked to the tweet and commented: “Two days later the two senators pictured here received private briefings on the coronavirus threat and proceeded to sell millions of dollars in stocks right before the market crashed while lying to the public about the Trump administration being fully prepared for the response.” There were widespread expressions of anger and disbelief at the senators’ alleged conduct. The Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez called for both Burr and Loeffler to resign. “It is stomach-churning that the first thoughts these Senators had to a dire & classified #COVID briefing was how to profit off this crisis,” she wrote on Twitter. “They didn’t mobilize to help families, or prep response. They dumped stock.” Walter Shaub, former head of the Office of Government Ethics, posted: “Investigation is needed to find out if laws were broken by senatorial stock dumps. But whether or not they were, we have politicians in the government’s inner circle protecting their interests as the storm closed in on regular Americans who will do the suffering and the dying.” More surprisingly Tucker Carlson, a host on conservative Fox News, joined in the calls for Burr to step down. “Maybe there is an honest explanation for what he did,” Carlson told viewers. “If there is he should share it with the rest of us immediately. Otherwise he must resign from the Senate and face prosecution for insider trading. “There is no greater moral crime than betraying your country in a time of crisis. And that appears to be what happened.”