People over 70 will soon be asked to self-isolate themselves for up to four months to protect themselves from the risk of contracting coronavirus, the UK health secretary, Matt Hancock, has confirmed. Ministers are also not ruling out ordering the closure of all bars, restaurants and non-essential shops as the coronavirus pandemic escalates. Such drastic measures would go beyond what the government anticipated in its coronavirus action plan, but countries such as France have ordered closures on this scale and Hancock said the government would do whatever was necessary to protect life. Hancock confirmed the government will soon tell the over-70s that they will need to self-isolate at home for up to four months to protect themselves from the disease. He said older people would be “shielded for their own protection” and that the plan would be announced, with further details, when the time was right. Hancock also said the government could requisition empty hotels – many bookings have been cancelled because of coronavirus – and convert them into temporary hospitals to help the NHS deal with the expected surge in the number of seriously ill patients. “The measures that we’re looking at taking are very, very significant and they will disrupt the ordinary lives of almost everybody in the country in order to tackle this virus,” he said. In an interview on the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show, Hancock was asked if the government would follow countries such as France and Spain, where bars, restaurants and shops have been closed, apart from supermarkets and pharmacies. Hancock replied: “We have not ruled that out. We will do what is necessary. Because the top priority is to protect life, and you do that by protecting the vulnerable, and by protecting the NHS. That is the goal.” While wholesale closures are still just an option, Hancock did use interviews on Sunday to confirm that self-isolation for older people, in which the over-70s would be asked to stay at home and to minimise contact with other people, is coming soon, and could last for up to four months. Speaking on Sky’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday, Hancock said asking older people and the vulnerable to self-isolate for a long period of time would be “clearly not an easy thing for people to do” and “not an easy thing for people to sustain”. That was why the government did not want to move to this stage too soon, he said. Asked about the state of the NHS, Hancock said hospitals would need more beds and that one solution would be to cancel operations and to convert operating theatres used for non-urgent procedures such as knee operations into wards for coronavirus patients. Operating theatres were suitable because they had oxygen supplies, he said. He also said he was looking at converting hotels, “many of which are currently empty”, into temporary hospitals. And he said the government would be urging manufacturers to produce more ventilators. He said the NHS already had about 5,000 ventilators, which were needed for people who get severely ill through coronavirus, but he said the country needed “many times more than that”. He said that, although they were complicated pieces of machinery, they were not so complex that it was impossible for advanced manufacturers to switch to producing them, and he said that in a conference call, scheduled for Monday, Boris Johnson would be urging manufacturing companies to do just this. “We are saying: you produce a ventilator, then we will buy it. No number is too high,” Hancock said. Stay at home for 7 days if you have either: This will help to protect others in your community while you are infectious. Do not go to a GP surgery, pharmacy or hospital. You do not need to contact NHS 111 to tell them you’re staying at home. People who are self-isolating with mild symptoms will not be tested. Source: NHS England “The prime minister is hosting a conference call … to say very clearly to the nation’s manufacturers: ventilators are the thing that we are going to need, and frankly, right across the world, the demand for them is incredibly high, so it is not possible to produce too many. So anybody who can should turn production and their engineering minds over to the production of ventilators.” Cobra, the government’s emergency committee, will meet again on Monday to discuss the coronavirus pandemic, and on Tuesday the government will announce details of the emergency legislation it plans to pass to give it new powers it may need as the crisis escalate, Hancock said. He said the bill had been amended to take in suggestions made by the Labour party, and that it would be published on Thursday. It is due to go through the Commons the following week. Among other provisions, the bill will give the government the power to quarantine people deemed a threat to public health, Hancock said. He added: “I doubt that actually we will need to use it much, because people are being very responsible.” Hancock also confirmed the government may ban gatherings of more than 500 people – a move that is already being introduced in Scotland from Monday. In recent days, the government has faced growing criticism for not matching some of the more stringent public health measures taken in other European countries, where schools have been closed, public gatherings banned and entry restrictions imposed. Hancock defended the UK’s response. He said it was doing more coronavirus testing than in any country apart from China, South Korea, and Italy, where the outbreak has been more severe. And he rejected claims that the UK measures were out of step with what was happening elsewhere. “We are similar to many countries,” he claimed. “For instance, we are very similar to the approach being taken in Germany and Australia and others. “It is about making sure you do the right thing at the right time. We are prepared to take, if we need to, all the sorts of measures [discussed], but we will do it based on the science.” He said that “in the coming days” the government would publish details of the modelling it was using when determining its policy. He also said he was confident food supplies would continue. He was also relatively dismissive of an open letter signed by more than 300 scientists from UK universities criticising the government’s approach. In the letter, the group, most of whom are not epidemiologists but instead specialists in subjects like maths, call for “social distancing” measures to be introduced immediately, and argue that aiming for “herd immunity” is not viable. Asked about the letter, Hancock said: “What we will do is listen to all the credible scientists. What we will not do is deviate from having a plan that is based on the best scientific advice.” Hancock also argued that the letter was misstating government policy in suggesting that it wanted to build up herd immunity to coronavirus among the population at large. “Herd immunity is not our goal or policy, it’s a scientific concept”, he said. “Our policy is to protect lives and to beat this virus.”