A fortnight ago, we had the first meeting of our – not entirely genuine – Crossword Council. Since the discussion is more valuable than any resolutions, I’ve simply minuted this on the proposed “carrollism”: it has some appeal … … but is likely to achieve deftness only on rare occasion it’s probably more pleasing for the solver when the words to be carrollised have some connection to the answer (as in, the answer could conceivably have been coined in that way) it’s about the sound of the words (perhaps as well as the spelling) Any objections to these minutes can be presented in the usual place (as well as objections to the chair doing the job of the clerk) and now we shall wait and see what appears in real crosswords. Council members need not worry that this is going to become a fortnightly duty, but the second session is today. And we begin with what is nowadays sometimes called a piece of anecdata. I spend a lot of time in the National Archives and a fair amount of time in schools. In both places, you might see “g” scribbled down to mean “girl” and “b” to mean “boy”. And so when I see “girl” in a clue, I unthinkingly consider that this might mean there’s a G in the answer. Likewise, when Armonie wrote this in the FT shortly before Christmas … 14ac Miserable boy’s cross with Yankee (6)[ wordplay: abbrev. for ‘boy’ + synonym for ‘cross’ + ‘Yankee’ in Nato alphabet ][ B + ROOD + Y ][ definition: miserable ] … I unthinkingly substituted B for “boy” en route to BROODY. But it turns out that I’ve been largely wasting my mental energy. This was revealed to me when I checked what the dictionaries suggest can indicate a B. From Chambers we have bastard, 300, magnetic flux density and others. From Oxford, bugger, bottom, breathalyser and more. Collins: balboa, belga, bolí and so on. (More sensible and useful candidates are included at Meet the Letter: B.) A boy is nowhere to be seen. And, without dictionary support, it turns out that setters are hardly ever doing what I often suspect them of. Does anyone else automatically consider a B when they see a “boy”? Is anyone else a little surprised to see that no dictionary shares my experience? And, the motion for discussion: should I undertake the fiddly business of seeing whether I can find decent enough documented uses of “b” and “g” in the wild to consider submitting them for inclusion in Oxford and Collins? The floor is open. Don’t hog the conch.