For absolutely no good reason, I’ve decide that the theme of my quarantine should be the number 40. To pretend to keep fit, I’ve been doing 40 sit-ups and 40 weight-lifts a day. I did an online talk for film students and called it 40 Days to Learn Film. And I decided that, in my free time, I’d watch films released in 1940. I skipped the famous ones – Hitchcock’s Rebecca, Chaplin’s The Great Dictator, Cukor’s The Philadelphia Story, etc – because I’d seen those and I seldom watch a film twice. I wanted to know what I didn’t know about movies in 1940. I wanted an adventure. I feel alive when I’m discovering something new. My first try was Son of Ingagi, a schlocky African American horror flick about a woman who keeps an ape-man in her basement. It is inept and visually flat, and I got a kick out of it as a predecessor of blaxploitation. Next was a Russian family film, Vasilisa the Beautiful, which starts bucolic then spirals off into the magic realms of a gnarly forest, backward walking cows, a rat man and a massive three headed dragon. It’s naively, fantastically charming and extravagant. My third choice from 1940 is a masterpiece: Mikio Naruse’s Travelling Actors, a poetic comedy about two kabuki performers playing the front and back of a horse. The fourth was even more of a discovery, a beautiful film about a little girl who gets lost in Moscow. Streets ahead of the Shirley Temple films of the same period, it was directed by one of the first female film-makers, Tatyana Lukashevich, and ends with the line: “Mama, let’s get lost together tomorrow.” Wow. Next up for me is the Austrian musical Operetta, directed by Willi Forst. I love getting lost in 1940. Mexico, Japan, the US, Britain, France, Russia, India – so many countries were making films then. Often they were comedies, or utopian stories about everyday life. I feel I’m travelling the world from my sofa, just as I did as a boy when the movie magic casement first opened up to me on TV. If these discoveries continue, if my picture of 1940 builds, then I think I know what tattoo I’ll get when the crisis ends: “40.” This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.