Carlo Ancelotti has ordered Everton’s backroom team to improve their English as they adapt to life in the Premier League. The Italian brought six of his trusted staff to Goodison Park when he succeeded Marco Silva as manager in December, including his son, Davide, as assistant manager, and his son-in-law, Mino Fulco, as head of performance. Ancelotti’s long-serving fitness coach, Francesco Mauri, and analyst, Simeone Montanaro, are also part of his backroom team alongside Duncan Ferguson and goalkeeping coach, Alan Kelly. Ancelotti, who has until 5pm on Thursday to respond to an FA charge of improper conduct after being sent off against Manchester United, wants to break any language barriers with Everton’s players and has put the staff he appointed on a crash-course in English. The three-times Champions League-winning manager said: “I brought here an assistant, my son, a video analyst, I brought here three physical trainers and a head of performance who works on the recovery of the players. Six people. I won’t add more. “I am really happy because we are working well together with the other staff who were here before. We don’t have problems, just a few of my staff are not speaking English properly but I force them to speak English, to learn English. Everything is OK until now.” One area Ancelotti will be looking to strengthen in the summer is central midfield, where he admits the team require more energy. It has been a problem area all season, with the £22.5m signing Jean-Philippe Gbamin and André Gomes, intended by Silva to partner one another, sustaining serious injuries and Fabian Delph also restricted by fitness problems. “It is an area where we need more energy, I think,” Ancelotti said. “We have quality but, above all, energy in the Premier League is really important. This doesn’t mean that I am not happy with the players I have but if we are thinking to improve, I think on this aspect we can improve.” Ancelotti has tried various midfield partnerships admits his choice alongside the fit-again Gomes is dependent on tactics and form. “We have the possibility to play in different ways with Tom Davies or Fabian Delph,” he said. “Maybe they can combine better than Gylfi [Sigurdsson] because they are more powerful players but it depends on the game or what type of game we want to play. If we want to play a game building up from the back, I think Gylfi and André give us the possibility to play better from the back.” Mason Holgate is targeting silverware after signing a new five-year contract with Everton. The defender, who made the move from Barnsley to Goodison Park in 2015, has made 74 first-team appearances since his debut for the club against Tottenham in August 2016. The 23-year-old’s deal commits him to the club until the end of June 2025. “This is my fifth year at Everton and my development as a person and a player in that period has been massive,” Holgate said. “The direction the club is going, it is a great club to be at and I am really excited about it. “We want to move to the next step and push for bigger and better things. I want to win things and winning some silverware is where I see us. It is definitely a positive time to be here and I am looking forward to seeing how far we can go.”