When you’re trying to keep within a budget, avoid another run to the supermarket, or stave off the boredom of being cooped up indoors, it’s a great time to start using up the ingredients that have been hiding in the back of your pantry for months. It’s about using what you have to cook a flavoursome and diverse range of foods with basic pantry supplies. These recipes are also adaptable to work with whatever you currently have on your shelves at home. Don’t have lentils for Colin Fassnidge’s spiced lentil stew? Try using tinned white beans instead. Only have canned peaches instead of apricots? They’ll work just as well for Shannon Martinez’s apricot crumble cake. Have fun playing around with the foundations of these recipes. Make Kylie Kwong’s Mum world-famous fried rice Prep 10 minsCook 30 minutesServes Four or as part of a shared meal for four to six Kylie says: “Fried rice is a great dish to make from leftover rice, but can also be cooked using fresh rice. It is also delicious when eaten cold! I love the subtle scent of Jasmine rice and I like to use medium-grained rice. Yet any rice you’ve got in the pantry is fine for this recipe.” 4 free range eggs⅓ cup vegetable oil1 small red onion, finely diced1 tablespoon ginger, finely diced2 rindless bacon rashers, finely diced (optional)2 teaspoons brown sugar2 tablespoons shao hsing wine, or dry sherry4 cups steamed jasmine rice⅔ cup spring onions, finely sliced2 tablespoons tamari¼ teaspoon sesame oilBreak eggs into a bowl and beat lightly. Heat half the oil in a hot wok until the surface seems to shimmer slightly. Pour beaten eggs into wok and leave to cook on the base of wok for 10 seconds before folding egg mixture over onto itself with a spatula and lightly scrambling for about one minute or until almost cooked through. Carefully remove omelette from wok with a spatula and drain on paper towel. Set aside. Heat remaining oil in hot wok and stir-fry onion, ginger and bacon for one minute. Add sugar and stir-fry for 30 seconds. Pour in wine or sherry and stir-fry for one minute. Add rice to wok with spring onions, tamari, sesame oil and reserved omelette and stir-fry for two minutes or until well combined, and rice is heated through. Use a spatula to break up the omelette into smaller pieces while cooking. Transfer rice to a bowl and serve immediately – will also make a great lunch for the next day. Make Jacqui Challinor’s baked bean cassoulet Prep 20 minsCook 1 hour Serves Four500g baked beans200g smoked speck or streaky bacon, cut into 1cm cubes1 tin crushed tomatoes1 brown onion, finely diced2 large cloves garlic, crushed2 stalks celery, finely chopped1 carrot, finely chopped1 bunch parsley2 bay leaves50ml extra virgin olive oil4 slices sourdough50g cold butterSaltBlack pepperHeat oil in a saucepan, add speck or bacon and cook until crispy and golden. Add the garlic, bay leaves and onion and cook out until lightly golden and aromatic. Add celery and carrot. Add baked beans, crushed tomatoes, salt and pepper to taste. Put the lid on, reduce heat and allow to simmer for 30 minutes. While it’s simmering, remove the crust from sourdough, break bread down into 2cm pieces. In a food processor, combine bread, butter and a handful of parsley stalk and blitz to a rough crumb. Transfer the bean mixture to a baking dish, spread bread crumbs evenly over the top and bake in a 180C oven until the crumbs are golden and toasted.Serve immediately, and unless cold baked beans is your thing – devour it all. While much of the pasta aisle has fallen prey to panic buyers, risoni seems to have been spared. Which is good news for you, because you can… Make Matt Moran’s chicken soup Active prep 30 minutesCook 1 hour (5 hours if making stock from scratch) Serves Four For the stock2.5kg chicken bones or wings1 onion, roughly choppe2 leeks, white part only, washed and roughly chopped3 stalks celery, trimmed and roughly chopped1 bulb garlic, cut in half crossways1 bunch thyme2 bay leaves10 white peppercorns For the soup1.2kg chicken3 litres chicken stock1 bay leaf1 sprig of thymeSalt and pepper1 cob sweetcorn, husk and silk removed½ bunch curly kale, trimmed2 tablespoons olive oil½ leek, white part only, washed and chopped150g risoni or other small pasta¼ bunch tarragon, leaves picked To make the stockPlace the chicken bones or wings in a large heavy based saucepan or stockpot and cover with water. Bring to a boil over high heat, then reduce the heat to low and skim off any scum that has risen to the surface. Add the onion, leek, celery, garlic, thyme, bay leaves and peppercorns and gently simmer for four hours, skimming occasionally. Strain through a fine –meshed sieve over a large heatproof bowl and set aside to cool. This can be stored in the fridge for up to four days or in the freezer for several weeks. To make the soupPlace the chicken in a heavy based saucepan and pour over the stock – the chicken should be completely covered (top up with a little water if it isn’t). Add the bay leaf and thyme and season lightly with salt and pepper. Bring to a gentle simmer over medium heat, then reduce the heat to hold at a very gentle simmer for 30 minutes. Remove the chicken (reserve the stock) and shred the meat, discarding the skin and bones. Set aside. While the chicken is cooling, cut the corn kernels from the cob. Tear the kale leaves into bite sized pieces and roughly chop the stalks. Heat the olive oil in a large heavy based saucepan over medium heat. Add the leek and kale stalks, season with salt and pepper and cook for five minutes or until softened. Add the corn kernels and cook for two minutes, then add the kale leaves. Strain the reserved chicken stock and pour over the vegetables, then add the pasta and bring to the boil over high heat. Reduce the heat to low-medium and simmer for 10 minutes. Add the shredded chicken and tarragon, increase the heat to medium high and return to the boil. Taste and adjust the seasoning, if required. Ladle into serving bowls and serve, make big batches to freeze and used at a later time. Make Colin Fassnidge’s spiced lentil stew Prep 20 minsCook 1 hour Serves Four 300g lentils, dried1 onion, diced4 cloves of garlic, diced1 carrot, slicedKnob of ginger, sliced4 bird’s eye chillies, sliced1.5L chicken stock3 tbsp miso paste100ml white wine1 tsp soy sauce, for seasoning Sweat the vegetables in a saucepan for about five minutes until soft. Add lentils, continuously stirring, and add white wine to deglaze the pan. Continue to cook until most of the liquid has evaporated and any crispy brown bits stuck to the bottom of your pan have been dissolved. Add the stock and bring to boil. Simmer until nearly cooked (about 15 to 20 minutes). Remove one third of your mixture and blend (either using a blender or another deep saucepan and a stick blender). Add this portion back to your original mix. Season with soy sauce and pepper. Serve immediately, making sure you save some for your hangover breakfast on the weekend, with some grilled bread lathered in butter. Make Shannon Martinez’s apricot crumble cake Prep 45 minCook 45-55minServes Four Shannon says: “Created as a recipe for the ‘Dine With Heart – Four Dollar Meal Challenge’ and coming in at only 65 cents a slice – She’s a keeper! And of course, all vegan.” For the base825g tin apricot halves, keep juice1 ½ cup plain flour, sifted3 tsp baking powder½ cup caster sugar1 tsp cinnamon½ tsp cardamom powder3 tsp “no-egg” mixed with 4 tablespoons of cold water, (or an actual egg)½ cup milk of choice1 tsp vanilla125g melted Nuttelex (or unsalted butter)For the crumble60 grams plain flour, sifted1 tsp cinnamon5 tbsp caster sugar55g of Nuttelex, cold (or cold unsalted butter) Sift the flour, baking powder and spices into a bowl. Add the sugar and mix. In a jug, mix the melted Nuttelex, no-egg mixture, vanilla and milk. Pour this into the dry mix. Stir until combined (batter will be thick). To make the crumb, add the flour, cinnamon and sugar into a small bowl, then using your fingers mix the Nuttelex in, until it resembles crumble. Grease and line the bottom of a 20cm cake tin, then pour the batter and smooth out. Place the apricot halves over the mix, cut side up, then sprinkle the crumble over the top. Bake on 175C for 45-55 minutes.