Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: Saudi Arabia, the chair of the group of the 20 most industrialised nations, is to stage a virtual G20 summit in the coming days in a bid to show world leaders have coordinated medical and economic plans to control coronavirus. Members of the G20, mainly western nations and Japan, held a smaller virtual summit on Monday promising to do whatever it takes to bring the west through the crisis. The G20 also brings in China, India, Brazil, Russia, Korea, Turkey, Australia and South Africa, and other big drivers of the world economy Iran has temporarily freed a total of 85,000 prisoners, including political prisoners, a spokesman for its judiciary said on Tuesday, adding that the prisons were responding to the threat of a coronavirus epidemic in jails. “Some 50% of those released are security-related prisoners. Also in the jails we have taken precautionary measures to confront the outbreak,” the spokesman, Gholamhossein Esmaili, said. Britain had “no time to lose” in changing tactics in order to prevent thousands of deaths and the NHS being overwhelmed, scientists providing guidance to the UK government have said. The Imperial College Covid-19 response team – which is one of several scientific teams advising UK ministers – published a paper showing that 250,000 people could die if efforts were focused only on delaying and slowing down the spread of Covid-19. Separately, England’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, could not rule out the strict measures having to last for a year but predicted they will last at least “several months“. Australia’s department of foreign affairs has advised Australians to return home as soon as possible by commercial means because overseas travel is becoming “more complex and difficult” as countries impose travel restrictions and close their borders. The new travel advice, issued on Tuesday night, triggered speculation that the Morrison government could be about to impose a lockdown in Australia. But officials told Guardian Australia that was not in contemplation. The European Union is set to endorse the strictest travel ban in its history – with France joining Italy and Spain in full lockdown – as Donald Trump told Americans to change their behaviour, acknowledging for the first time that beating the coronavirus could take months. Leaders of EU states were expected on Tuesday to suspend all travel into the passport-free Schengen zone by non-EU nationals for at least 30 days in a bid to instil uniformity across the bloc after some member states, including Austria, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Poland, unilaterally began imposing border checks. Germany’s foreign minister, Heiko Maas, has announced that the government was going to start an operation to bring home thousands of citizens who have been stranded abroad by the coronavirus. More countries and cities around the world followed each other in locking down borders and introducing draconian restrictions on citizens’ movements or enforcing quarantines on new arrivals They included moves by Vietnam to start mandatory quarantines of all arrivals from the US, Europe and countries from the ASEAN group. In India, airports and hospitals in Mumbai were ordered to use 14-day ink to stamp the left hand of those who were to be quarantined at home. In Spain, one of the European countries hardest hit, the virus claimed more than 150 lives in the past 24 hours, bringing the total death toll to 491, health authorities said on Tuesday. The number of confirmed cases across the country sits at 11,178 – the first time that known cases in Spain have officially passed the 10,000 mark. Nearly half of the cases are in the Madrid region. Among the latest to test positive were several more players and coaching staff of La Liga’s Valencia. China has issued an angry reaction to US president Donald Trump’s characterisation of the disease as “the Chinese virus”. China’s foreign ministry spokesman, Geng Shuang, said the US president should take care of his own matters first and not seek to “stigmatise” China. Three US states will hold their Democratic presidential primaries as scheduled on Tuesday, but an election in Ohio was thrust into chaos when the state defied a judge’s orders and proceeded to delay the election hours before polls open amid concerns over the coronavirus outbreak. Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders are competing again on Tuesday for the opportunity to lead their party in a campaign season suddenly overshadowed by a pandemic that closed borders, shaken the economy and swept every corner of public life. China has authorised clinical trials on its first vaccine developed to combat the new coronavirus, state media reported on Tuesday. In other developments, the US company Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc said it had identified hundreds of antibodies that could potentially treat the coronavirus. The postponement of soccer’s Euro 2020 championships may already have been decided after Uefa last week cancelled its hotel bookings in Copenhagen. Uefa has called a video conference for Tuesday to discuss football’s response to the coronavirus crisis, with all 55 of Europe’s football associations, the European Club Association, European Leagues and the international players’ union Fifpro. Thailand reported 30 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, raising the total to 177, with 70-80% of them in Bangkok, according to the health ministry. Cambodia reported 12 new cases, bringing the total to 24.