We’re basically polite, aren’t we? When someone encroaches on our space or imposes themselves, we tend to give a feeble grin and move on. It saves the hassle of a fight, especially when the offence seems mild. But how mild is it? As actor and co-writer Andrea Heaton puts it, “Cheer up, love, it might never happen” could be either compliment or command. Do the expectations society puts on women in particular – to dress attractively, to be accommodating, to smile – reflect an innocent desire for everyone to get along or an insidious urge to suppress and control? Heaton and co-writer Adam Z Robinson opt for the latter in this dystopian solo show in which the newly redundant Lisa Goodwin hears one too many requests from a stranger to lighten up. After a day when everything has gone wrong, she lashes out. Her punishment is a remedial course at the Smile Club, a Stepford Wives-style finishing school run by “pro-smile executives” whose aim is to knock every idea of resistance out of the inmates’ pretty little heads. Chief among the teachers is positive Paula, who is the missing link between the passive aggression of Alison Steadman’s Beverly in Abigail’s Party and the straight-ahead cruelty of Ann Dowd’s Aunt Lydia in The Handmaid’s Tale. On the concrete bunker-like set by Emma Williams, she exerts a chillingly cheerful command. This is funny, of course, but in a Nineteen Eighty-Four-like story of acquiescence and rebellion, Heaton makes the connection between a supposedly innocuous compliment and a system of patriarchal control. Her scorn is even-handed; the assumptions of entitled men might be to blame, but the self-policing of women is an equal obstacle. As sound designer Ed Heaton’s inane jingles warp in and out of tune in Rod Dixon’s gripping production for Red Ladder, Smile Club switches from satire to thriller to polemic. Alternating between narrative and dialogue, it sometimes feels like a three-hander squeezed into a monologue, but Heaton is a commanding storyteller who keeps the twists and turns coming – not to mention the feminist rage. • At Leeds Playhouse, until 7 March. Then touring until 5 April.