All cafes, pubs, restaurants, gyms and similar venues across the UK have been ordered to close from Friday evening for the foreseeable future, as Boris Johnson said it was vital to take more stringent steps to reduce the spread of the Covid-19 virus. At a press conference at Downing Street, the prime minister thanked people for responding to official encouragement this week to stay away from such places but said the time had come for more action. “The speed of our eventual recovery depends entirely on our collective ability to get on top of the virus now and that means we have to take the next steps on scientific advice,” he said. “And following our plan we are strengthening the measures announced on Monday. “We need now to push down further on that curve of transmission between us,” Johnson added. It would, he acknowledged, be “a wrench” for people, and “heartbreaking” for businesses. With the agreement of the three devolved governments, he said, “we are telling – telling – cafes, pubs, bars and restaurants to close tonight, as soon as they reasonably can, and not open tomorrow”. They would be allowed to sell takeaway food and drink. The same instruction was being given to nightclubs, theatres, cinemas, gyms and leisure centres. The new social distancing measures would be reviewed every month to see if any could be relaxed. There was brief confusion when the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, who was standing next to Johnson, referred to “shops” as being part of the forced closure. This was later clarified, with No 10 saying this was not the case. A full list of affected venues tweeted by the communities secretary, Robert Jenrick, also mentioned betting shops, bingo halls, casinos, spas, museums and galleries. Johnson urged people not to decide to go out one final time on Friday: “Please don’t. You may think you are invincible, but there is no guarantee you will get mild symptoms, and you can still be a carrier of the disease and pass it on to others.” Answering questions, the prime minister confirmed that, if needed, the government would enforce the closures, but added: “In reality I think everyone can see the imperative of doing what is necessary.” Responding to another question, Johnson seemed to dilute the message on social distancing, especially from older people, by saying he hoped to visit his mother on Mother’s Day this Sunday. There had been expectations that such closures would take place only in London, which has notably greater levels of coronavirus infection than other parts of the country. The capital has also had more deaths than any other part of the UK – about a third of the total. The government had been considering a formal ban on Thursday and was braced to announce it, but pulled back. Among senior government figures there was a deep reluctance to issue outright banning orders. Ministers have been under growing pressure to act more decisively, with the shadow health secretary, Jon Ashworth, calling on Friday for immediate action. “It is time for resolute action and not just advice,” he said. “The prime minister must take urgent steps today. “Many are now questioning why pubs and restaurants are still open. It’s not good enough to ask people simply not to go to pubs. Government must act now, shut them while protecting the income of staff and supporting business. If ministers don’t think it’s correct they must explain why.” At the press conference Sunak said he was establishing a coronavirus job protection scheme to help employers hit by the outbreak. He said they would be able to apply to HM Revenue and Customs to cover 80% of the wages of staff they keep on up to £2,500 a month. Symptoms are defined as either: NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home. After 14 days, anyone you live with who does not have symptoms can return to their normal routine. But, if anyone in your home gets symptoms, they should stay at home for 7 days from the day their symptoms start. Even if it means they're at home for longer than 14 days. Information: If you live with someone who is 70 or over, has a long-term condition, is pregnant or has a weakened immune system, try to find somewhere else for them to stay for 14 days. If you have to stay at home together, try to keep away from each other as much as possible. After 7 days, if you no longer have a high temperature you can return to your normal routine. If you still have a high temperature, stay at home until your temperature returns to normal. If you still have a cough after 7 days, but your temperature is normal, you do not need to continue staying at home. A cough can last for several weeks after the infection has gone. Source: NHS England on 18 March 2020 Anecdotal evidence had suggested that Londoners, especially the young, were continuing to go to pubs despite repeated requests to keep away, which led to ministers to believe they now had to issue a ban. Planners are trying to keep within the NHS’s capacity the number of infected people needing intensive hospital treatment. The NHS in London is described as already “close to the edge” in terms of how many critically ill people it can look after at any one time. There had been some signs that the pleas to Londoners to avoid gathering in social spaces was in part working. By Thursday, tube use in London was down almost 70% overall, according to the latest data, with the trend showing sharp day-on-day falls. Bus use remains almost 40% down compared with normal, broadly the same figure as for the preceding 24 hours. More pressure is expected on NHS critical care as the number of Covid-19 cases rise, with patients needing oxygen or ventilation machines, and crucially, the staff skilled enough to operate them. More capacity for critical hospital care is coming on-stream, with beds freed up and staff redeployed and retrained, but planners need to keep that predicted increase in capacity ahead of a near-certain expectation of a soaring rise in severe cases when the peak is hit sometime in May.