Part adventure series, part manifesto for ditching the environmental burdens of air travel, the second season of this chaotic competition sees five pairs of Brits trying to make it from Mexico City all the way down the length of South America to the Argentinian city of Ushuaia in just eight weeks. And with only enough cash for the equivalent cost of a single airfare. First up, the contestants have to work out what and where Ushuaia actually is before trying to make it out of the sprawling metropolis and into Guatemala. Ammar Kalia The latest report from the Royal Philharmonic Society found that only 5.5% of conductors represented by British agents are female. This special explores the challenges faced by some of these women, such as Marin Alsop and Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla, and their passion for the music regardless. AK It might feel more Midsomer than Morse but this well-crafted new cop drama, set in Bath, makes a convincing case for renewal. In the closing mystery of its initial run, ambitious DCI McDonald (Tala Gouveia) and timid brainbox DS Dodds (Jason Watkins) probe a death at a rehab clinic full of suspects. Graeme Virtue Alan and Celia’s genteel rural retirement is becoming unexpectedly urban, what with the mysterious graffiti on Gillian’s barn and Alan’s grubby pal starting a protection racket. Celia has to take the bus and she’s not impressed: “See, this is what happens when folk start working in supermarkets!” Ellen E Jones The remarkably hardy investment show returns. And it’s the usual mixture of nerves, sob stories and unravelling balance sheets as the Dragons eviscerate various startups. Aspirant business partners include a woman touting grooming products with a social conscience and a pair of bullish brewers. Phil Harrison Former rugby player Shane Williams can’t remember how many concussions he received during his time as a professional, which is a worrying prospect for his retirement. In this doc, he examines how the trauma could be avoided for future generations. AK Suffragette, 6.50pm, Film4 It’s not the subtlest account of the heroic fight for women’s rights – there’s plenty of exposition alongside scenes of repression in everything from parliamentary equivocation to domestic violence – but the rebel spirit still burns bright. That’s much due to the marvellous Carey Mulligan. Paul Howlett Premier League Football: Chelsea v Everton 2pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Coverage from Stamford Bridge. Six Nations Rugby Union: Scotland v France 2.30pm, BBC One. The form team visit Murrayfield. Premier League Football: Manchester United v Manchester City 4pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Derby day at Old Trafford.