When two of the league’s lowest scorers come together with an awful lot at stake (for one team at least), a goal fest is unlikely to ensue. When Jordan Ayew created the space to fire a first-half strike past Ben Foster it felt like the decisive moment of the match, and so it proved. With 52 goals scored at the start of play, Crystal Palace and Watford had fewer goals between them than Leicester City by themselves. This was less of a concern for the hosts who are mid-table by dint of being conservative and had won their previous two matches 1-0. For Watford however it was a concern and remains so, with the Hornets remaining outside the relegation zone by only a single goal come Saturday’s end. The match began in the style of two zealously polite individuals standing in a doorway. After you, sir. No, please, after you. With both teams preferring to play on the counter-attack, neither appeared overly keen on having possession, at least not in places where they couldn’t effect a chance. For a while this suited Watford best. The visitors were better at dropping deep, turning over possession then breaking quickly. Aided by a Palace defence that was uncharacteristically sleepy, particularly down the left hand side, the Hornets bustled into the box on more than one occasion and in the 13th minute first Abdoulaye Doucouré then Ismaïla Sarr were able to trouble Vicente Guaita with shots from inside the box. While it was easy enough for Watford up until the area, there was a sense that they weren’t quite sure what to do once they were there. Another opportunity, in the 29th minute saw Doucouré drive through ominously only for Roberto Pereyra to get caught in two minds between shooting and creating more space, playing the ball to Adam Masina as a compromise and losing the chance. Seconds later and Palace were ahead, from a counter-attack that was predictable but decisive. It began with Christian Benteke, hustling for the ball on the half-way line, claiming it, then charging back upfield and finding Wilfried Zaha. It is no secret that Palace look to their talisman at every opportunity, but knowing that fact and doing something about it are two different things. Zaha burst into the box, and produced a cutback, to Benteke once more. The Belgian found James McArthur and the Scot then found Jordan Ayew. He was on the edge of the box and surrounded by Watford players, but he knew exactly what he wanted to do. He had two quick touches that allowed him to pivot and then bent a right-footed shot beyond Ben Foster and inside his left hand post. It was the Ghanaian’s eighth league goal of the season and his second winner in consecutive matches. It was also the last meaningful moment of the game. The second half was a non-event, with most energy spent on a series of testy square-ups which kept the referee, Anthony Taylor busy. This was fine for Palace. They know exactly what to do to hold onto a lead and while Watford did manage to force a couple of efforts on goal, one an impressive long range effort from Troy Deeney, Guaita dealt with them easily enough.