Eddie Jones has been reprimanded by the Rugby Football Union chief executive, Bill Sweeney, and warned over his future behaviour following his stinging criticism of the referee Ben O’Keeffe after England’s Six Nations victory over Wales last Saturday. Jones has not apologised for his comments but has escaped a charge of misconduct. It is believed the RFU was under pressure to act with World Rugby ready to step in after the Six Nations organisers did not bring disciplinary action against the England head coach, who was furious that Manu Tuilagi had been sent off for a dangerous no-arms tackle in the closing stages of his side’s 33-30 victory. “It was 13 versus 16 at the end,” said Jones, who had already seen the replacement front-row Ellis Genge sent to the sin-bin. “It’s absolute rubbish.” Jones has escaped further action from the world governing body, who consider the matter closed in light of Sweeney’s statement distancing his organisation from Jones’s words. The RFU could have launched its own investigation but has in effect delivered a rap on the knuckles rather than a fine or stadium ban. “The Rugby Football Union does not condone comments that in any way undermine the integrity of match officials, who are central to the sport and its values,” said Sweeney. “We have discussed with England head coach Eddie Jones the nature of the comments he made … and have made it clear that such comments are not in line with the values of the sport or the RFU. “Eddie and the RFU regret any implication that Ben O’Keeffe was biased in his decision-making. We have outlined this position to the tournament organisers the Six Nations and World Rugby, who will pass on our apologies to Ben O’Keeffe and the match officials team.” It is bad timing for Jones, who will hold talks with Sweeney in the coming weeks over potentially extending his contract, which is due to expire next year, until the 2023 World Cup. It is a second warning for Jones after he was similarly reprimanded by the RFU in the summer of 2018 following an unseemly row with Bruce Craig, when he called the Bath owner “the Donald Trump of rugby”. During the 2018 Six Nations Jones was forced to apologise after a video in which he made derogatory comments about Wales and Ireland surfaced while earlier in this year’s competition Jones apologised after a bizarre remark in which he insinuated a reporter was guilty of casual racism.