If you peer behind the construction hoardings on a side street near Aldwych, you will see one of London’s great new interior spaces in the making. Large fan-shaped wedges of concrete zig-zag across the ceiling, connecting to thick tree-like columns that plunge below the hoarding line, suggesting a dramatic Piranesi-esque world under construction within. This new building for the London School of Economics is the work of Yvonne Farrell and Shelley McNamara, today named as the 2020 recipients of the Pritzker prize, the highest accolade for architecture. When it is completed next year – with an open public plaza on the ground floor and spiral staircases twisting their way up towards cascading planted terraces – the project promises to embody many of the characteristics for which the Dublin duo’s work has become renowned. “A framework for human life,” is how McNamara describes architecture, something that “anchors us and connects us to the world.” Founding Grafton architects in 1978, the pair have spent the last 40 years creating buildings that encourage interactions between people, whatever activities and communities might come along. They have a preference for weighty materials, such as concrete and stone, often sculpted in massive volumes that give their buildings a tough, primal quality. Their projects feature airy atria, broad meandering staircases, views between floors, places to perch and loiter, celebrating the “free gifts” that architecture can provide to the public, beyond merely fulfilling a client’s brief. “They demonstrate incredible strength in their architecture,” says Tom Pritzker, chairman of the Hyatt Foundation, the hotel empire’s charitable body, which funds the prize. “[They] show deep relation to the local situation in all regards, establish different responses to each commission while maintaining the honesty of their work, and exceed the requirements of the field through responsibility and community.” The decision to award McNamara and Farrell the prize represents a small step towards addressing the vast gender imbalance of the award’s history. Of the 46 laureates to date, only three have been women (Zaha Hadid in 2004, Kazuyo Sejima in 2010, and Carme Pigem in 2017). In recent years, the Pritzker organisation has been dogged by calls to recognise more women, having overtly excluded female partners in the past, most prominently Denise Scott Brown in 1991, when her husband Robert Venturi was awarded the prize alone. The choice of Grafton is a welcome decision, but it looks rather like playing catchup: it comes hot on the heels of Grafton winning this year’s RIBA gold medal, and their selection to curate the most recent Venice Architecture Biennale in 2018. Their theme for the Biennale defined their inclusive philosophy. Titled Freespace, it emphasised the capacity of architecture to provide “additional and unexpected generosity”, be it in the form of a bench or a patch of shade. A beautiful wall, in Grafton’s eyes, can give pleasure to a passerby, as can a glimpse into a courtyard, or a place to take cover from the rain. “It was also,” Farrell added, “trying to capture for non-architects how the general public should be absolutely outspoken in demanding the highest quality in architecture.” Their work is an apt reflection of architecture’s current mood. They rose to prominence in the 2010s, as the discipline took a somewhat ascetic turn. Their muscular geometries and raw material palettes of brick, wood, concrete and stone provided a corrective to the previous decade’s surfeit of high-octane “iconic” buildings, which often seemed more interested in their signature shapes than the people they contained. Grafton’s most lauded project to date, a building for the Universidad de Ingeniería y Tecnología (UTEC) in Lima, Peru, stands above a busy main road like a great concrete cliff face, supporting a series of terraces and classrooms in its massive structural skeleton. The teaching rooms are connected by open walkways and leaping staircases, creating a theatrical sequence of spaces, open to the elements. “We like to create spaces you couldn’t design consciously, things that just happen somehow,” McNamara told me in 2017, when the building was the inaugural winner of the RIBA international prize. “Rather than thinking of a space and then finding a structure for it, we make a structure and that, in turn, makes a space.” They are interested in “the spaces in between” and describe their architecture as a kind of “scaffolding” on which lives and events can be played out. As the Pritzker jury citation emphasises, the architects are skilled at working at many scales, from large institutional buildings to a house of only a little more than 100 sq m. Higher education has become their specialty, with recent projects for universities in Milan, Toulouse, and Kingston, each tuned to the specifics of the institution, balancing the needs of different users at all scales. “Without grand or frivolous gestures,” the jury concludes, “they have managed to create buildings that are monumental institutional presences when appropriate, but even so they are zoned and detailed in such a way as to produce more intimate spaces that create community within.”