Confirmed cases in the country approach 5,000 after 600 new infections were recorded on Tuesday. The death toll stands at 28. President Moon Jae-in said “the whole country has entered a war against the infectious disease” and ordered all of the government’s organisations to shift to a “24-hour emergency situation room system”. A team of six WHO medics has arrived in Iran along with six tonnes of medical supplies. The semi-official Fars news agency said Iran was “accelerating measures” in the fight against the virus, stepping up the production of face masks and sterilising materials. France, Germany and the UK were among countries that pledged to send emergency medical supplies to Iran. The WHO chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has warned that the world is in “uncharted territory” and has “never seen a respiratory pathogen that is capable of community transmission, but which can be contained with the right measures”. He said containment must be the top priority for all countries and that there is “no one-size-fits-all approach”. At a briefing in Geneva on Monday, Tedros said the outbreaks in Iran, South Korea, Italy, and Japan were the most worrying. China reported 125 new cases on Tuesday, its slowest daily increase in six weeks. All but 11 of the new cases were in Hubei and all 31 new deaths were in Hubei. The death toll now stands at 2,943 with a total of 80,151 infection (47,204 or 59% of whom have recovered). China also recorded another seven “imported” cases of the virus and asked its overseas-based citizens to reconsider or minimise their travel plans. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, has announced a charter flight operation to bring home 533 Hong Kong residents from Wuhan. Twitter has said: “Beginning today we are strongly encouraging all employees globally to work from home if they’re able.” Europe’s worst-hit country recorded a jump in deaths to 52 from 18 as the number of confirmed cases reached 1,835. The Australian prime minister warned against panic buying as the central bank cut interest rates to a historically low 0.5% in an attempt to protect the economy. There are at least 35 confirmed cases and all public schools have been told to cancel or delay overseas excursions. Washington state has found itself at the centre of the US coronavirus outbreak with health officials confirming 18 cases, including six deaths, many of them linked to a nursing home in the Seattle area. British supermarkets have drawn up “feed the nation” contingency plans that would help cope with any panic-buying brought on by a sudden escalation of the coronavirus outbreak. Supermarkets would work with suppliers to scale back the variety of foods and groceries available, and instead focus on maintaining supplies of staple products. Passengers from Australia, New Zealand and the UK on board a ship operated by Princess Cruises have been met by violent protests at Réunion Island in the Indian Ocean due to fears over coronavirus.