Jackson Browne has tested positive for coronavirus. The 71-year-old musician told Rolling Stone that he had mild symptoms including “a small cough and a temperature” and was recuperating at home in Los Angeles. “I feel lucky that I’m not really badly affected,” he said. “I guess I’ve got a really strong immune system. There’s so much we don’t know.” He told the magazine that he assumed he had contracted the virus while in New York for the Love Rocks NYC benefit earlier this month. He said he now regretted making the trip. “There was already a question of being careful and saying, ‘I’ll bump elbows and not shake hands and won’t hug anybody. I won’t behave like that at this show.’ But still, you’re in close quarters and you’re breathing the same air. They are swabbing the mics, but somebody in the crew has it. For all I know, he got it from me. I could have got it from the crew member that has it or he could have got it from me. I don’t know. I travelled on an airplane to get there.” Browne counselled young people to take the virus seriously. “So many people that have it aren’t going to be tested,” he said. “They don’t have symptoms, but they might have it and might be able to pass it on. That’s what younger readers need to understand: They need to take part in the global response to stop the spread. That means not going anywhere, not getting into contact with anybody, not seeing anybody.” Browne said he had been in quarantine for 10 days and was passing the time by calling friends, listening to music and reading the news. He said it was important for people with the virus to share their experiences. “I don’t think my case is that important, but it might be helpful to know that some people don’t get this really bad. The idea that we can contribute to the overall herd immunity. You get over this as quickly as you can and be available to help others.” Browne’s last solo album was 2014’s Standing in the Breach. Earlier this year, he released Let the Rhythm Lead: Haiti Song Summit Vol 1, an all-star charity album featuring musicians including Jenny Lewis, Jonathan Wilson, Malian musician Habib Koité and Spanish flamenco guitarist Raúl Rodríguez. Browne is due to tour the US with James Taylor in May: the dates are still scheduled to go ahead, but are subject to change.