While I welcome articles on ideas for isolation (Fun – and friendly fights – for all the family, G2, 17 March), origami has not been mentioned, which is ideal for those who are alone. I work as a creative specialist with patients treated for cancer, who often need to be in isolation. One wanted to learn to make an origami flower to pass on as thanks to health professionals. From a simple piece of paper, the possibilities are endless. Folding is a way to become completely engrossed to create something beautiful, encouraging personal qualities of persistence and playfulness to overcome challenges. Origami offers a structure to embark on a journey to make something special and symbolic. I asked members of the British Origami Society how this art form helps, and loosely found three ways: for creativity and self-expression, relaxation, and connection with others. Origami is passed from one to another without the need for physical contact. YouTube videos are a great way to learn, through watching hands, which is calming. If you’re restless, why not try this new challenge, and bring back happy memories of making paper aeroplanes or chatterboxes with friends. Find an online origami tutorial for something you would really like to make – and give it a go.Dr Lizzie BurnsUniversity College London hospitals NHS trust • Given the government pronouncement on self-isolation for the over-70s, might it not be an ideal opportunity to look into the potential of Moocs – massive open online courses? These are free and open to all, and cover a myriad of topics to cater for all interests. Two platforms I have used are Futurelearn and Coursera, but these are not the only ones. In addition, might I suggest the Open University, which makes some of its courses available at more flexible enrolment dates and at reduced prices. This would make a very positive contribution to the wellbeing of many over-70s at this difficult and stressful time.Peter HumphreysAndover, Hampshire • The Tory government proposes to tell the over-70s to stay at home to relieve pressure on the NHS. It suggests good neighbours could leave food offerings on doorsteps. Who was it again who said “there is no such thing as society”?Ursula HutchinsonNewport, Isle of Wight • If the over-70s are going to be stuck indoors for four months, you’ll need more staff to deal with the flood of letters. The sports writers should be available.John Bailey St Albans, Hertfordshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 