Twenty years on from the start of this landmark documentary series charting the birth and development of 25 millennium babies, we check back in with Eve, Jamie and Rhianna on the past three years of their lives since the show last aired. Rich archive explores everything from divorced parents to tentative young love and coming to terms with their sexualities. It’s a simple premise that explores the chaotic changes time can bring and the deeply emotional consequences. Ammar Kalia Seven celebs, among them the presenter Nick Grimshaw, the actor Samantha Womack and the newsreader Krishnan Guru-Murthy, have signed on to cross the Namibian desert for Sport Relief – a decision they begin to regret as they walk more than 100 miles under the relentless sun. A call for donations follows Friday’s live show. AK Kirstie Allsopp and Phil Spencer are reunited – for the first time since last month’s Love It or List It – to help yet more members of the British public find their ideal home. First-time buyers Liz and Ben want to settle down in Clifton in Bristol, while Greg and Joanna need a home within walking distance of a good school. AK Episode two of this odd comedy-drama, and the villagers react to neurotic busybody Maggie (Dawn French) slagging them off in a drunken radio interview. If you assumed this boldly low-key inciting incident would have serious consequences … well, not yet, although it’s all quite droll. Jack Seale The reality show about atypical singletons returns, with three likable twentysomethings – budding football commentator Nicholas, drama student Shantae and equestrian expert Sam – looking for love. Despite a lack of dating experience, their warmth and enthusiasm shine through. Graeme Virtue Our musical heroine is still figuring out her newfound powers and her best friend’s feelings for her in the second episode of this charming and heartfelt series. Meanwhile, a medical breakthrough could mean very promising news for her paralysed dad Mitch. Expect another round of a cappella pop hits and “heart songs”. AK Rafiki (Wanuri Kahiu, 2018), 1.15am, Film4Wanuri Kahiu’s groundbreaking drama was celebrated as the first Kenyan film to feature at the Cannes film festival – and was promptly banned in its home country for “promoting lesbianism”. It’s the bittersweet tale of Kena and the vibrant Ziki, whose love is further complicated by being daughters of political rivals. Paul Howlett Bundesliga football: Borussia Moenchengladbach v FC Cologne 5.30pm, BT Sport 1. German top-flight clash. Champions League football: Liverpool v Atlético Madrid 7pm, BT Sport 2. Coverage of the last-16 second leg from Anfield. SheBelieves Cup: England v Spain 10pm, BBC Four. Both teams’ concluding match of the round-robin competition.