Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: According to figures from Johns Hopkins University, 100,472 people confirmed to have contracted Covid-19 have now recovered from the illness, more than half of them in China. That figure represents almost a third of the people known to have been infected around the world. However, these figures are partly based on official releases and could, therefore, underestimate the number of confirmed cases. The institution has counted 354,677 confirmed cases and 15,436 confirmed deaths. The World Heath Organization said it had taken 67 days from the first reported case to reach the first 100,000 cases, 11 days for the second 100,000 cases, and only four for the third 100,000 cases. According to the Department of Health and Social Care, 6,650 people have tested positive, 77,295 negative and 335 patients have died. That included 46 more deaths in England, as well as four more in both Scotland and Wales. Two people have died from the disease in Northern Ireland, though it did not record any further deaths on Monday. The Foreign Office urged as many as a million Britons on holiday or business trips abroad to return to the UK immediately. Italy, which has seen the most deaths of any nation, registered a smaller day-to-day increase in new coronavirus cases. The death toll from the outbreak grew by 602 to 6,078, the head of the Civil Protection Agency said. While that is an 11% increase, it is the smallest nominal rise since last Thursday. Researchers from the University of Oxford launched a clinical trial to test the effects of potential drug treatments for patients admitted to hospital with the virus. There are currently no specific treatments for the coronavirus, but it is possible that existing drugs used for other conditions may have some benefits. In the House of Commons, the UK’s health secretary Matt Hancock said 7,563 former clinicians had answered his call to return to the NHS to help out during the outbreak. This followed news that thousands of private hospital beds had been secured. The governor, Andrew Cuomo, said the state had 5,707 new cases, meaning it has confirmed 20,875 in total. Of those, 13% have needed to be cared for in hospital, around a quarter of whom are in intensive care, and 157 people have died. Offering yet further evidence that young, healthy people are not invulnerable to Covid-19, Panama confirmed the death of a 13-year-old girl. Medical experts have been trying to drum home the warning that, while older people and those with underlying conditions are at greater risk, they are not the only ones who need to take precautionary measures. The nationwide restrictions will now last until 13 April. The emergency measures, initially imposed on 11 March for a fortnight, closed schools and restaurants in the Nordic country and kept most public sector workers at home. They will now be in place for nearly a fortnight longer. Russia may be forced to put off a public vote on amendments allowing Vladimir Putin to hold office until 2036. The Kremlin has not rescheduled the 22 April vote, but the prospect was explicitly acknowledged by Putin’s spokesman.