Angelo Ogbonna has attacked the Premier League’s response to the coronavirus outbreak, with the West Ham defender accusing English football’s governing bodies of “ignoring” the potential risk to players. “It was almost as if they wanted to ignore such a serious problem ... [or] almost waiting for someone to die before taking action,” Ogbonna told Italy’s Corriera della Sera newspaper on Friday. The Italy centre-back said he was “happy and relieved” that the Premier League and EFL had now been suspended, but added that English football’s slow response reflected wider attitudes in the UK. “It’s not just football, but this problem is ingrained in the English mentality. They still don’t realise the danger of a virus that can be passed on in seconds,” he said. “I haven’t been tested or checked over in any way. [There is] an attitude that is superficial, at the very least.” Ogbonna also condemned the decision to allow West Ham’s away game at Arsenal to go ahead. “It’s completely unacceptable,” the 31-year-old said. “They had just played against Olympiakos, whose president tested positive for coronavirus.” Evangelos Marinakis announced his positive test on 10 March, three days after West Ham’s 1-0 defeat at the Emirates Stadium. Arsenal have not played since then, with players and staff entering self-isolation on 11 March. Ogbonna’s comments come as more Serie A players test positive for Covid-19. The Fiorentina forward Patrick Cutrone, who is on loan from Wolves, is one of three players at the club to receive a positive test result since Friday. The Italy forward was tested along with Argentinia defender Germán Pezzella and the club physiotherapist Stefano Dainelli. All three men were showing symptoms of the virus but they are all in good health according to the club. Dusan Vlahovic also tested positive on Friday, with the Serbian striker in self-isolation and not displaying any symptoms. The Juventus defender Daniele Rugani tested positive on Thursday, along with the former Southampton forward Manolo Gabbiadini. Four of his Sampdoria teammates – defender Omar Colley, midfielders Albin Ekdal and Morten Thorsby, and forward Antonino La Gumina, were announced as testing positive on Friday.