Donald Trump has announced the US will close its border with Canada to “non-essential traffic” in an attempt to keep out what he again called the “Chinese virus”, prompting further allegations of racism. In a string of tweets about the coronavirus outbreak on Wednesday, the president wrote: “We will be, by mutual consent, temporarily closing our Northern Border with Canada to non-essential traffic. Trade will not be affected. Details to follow!” Such a move raises fresh questions over America’s southern border with Mexico but was welcomed by Canada, as health officials grapple with a surge in coronavirus cases originating in US. Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said: “We’re encouraging people to stay home. We’re telling our citizens not to visit their neighbours if they don’t absolutely have to. This collaborative and reciprocal measure is an extension of that prudent approach. I want to be clear though, that essential travel will continue.” Trudeau was speaking outside his home in Ottawa. For nearly a week, he has been in self-quarantine after his wife, Sophie Grégoire Trudeau, tested positive for Covid-19. The longest undefended land border in the world, spanning more than 5,000 miles, represents a critical lifeline for both countries, with billions in goods passing through each day. The last time the border closed was in the days after the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington. Trudeau added: “Our governments recognise that it is critical that we preserve supply chains between both countries. These supply chains ensure that food, fuel and life-saving medicines reach people on both sides of the border.” Trump’s decision to work with Trudeau contrasted with his earlier move to ban most travel from Europe, which was abruptly announced in a televised Oval Office address and blindsided many officials. Christopher Sands, director of the Canada Institute at the Wilson Center thinktank in Washington, said: “The most significant aspect of the decision to restrict crossings at the US-Canadian border is that it was mutual, with both Washington and Ottawa taking coordinated action that allows for essential shipments and individuals to cross. “That was not the approach taken by the United States with China nor Europe, and it is the fruit of nearly two decades of efforts by the United States and Canada after the September 11 attacks to adopt a shared border management approach that is data-driven, utilizing risk management to allocate personnel and technology to keep the border open to legitimate trade and travelers in an emergency.” The total number of known US infections has surged past 6,400 with cases reported in all 50 states. Critics have accused Trump of initially playing down the threat and providing misleading information on issues such as the availability of testing. His claim on Tuesday that “I felt it was a pandemic long before it was called a pandemic,” was met with widespread derision. On Wednesday the president used Twitter to defend his handling of the crisis and lashing out at media coverage. He posted: “I always treated the Chinese Virus very seriously, and have done a very good job from the beginning, including my very early decision to close the ‘borders’ from China – against the wishes of almost all. Many lives were saved. The Fake News new narrative is disgraceful & false!” But his brazen repetition of the phrase “Chinese virus” in this and other tweets sparked fresh condemnation. The World Health Organization has advised against such terminology, warning that it could be “stigmatising”. Hillary Clinton, the former secretary of state defeated by Trump in the 2016 election, tweeted: “The president is turning to racist rhetoric to distract from his failures to take the coronavirus seriously early on, make tests widely available, and adequately prepare the country for a period of crisis.” She added: “Don’t fall for it. Don’t let your friends and family fall for it.” Republicans, however, are backing the president. Liz Cheney, a senior congresswoman and daughter of former vice-president Dick Cheney, wrote on Twitter: “We must never forget: We are in the midst of a pandemic lockdown today because the Chinese Communist regime cared more about suppressing information than suppressing a virus.” She linked to an article on the subject and added: “#ChineseVirus” The White House is working with Congress to approve urgent economic stimulus legislation amid fears that millions of jobs will be lost. Late on Tuesday, the administration asked Congress for another $45.8bn to shore up federal agencies, seeking extra money to help sanitise airports, get protective equipment to federal officers and strengthen cyber defenses.