I started ice skating when I was four. Initially, I was just tagging along with my sister, but soon enough the sport became my entire life. In 2004, when I was 10, I won the Moscow Championships and I was a candidate to become a “master of sport” – a Russian title for international champions who have made valuable contributions to sport. I was told that I had what it took to become a professional and even take part in the Olympics. I didn’t go to school, because I had to train for up to six hours a day. All of my friends were ice skaters; it was the only thing I knew. When I was 12, puberty kicked in. I started menstruating and my body changed rapidly. Even though I was just an average teenager, I knew right away that there would be a chance my body would prevent me from being the best skater I could be. With a bigger body, I would no longer be able to do some of the complicated jumps that are necessary for competitions. Besides, in ice skating, a slim, childish body is the beauty standard. A curvy body is not. Training was tough: I had to follow a strict diet. For every kilo I gained, I had to run extra kilometres on top of my usual 15km. My body was being pushed to extremes. I ruined my knees trying to lose weight, but my body never went back to its prepubescent state, despite all the effort. At this point, I was advised to take medication that would block the production of hormones: I would stop menstruating, my breasts would stop growing – and I would keep my young, slim body. I never questioned it. In Russia, it is widely known that young ice skaters use hormone blockers to keep their bodies from changing. In most cases, taking the hormone blockers works – although there are always side-effects, such as problems with your nervous system and your heart, that no one really talks about. I don’t think that the professional ice skating judges are explicitly sexist for not liking a voluptuous female body: the weight of your breasts really does affect your jumps. But many young girls are pushed to a point at which they have to quit the sport entirely; they literally break their bodies. All the older professional skaters have metal screws and plates in their bodies, because they have been ruined by competing. My sister is 25 years old and has fake knees. In my case, the drugs backfired – they had the opposite effect to the one intended. I took them for only three months, but my breasts grew rapidly and I gained 36kg (5st 9lb) in six months. I never got back to my normal body. There was no longer any chance of me competing at the highest level, so I quit ice skating altogether. Losing everything I had fought for caused me to sink into a deep depression for most of my teenage years. It also meant that, aged 14, I had to go to school for the first time. It was harsh. I was bullied a lot and people called me fat all the time. It wasn’t even something I was mad about: in Russia, it is normal to scold someone for being overweight. Eventually, I realised I could get out of my depression only by redefining who I was and no longer focusing on my weight. I decided to start educating myself; I learned Spanish and went to law school. In Russia, there is no system in place to create a healthy sports environment for children. Some figures within ice skating have started publicly criticising these medications, but there was nothing in place to protect me. I am now a coach myself. I teach only children who skate to improve their health, not those who do so with the intention of becoming professionals. Also, ice skating is an expensive sport: if you want to train with a renowned coach, you have to pay thousands of pounds a month. But the kids who need these classes for their health usually don’t have a lot of money, so my lessons are very cheap. I am thankful that this happened to me, and that I was young enough to turn my focus to something other than sport, so I could become the best version of myself. •As told to Djanlissa Pringels Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com