A popular idea of am-dram is that the play goes wrong. We love nothing more than a good bit of mayhem and mishap in theatre. Indeed, The Play That Goes Wrong (2015) is a palpable hit, still running in the West End and on Broadway, conceived and performed by three drama school graduates pandering shamelessly to our delight in disaster and misplaced props during a performance of the fictional Murder at Haversham Manor by the equally fictional Cornley Polytechnic Drama Society. The show is an anthology of what we now call Coarse theatre, as famously propounded in Michael Green’s The Art of Coarse Acting. And here’s the thing: Green was a longstanding member of one of the country’s outstanding high-minded amateur companies, the excellent Questors in Ealing. And Henry Lewis, one of the Goes Wrong trio, was a member of Young Questors before going on to drama school. Even at the National Theatre you sit tight whenever an onstage telephone rings, hoping against hope that it will stop ringing when plucked from its cradle; even better, of course, if plucked just after it has stopped ringing. It takes a real pro to extract him or herself from a phone disaster, as did Sybil Thorndike when she stepped confidently downstage to answer a rogue phone that should not have rung at that point, picked it up, and turned upstage with an arm outstretched towards Gladys Cooper saying: “It’s for you, dear.” Mishap, telephone-wise, is elevated to sublime comedy in Michael Frayn’s Noises Off (1982), arguably the funniest English play since the war, when Dotty the diva, in the role of Mrs Clackett, the housekeeper in the play-within-a-play (Nothing On), gets in a rehearsal tizzy over putting back the phone she’s just answered and leaving the stage with a plate of sardines she’s just come on with. “It’s no good you going on,” she yells at the director at the back of the stalls. “I’ve only got one pair of feet.” The delirium of Noises Off (the first act is set in a rehearsal, the second backstage, the third during a disastrous performance) lies in the deployment of rep cliche and incompetence in the cause of creating iron-cast, clockwork farce; ironically, and splendidly, the play is now an am-dram staple. Two years after Noises Off, Alan Ayckbourn created his spirited response to Frayn, A Chorus of Disapproval, which in the original 1985 National Theatre production featured no less than three great male actors who had each first made his mark in am-dram: Michael Gambon as the harassed Welsh director Dafydd ap Llewellyn of the Pendon Amateur Light Operatic Society putting on The Beggar’s Opera; Colin Blakely, who succeeded Gambon on the West End transfer in his last ever stage performance; and Bob Peck as the bereaved office worker cast as Macheath in the John Gay play (with music), and an unlikely sex god torn between the director’s distraught, unhappy wife and the company’s voracious, married swinger. Gambon, an apprentice engineer, had acquired the confidence to go into the profession by appearing in several productions with the Geoffrey Whitworth Theatre in Crayford, Kent, where he attended the local secondary school, before joining the left-wing amateur Unity Theatre in London, firstly as Buck Mulligan in James Joyce’s Bloomsday. Blakely was a stalwart of his home-town Bangor Drama Club in County Down, Northern Ireland, before turning professional in Belfast. And Peck appeared with amateurs in the Leeds Civic Theatre when he was an art student in the city. This binding of the amateur and the professional stage in the careers of such actors is far more the norm than the exception. The catalyst is often, though not always, Shakespeare, as documented by the scholar Michael Dobson in his Shakespeare and Amateur Performance. Many of our leading actors – sometimes I think almost all of them – have toiled in am-dram, often while holding down proper jobs, and then become notable stars. Leonard Rossiter worked in insurance, and am-dram, for years before turning professional in his late 20s. Freddie Jones left school to work in a home appliances store, then for 10 years as a lab assistant at a chemical factory in Tamworth, while immersing himself in amateur dramatics at the old Shelton Rep and other companies around Stoke-on-Trent; he was well into his 30s by the time he trained at Rose Bruford and made his London debut with the RSC in 1962. When Anthony Hopkins and Ian McKellen played in Richard Eyre’s fine television production of Ronald Harwood’s The Dresser in 2015, the backstage milieu of the play was supplemented with a BBC online feature recording the stars’ debt to where they started. McKellen mentioned the Bolton Little Theatre. Hopkins said he found himself, by accident, in an amateur dramatics class at his local YMCA in Wales. Ben Kingsley, the son of a doctor, joined his local amateur society, the Salford Players, where he performed while working as a lab technician. He was so “transported” by the thrill of the audience response that he joined a children’s theatre company in London. Glenda Jackson’s first job on leaving school was in a local pharmacy and she got involved in amateur theatre in her home town of Hoylake in Cheshire, “usually playing maids and things like that”. Brenda Blethyn recounted how she worked as a secretary for 10 years before finding her feet with the Euston Players, British Rail’s am-dram group. She even remembers the first line she ever uttered on stage: “It’s a real dirty old night. Evans the post says the mist is right down to the path, quite thick it was.” The more she did, the more she loved doing it, being part of the whole operation of “putting on a show”. So when she learned that the Young Vic needed a volunteer to type thousands of envelopes, she offered her services. “I found I could sneak out and watch The Taming of the Shrew with Jim Dale, Jane Lapotaire and Nicky Henson from the balcony. How could I possibly know that six years later [in 1976] I’d be performing there as Cassandra in Troilus and Cressida?” She moved with her then husband to Sussex, joined the amateur Chichester Players whose director insisted she take up acting professionally. She applied to, and was accepted by, the Guildford School of Acting in 1972. This is how careers in the theatre often, almost usually, happen. Mind you, I did once ask Toby Jones, Freddie’s son, if he had ever worked in amateur theatre. “Why, does it look as though I have?” was his half-serious, self-deprecating riposte. The story of many even younger prominent actors is incomplete without reference to am-dram. Jude Law’s induction into his profession was no doubt inevitable. His parents, both theatre enthusiasts, met as students at Goldsmith’s College in London and took along their son, and his elder sister, Natasha, now a successful painter and graphic designer, to their local amateur theatre in Eltham, south-east London, in the late 1970s. While mum directed and dad acted, young Jude watched, listened and joined in. He recalls that nobody in the Eltham Little took the work anything but seriously. He was part of the youth group, the New Stagers, for several years, during which time the theatre was renamed (in 1982) the Bob Hope Theatre for the great comedian who was born locally and funded the theatre through his Pro-Am Golf Classic. For Law, am-dram was part of his training which continued when, as a 15-year-old schoolboy at Alleyn’s, he joined the National Youth Music Theatre in 1987. His great friend and contemporary in the NYMT was another future star, Jonny Lee Miller, and they were soon followed by comedian Matt Lucas and such other rising talents as Sheridan Smith and Eddie Redmayne. “It was more than song and dance,” says Law. “I learned almost everything I know about acting, and ensemble work, at the NYMT under Jeremy James Taylor. And when I was asked recently to write about the Bob Hope in my time there, I was literally overcome with emotion at the memory of it all. It all meant a great deal to me, and the level of professionalism in that experience of amateur theatre was as high as anything I’ve subsequently known.” And that might suggest that amateur theatre is not always a mere laughing matter. This is an edited extract from Questors, Jesters and Renegades: The Story of Britain’s Amateur Theatre, published by Methuen Drama (RRP £27).