The British Horseracing Authority has abandoned its attempt to continue racing behind closed doors and announced that all racing in Britain will be suspended from Wednesday until the end of April, in order “to protect essential emergency services and the health and welfare of staff working in the racing industry”. The BHA’s move follows a revision to the government’s plan to combat coronavirus on Monday, which included recommending the avoidance of social contact and the withdrawal of medical support from mass gatherings. Two race meetings scheduled for Taunton and Wetherby on Tuesday afternoon will go ahead as planned with no spectators present, and with private ambulances to provide medical support. “This is a national emergency the like of which most of us have never seen before,” Nick Rust, the chief executive of the British Horseracing Authority, said on Tuesday. “We’re a sport that is proud of its connection to rural communities and to the local businesses that support our industry. But our first duty is to the health of the public, our customers and to racing industry participants and staff, so we have decided to suspend racing following the government’s latest advice.” The Grand National has been cancelled and the question facing an industry that supports the employment of tens of thousands of people, many of them in rural areas where alternatives are increasingly scarce, is what happens now. Racing continued, albeit in a very truncated form, through two world wars, as this newsreel footage of a wartime Derby at Newmarket, with an immense crowd in attendance, reminds us. But as the voiceover implies, the decision to continue was not without controversy. “We agree with the government that war workers should have occasional relaxation,” it says, “but we find it difficult to believe that these tens of thousands are war workers who can be spared in midweek.” Will the crowds come roaring back to the races as they did in the immediate post-war period in the late-1940s? Perhaps, and as Jonathan Garratt, the MD at Kelso, pointed out to me on Monday, there was also a surge in attendance at courses such as Carlisle, in Cumbria, when they finally reopened after an extended period of closure due to foot-and-mouth restrictions in 2001. “People realised how much they had missed it,” he said. But the difference here, of course, is that racing had not stopped completely in either case. Thoroughbreds were still being bred, reared and raced, and the racing economy did not crash completely. All sports will suffer along with every other part of the economy as the pandemic unfolds, but none are as vulnerable to an indefinite suspension of activity as racing and so the effort to keep the show on the road needs supporting for as long as it lasts. One glimmer of good news is that Gordon Elliott still hopes to be able to return to Aintree next year with Tiger Roll, who will be an 11-year-old the next time that the field goes to post for a Grand National. “It is disappointing, but everyone from Aintree and involved in it has to do what’s right to get everything back on track,” Elliott told Radio Four on Tuesday morning. “So listen, we’re all on the one team, you know. From Rose Paterson, the chairman of Aintree, to everyone underneath her, they all have to make the right decision, and we’ll be backing them up 100%. “There is every chance of him competing, he hasn’t got many miles on the clock and we will be training him back for the Grand National again. All we can do is dream, so you never know what might happen.” They race at Wetherby and Taunton, and though Bobndave (3.45) has taken a very sharp walk in the market on Tuesday morning, he could still be worth an interest at around 7-1 for the handicap hurdle at the former track. The worry, clearly, is that he has not been out since August, but his overall form includes several promising runs and this is not a race that will take much winning. Espoir Moriviere (4.55) has made a more positive move in the betting and should go well later on the card at around 100-30, while Playa Blanca (4.00) and Adherence (4.35) look best at Taunton. Wetherby 2.00 Flanagans Field 2.35 Global Fame 3.10 Lady Master 3.45 Bobndave (nap) 4.20 Bobo Mac 4.55 Espoir Moriviere (nb) 5.25 Glencassley Taunton 2.15 Mille Sussurri 2.50 Vinnie’s Getaway 3.25 This Breac 4.00 Playa Blanca 4.35 Adherence 5.10 Fair Kate