Vauxhall owner Groupe PSA is shutting European car plants, including two in the UK, due to coronavirus fears. The shutdowns come as the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, prepares to ask carmakers and other manufacturers to start making ventilators, to cope with a potential rise in the number of coronavirus patients. PSA said operations across Europe, including the Ellesmere and Luton plants that employ 2,560 staff between them, will be suspended until 27 March. Employees will be paid during that period. The French carmaker blamed disruption to supply chains, tumbling demand for cars amid the global outbreak, as well as an “acceleration observed in recent days of serious Covid-19 cases close to certain production sites”. Fiat Chrysler had announced on Monday that it would be pausing production at most of its European plants, also until 27 March. Johnson will outline a medical manufacturing plan during a conference call at 6.15pm on Monday evening with firms such as carmakers including Rolls-Royce and Jaguar Land Rover, with the latter already saying it is ready to offer support in any way it can. Johnson will address the participants first, before handing over to Michael Gove, the chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, to flesh out the details of the government’s requirements. The firms are expected to receive advice on how to navigate the complex migration from their current production models to making unfamiliar medical devices. A full-scale switchover of production lines is unlikely to happen quickly but experts said that manufacturers could help in the shorter term by supplying firms that already make medical equipment with staff or factory floor space, to increase output. The plan is part of an effort to harness the combined power of Britain’s manufacturing firms to address a potential shortage of devices such as ventilators, used in the treatment of people suffering from Covid-19. PSA said it was keen to help improve the UK’s readiness for an increase in the number of people falling ill and requiring treatment. “We have been in contact with the UK government and are keen to assist at Vauxhall Motors’ Ellesmere Port plant,” said Stephen Norman, the managing director of Vauxhall Motors. “Once we have more details on the requirements, we will be able to analyse what we can do.” The company did not clarify whether the closure of its European sites could affect its ability to assist in ventilator production. Jaguar Land Rover said: “We have been approached for help with the production of ventilators as part of ongoing discussions with government. “As a British company, naturally, we will do whatever we can to support our communities during these unprecedented times.” The Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) has set up a dedicated hotline that manufacturers can call if they believe they might be able to supply medical equipment. Calling all manufacturers who can support our National Effort for #coronavirus ventilator production - to help, contact Government Business Support team: 0300 456 3565 / ventilator.support@beis.gov.uk Earlier, Downing Street said it wanted UK manufacturers “to come together to help the country”. “Preparing for the spread of the coronavirus outbreak is a national priority and we’re calling on the manufacturing industry and all those with relevant expertise who might be able to help to come together to help the country tackle this national crisis.” “We need to step up production of vital equipment such as ventilators so that we can all help the most vulnerable, and we need businesses to come to us and help in this national effort.” This evening’s call is expected to involve companies such as JCB, engineering firm Rolls-Royce, carmakers including Jaguar Land Rover, PSA and Nissan, as well as manufacturing trade body Make UK. Automotive firms could be particularly suited to refocusing on medical equipment, as many already have spare production capacity in readiness for future expansion. The industry has also suffered a fall-off in demand and disruption to supply chains, potentially freeing up further space for making unfamiliar products. David Bailey, a professor of business economics at Birmingham University, said it could take some time for carmakers to be in a position to assemble medical equipment. “What’s most likely is that if there’s a manufacturer already making ventilators that wants to work 24/7, other manufacturers could help in terms of staff, components and supply chains, supporting them in that way. “Technicians could be redeployed to operate machinery on different production lines where there are similar manufacturing processes in place.” “Longer-term it might be about production lines but it would take a while to tool up. The issues will be supply chains. Where are these components coming from and if there is disruption, can they be purchase locally instead?”