How will society cope with the total shutdown of theatres for the foreseeable future? It will, one trusts, survive, but the effect of closures on the theatrical ecology will be potentially devastating. Productions will be jettisoned, people put out of work, institutions imperilled. Even the National Theatre, which is reasonably well-endowed, ultimately depends on the box-office: as its director, Rufus Norris, pointed out to me recently, only 15% of its income derives from subsidy. Boris Johnson in his Tuesday press conference compared the task of confronting Covid-19 to a war effort. But, when it comes to the theatre, comparisons with the second world war quickly break down. On 3 September 1939, all theatres closed upon the declaration of war. Within two weeks, however, there was renewed activity. The first theatre to reopen, from noon until six, was the Windmill, which offered the consolation of nonstop variety and stationary nudes. The Old Vic decamped to the London suburbs with an ambitious blend of Shakespeare, Shaw and Goldsmith. By February 1940 Donald Wolfit was presenting hour-long lunchtime versions of Hamlet, Othello, Twelfth Night and other Shakespeare plays, which drew huge audiences and made him a national hero. None of that is possible today, where theatres are heeding the advice against the danger of large assemblies. But even in these straitened times, I’m impressed by individual initiatives. Papatango Theatre Company, a new writing group, has announced it is commissioning 10 five-minute monologues (actors and playwrights to be paid £100 each) that will be shown online for free. Theatres are also pragmatically asking people who have already bought tickets to treat their money as a donation. They are even planning for the future. I am told that the Old Vic, confronted by the postponement of its sold-out production of 4000 Miles, starring Timothee Chalamet and Eileen Atkins, is planning to stage it in the autumn – and that the Chichester Festival theatre has similar hopes of bringing its aborted productions of Brecht’s The Life of Galileo and Stoppard’s The Real Thing back during the summer. For the moment, however, we are confronted by a total shutdown of live theatre. You could argue that for those who never go anyway it won’t make a huge difference. But, aside from its disastrous impact on personal pay-packets and theatre bank-balances, I suspect it will have unforeseen consequences. Theatre is a place of entertainment and, in the capital especially, a magnet for tourists. But it is also a forum for debate and discussion and, at best, a means of rearranging consciousness. One of the British theatre’s many virtues is its ability to tackle the big issues. That can take many forms. It may consist of a willingness to confront racism, as in Helen Edmundson’s remarkable adaptation of Andrea Levy’s Small Island or John Kani’s vision of post-apartheid South Africa in Kunene and the King. It may consist of an examination of political history – as in National Theatre of Scotland’s bracing revival of John McGrath’s The Cheviot, The Stag and the Black, Black Oil. Or it may consist of a study of individual depression, as in a striking adaptation of Matt Haig’s Reasons To Stay Alive, which I saw last year in Sheffield. Theatre can do many things. At its best it offers entertainment, enlightenment and ecstasy. And, while I may be prejudiced, I think theatre is far better placed than other media to point the way society should be going: look, for instance, at the way it has far outstripped television and film when it comes to race and gender-neutral casting. Theatre is also, above all, a social medium. I am constantly struck by the way, especially in somewhat lifeless urban centres, a theatre is often a beacon of communal activity. Since I gave up my post as the Guardian’s chief theatre critic in December, I am often asked what I miss. Luckily, since I am contracted to write regular columns both for this paper and Country Life, I’ve still been going to the theatre twice a week. But what I miss most about not being a regular critic is the social aspect. By that I mean the chance to constantly discuss, debate and argue about plays with friends, colleagues or total strangers. With the shutdown, I’m also finding that a whole series of meetings with students and theatre parties have been scrapped. All this may be a small price to pay for avoiding contamination by the coronavirus. But, while I fully understand the need to save lives and guard the nation’s health, the absence of theatre for the foreseeable future is a huge loss. Theatre can be a way of making us feel more like a member of the human race, and I pray for its speedy restoration. • Michael Billington has written about theatre for the Guardian since 1971