The NRL will forge ahead with the season despite the coronavirus pandemic but will ask the Australian government for financial assistance to keep the game alive should they be forced to suspended the competition. In an extraordinary press conference on Sunday morning, ARLC chair Peter V’landys and NRL chief executive Todd Greenberg outlined the ’catastrophic’ impact suspending the season would have on rugby league. With two games to be played in front of crowds on Sunday, the NRL will proceed as planned although league bosses admitted this could change by the end of the day. While round two is scheduled to go ahead without crowds, all options are on the table including isolating players and staff and suspending the season entirely. “I can’t stress enough our game has never faced a challenge like this,” V’landys said. “The longer it takes, the more pressure on our financial viability. It could have catastrophic effects on us going forward. Our money will only last so long and once its extinguished we are in big trouble. “An Australia without rugby league is not Australia. The government has to assist us in this crisis because it is not of our own doing. Rugby league... is people’s escape, it is people’s relaxation. And we have to do everything we can to continue the tradition of rugby league.” It paints a bleak future for the game with clubs already expected to suffer a huge financial hit while playing without crowds in the interim. Without insurance or assets to produce income outside of the games themselves, V’landys said the NRL would not take long to collapse if the season was suspended. “If it’s a total closure, we haven’t got long at all,” he said. “If it’s one where we can continue to play the game with no spectators, that gives us a much greater flexibility to survive. “It really depends on what we’re faced with. If one player or ball boy catches the disease and we have to suspend the season, that’s another scenario. I spent hours yesterday looking at all our accounts and all I could see was the word ’catastrophe’ if this continues.” While refusing to reveal specific contract details of its $2 billion deal with broadcasters, V’landys said Fox Sports and Channel Nine have not put pressure on the NRL to continue playing. However, he admitted the broadcasters will not need to pay if games are cancelled. The NRL has commissioned biosecurity and pandemic experts to advise the governing body and said it would play on until they were told to do otherwise. North Queensland captain Michael Morgan has already expressed his preference to suspend the season, and Greenberg confirmed no player would be forced to play if they would prefer to isolate. “We’re picking up the phone to as many players as we can, we’re having conversations with those players, we’re explaining to them, like we’re explaining to you today, some of those challenges,” Greenberg said. “No player will be forced to do anything that they don’t want to do, and that’s the conversation I had with the Warriors players last night. We’re trying to communicate with our players as best as possible, listen to their views as well, and explain to them why we’re doing what we’re doing.” The Rugby League Players Association has been contacted for comment. In a further security measure, NSW Cup and Queensland Cup games will not be held before NRL games from round two onwards. Just two NRL players have been tested for coronavirus, Angus Crichton and Bronson Xerri, and both tested negative.