Anthony Costello (The UK’s Covid-19 strategy dangerously leaves too many questions unanswered, theguardian.com, 15 March) argues for the importance of a public health response to Covid-19, including testing, tracing and quarantining. In Britain, how would this be managed locally? Before 2012, the responsibility for local public health within the NHS was held by primary care trusts (PCTs) and, before those, by local health authorities. In each case, they worked alongside local government, environmental and other key public health-critical services. In 2012 the Health and Social Care Act (the “Lansley reforms”) abolished PCTs and shifted local NHS public health responsibility to local government. Simultaneously, after 2010, the local government financial base was largely destroyed, stripping out swathes of supported local networks and infrastructural services, and wrecking social care. Community health services have struggled since, and while many efforts are being made by GP commissioning groups and trusts to reintegrate services locally, these efforts struggle to overcome the impediments to integration put in place by the Lansley reforms. Where does this leave the public health response to what Boris Johnson describes as our “worst public health crisis for a generation” (Report, 13 March)? Who is in charge locally, and what networks can they call upon? Is the extent to which the UK is clearly out-of-step with more active measures being taken across Europe an implicit recognition that we now lack local public health leadership with the right tools and infrastructure? Public health emergencies are always, in the event, managed locally. Everyone in the public services will do their best, but are they battling institutional fragmentation in public health, as well as Covid-19?Maureen Mackintosh Professor of economics, The Open University, Pam Smith Professorial fellow, nursing studies, University of Edinburgh, Dr Bridget Towers Historian of international public health, Dr Richard Williams General medical practitioner (retired), Dr Moira Dick Consultant community paediatrician (retired), David Wield Professor of innovation and development, The Open University • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition