Radicchio, in its many varieties and hues of pink, is nature’s most outrageous flirt. The castelfranco is big and blowsy, like a giant rose that’s almost too good to eat. The trevisano is torpedo-shaped, contained and very secretive. The most commonly available here, chioggia, looks like red cabbage except for its white veins like snow-covered trees. And tardivo has tendrils like Medusa’s hair that stay robust and firm when cooked. Whichever type you find (and you can use any in this dish), they all have a very special bitterness that makes them a perfect partner for sweet-and-sour balsamic vinegar and the earthy richness of mushrooms and polenta. Once, these special leaves were the preserve of upmarket Italian restaurants only, but these days they make regular cameos in farmers’ markets and even some supermarkets. If you can’t find them, use red endive (chicory) instead, but because bitterness varies between the different breeds, so add the agave syrup to taste. Prep 15 minCook 45 minServes 4 1 litre vegetable stock180g instant polentaFine sea saltOlive oil, for cooking1 large head radicchio tardivo (around 500g), cut into 1cm shredsBalsamic vinegar2 tbsp agave syrup (or to taste)1 tbsp lemon juice12 sage leaves500g chestnut mushrooms, sliced4 garlic cloves, peeled and mincedExtra-virgin olive oil, to finish Put the stock in a saucepan for which you have a lid and bring it to a rolling boil. Pour in the polenta in a thin, steady stream, whisking as you do so, then keep whisking for another minute. The polenta will quickly thicken to a paste, and the moment it starts bubbling like molten lava, turn off the heat (if you let it bubble too much, it will get too thick). Stir in half a teaspoon of salt and cover the pan with the lid. Heat three tablespoons of oil in a wide frying pan and, once it’s hot, add the shredded radicchio. At first it will look like it will never wilt, but six minutes later, the radicchio will be soft and tender. Add two and a half tablespoons of balsamic vinegar, agave syrup to taste, lemon juice and three-quarters of a teaspoon of salt. Cook for another two minutes, transfer the radicchio and all the pan juices to a bowl, then wipe out the pan. Line a small plate with a couple of pieces of kitchen paper(or a clean cloth). Heat three tablespoons of oil in the same pan over a medium-high heat and, when hot, add the sage leaves. Cook until the sage crisps up in the pan (around three minutes), then transfer with a slotted spoon to the paper-lined plate to drain. Add half the mushrooms and garlic to the hot oil, cook for about 10 minutes, until the mushrooms are bronzed, then tip into a bowl. Repeat with the remaining mushrooms and garlic. Return the first batch to the pan, then add a tablespoon of balsamic vinegar and three-quarters of a teaspoon of salt. Ahead of serving, stir the polenta to check the consistency – it should be like thick custard – if not, boil the kettle and add just enough hot water to loosen it. To serve, portion the polenta on to plates, flatten with the back of a spoon, then top first with some radicchio and then some mushrooms and crisp sage. Finish with a drizzle of your finest olive oil.