Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has urged everyone in New Zealand to “act like you have Covid-19”, hours before a stringent lockdown lasting at least four weeks is imposed across the country. Ardern warned that those violating compulsory stay-at-home rules would face “no tolerance”. “We will not hesitate to use our enforcement powers if needed,” she said, as the nation of almost 5 million people prepared for measures tougher than those in many other countries. The government declared a national state of emergency on Wednesday, ahead of the country’s move to a level-four alert – the highest possible – for the Covid-19 outbreak, which was due to take effect just before midnight. It also announced that New Zealanders returning from overseas would now be quarantined in airport hotels or motels if they did not have anywhere to self-isolate in the city they arrived in. New Zealand has a relatively low number of infections – with 205 confirmed or probable cases – and no deaths. But Ardern emphasised when she spoke to parliament and reporters on Wednesday that the strict new measures were necessary to save lives. “I am fully aware that we have moved with huge speed,” she said. “No other country in the world has moved to these measures with no deaths and so few infections. But we have no time to waste.” Officials have scrambled to decide which businesses would count as “essential” and which would be forced to close after plans for the heightened alert were announced on Monday. The list of essential businesses, which includes supermarkets, corner shops, pharmacies, and medical providers, is stricter than those issued in Australia and the UK, and bars “big-box” stores, takeaway delivery services such as Uber Eats, and those packing online orders other than groceries, from operating. “We could have waited to plan every intricate detail required to execute this closure, till we could answer every single question or circumstance,” Ardern said on Wednesday. “But, every hour we wait, is one more person, two more people, three more people, exposed to Covid-19. That is why we did not wait.” She added that the restrictions would be enforced: “And we will be the enforcer.” “You may not be at work, but that doesn’t mean you don’t have a job,” she said. “Your job is to save lives, and you can do that by staying home, and breaking the chain.” Officials warned that the police would be deployed to deal with those flouting the rules, and could detain them if necessary. Earlier at a news conference, Sarah Stuart-Black, a civil defence leader, did not rule out engaging the military for the task. The new state of emergency powers allow authorities to requisition food and fuel and close roads if necessary. It is New Zealand’s second-ever national state of emergency; the first followed the devastating Christchurch earthquakes of 2010 and 2011. Ardern warned that the worst was “yet to come”, as confirmed Covid-19 cases were expected to continue rising into the quarantine period. That was because those infected before it began would begin showing symptoms over the next fortnight. “But over time, we will see change if we all stick to the rules,” she said. New Zealanders would be permitted to leave the house for “fresh air” as well as to buy groceries or seek medical help, but Stuart-Black warned that this did not entail “just going out for a bit of a mooch”. Ardern reinforced the rule, adding that playgrounds were off-limits and those out for walks should not stop, speak to anyone, or touch anything. The government also announced it would ban rent increases for the next six months, and allow more leniency for tenants who were not able to pay due to the pandemic.