Emergency talks have taken place in Westminster between the Speaker and the government’s chief medical officer about the possibility of parliament closing during the Covid-19 outbreak. The Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, is said to be concerned about the spread of the coronavirus, not only for the staff working in the building but because the Palace of Westminster is a major tourist attraction. Boris Johnson said more information could be released in the next couple of days on the advice for parliament, which employs 3,000 people, as well as for other large gatherings of people. The prime minister’s spokesperson said: “It’s not for me to speak for parliament but I’m sure parliament will itself be led by the advice of the experts in terms of taking the steps it needs in order to protect the people that work there. “Discussions are already taking place with parliamentary authorities and scientific and medical advisers.” Hoyle has had briefings from the chief medical officer for England, Chris Whitty, and the director general of the House of Commons, Ian Ailles. The commissions of both the Commons and the Lords are due to meet on Monday, presenting another chance to discuss the virus. However, some MPs believe any talk of a parliamentary shutdown is premature and would be very difficult to implement. The Labour MP Chris Bryant, a former deputy leader of the Commons, said parliament could be doing much more to safeguard against the spread of Covid-19 before it took such a drastic step. “There are early-days measures they could do tomorrow like toilets with hot water, and it isn’t there. They should be thinking about it. There could be more hand sanitiser,” he said. The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the Wuhan coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine. The UN agency advises people to: Despite a surge in sales of face masks in the aftermath of the coronavirus outbreak, experts are divided over whether they can prevent transmission and infection. There is some evidence to suggest that masks can help prevent hand-to-mouth transmissions, given the large number of times people touch their faces. The consensus appears to be that wearing a mask can limit – but not eliminate – the risks, provided it is used correctly. Justin McCurry Bryant said emergency powers would also need to be voted on every 28 days and that would require MPs to come back to parliament. Another plan being considered is that Easter recess is brought forward in an effort to reduce the rate of transmission, he suggested. Before any such decision was made the leader of the Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, would have to become involved. Many in the Palace of Westminster will be looking to his turn at the despatch box on Thursday for more guidance. The leader of the Liberal Democrats in the Lords, Dick Newby, said there were older peers with health issues who were considering not coming into the House of Lords. “At this moment I don’t think they are running to the hills but if there are more cases in London and they rose significantly then perhaps this could happen but I’m not aware of anybody taking that step yet,” said Lord Newby. He said he could not envisage a scenario in which the Lords was shut down but the Commons remained open, adding: “We’re not all geriatric and it will take a lot to persuade me not to come in myself.” A spokesperson for parliament said: “We are monitoring the situation closely and continue to work with the Department for Health and Public Health England. “We have taken a range of precautionary measures including placing information posters across the parliamentary estate encouraging thorough handwashing. We have been reassured by Public Health England that the steps we are taking to reduce the risk of transmission are proportionate and reasonable.”