The UK government has set out its objectives for a trade deal with the US in a 167-page document from the Department for International Trade. The European Union does not have a trade deal with the US although there have been several attempts to strike one. Outside the confines of the EU, the UK cannot strike out on its own. Currently UK-US trade is worth £221bn, 20% of exports, the document notes. Government analysis suggests it could increase by £15.8bn. It believes wages can get a long-term bounce worth £1.8bn from a US deal. There are also 1 million British people working in US companies and the same number vice versa. The UK says it is seeking to maximise its reach in global data and artificial intelligence, in line with the Conservative party’s manifesto. It also cites professional services, food processing and car manufacturing – the Mini is a big seller in the US – as beneficiaries. Removing trade barriers, including tariffs, could “deliver huge gains, especially for the 30,000 small- to medium-sized enterprises already trading with the US”. Just months after the Labour party accused the government of putting the NHS on the negotiating table, the government has pledged to keep it out of US hands. In clear language on page one, it says: “The NHS will not be on the table. The price the NHS pays for drugs will not be on the table. The services the NHS provides will not be on the table. “The NHS is not, and never will be, for sale to the private sector, whether overseas or domestic. Any agreement will ensure high standards and protections for consumers and workers, and will not compromise on our high environmental protection, animal welfare and food standards.” The debate about chlorinated or lactic-acid-washed chicken were never about food safety but about the lower animal welfare standards and lack of regulations in the US where industrial scale farming can involve practices long outlawed in the EU. The UK would protect the right to regulate public services, including the NHS and public service broadcasters. Northern IrelandExports of furniture, machinery and pharmaceuticals could rise. ScotlandA free trade agreement could bolster exports of Scottish whisky and salmon, cashmere and “high quality meat”. MidlandsOne in five exports from the Midlands go to the US. Ceramic manufacturers and drink exporters have been singled out as potential beneficiaries. North of EnglandSheep farmers, dairy producers and car manufacturers could benefit. WalesLamb is big in Wales and most exports go to places like France and the Middle East. A deal with the US could open up a vast market for sheep farmers. The document also suggests there could be benefits for Welsh steel and ceramics. South-westA reduction in tariffs could help dairy and beef farms, while an easing of customs barriers could benefit luxury sports manufacturers and those making marine equipment and beverages. East of EnglandMedicinal products and the life sciences would be the key beneficiaries. London and the south-eastProfessional services, digital trade and UK tech firms would benefit. Data, driverless cars and quantum technology would blossom if the UK had preferential access to the US, according to the report. The UK also thinks professional services, including architecture and law, could benefit. If the US dropped its tariffs on products such as cheddar cheese, which has a 17.6% levy, dairy producers could benefit. Textiles, cars, ceramics and creative industries are also earmarked for the negotiation. More than 700 individuals expressed concerns about competition, with more than 200 of them being worried about the potential for the UK to become a dumping ground for cheap US imports. The UK is looking for the US to lower its tariffs, with the report specifically mentioning the punitive tariffs imposed following the World Trade Organization’s ruling on government subsidies to Airbus. “The UK continues to support a negotiated settlement to Airbus and Boeing.” About 62% of all goods exported from the US to the UK, and 42% of all UK goods exported to the US, are supply-chain components, so the lowering of tariffs will make production cheaper for all.