What were you hoping for?A pleasant conversation, a good meal and a fun story. First impressions?Phew. He’s charming! Who was the most European?If we divide it into “old” Europe and “new” Europe, I suppose he wins. But we’ve had enough of divisions, as the Brits know painfully well. What did you talk about?Art, photography, the gilets jaunes, relationships and travel. Any awkward moments?Can’t remember any. Good table manners?Nothing to complain about. Best thing about Olaf?He is open and curious, and passionate about life and art. Would you introduce him to your friends?Sure, they’ll get along well. Describe Olaf in three words?Intelligent, articulate, easy-going. What do you think he made of you?I’m curious! He did say he enjoyed the evening. Was there a culture clash?No. We are both well-travelled, open-minded (and modest)! Would you form a European union?Let’s try to preserve what’s left of the real one and try to keep politics out of love, shall we? Did you go on somewhere?It was getting late, so we walked to the metro together. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Considering how fun it was, I wish I had stressed out about it far less. Marks out of 10?Not sure what to compare it to – it’s my first blind date ever. Maybe 8? Would you meet again?Yes. We had such a lovely time. He’s someone I’d be happy to see again definitely, be it as friends. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?A pleasant evening with some laughs and not too many awkward silences. My hopes came true. First impressions?Petya has friendly eyes. Who was the most European?I couldn’t say. We are both not French, that much was clear. What did you talk about?Dance, and how we ended up in Paris. Any awkward moments?Apart from my clumsy hesitation between a kiss on the cheek or a handshake when we were first introduced, none. Good table manners?Impeccable. Best thing about Petya?Her disarming smile. Would you introduce her to your friends?Yes. I think they would like her. Describe Petya in three words?Easy-going, kind and joyful. What do you think she made of you?I think she had a nice evening. Was there a culture clash?None whatsoever. We are both sufficiently “Parisianised”. Would you form a European union?Bulgaria and the Netherlands are still in the EU. No Buxit or Nexit if it’s up to me. Did you go on somewhere?No, but we stayed in the restaurant for three hours. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?That clumsy handshake. Marks out of 10?It is so impersonal to put a mark like that on the evening. I will just say that it was delightful. Would you meet again?Yes, I would like that. • Petya and Olaf ate at Les Grands Verres, Paris. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like‑minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com