If you were to list the comedians who would rather be a rock star, who would you pick? Tim Minchin and Nick Helm seem dead certs. In his show Reset, James Acaster suggests there was a musical road not taken.But pun-meister general Tim Vine would be near the bottom of my list . After all, to pun is to be clean and wholesome, witty and precise – not exactly rock’n’roll is it? The phrase isn’t “sex, drugs’n’clever wordplay”. Yet, it turns out that Vine is a hound dog for Elvis Presley – so much so that he is taking an Elvis tribute act on tour this spring, complete with five-piece band, quiffed wig and a plastic suit that’s entirely unbreathable. But before we get on to Vine’s Elvis obsession – and it is an obsession – it must be noted that this brief pivot to music makes perfect sense to Vine. He speaks wistfully about his galloping youth when he was a prolific songwriter, and his cache of unreleased songs that is vast enough to make Prince look creatively constipated. “I’ve 100% always wanted to be a pop star,” he says, “that’s the honest truth. Even before I wanted to become a comedian. The comedian thing started out more like ‘Oh this is fun’, then it grew and grew and turned into my job, and it’s a fantastic thing to do. I had the opposite experience with songwriting – in my 20s I was writing loads, but obviously it never happened. I’ve still got the old cassettes. There must be 10 of them with 30 songs each, then a load more on CDs. I’ve been thinking of uploading them.” Suddenly, his performance for Comic Relief in 2013 makes perfect sense – Vine donned a dapper white suit and did his best Justin Timberlake impression to whooping from the audience. But it is Elvis who runs through his veins. “I’ve been in to Elvis since I was 10 or 11, so this is a tribute act that is 40 years in the making. We tried it a few times, did it one night in Edinburgh to 500 people, and it worked well, people seemed to really enjoy it.”Since those shows, Vine has been developing his best workable impression of Elvis. This largely involves “a lot of leg work”, and perfecting the famous Mississippi drawl (apparently the word “fantastic” is a good in for this). There was a scare over Christmas when Vine put his knee out doing panto in Croydon, the result of some over-enthusiastic conga dancing, but he and his band are now back in the rehearsal room and fine-tuning the setlist. The aim, Vine says, is to do a fun but respectful show: “There are funny bits in it, but it is a concert not a standup show, and I hold him in too high esteem to do crass jokes about burgers or him dying.” As you might imagine of an Elvis superfan, Vine has accumulated plenty of memorabilia in his home in Sutton, south-west London – indeed there is a picture of Elvis in every room. But Vine has one prized possession above them all: a lock of hair that belonged to “The King”. Probably. “I bought it in a shop in Manchester, it cost about £200. It’s less than an inch in length, and the colour of it is interesting, it looks almost ginger – I mean if you’re faking it you’d make sure it stayed jet black wouldn’t you? The pigmentation of the dye in this one has completely gone.” It’s an indication of Vine’s commitment to the cause. With an estimated 400,000 Elvis impersonators worldwide he’s entering a flooded market, and is probably wise to be returning to his usual gag-packed shows this summer. So does he have any Elvis one-liners? “Just the one,” he says. “Elvis was getting out of his swimming pool for the 10th time. Priscilla said, ‘What are you doing?’ He said, ‘I can’t help falling in, love.’ Just don’t expect to hear that, I’ll be in character.” • Tim Vine tours Plastic Elvis around the UK from 1 May-30 June.