The man found guilty of the murder of British backpacker Grace Millane will appeal his conviction and life sentence, lawyers said on Wednesday. In November a jury of seven women and five men took just five hours to unanimously agree that the accused, whose name is suppressed, murdered Millane in his hotel room after the pair met on a date in Auckland’s CBD. In February a judge sentenced him to life in prison with a minimum non-parole period of 17 years. On Wednesday the defendant’s trial lawyer Ian Brookie confirmed to the Guardian that he had recommended his client seek an appeal. “Sometimes trial lawyers consider that it may be helpful for another lawyer to review afresh the trial and sentence process when an appeal is being considered,” Brookie said in a statement. “That has been recommended to my client and has happened here, with our assistance. The appeals filed will be advanced by that lawyer for this reason.” Rachael Reed QC, a criminal lawyer based in Auckland, confirmed that she would appeal against both the murder conviction and sentence. “I can confirm that I am now acting and that an appeal against conviction and sentence has been filed,” Reed said. “No further statement or comment will be made.” In delivering the life sentence Justice Simon Moore said the crime had shocked New Zealand and the killer showed no remorse. “Manual strangulation is a particularly intimate form of violence … cold-blooded,” Moore said. “Your actions reveal a complete disregard for your victim. “You didn’t ring an ambulance, or call the police, instead you embarked on a well-planned and sustained and coordinated course of action to conceal any evidence of what had occurred in your room.” Millane, 22, from Essex, arrived in New Zealand in November 2018 as part of a round-the-world trip. She died by manual strangulation on 2 December during sex in the man’s hotel room. The pair had met on the dating app Tinder. After Millane’s death the man packed her body into a suitcase and buried her in the Waitakere ranges, a bushland area west of New Zealand’s largest city. Her remains were found eight days after she died. During the sentencing hearing Millane’s mother, Gillian, read out a victim impact statement via videolink describing the destruction Millane’s killer had wrought on her family. “The tears I shed are never-ending, at the thought of never having the chance to be being able to kiss my darling Grace goodbye,” said Gillian Millane. “Grace was never just a daughter, she was my friend, my very best friend. “I torment myself over what you did to my Grace, the terror and pain she must have experienced at your hands. As a mother I would have done anything to change places with her. “I should have been there, but she died terrified and alone in a room with you.”