On the face of it, writing a restaurant review right now seems utterly ludicrous. Trying to recall whether the texture of the salt cod croquettes at Ampéli, a Greek-inspired, modern Mediterranean new opening in Fitzrovia, was to madam’s liking? Or if the standard of its Cretan oil pleased my gilded oesophagus? Yes, I know how that sounds. As I decipher my tipsy notes on Ampéli’s Josper-smoked aubergine, written three weeks ago, it now feels as if back then was a very different landscape, and a very different time of eating. Ampéli happened before the news turned to the virus and almost nothing but the virus, and the restaurant world donned its crash helmet for freefall. I ate here in a time before the big farfalle purge of 2020, when the British, or at least the more able ones, ransacked shelves of De Cecco bow-ties and tinned mackerel, planning, it seemed, to sit out bad times eating rudimentary pasta bakes. I lingered over Ampéli’s menu at a time before I had to choose between going to cook and care for my mother, or potentially causing her death by doing so. My deliberations over this, forwards and back, backwards and forth, has somewhat blunted my appetite. She is 83, with one half-decent lung – not that this scarcity of breath shuts her up. I’ve pointed out to her that Rudolf Hess took to incarceration with more equanimity than she has. Hess did not, for example, escape Spandau within 16 hours, hellbent on going to Lidl to buy cheddar and resulting in the keys to his Fiat Panda being confiscated. She already had cheddar, but shopping and cooking for herself is her greatest pride, and now I’ve stolen that. My mother, incidentally, holds no truck with fancy restaurants. Her favourite is Morrisons cafe, and if I wasn’t so interfering, I’d let her go. “You will not be happy,” I shout into the phone, “until I’m dining from a hospital vending machine and wearing a hazmat suit while you die face down in a car park, will you?” Having both vented, I then go back to writing a review of a place that may not even be open by the time you read this. Those croquettes were fine, by the way, if a touch underseasoned, and the oil exemplary. Smoked cod’s roe with pickled jalapeño was a novel twist. A bowl of manti dumplings with seasonal greens lay submerged in yoghurt sauce; I’m still not won over by manti, having eaten them many times during their path to hip. “They’re a bit like ravioli,” the waiter explained as I ordered. He was a lovely lad; in fact, all the staff were fantastic, and so proud of this venture; I hope they weather all this. Assuming you’ll be able to, if you do book Ampéli, try to bag a table on the mezzanine, because the view is prettier and the vibe more romantic. Poor me: I was seated downstairs, on the ever-so-slightly less gorgeous ground floor, which, now that I’ve spent seven days in the house, I can see was terrific. We drank Greek fizz – Amalia Brut, made with 100% moschofilero grape – planning to have one glass because it was a Monday, but ending up drinking two. We were lucky to grab a walk-in because the place was heaving, but then, Charlotte Street is one of London’s best bets for an impromptu, high-standard dinner. When things return to normal, which they will in time, please remember these words. It’s a quick hop and skip from Oxford Street, but a more elegant world entirely. You’ll find on the same road, among many others, Ben Tish’s Norma, which serves Moorish-Sicilian food in a dark room that’s perfect for lunchtime conspiring. Close by is Jun Tanaka’s The Ninth, an absolute gem, with Monica Galetti’s much-loved Mere just up the road, and I have a long-held theory that it is impossible to have a bad time in a Roka. Into the mix Jenny Pagnoni has added this cosmopolitan, Athens-style, neighbourhood joint decked out in plush greens and earthy bronzes, featuring the work of Greek artists, and serving Pagnoni’s family recipes and the brainwaves of head chef Oren Goldfeld, previously of Nopi, Brother Marcus and the Tel Aviv-based Toto. Onglet steak shish was delicious, and came flanked by charred broccoli, potato à la plancha and sweet, caramelised yoghurt. We ate a pretty, moist semolina cake with pistachios, candied pumpkin and cardamom syrup. Ampéli is a cool-headed repositioning of Greek-Mediterranean food, one of the first of its kind in London. By 9pm that evening, we were one big happy room of diners, laughing and gossiping and bashing our way through the fully Greek wine list. For a restaurant critic, it was just an ordinary evening. I won’t ever take that for granted again. • Ampeli 18 Charlotte Street, London W1, 020-3355 5370. Open Mon-Sat, noon-2.30pm, 5.30-10.30pm; Sun noon-9pm. About £35 a head, plus drinks and service. Food 6/10 Atmosphere 8/10 Service 9/10 This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.