Wales expect Dan Biggar to be fit to face England after the Northampton fly-half made a quicker than expected recovery from the knee injury that forced him off while playing against Saracens last weekend. Biggar is known for his ability to overcome injury rapidly. Three years ago he failed to make the second half in Italy after damaging ribs but was defying medical opinion and playing again seven days later. Wales are prepared to give their one available experienced fly-half until Friday morning to prove his fitness for Saturday’s Six Nations match at Twickenham. “The initial signs are positive for Dan,” said Sam Warburton, the breakdown coach who captained Wales to their last Six Nations victory at Twickenham in 2012. “He does not need a scan and the feedback from the physios has been good. It has put our selection on hold because we want to see how he goes on Wednesday and Thursday. We are confident at this stage that he will make it.” Wales also expect Liam Williams, who has not played since injuring an ankle in training before last October’s World Cup semi-final against South Africa, to be available. George North, who will see an independent concussion expert after failing a head injury assessment against France, and Josh Navidi, who has yet to appear this championship after straining a hamstring, are also in the frame to play. The champions lost the chance to retain their title after losing to France in Cardiff but Warburton said there would be no shortage of ambition at a ground where Wales have won only twice in the Six Nations era, fewer than at any other ground. “I remember when we won at Twickenham in 2012, Ryan Jones [the former Wales captain] told me to enjoy it because victories there are rare,” Warburton said. “I thought not to worry and that we would come back and do it again but you learn the hard way that it is a very tough place to get a result: I had to settle for two wins there. “It is my favourite place to play outside our own stadium and those who say the atmosphere at Twickenham is bad have not been there. I can’t wait to get to the ground on Friday, have a look there with the kickers and then watch on Saturday. It has felt like a long two weeks after the France game but players need that time to recover. There is no way you can play five games like this in consecutive weeks. “The championship has gone, which is devastating, because your only goal at the start is to win it, but we are not as down as you would think. The general consensus in the group was that we did not turn up in Ireland but that we left tries out there against France. There has been real pressure in training: we have to stick to the plan because we have the talent to get over the line.” Warburton expects the battle of the back rows to be a key feature. Wales selected the Lions trio of Ross Moriarty, Justin Tipuric and Taulupe Faletau in the last round, while England had two of the standout players in the World Cup, Sam Underhill and Tom Curry, and the in-form Courtney Lawes. “I knew from day one Curry and Underhill would be top internationals players,” Warburton said. “They are not talents any more, but big-game players, among the first names on the teamsheet. They are key to England’s line speed and collision dominance in previous games. They both have instinct and are positionally very good. The back row is a matchup to look forward to, one of the biggest challenges both teams will face. “I always got on with the English boys on a Lions tour. They were some of the best on tour and I particularly mixed well with the Sarries lads. I know Welsh fans want to hear of a huge rivalry but it is a game that means a huge amount to players and victory brings national pride.”