In his novel Vile Bodies, published in 1930, Evelyn Waugh gleefully satirised the gilded lifestyles of the so-called Bright Young Things, whose antics were then regularly attracting the attention of gossip and society columnists in an otherwise colourless postwar Britain. In one vignette, Waugh describes a party hosted by a character he calls Miss Mouse, whose father was bankrolling the revels. He writes: “Miss Mouse (in a very enterprising frock by Chéruit) sat on a chair with her eyes popping out of her head … She never could get used to so much excitement, never ... It was too thrilling to see all that dull money her father had amassed, metamorphosed in this way into so much glitter and noise and so many bored young faces.” Miss Mouse, her designer dress and her daddy’s money, popped into my head as I wandered through the National Portrait Gallery’s exhibition Cecil Beaton’s Bright Young Things, in which Waugh briefly features. It is an extended historical portrait of a very English upper-class milieu comprising youthful aristocrats and socialites, their bohemian tendencies buoyed by their inherited wealth and privilege. As Beaton’s portraits show, the world the Bright Young Things inhabited was one of surface and style, performance and role-play, a world both elaborately inventive and incandescently empty. That is not to say they did not have genuine talents among their number. They did, and Beaton was one of them, alongside the painter Rex Whistler, the composer William Walton and the novelist Nancy Mitford, all of whom he photographed. They appear here, though, as players in an elaborate masquerade, wherein the participants disguise themselves in elaborate costumes; the more ornate, the more they reveal about their self-enclosed world and its values. Perhaps Beaton, who came from a middle-class, suburban background was, as the show’s curator, Robin Muir, implies, alert to the subtext inherent in his portraits and snapshots of the Bright Young Things. “It was a world to which Cecil was instinctively drawn and to which he felt he belonged,” writes Muir in his catalogue essay. “But his was, initially, an outsider’s eye scrutinising, recording, marvelling. If he had been born to it, he might have been less perceptive of it.” Throughout his life, though, with a few notable exceptions, Beaton was drawn to beauty and elegance for their own sake, and that uncritical aesthetic surely has its roots here. His friends, whether posing as themselves or as exotic creatures given to often extravagant gender blurring, were utterly at ease in front of his camera. Stephen Tennant, the brightest – though not in every way – of the Bright Young Things, thought it “enchanted”, mistaking the machine for the person operating it. Beaton’s enchantment with this social world is evident throughout the show. His adoring gaze finds its first subjects in his two sisters, Nancy and Baba, both of whom were willing collaborators in his early experiments with ornate costumes and elaborate props. He sometimes photographed them alongside their reflections, in one almost surrealist image capturing both their faces mirrored in piano lid. In 1922, while at Cambridge, he created a handful of portraits of his friend, Steven Runciman, who would later become a lauded historian of the Byzantine era. Despite the theatrical props – a bird, a tulip, patterned robes – they have an austere presence, a stillness that emanates from Runciman’s averted eyes and quiet composure. Though untypical in terms of what follows, they meant a lot to Beaton. In 1951, he wrote: “When I photographed Steven Runciman wearing his black hair in a fringe with a budgerigar poised on his ringed finger, looking obliquely into the camera in the manner of the Italian primitives, I knew I had not lived in vain.” The exhibition moves from the intimate to the extravagantly exhibitionist as Beaton’s reputation grows and the foppish and the famous are drawn to him, confident in the knowledge that he will reflect, and in some cases enhance, their glamour and their social stranding. He charmed great society beauties such as Lady Diana Cooper, who posed for a Vogue shoot by him in “an enormous apricot garden hat”. His portrait of Lady Loughborough illuminates her fragile beauty by using a bell jar as a prop, her head seemingly encased inside it against a geometrically patterned backdrop. If these moments suggest a latent love of experimentation, it never fully materialises. Beaton was certainly alert to the disruptive innovations of the contemporary art world, whether modernism or surrealism, but at this point they are acknowledged rather than embraced. If his eye was instinctively drawn to beautiful, aristocratic young men like Tennant, he also made candid portraits of the more serious creative talents that were drawn into their orbit, including Rex Whistler and Siegfried Sassoon. Their seriousness brought out his own. In contrast, he posed for other photographers, often indulging his love of role-play. For one startling portrait by George Hoyningen-Huene, Beaton disguised himself as the writer Elinor Glyn, posing theatrically in a long black dress and pearls, clutching a small crucifix, and staring intensely at the camera. The transformation is entirely convincing. “I don’t want people to know me as I really am,” Beaton once said, “but as I am trying and pretending to be.” His flattering gaze encouraged others to do the same. One room is given over to less formal portraits of an extravagant summer fete that Beaton hosted at his home, Ashcombe House, in Wiltshire in 1937. The captions alone impart a sense of the occasion, in which guests indulged in the elaborate and the grotesque without that much irony: Lady Stavordale Dressed As a Faun; Tilly Losch As a Meissen Shepherdess; Lord Berners in His Pig Mask. Muir describes the occasion as “a personal triumph ... which saw Cecil make four costume changes as ringleader-designer-actor-host; the auteur of his own theatrical fantasy special.” Maybe so, but it also marks Beaton’s almost total immersion in a world that he had willed himself into, not least by his constant mythologising of it. There is much that is intriguing here, both aesthetically and sociologically, but for me it is the passing faces of his female subjects that fascinate the most: a young and uneasy Daphne du Maurier as a reluctant debutante; the utterly contemporary beauty of Iris Tree, modernist poet and true Bohemian; the socialite with a social conscience, Nancy Cunard, looking fierce in kohl-rimmed eyes. An exuberant Nora Holt, musician, performer and key figure in the Harlem Renaissance, for whom Beaton hosted a cocktail party in the summer of 1929, is a noticeable exception here: an African American woman in an exhibition whose subtext is white, English privilege and exclusivity. When Vile Bodies was published, Beaton had Miss Mouse host a themed fancy dress party for which the guests had been instructed “to come dressed as savages”. As the catalogue introduction makes clear, Waugh’s satirical vignette was not that much of an exaggeration. While mentioning the number of extravagantly themed social gatherings hosted in London in the summer of 1927, Muir cites Katherine (Miss Reginald) Coke’s party, which required “people to come as beggars”. What fun! Though Beaton’s gaze was perceptive, then, it was selectively so. In his extended portrait of this glittering social setting, there is not a trace of the ingrained class snobbery, and indeed cruelty, that existed alongside the creativity. In his enchantment with dressing up and playacting, Beaton overlooked, or, most likely, chose not to see, the bigger masquerade. An outsider’s eye view, perhaps, but a disingenuous one. Cecil Beaton’s Bright Young Things is at the National Portrait Gallery, London, 12 March-7 June.