Modern Britain is no longer a nation of shopkeepers but a nation of singers. From the coves of Cornwall to the suburbs of Glasgow, inspirational choirs and angel-voiced ordinary folk are just waiting to be discovered and made into a movie. Not content with mining our pop heritage (Rocketman, Bohemian Rhapsody, etc), British cinema has set up a production line in everyday tales of the power of song, often claiming to be “inspired by a true story”, which might not be quite accurate. Military Wives is both the latest example, and an illustration of why this stuff is so prevalent. The true story in question is well known: how the partners of British servicemen fighting in Afghanistan formed a choir that became a national sensation. It is perfectly enjoyable, and the premise is beyond reproach, but we know how this tune goes: unpromising beginnings, a cappella pop hits, a chalk-and-cheese character clash (Kristin Scott Thomas and Sharon Horgan), preparations for the Big Concert, and the obligatory angel-voiced introvert among them who never knew she had it in her. In the past few years we have had myriad variations on this theme. Such as Fisherman’s Friends, based on the real-life Cornish choir whose sea shanties became a surprise hit. We have had Jessie Buckley as a single mum following her country-singing dream in Wild Rose. For the seniors, we have had Song for Marion, with Gemma Arterton coaxing Ace of Spades out of her seniors choir. And, for the younger demographic, Teen Spirit, with Ellie Fanning as a glum Polish immigrant whose talent takes her into the final stages of an X Factor-like competition. The latter gives you some indication of where this is all coming from. Rather than reality, these movies are increasingly based on reality TV, which has already prepackaged the feelgood story for us. The popularity of shows such as Britain’s Got Talent, X Factor and Gareth Malone’s The Choir (which itself owes a debt to 2004 French hit The Chorus) has belatedly dawned on British cinema, just when the shows themselves are falling out of favour. Sometimes, cinema transcribes these tales directly: James Corden played BGT-winner Paul Potts in One Chance; a Susan Boyle biopic is still on the cards with Meryl Streep rumoured to fancy the role. Other times, the movies massage the truth somewhat. In real life, the Military Wives benefited considerably from the input of Gareth Malone, who marshalled them into a chart-topping phenomenon and chronicled the whole process in his TV series. But Malone is tidily airbrushed out of the movie, as is composer Paul Mealor, leaving the impression of a grass-roots human tale when in fact this is more like a cover version of one. The reality is often rougher and messier, but also more interesting.