The exaggerated winged eye – as per Halpern SS20 – makes such a statement that to add anything else is just attention seeking. So simplify. Pull the eye taut, draw and fill in the shape you want (an inky liquid liner gives a slicker finish). Then take a small brush and press in – don’t brush – the dense black glittery particles on top. It’s a bold look so soften the skin with a hint of colour and highlighter. A non-shiny nude balm on the lips is the only finish you need. This is one instance where the adage, “Eyes or lips, never both,” applies. MAC Pro Longwear FluidLine in BlackTrack £17.50, maccosmetics.co.uk Lanolips Tinted Lip Balm £7.99, lookfantastic.co.uk Smashbox Cali Contour Palette £35, smashbox.co.uk Eco Stardust Black Biodegradable Glitter from £6, ecostardust.com Charlotte Tilbury Beauty Light Wand in Peachgasm £29, charlottetilbury.com Goop, the wellness and lifestyle brand founded by Gwyneth Paltrow is known for being at the centre of headlines and watercooler conversations. Much of the controversy revolves around its relationship with female genitalia. In 2017, jade eggs were supposedly good for your vagina (they’re not), more recently the brand sold out of ‘vagina’ candles. Following that, the promotional poster for The Goop Lab, the Netflix series, featured Paltrow in front of a supersized… yes that V-word again. The sensationalist din around Goop’s polarising approach to wellness means people forget about its skincare products. And that’s a shame as I find them rather good. If you suffer from troublesome skin that’s prone to oiliness, try this cleanser. The shade of green is not artificial (this is a wellness brand). It comes from malachite, a detoxing mineral, known as a ‘free radical scavenger’ that boosts skin defences against environmental aggressors. The fruit acid also gently exfoliates and de-clogs. Many people shy away from foaming textures, but I wouldn’t worry about this one. The suds are not excessive, but will rid skin of grime without drying. Post-wash, my skin feels balanced and clean. You might not deem this worth a clickbait headline, but you might be impressed enough to mention it at your next watercooler conversation. Goop Beauty G. Tox Malachite and Fruit Acid Pore Purifying Cleanser, £44, goop.com Slow release Anyone wanting retinol’s skin-perfecting abilities without the downtime will love this new retinol range. It uses a slow-release technology to minimise fine lines and even skin tone effectively but gently. Murad Retinol Youth Renewal Serum, £75, murad.co.uk Flower power A science-meets-sustainability brand from the US that uses bakuchiol – a plant-based retinol alternative – and squalane to smooth skin. Biossance Squalane + Phyto-Retinol Serum, £61, cultbeauty.co.uk Vitamin kick Made specifically for sensitive skin, this resurfacing retinol formulation is offset by niacinamide (Vitamin B3) so side-effects are reduced and the skin barrier is restored. La Roche-Posay Retinol B3 Serum, £38, feelunique.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.