The ramifications of the coronavirus outbreak are still unfolding, changing how we work, interact and, for me at least, use social media. Self-isolation means that most of us are using our phones even more than usual. It was already a great deal, with the average Brit checking their phone about every 12 minutes of the waking day. A digital detox is probably more necessary than ever during this period and yet also less feasible. Over the past few days, overwhelmed by rolling news coverage and conspiracy theories, I’ve only managed to survive online by frequenting the “sunny side up” social media channels that are so often the subject of ridicule. Most of us have a certain level of scepticism for the perma-positive brigade. I’ve eye-rolled at the endless captions demanding “good vibes only”. I’ve scrolled past the posting of a reposting of a quote on silver linings, which appear only to be visible through rose-tinted sunnies. But I must admit, eternal optimists have been a godsend during this time. For me, the relentless, almost aggressive optimism of many Instagrammers is an unexpected comfort when I’m distinctly lacking in any of my own. I’ve come to love twee, child-like illustrations assuring that “we’ve got this” or reminding that we’re “all in this together”. Accounts documenting small, medium and big acts of kindness have been heartwarming displays of human spirit. When you are feeling powerless, Twitter users offering advice on how you too can muck in can make you feel slightly less so. Just last month, we urged each other to be kinder online via the hashtag campaign #BeKind, created after the tragic death of Caroline Flack (which itself illustrates just how sad and strange this year has already been) to little avail. And while the usual callousness will never disappear from the internet entirely, being in this for the long haul has meant that it finally occurred to me that I don’t have to give it any time. Things are already dark enough. Snark and cynicism are mainstays of the world wide web – even the most wholesome corners of it usually have comment sections dripping in sarcasm. But there is nothing like being in the throws of a global pandemic to put the time you spend online in perspective. Like a social media Scrooge, faced with Covid-19 instead of Christmas, I’ve found the true meaning of being on Instagram. Despite our previous scoffing, it’s the “Live, Laugh, Lovers” who will inherit the Earth.