Australia’s bid to win a fifth Women’s Twenty20 World Cup has suffered a blow with all-rounder Ellyse Perry ruled out of the remainder of the tournament due to a serious hamstring injury. Perry hobbled off the pitch during the host nation’s win over New Zealand on Monday after sustaining the injury while attempting a run-out at Junction Oval. Scans later revealed the severity of the damage. “Ellyse sustained a high-grade right hamstring injury that is expected to keep her out of the game for a significant period of time,” team doctor Pip Inge said. “We are currently exploring management options and will continue to support Ellyse through her recovery.” Perry will miss Thursday’s semi-final and Australia’s tour of South Africa later this month but she will remain with the team for the duration of the current tournament. “Ellyse is a key member of our squad and has been for a long period of time and on a personal level we’re disappointed that she won’t have the opportunity to finish the tournament,” coach Matthew Mott said. “She gives her absolute all every time she takes to the field for her country and that was evident again against New Zealand in the selfless manner in which she threw herself into her batting, bowling and fielding performances. “We’re confident that we have enough depth in the squad to cover her batting and bowling and know whoever gets an opportunity will make a strong contribution.” The loss of Perry is not the only hurdle Australia will have to overcome if they are to defend their World Cup title, with inclement weather this week threatening to derail their campaign. Rain is forecast for Sydney on Thursday, when Australia are scheduled to play either South Africa or England for a place in Sunday’s final at the MCG. With no reserve day in place, Meg Lanning’s side will miss out by default should the semi-final be washed out. Ten batting overs for each side are needed for a result to be possible but if play at the SCG is impossible, Australia’s opponents, as Group B winners, will progress to the final, according to tournament rules. Australia’s victory over New Zealand on Monday secured their place in the final four as Group A runners-up, behind India. “The cricket and the weather are things we can’t control,” World Cup CEO Nick Hockley told SEN. “We’ve just got our fingers crossed we can get a full game away. It’s why finishing positions in the pool can be important. Fingers crossed it doesn’t come down to that.”