Brentford strengthened their Sky Bet Championship promotion push with an emphatic 5-0 win over troubled Sheffield Wednesday. A Josh Dasilva brace and goals from Tariqe Fosu, Emiliano Marcondes and Bryan Mbeumo ended the hosts’ five-game winless run in some style. The result also heaped more pressure on the Sheffield Wednesday manager, Garry Monk, who was left fuming at his side’s performance. “That was the most embarrassed I’ve ever felt in football. It was inexcusable. I’ve defended the team before but we were hiding today,” said Monk. “We have responsibilities in terms of what we face on a football pitch but the one thing you need is heart and we didn’t show any of that. I can only apologise to the fans behind the goal because they don’t deserve this.” Dasilva gave the Londoners the lead on 10 minutes when he swept home from 12 yards after Saïd Benrahma cut in from the left and his blistering drive was parried into his path by keeper Cameron Dawson. The Bees made it two eight minutes later when a half-cleared ball dropped for Marcondes, who fired over the keeper and into the far corner with an unstoppable dipping drive from 20 yards. The hosts stretched their lead just after half hour, Marcondes playing a slide-rule pass into the path of Mbeumo, who put the burners on to outpace his marker and coolly slot home in the far corner. Wednesday battled back after the break, but Brentford weathered the storm and exerted their dominance again in the 73rd minute when Dasilva was played in by Benrahma and slotted under the keeper to make it four. Brentford were running riot and some intricate passing around the box slipped Fosu in and he fired an angled drive past Dawson into the far corner to complete the rout. It was no more than the promotion chasers deserved and it could have been even worse. Top scorer Ollie Watkins nearly opened his side’s account after just seven minutes, but his half-volley from a clever Christian Norgaard cross smashed to safety off the bar. “Every time we take a step forward we take two steps back,” said Monk. “I have said the boys train well and hard and a lot of it you don’t see coming, and then you get that on the pitch. “There is a leadership problem and I share responsibility for that. I have to lead that team and those players on a daily basis, but I’m clearly not getting a response. I understand that but I can only do what I can physically do. I have done all I can and it’s not had the response that’s needed. We were nowhere near it today. “There’s a culture here that will never, ever be successful. We don’t have enough desire, determination and character and if you want to be successful there has to be desire beneath you. There is not enough of that at this football club.” The Owls appeared to be sharper after a half-time talking-to but it was nowhere near enough to stem Brentford’s attacking play and the game ended with the travelling fans calling for the board’s sacking. The win for Brentford keeps the pressure on the Championship’s top two. “We have drawn a few too many recently and some of that may have been down to the fine margins, but I hope this will mean we have turned the corner,” said the Brentford manager, Thomas Frank.