Samcro is back and, to judge by the ecstatic reception he received on his long walk past the stands, his legions of followers never doubted there would be a second coming. It has been a long time since he last won a race of any consequence but now, evidently, the world belongs to Samcro once more and the rest of us are just lucky to be breathing the same air. “Class is permanent,” one press-room supporter declared, but his dictionary differs from mine if it defines permanent as something that shows up at two-year intervals. In fairness to the chestnut, who was game to prevail by a nose over Melon, it appears there was a perfectly valid reason for his recent disappointments. For Samcro has been revealed as “a silent choker”, a horse who was having trouble breathing during exercise but did not make the noise normally associated with that problem. “They’re the worst because you can never diagnose them,” said Eddie O’Leary, who manages the Gigginstown ownership operation for his brother, Michael. The penny dropped for those around Samcro in the wake of his 10-length defeat to Faugheen over Christmas. Since then, he has had a “tie-forward” operation in the hope of keeping his airways open throughout a race. To the Samcro sceptics, this was a last throw of the dice, redolent of desperation. But O’Leary still nursed hope and made Samcro his charity bet at a couple of Festival preview nights. “I said if he can breathe, he’ll win,” the Irishman recalled. Samcro will now become one of the more famous examples of a successful wind operation, along with Cue Card. It is important to set this victory in perspective before the unquenchable enthusiasm of Samcro acolytes leads us all back up the garden path. This was the Marsh Novice Chase, which is not always won by a champion, and he prevailed in a head-bobbing finish, with many believing Melon had pipped him. His jockey, Davy Russell, appeared stunned when the result of the photo was called and people started congratulating him. “Me?” he mouthed, seeking confirmation from other jockeys. But, as O’Leary noted with some justice: “If he hadn’t broke the second-last, he’d have won as he liked.” O’Leary had phoned his brother, who stayed in Ireland on Ryanair business, and reported: “Michael was absolutely over the moon. This horse is very special to us. He lost his way for a while but so did Don Cossack. He’s trained by a genius, so hopefully he’ll come forward now. “We always thought he was a champion. And now we’ve got his wind right, we can go any trip. This horse’ll go three miles, no problem.” Hopefully, there were no Samcro supporters within earshot or they may have gone newly mad with excitement about a tilt at next year’s Gold Cup. The bookies chalked him up at 25-1 last night and already there have been takers. O’Leary, who was graceful in accepting defeat for Tiger Roll on Wednesday, was keen to acknowledge the riding of Patrick Mullins, not just for Melon but also for making it as far as the last fence on the moderate jumper Carefully Selected in the National Hunt Chase. It might be that some underrate Mullins in the saddle, out of a feeling that his opportunities flow from his family connection, but O’Leary was glowing in his praise. “Paddy Mullins can get a horse to jump like no other jockey,” he said. “Melon can’t jump but he got him to be foot perfect there. He got a horse that eats fences to jump round the three-mile-sixer. He’s an unheard-of talent.” Mullins’s father, Willie, has had his share of disappointments this week but Min delivered the Ryanair Chase for him, holding on by a neck from Saint Calvados. It was a welcome second win here for the jockey Paul Townend, during his first Festival as Ruby Walsh’s successor. But how much more welcome was success for Rebecca Curtis, whose Welsh yard enjoyed regular Cheltenham victories at one time but has fallen out of fashion. Her Lisnagar Oscar landed the Stayers’ Hurdle at 50-1, in part because of the flop of Paisley Park, who was found to have an irregular heartbeat. “It’s a time when I need it,” said Curtis. “I’m trying to rebuild the yard. I’ve had four winners here before but it’s been five years, so it’s great to win another one.” Jamie Codd, the amateur who won on Ravenhill here on Tuesday, made a less glorious contribution to Thursday’s action. Riding Le Breuil in the Kim Muir, he made an apparent attempt to push Zac Baker on Flying Angel off the track when Baker made a move up his inside before halfway. The stewards gave Codd a six-day ban for improper riding and two more for squeezing Baker up on the following bend. The dates have yet to be determined but it probably means he will lose the chance to ride in the Aintree Foxhunters next month, a race he won in 2016 aboard On The Fringe. Asked to comment, he said of the Aintree fixture: “It probably won’t happen anyway.”