The British prog rock band Genesis have announced that they will reunite for a series of UK stadium shows in November and December. “There’s a Genesis sound which is still there,” said guitarist Mike Rutherford. “I missed it, it’s nice to play it again. The group announced the Last Domino tour on Zoe Ball’s BBC Radio 2 breakfast show. Rutherford said: “It feels great, it feels the right time, we’re looking forward to doing it. A lot of our contemporaries have been playing a lot – we’ve done two shows in the UK in the last 28 years.” The group said that they would be joined by Phil Collins’ 18-year-old son Nicholas on drums for the shows. “He plays like me and he kind of has the same attitude as me,” said Collins. “So that was a good starter.” Quizzed on the potential setlist, Collins said: “There are songs you feel you have to play because the audience would feel cheated if you didn’t, then it’s a question of putting the rest of the stuff together from songs we haven’t played for a long time.” Ahead of their appearance on BBC Radio 2, the band posted a clue to their Instagram page, reading: “And then there were three”. The group last played together in 2007, their first tour with drummer Phil Collins in 14 years, and have faced constant speculation about the possibility of a reunion in the intervening years. In January, the trio were spotted at a New York Knicks game at Madison Square Garden, sparking renewed rumours. Genesis formed at Charterhouse school in Surrey in 1967, and enjoyed cult success until the early 1970s, when their fourth album, Foxtrot, became their highest-charting release, and a theatrical tour stoked their reputation. They reached a creative peak with the 1974 album The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway, which would be their last with Peter Gabriel. He left in 1975, at the end of an even more elaborate tour for the record, and embarked on a highly influential solo career. Their progressive origins would gradually smooth into a more generic pop sound. Following Gabriel’s departure, Phil Collins took over as lead singer, and Genesis achieved massive commercial success with A Trick of the Tail in 1976. Steve Hackett would leave the band a year later, leaving them as the trio of Collins, Rutherford and Banks. It is estimated that Genesis have sold between 100 and 150m albums worldwide. In 2010, they were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Their last album was Calling All Stations, released in 1997. Tickets for the Last Domino tour go on sale at 9am on 6 March. Genesis will play: 16 November - Dublin 3 arena19 Nov – Belfast SSE arena23 Nov – Liverpool M&S Bank arena26 Nov – Newcastle Utilita arena29 Nov – London O2 arena30 Nov – London O2 arena2 December – Leeds First Direct arena5 Dec – Birmingham arena8 Dec – Manchester arena11 Dec – Glasgow SSE arena • This article was amended shortly after publication to correct tour dates that were distributed prematurely.