Here’s a novelty: a book about love as utter abandonment of the self, love as capitulation, love as not only obsession but possession, which manages not to be overwrought. It’s a deft trick. French debut novelist Pauline Delabroy-Allard uses simple language, repetition and short sections to build up a picture of an intense love affair between two women, severed suddenly by illness. It’s “all about Sarah”, but everything we read comes from her unnamed lover, a woman in her 30s with a partner and daughter. They meet at a New Year’s Eve party in Paris. “What a weird girl,” says the partner; but our narrator is quickly undone, besotted by “Sarah the impetuous, Sarah the passionate, Sarah the sulphurous”, who plays the violin, who always has a bottle of water with her, who “has no patience with anything. She wants everything, instantly.” Time passes, the relationship deepens, and our narrator begins to subsume her own personality into Sarah’s. “She wears mascara every day. I start wearing mascara every day. She uses crude words I don’t know. I adopt them into my vocabulary.” She notes that the word passion derives from one for suffering. It begins to sound dangerous. “The intensity of our connection is too strong, storms erupt.” But even though almost every sentence contains the word “she”, we never get a clear idea of what it is that makes Sarah so attractive, and the narrator’s partner and daughter are seldom mentioned. Both aspects are less a novelist’s sleight of hand than a plausible representation of the selfish nature of this sort of love. The second half of the book is even more satisfying than the first Prose chopped into short sections (the book’s first half has 82 chapters in 77 pages) is a popular tool at the moment – it can bring weight without adding length, by inviting the reader to fill the gaps – recent examples include Jenny Offill’s Weather and Colum McCann’s Apeirogon; but it must be used carefully to avoid seeming either glib or portentous. Delabroy-Allard succeeds by keeping things simple and using repeated phrases to layer the story. Nothing so consuming can last. A theme is latency: a state of delay or, in medical terms, “a period of inactivity when symptoms may appear at any time”. Sarah develops cancer, and our narrator sees this as a consequence of their love, and she – put bluntly – runs away. The second half of the book is even more satisfying than the first, as the narrator flies to Italy, stays with a friend, and keeps moving to prevent the settlement of thoughts she would rather not face. The sentences and sections become longer, reflecting the scurrying activity of her mind, as she enters a period of permanent distraction and displacement, calmed only by contemplating the endless sea. “At a turn in the road, around a bend, all at once, there, offered, like a gift, spread out as it has been for years, glimmering gold, blindingly beautiful, the Adriatic.” Even now she rarely gives thought to others, and to whether her behaviour is healthy or harmful. The persuasive translation by Adriana Hunter does occasionally let an awkward word poke through its straightforward language. When it comes to what the narrator calls “the source of my wonderment,” couldn’t another word have been found than the bathetic and mildly comic “snatch”? And why bother even to translate, as she does, Hiroshima Mon Amour? But these don’t diminish the pleasures of a book that reads at times – this is high praise – like a new iteration of Jeanette Winterson’s Written on the Body (absorbing passion, illness, separation) and that moves impressively from the chaos and noise of love, to silence and solitude, like a spun coin settling. • All About Sarah by Pauline Delabroy-Allard, translated by Adriana Hunter, is published by Harvill Secker (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15