A little over two years into the Spanish civil war, one of Spain’s greatest poets wrote to a Chilean friend to tell him how desperately he and a couple of their mutual acquaintances longed to escape the conflict and travel to South America. “We’ll come to your sad and beautiful land,” wrote Miguel Hernández in September 1938. “We have to leave, and we’ll rest from this fight, and we’ll breathe the air we lack.” Hernández, a goat-herder-turned-poet and staunch Republican, would never breathe Chilean air. He was dead within four years of writing the letter, his lungs eaten away by the tuberculosis he contracted after being shunted through a succession of baleful Spanish prisons. Along with more than 600 books, manuscripts, photographs, magazines, letters and postcards, Hernández’s missive to his Chilean correspondent, the poet and diplomat Pablo Neruda, now forms part of a unique and lovingly amassed collection dedicated to the Nobel-prize winner’s life and work that will be auctioned in Barcelona next week. The collection is perhaps the finest Neruda archive in private hands. Among its treasures, put together over the past 25 years by the winemaker, poet and collector Santiago Vivanco, is a first edition of Neruda’s Twenty Poems of Love and a Song of Despair, published in 1924. So rare was the book that the poet himself confessed that even he didn’t possess a copy. The book’s scarcity is further enhanced by the dedication, inscribed in Neruda’s trademark green ink: “For Gabriel García Márquez. My congratulations, dear friend, on this ‘find’ from nearly 50 years ago that even I don’t have. A hug. Pablo Neruda. Paris, 1971.” Elsewhere is a manuscript dedicated to Neruda’s friend Salvador Allende, the Chilean president whose socialist government was toppled by a US-backed coup less than a fortnight before the poet’s death in September 1973. Vivanco first fell under Neruda’s poetic spell as a teenager. But, as he began building his collection, he became fascinated by the man and the tumultuous times through which he had lived. “In tracking down pieces of his life and work, I came across huge parts of the 20th century,” Vivanco told the Guardian. “He lived until 1973 and he mixed among all these artistic movements; he was in the Spanish civil war and he went on to live through everything that was happening culturally in Latin America later on.” As he travelled the world in search of fragments and relics of Neruda, Vivanco found himself becoming better acquainted with a man who claimed his life’s greatest achievement was not his poetry, but using his diplomatic status to get more than 2,000 Spanish republican refugees on a boat from France to Chile in 1939. He also found that the poet who wrote so eloquently about love and sex was a rapist who had treated some of the women in his life appallingly. Neruda’s status as Chile most beloved literary son was sorely tested two years ago after the rediscovery of an episode in his memoir in which he confessed to raping a Tamil woman who worked as his servant when he was posted to Ceylon as a young diplomat. Some aspects of Neruda’s life, such as the rape, remain utterly indefensible, Vivanco said. “He treated his daughter, Malva Marina, very badly; she was born with hydrocephalus and he basically abandoned her and her mother,” he said. “Neruda was attractive to women and he was very seductive, but he deceived all three of his wives.” As with Pablo Picasso and others, Vivanco added: “You see there’s greatness there, but there’s also something wretched.” After spending a quarter of a century searching for and reassembling fragments of Neruda’s existence – from a photo of the poet aged 18 months to a manuscript he was working on in bed 10 days before his death – the collector feels it is time his archive found a wider audience. “I think that the two most thrilling moments for a collector are when you first discover something, and then when you can put together everything you’ve found and share it with other people,” he said. Both Vivanco and Juan Manuel Bonet, the writer and critic who wrote the preface for the auction catalogue, hope the collection will end up in a major library or university – preferably in Chile. Bonet, a former director of both the Reina Sofía museum and the Instituto Cervantes, sees the archive as “an Ali Baba’s cave made of paper” in which echoes of the poet’s own obsessions resonate. “The archive is rather beautifully in line with Neruda’s own appetite for collection – he was mad when it came to collecting books and he was an inveterate bibliophile,” said Bonet. “Here we have a Spaniard who has devoted himself to finding relics of Neruda, but who has also found the books that link him to García Márquez and Miguel Ángel Asturias and Salvador Allende.” Despite the size and geographical breadth of his acquisitions, one of Vivanco’s most remarkable finds was made not in Chile – but in his home region of La Rioja. After reading a local newspaper report about a girl who had told her teacher that her great-grandmother had been one of Neruda’s lovers, the collector set out to investigate. He soon established that the girl was indeed the great-granddaughter of Olga Margarita Burgos, Chile’s first female orthodontist and the lover whom Neruda had addressed in a longing letter in September 1933: “I remember your hair, your feet, your mouth, you leave me sleepless … ” Burgos had never told her daughter about the relationship, confiding instead in her granddaughter, the schoolgirl’s mother. It was in a box in her care that Vivanco discovered letters, photographs and a staggeringly rare first edition of Neruda’s Residence on Earth, which had a first print run of just 100 copies. “I’d been all over the world looking for that book,” he said. “And all the time it was here in La Rioja, along with all these letters.”