Andrew Marvell would tear his curls out in frustration if he knew. All the work you once had to put in to try to persuade a coy mistress to get busy. All those clever couplets, all that iambic tetrametering, all the conjuring of time’s winged chariots behind and deserts of vast eternity before you. Four hundred years later, all it takes to get the heroine of the new dramedy Mrs Fletcher (Sky Comedy) galloping down the path of sexual enlightenment is the assurance from her friend that she is “a skinny milf goddess”, a Google search to check definitions and she’s off, in almost every sense. Eve Fletcher (Kathryn Hahn) is a 45-year-old divorcee (whose ex-husband is now absorbed in his second family, though he still makes time to be a thorn in her side) and elderly daycare supervisor whose only child, Brendan, heads off for college in the first episode. Bemoaning her empty nest, her best friend advises her – as TV best friends do – to start dating again and spread her milf goddess wings. Out of this slightly unpromising start something much better evolves, fit to stand beside the unbroken line of successes inspired by Tom Perrotta’s books – two critically acclaimed films from his novels Election and Little Children, and three award-winning series of the drama The Leftovers based on another. The marketing for the show (and the book when it came out, in 2017) concentrated – as you might expect – on Eve’s discovery of online porn, and the small-screen version does have her filling a fair proportion of her newly abundant leisure time by masturbating wherever and whenever the fancy takes her. (I am for once quite glad my wifi signal doesn’t reach my kitchen. It turns out that it could be quite unhygienic.) For her, the abundance and accessibility of material acts as a form of liberation. For Brendan – and, we infer, his generation – however, it has arguably done the opposite, by shaping his tastes, expectations and attitudes before he had a chance to find them out for himself. Eve is (doubly) shocked when she not only catches him getting a blowjob from an ex-girlfriend in his bedroom but overhears him calling her a “dirty fucking slut” in the process. Her feeble attempt to talk to him about it in the car on the way to his first day at college (“You have to be nice to women”) only underlines the futility of the fight. Brendan carries on his merry way, though (hearteningly) soon finds himself in the unenviable position of least woke man on campus and is socially ostracised for it. But beneath and beyond the porn, this is a show about the compromises and disappointments life inflicts on everyone. Ahead of her, Eve has the example of the clients at her daycare centre – most poignantly Roy, who is starting to lose his faculties to dementia and will soon require more care than they can give. Behind her, we see Brendan getting his first, unpleasant taste of existence as a small fish in a big pond, as he learns that what once served you well in life sometimes has to be stripped out and replaced with a very different set of skills, even if you are far from sure what they are. Mistakes start to have consequences. People become less tolerant. They have their own needs that don’t always jibe with yours. It’s a real bummer. But Eve is in the middle, and it is the great innovation of the show to represent this stretch of life as perhaps the best place to be – the only time you get to make choices that are born of self-knowledge, to take the opportunities, post-divorce or post-childrearing, that previous decades’ circumstances and responsibilities put on hold. Including, should you so wish, getting banged by someone new and decidedly fresh-faced. In a cultural landscape probably best summed up by 30 Rock’s scene in which Jenna Maroney plays a mother in a teen show who is dying of old age at 41, the depiction of a woman in her fifth decade as a still fully-functioning adult remains striking. And it is further elevated by a simply brilliant performance by Hahn as a woman who is a fully credible mixture of confidence and insecurity, competencies and inadequacies and – most importantly – who is gradually realising that she contains multitudes.