If ever there was a need for simple food, the time is now. Sprouting broccoli is bang in season, so all over the shops and markets right now. It is full of essential nutrients, making it perfect for feeding a nation of children who face home-schooling for the foreseeable future. Here I cut the broccoli into ribbons so it folds and disappears into the piles of similarly shaped pasta. That, and the insanely silky, cheesy sauce, should win over many a picky child and get them eating their greens. This beautiful sauce needs a little time on the stove, but children can help stir while you prepare the broccoli. Prep 15 minCook 30 minServes 4 2 garlic cloves, crushed with a little salt300g creme fraiche, or soured cream or double cream with a small squeeze of lemon6 anchovy fillets, finely chopped2 egg yolks140g pecorino or parmesan, plus extra to serve500g tagliatelle or other long pasta200g purple sprouting broccoli spears, trimmed and cut into lengthways strips, or normal broccoli or even cauliflower To make the sauce, you will need to make a bain marie with a bowl that can comfortably fit on top of a saucepan. Rub the crushed garlic around the bowl, then add the creme fraiche, anchovies, egg yolks and cheese. Fill the saucepan with a few inches of water and sit the bowl on top, making sure the water doesn’t touch the bottom of the bowl. Bring the water to a simmer and stir the ingredients for 15-20 minutes, until the sauce thickens – it will loosen first and then become thicker, but it does need a little patience. Taste and season with a salt and lots of freshly ground black pepper, and keep warm. While you are making the sauce, prep the broccoli. Trim the ends and peel any of the tougher stalks, then slice the rest into slender strips to mimic the shape of the tagliatelle. Bring a large pan of salted water to a boil and cook the pasta according to the packet instructions, adding the broccoli for the last three minutes until it’s completely tender. Drain both, keeping back half a cup of the pasta water, then tip both pasta and broccoli into the sauce bowl, and stir well so that every strand is covered. Wait for a minute and then add a splash of the pasta water if necessary, to loosen things up. Check for seasoning again and serve on hot plates with a little extra cheese. The sauce is great folded into leftover risotto to make cheesy arancini balls. Leave out the anchovies and fold into stewed onions and pancetta for a meatier version of the dish. Leftover broccoli can be steamed tender and eaten as a snack brushed through homemade mayonnaise.