There is an ever-growing body of scientific evidence that gardens and gardening are good for our physical, mental and social wellbeing. Having something to nurture brings a sense of unpressured purpose to our lives. And if you choose the right plants and design, you can enhance the wellbeing your garden provides. A considered, layered approach to planting can block traffic noise; the right trees and shrubs can combat pollution; certain flowers can keep pollen counts low, while still encouraging bees and insects; and scented plants can reduce stress. Here’s how to do it. English yew (Taxus baccata) has dense natural form and a large surface area through its delicate needle-like foliage. It’s as good for topiary as it is for a formal hedge. Hornbeam (Carpinus betulus) leaves provide air-filtering qualities. It has beautiful yellow foliage in autumn. Hawthorn (Crataegus monogyna) is an underrated native, and a popular choice for hedgerow mixes. It also provides a thorny retreat and protection for nesting birds. Japanese barberry (Berberis thunbergii), with its tiny leaf form, provides a fine filter for air particles. It’s robust, and suitable for both roadsides and ornamental settings. Holly (Ilex aquifolium) A combination of dense growth and waxy leaves help holly perform well against pollutants. Particulates become trapped in the waxy layer of the leaves. Italian cypress (Cupressus sempervirens) is brilliant for adding impactful height and structure in relative confinement; its dense foliage is great at absorbing sound. Deodar cedar (Cedrus deodara) Shaped like a wizard’s hat, this majestic tree has strong yet delicate limbs that extend laterally. One of the best climbing trees for kids, it is particularly good at absorbing low frequencies. Chilean bamboo (Chusquea culeou) helps mask noise with lance-shaped leaves that rustle in the breeze. Beech (Fagus sylvatica) holds beautiful form and great leaf colour. The ovate leaf shape is effective in limiting noise. Portugal laurel (Prunus lusitanica) is a great hedging plant that can fit in tight spaces. If placed near a source of noise (a road, say), its dense spreading habit can dampen sound. Clematis (Clematis armandii) has beautifully scented white flowers and a low pollen count. Allow it to clad a boundary fence or pergola to great effect. African lily (Agapanthus) is a bold plant that will minimise pollen levels in your plot. It can brighten a border or provide brilliant focus in a pot on a terrace. Foxglove (Digitalis) Although laden with pollen, its bell-shaped flowers act as cups that hold it inside. Given the height the flower spikes reach, they can also be placed at the back of a border. Female silver-margined holly (Ilex aquifolium ‘Argentea Marginata’) has just about zero effect on allergies. With its waxy leaf structure and red berries, it can add interest in more shady spots. Whitebeam (Sorbus aria) is a deciduous tree that produces clusters of white flowers in spring and red berries in early autumn, providing long-lasting interest throughout the season. Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) looks great in mixed borders or pots, can be used in many recipes, and is proven to enhance alertness, memory, reduce anxiety, improve mood and aid relaxation. Peppermint (Mentha x piperita) Be sure it doesn’t take over, so place in pots (in sunny spots). Peppermint will enhance attention, alertness and memory as well as reduce stress. Lavender (Lavandula) A therapeutic garden classic, fantastic for improving concentration, reducing stress and anxiety, increasing relaxation and improving mood. Plant near a back door or seating areas for maximum exposure. Thyme (Thymus) A great robust ground cover that, if planted along the edge of a path or gaps within paving, will release its beautiful scent when stepped on. Valerian (Valeriana officinalis) sits daintily within grasses and among other perennials. It makes a delicious tea and aids sleep. • Your Wellbeing Garden by Alistair Griffiths and Matt Keightley is published by RHS/DK, at £16.99. To order a copy for £14.27 go to guardianbookshop.com.