In seeking to avoid a “fried” brain, Rory McIlroy is not thinking about the Masters. His form will leave others to speculate about the world No 1’s prospects at the first major of the year, which is only a month away. A first round 66 at the Arnold Palmer Invitational planted McIlroy at the summit of the leaderboard before Matt Every’s late surge saw him take a one-stroke advantage. Day one saw the kind of effortless, free-flowing golf which renders the Northern Irishman so appealing. The score was even more impressive given he was one over par after six holes. His 18-hole scoring average is the best on this PGA Tour season. His goal from here is simple: to capitalise on a terrific start, which was not the case in Mexico City a fortnight ago.Even that apparent slip requires context, given McIlroy was visibly well short of his best over the concluding three rounds of the World Golf Championship. “I’m definitely playing a bit better than I was in Mexico,” said McIlroy in what should serve as a warning to the rest of the field. “I’m putting better, driving it better. I think the course suits me a little bit better as well. “Mexico was frustrating because I started well and then just couldn’t get the best out of myself for the final three days. I’m a little more comfortable on this course, comfortable with this style of play, and a little more comfortable on greens. “I mean 54 holes is still a long way to go and you sort of take it one day at a time. It’s not as if I played badly in Mexico. I shot 69, 68, 68 the last three days. I just didn’t get as much out of myself as I wanted to.” McIlroy’s moment on Thursday arrived at the 4th, his 13th, where he sent a glorious three iron from a fairway bunker to within 25ft of the pin. He converted for an eagle. “Harry [Diamond, McIlroy’s caddie] said that’s the best shot I’ve hit all year,” he said. “High praise from him. I had 260 yards, it was in between three iron and five wood. Five wood was going to carry up on top but it had a chance to go over the back of the green and that chip from over the back to that back pin is really tricky. “So I said to Harry: ‘If I can catch this three iron I can maybe pitch it 10 or 15 yards short.’ Short was always better than long. And it just came out perfectly and got up to pin high.” Justin Rose, playing in McIlroy’s company, was two under par at one stage but had to settle for a 73. Intrigue surrounds Rose’s equipment; he signed a club deal with Honma from the start of 2019 and, while that brand still appears on his bag, he has suddenly reverted to TaylorMade irons and driver. Brooks Koepka’s assessment of his 72 was typically blunt. “Even par, nothing to get excited about, nothing to rave about,” he said. “It’s not far off but it’s still annoying.” Matt Wallace enjoyed a welcome return to form with a 69. Tyrrell Hatton’s impressive start to the year continued as he signed for one shot better than his fellow Englishman. “I just putted really well,” Hatton said. “I actually feel like I struggled a bit with shots into the green but just putted nicely and that was a big part of the score.”