Gareth Southgate is optimistic about the possibility of Harry Kane and Marcus Rashford being fit for Euro 2020 and has left the door open for Phil Foden as he anticipated another competitive year of international football. Southgate was in Amsterdam for the Nations League draw, the Uefa competition that gives England the chance to lay the ghosts of 2016 after they were drawn against Iceland, as well as Denmark and Belgium, in group A2. Whatever the moderate advantages of the new tournament it is not the main event this year and Southgate is already thinking about the summer. England kick off their Euro 2020 campaign at Wembley on 14 June against Croatia but much can change between now and then as he is well aware. Southgate is without his two first‑choice strikers but he talked positively about the recovery being made by Kane and Rashford, two players who would be definite starters in his team were they to make it. “We’ve had really good updates right the way through and Harry and Marcus are exactly where we were expecting them to be,” Southgate said. “Both players will give themselves the best possible chance of being available, that’s their mentality and that’s their dedication to their sport. “That’s the only bit we can guarantee, what we can’t guarantee is how that rehab will develop as it’s stepped up and as it becomes more intense. But they are both on track from the information we were given at the very start.” This is an uncertain time for Southgate and there is much he cannot guarantee. One is the effect the coronavirus; most immediately, England’s friendly with Italy. “The reality is that we don’t know,” he said. “It is an ever-changing picture for everybody, in every walk of life, so we are updated all the time by government but of course none of us know what the next few weeks will hold.” Other unknowns for Southgate are on the pitch, such as the risk of more injury or players going out of form. Jordan Pickford is one who falls into the latter category, with his mistake against Manchester United’s Bruno Fernandes on Sunday putting the Everton goalkeeper in the spotlight. He has been consistent for England and Southgate stood behind his player. “His performances for us throughout have been outstanding,” the manager said. “I think he has been a key part of some big results we have had. I think that is clear to everybody but in goal, if you are the England goalkeeper, you are under the spotlight. I am expecting him to bounce back. The weekend goal is one he would want to do better with but then he had some outstanding saves at the end of the game. That is the life of a goalkeeper.” One final thing Southgate has no real control over is the number of players from whom he can choose. He believes he has 70 eligible players in the Premier League, meaning each ought to be under his consideration for selection. Some are more demanding of his attention than others, one being Foden after his performance for Manchester City in the Carabao Cup final. “The door’s open for everybody,” Southgate said. “We’ve got 70 English players in the league and when they’re of the quality of a player like Phil then of course the door’s open.” In the Nations League, the other home nations were all in League B and avoided one another in the draw, though Wales will face the Republic of Ireland in group B4 alongside Bulgaria and Finland. Scotland will play Israel, their European Championship play‑off opponents, as well as Slovakia and the Czech Republic. Northern Ireland will face Norway, Austria and Romania.