Countries around the globe are turning in increasing numbers to their militaries to assist with the escalating coronavirus pandemic, as the US reported the world’s largest caseload of infections, overtaking both China and Italy. As officials around the world sounded the alarm over health systems being overwhelmed, more countries joined China, Italy, Spain and the UK, among others, in deploying their armed forces to differing extents to help during the pandemic. With the global tally of reported infections passing 500,000 – including more than 24,000 deaths – the US has emerged as the country with the largest infection caseload – 85,000 – overtaking China and Italy, which themselves both have more than 80,000 cases. Spain, one of the hardest-hit European countries, recorded 769 deaths in the past 24 hours, bringing its death toll to 4,858. Authorities in the country withdrew 9,000 Chinese-made coronavirus testing kits from use after it emerged they had an accurate detection rate of just 30%. Australia, which is introducing an enforced quarantine by midnight on Saturday for citizens returning home from overseas, announced it will use the Australian Defence Force to check on people who have already been instructed to self-isolate. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said everyone arriving by plane would be detained in a hotel in the city of their arrival for two weeks. Israel also announced it will deploy its army to assist police on street patrols to enforce a lockdown, the military said on Friday. Around 500 troops will join police from Sunday to help “in patrolling, isolating and securing certain areas, blocking routes and additional similar assignments”, the military said in a statement. The tightened lockdown is in addition to the requirement for citizens to stay within 100 metres of their home and sanctions for those defying rules. In South Africa, which imposed a lockdown this week, the president, Cyril Ramaphosa, ordered the military to be deployed to support the police in enforcing the restrictions. Switzerland – where infections have topped 10,000 – has turned to army medical units to help hospitals handle the virus. The pandemic has spread to most parts of the world, triggering widespread secondary effects affecting both economies and wider social resilience, with a historic 3.3 million Americans claiming unemployment last month. As Russia, Indonesia and South Africa all passed the 1,000-infection mark, India launched a massive programme to help feed hungry day labourers after a lockdown of the country’s 1.3 billion people put them out of work. The stay-home order for India affected rickshaw drivers, fruit peddlers, cleaners and others who buy food from whatever they can earn in a day, forcing the government announced a 1.7tn rupee (£18bn) stimulus to deliver monthly rations to 800 million people. An increasing number of major global cities have warned they are at, or fast approaching, saturation point for the number of severe cases their hospitals can cope with. The head of the French Hospital Federation, Frédéric Valletoux, warned on Friday that a rise in coronavirus patients meant that hospitals in and around Paris would reach saturation point within 48 hours, despite the peak of infections not being expected until April. In the US, New York state has emerged as the hotspot of the country’s outbreak, reporting 100 more deaths in one day. The governor, Andrew Cuomo, said the number of deaths would increase soon as critically ill patients who had been on ventilators for days succumbed. At New York City-area hospitals on the frontlines of the outbreak, workers are increasingly concerned about the ravages of the illness in their own ranks, and that the lack of testing and protective gear is making it not a matter of if they get it, but when. “Our emergency room was like a Petri dish,” said Benny Mathew, a nurse at Montefiore medical centre, who added that he had Covid-19 and was worried he may infect his wife and two daughters. “I’m angry. We could have secured enough personal protective equipment months ago. It was happening in China since December,” he said. “But we thought it was never going to happen here.”