The Super League chief executive, Robert Elstone, is confident all 12 top-flight clubs will survive the financial uncertainty which has engulfed rugby league during the coronavirus crisis but concedes both the competition and clubs will have to seriously consider the possibility of furloughing. Domestic rugby league is on hold for an indefinite period following a meeting of the sport’s senior figures earlier this week. It is unclear when the season will resume, and with many clubs ordinarily struggling financially, the lack of regular income has left many fearing for their future. Elstone promised that all Super League clubs will be given the best possible chance of surviving. “We have added complications of French and Canadian teams but our big priority right now is economic survival for ourselves and our clubs,” he said. “We’re looking at what government support is offered to make sure we can access it as quickly as we can and that’s gratefully received by clubs. We’re looking at a specific request which is much-needed which the RFL is working on. “We’ve spent a week looking at every single line in the budget to save money and ensure we distribute funds to our clubs every month to protect them for as long as we can. That is very much our priority.” When pushed on whether he was confident all top-flight clubs would survive, Elstone said: “Yes.” He did, however, admit staff at both Super League clubs and within the organisation itself may be subject to furloughing: the procedure in which employees are placed on leave and the government covers 80% of their salaries. “Furloughing was a welcoming initiative the government put on the table which every club is looking at,” Elstone said. “We’ve spent time looking at our staff base and furloughing is an option for a large number of our employees. “We’ve got to respect the fact we have to work that through, communicate with our staff and do it professionally and sympathetically. A solid request for funding has been submitted. In the intervening period there have been things like furloughing and additional benefits put on the table by government and we need to reflect that in a revised submission. “Super League are actively involved in what that number was but I spoke to Ralph (Rimmer, RFL chief executive) late last night in terms of revising and updating that. We’re very keen to be involved to ensure what we put in front of government is as good as it can be.”