Some people consider art the best way to judge the state of a civilisation. I’d wager that dogs are a more accurate diagnostic. They have long been a splashboard for the human psyche, a place where our politics, pretensions and perversities accumulate and grow fur. And what they tell us is downright macabre. If you’re spending the week watching Crufts, the UK’s annual pedigree dog show, keep in mind a simple fact. Every single animal in the competition is a direct descendant of a wolf. Yes, that includes the Pekingese, an orange fluff ball with a demonic raisin for a face. And the pygmy rhinoceros lookalike drowning in excess rolls of skin, aka the Shar-Pei. We’ve been tinkering with the canine anatomy for upwards of 15,000 years now. Eyes have been shunted to the front of skulls in a spooky imitation of the human face. Snouts have been removed, spines contracted, the wolf’s shaggy coat transformed into a remarkable array of bouffants. It’s not just the body we’ve been messing with, it’s the mind too. Over the course of millennia we’ve been discarding animals with undesirable personalities, and selectively breeding those that show dependance, devotion and pliability, effectively ensuring that today’s domestic dog exists in a state of permanent puppyhood. Before I continue I ought to make something clear. I love dogs. I even love it when they lick my face. But if you really think about it, nobody can deny that they are weird. Or rather, that us humans are weirdos for what we’ve done to them. And when it comes to celebrating the dark arts of “dog editing”, Crufts is in a league of its own. The competition is the brainchild of the Kennel Club, an organisation established in Victorian Britain by wealthy enthusiasts that set about dividing dogs into types, creating elite bloodlines, and generally producing a twisted, canine imitation of the British upper classes. In 1883, 10 years after the Kennel Club was founded, Francis Galton came up with the theory of eugenics, the racist, classist and ableist belief that humans can be bred selectively – and what inspired him was the breeding of dogs. In recent years, our relationship to dogs has taken a turn for the ridiculous. Consider the craze for crossing established breeds, for the pleasure of making silly portmanteaus from their combined names. (Here’s looking at you, bullshit.) And then there’s the fashion among the urban bourgeoisie for spending vast amounts of money on breeds designed for manual labour tasks, such as rounding up livestock or collecting game. This phenomenon is a symptom of what I call Marie Antoinette syndrome – named after patient zero herself, who built a mock peasant village in the grounds of Versailles. Contemporary manifestations include taking your pointer or Portuguese water dog to peruse £5 loaves of “artisan” bread. Today’s city dog is neither hunter nor herder. My mother’s whippet, a pedigree hound named Tip, is a case in point. Supposedly a rabbit catcher by trade, I can confirm his day job actually involves modelling hand-knitted pyjamas. I am totally besotted with Tip, and happy are the occasions he comes to stay with me at my flat, accompanied by a care package of dog poo bags and a selection of organic, gluten-free treats that cost more than my weekly shop. Yet his visits also trigger a crisis of conscience. The whippet’s affectionate nature is partly down to being bred with a skin-and-bone physique, which compels it to seek out physical contact for warmth. Way to cast a shadow over our cuddles. The worst thing about pedigree dogs, and the most damning for their owners, is the fact that their bizarre physical form often goes hand in hand with terrible health issues. Among the most gothic creations is the cavalier King Charles spaniel, which suffers from a range of neurological conditions, including paralysis, as a result of being bred with a skull too small small to fit its brain. (In 2008 the BBC dropped Crufts after the Kennel Club refused to exclude 12 dog breeds at risk from genetic diseases from the competition, the cavalier among them; the Kennel Club said excluding any breeds would be “inappropriate and counterproductive”, and would compromise its contractual obligations.) Equally grisly is the French bulldog, which in recent years has become one of the nation’s most popular dogs. The”Frenchie” is an example of “ugly cute”: a pet whose unfortunate appearance inspires a form of love rooted in pity. I’d say its existence is also compelling evidence of an epidemic of Munchausen’s syndrome by proxy, inflicted upon our pets. The next chapter in the book of selective breeding? Call it “Ugly Cute: the Intensive Care Years”. Frenchies are a walking inventory of canine health problems caused by human interference. Like other dogs bred with flat faces, their constricted airways can cause life-threatening breathing disorders; they are also particularly prone to skin infections, hip dysplasia and deafness. The Kennel Club, which with some audacity describes itself as an “organisation dedicated to the welfare of dogs”, would have us believe that such health issues are an unfortunate side-effect caused by irresponsible breeders, to be ironed out with better practice. I beg to differ. Humans alone are responsible for the current state of the animal-formerly-known-as-wolf. It’s about time we ask what our relationships with our canine companions reveal about our wants and needs – and just how far we are willing to go in the name of love. • Rosanna McLaughlin is the author of Double-Tracking: Studies in Duplicity, and an editor at the White Review