Sky and BT will lose almost £1bn in revenue if top flight sport remains shut down until August, according to a new report, which recommended players take a pay cut to support their beleaguered clubs. In the UK, the Premier League has postponed matches until 30 April but it is increasingly unlikely games will resume as the government’s nationwide lockdown expected to continue for months. “The hypothesis informing governments assumes an initial three-month long lockdown,” said Enders Analysis, which published the report. “Group activities of 25 people involving close physical contact without protection will not plausibly be the first to be allowed when when some social life resumes.” Sky has stopped charging commercial clients like pubs that carry Sky Sports, and pay-TV subscribers can “pause” payments even if they are in contract. BT has told customers to call to “discuss their contract or other options”, while some customers on its flexible pay-TV package can elect to drop sport. “Assuming a worst-case scenario of a four-month suspension of all sports coverage (British and foreign), with all sports subscribers pausing their contract and wholesale clients being allowed to follow suit, Sky would lose £700m and BT £228m in revenues,” Enders said. The report says that beyond July Sky and BT will start saving money if sport remains off screens as upcoming rights payments would be postponed or cancelled. In July, Sky and BT are due to pay the Premier League the six month licence fee for the first half of the 2020-21 season, which amounts to about £530m in total. BT’s annual bill to Uefa, for the Champions League rights, is £394m annually. The report suggests that players need to play their part as clubs struggle economically, with wages accounting for 59% of revenues across the Premier League. “Football’s cost structure is pretty simple: most of the receipts flow into players’ pockets,” the report says. “The best solution is collectively negotiated pay cuts, but negotiating pay cuts with players is as difficult as herding cats.” One top flight German club has reached a deal with players, another is in talks. In France, Lyon has put players on the public “temporary” unemployment scheme, which should cut pay bills by half. “To limit disruption, pain will have to be shared across the supply chain with players’ pay first in line,” the report says.