A bitter conflict is escalating in the Scottish literary scene with the Scottish Poetry Library (SPL) standing accused of “institutional transphobia” after it said that it would not support “bullying and calls for no-platforming of writers”. The organisation – an influential part of Scotland’s thriving poetry scene – released its statement in February after what it described as an “escalation, particularly on social media, of disharmony” and an increase in writers being no-platformed at literary events. It stressed that the statement was to encourage freedom of expression and was not tied to a specific incident, but, speaking to the National, SPL director Asif Khan said that these issues had affected the mental health of some unnamed poets, claiming some had become suicidal. The issue was raised in the Scottish parliament on Tuesday, where the SNP’s Joan McAlpine said it was “worrying that women such as feminist poets in Scotland, Jenny Lindsay and Magi Gibson, have been subject to online mobs trying to stop them getting work or blocking their performances”. The library stressed that it had spoken out to encourage freedom of expression. “We are a values-led organisation that embraces inclusivity, collaboration and a respect for pluralism – of languages, cultures and faiths … this does not mean that we are taking sides in any particular debate but we will not be passive if we are made aware of behaviours within our community that do not align with our values.” But in response, a group of trans and non-binary authors released an open letter that said the SPL’s position “may reflect serious institutional transphobia”, and had caused “extensive distress”. “Your use of the term ‘no-platforming’ … risks being read as being directly about calls from trans people to act on transphobia,” says the letter, which is signed by poets Harry Josephine Giles and Sy Brand, and more than 100 supporters. “The language used and the manner of communication led us to worry that the statement provided cover and comfort to public transphobia, and failed to protect and respect trans writers.” Khan told the Guardian on Wednesday that the SPL board was considering its response. He said that its Edinburgh fringe programme last year was themed on trans and non-binary writers, and it is presently celebrating LGBT History Month with an exhibition. “We find the no-platforming of poets [is] in direct opposition to the principle of freedom of expression, which libraries uphold. No-platforming and ‘cancel culture’ are impacting writers’ livelihoods and lives, often with a severe impact on mental health,” he said. “Looking forward, we will engage with trans and non-binary writers and audiences through a process of healing and reconciliation. However, we will continue to champion freedom of expression as a core value. It is non-negotiable. In this week celebrating international women’s liberation, our thoughts are with women around the world who are prisoners of conscience.” On Wednesday, Giles confirmed that the SPL had been in touch saying that it hoped to repair the situation. “I think we would all really welcome engagement from the SPL and some proper work to understand transphobia and how it operates,” they added. “The letter we wrote lays out the path for doing that. We really need to repair things with a national institution that has done some damage to its reputation. “Personally I’ve seen a lot of upset from people about the kind of quotes which are appearing in the media, and the way the situation is being spun. We said in our letter that the language you’re using, if you’re not careful, it’s going to be spun against trans people, so please be careful, and lo and behold that’s what’s happening.” Reactions to SPL’s statement and the ongoing fallout have been varied. Scottish PEN said on Tuesday that it was disappointed, writing: “Free expression is complex and any policy that ignores such complexity can stifle the free expression of a range of stakeholders, most notably members of marginalised communities.” On Wednesday, more than 200 writers including author Lionel Shriver and comedian Graham Linehan put their names to an open letter of support for the “unequivocal stance” of the SPL: “From universities to arts organisations, libraries and government departments, the no-platforming and bullying of anyone holding views not actively endorsing extreme gender ideology is destroying our cultural life,” says the letter, although the SPL had mentioned not gender. “Scotland has always been an example of progressiveness in arts, education and culture, and we are proud that the first stand against this aggressive chilling of intellectual debate and thought has been taken by Scotland’s national poetry library.” The writers of Wednesday’s open letter say that many of them have been forced to sign the letter anonymously or under pseudonyms because “we are afraid for our reputations, our jobs, our livelihoods … This is how deeply this ideology has already travelled, that to speak against it is a danger,” they write.