Born in Seoul in 1965, Bae Suah is one of Korea’s most radical contemporary writers, whose prolific output has won prizes and acclaim both within her home country and abroad. Her fiction is notable for its surrealism, sudden shifts in chronology and lyrical intensity of language, a style no doubt influenced by her translation of writers such as WG Sebald and Fernando Pessoa. One Korean reviewer described Bae’s early novel A Greater Music as “doing violence to the Korean language”: it was this particular line that attracted Deborah Smith, translator of the Booker International prize-winning author Han Kang, to Bae’s subversive writing. Untold Night and Day, translated by Smith, marks the arrival of her heady fiction in the UK for the first time. The novel begins with Ayami’s last shift working at Seoul’s only audio-theatre for the visually impaired, where she is worrying about the cryptic “sound shadow” emitting from one of the theatre’s radios, which keeps turning on and off. An elderly couple walk past the theatre, lamenting its closure, and Ayami wonders if they might be her parents. Later, an agitated man, with “desert-dry gunmetal skin”, threatens to kill Ayami before he is removed by two security guards. Ayami recognises the man but she no longer trusts her own memory: she overhears faraway conversations that should not be audible; she lipreads a man she cannot see. Untold Night and Day is a hallucinatory novel propelled by the logic of dreams: the story resists conventional categorisation and coherence in favour of instability, a shamanistic borderland of feverish disintegration between the physical and the spiritual. Which illusions are genuine, which are not? In one long vivid sequence Ayami imagines the apocalyptic end-point to Seoul’s stifling summer weather: Merely turning your face in a certain direction was enough for a storm of flaming arrows to inflict burns … By the time the heatwave came to an end, nothing remained of the people but ash. They became fused into panes of glass: grey and opaque. As night morphs into day, Ayami and the theatre’s director begin a loose quest to report the inexplicable disappearance of Ayami’s German-language teacher. Characters appear and disappear like spirits; Bae twists together interludes of parallel lives and doppelgangers so that images, and sometimes entire paragraphs, are reiterated word-for-word like an endless hall of mirrors folding over on to itself. Ayami is a typical Bae protagonist: vague, wayward, yearning to travel and transcend the limits of the city’s anomie, “no more than an imaginary woman in your dream”. As a result of their precarious socio-economic circumstances, these independent women are often unable to find a secure place within traditional Korean society; their dislocation from their desires is represented in the novel’s disorienting structure. Meanwhile, haunting the backdrop of Ayami’s somnambulant orbits are hints of Korea’s rapid economic and familial shifts: modern histories of military violence, tension and division on the peninsula. Seoul’s infinite metropolitan potential as a “temple of benumbed languor” is defamiliarised down into a series of repeating archetypal motifs, whether a white bus driving around in endless circles, the presence of soldiers, or the city’s unexplainable power cuts. Bae masterfully layers these themes into an almost hidden code beneath the novel’s meditative surface. In one chapter Ayami spontaneously decides to board a night train, with the aim of travelling to a border that is no longer accessible. She finds the carriage packed with families who look uncannily similar to refugees fleeing from a war, but before we discover if Ayami ever makes it to her destination, the chapter abruptly ends. Bae never reveals if the worlds beyond the reach of Ayami’s wanderings are real or metaphysical. The novel teases these allegorical entrances and exits, journeys where characters may end up somewhere else entirely. To read this novel of shrouded pilgrimages is also to arrive at a meaning that is “bewitching, and utterly private, a secret for me, a single ship, a single concealed place”. • Untold Night and day is publshed by Vintage (RRP £12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.