Scotland’s match against France in the Women’s Six Nations on Saturday has been postponed after a member of the Scotland team tested positive for coronavirus, Scottish Rugby has announced. The player, who has not been named, tested positive on Friday. “[She] has been admitted to a health care facility as part of the protocol but is otherwise well,” Scottish Rugby announced in a statement, adding that “seven members of management and players are self-isolating on medical advice”. The Scottish women’s team returned from northern Italy on 23 February, after their match there was postponed. Scotland were due to take on Italy at the Stadio Giovanni Mari in Legnano, a town on the outskirts of Milan in Lombardy, one of the regions most affected by the coronavirus outbreak. “This decision has been taken together with the French Rugby Federation (FFR) and Six Nations,” the statement added. “The Six Nations CEO has been in constant contact with Scottish Rugby and is in full support of this decision. The Scottish government has also been briefed. “Scottish Rugby has taken advice from the Chief Medical Officer for Scotland and the Scottish Government, but ultimately this decision to postpone rests with the rugby authorities.” The governing body’s chief medical officer, Dr James Robson, said: “We are pleased that our player is doing well and that all the correct medical procedures have been followed and continue to be followed.” The statement added that the fixture at Scotstoun Stadium in Glasgow will be rescheduled, with tickets for the original date remaining valid. The under-20 international was played on Friday evening in Galashiels, and there are currently no plans to reschedule the men’s Six Nations match at Murrayfield on Sunday. Earlier on Friday, Scotland’s chief medical officer had sought to ease public fears over the coronavirus outbreak, stating that outdoor mass gatherings are unlikely to result in the virus being passed on. Speaking at Murrayfield, Dr Catherine Calderwood said: “I’ve looked at the scientific evidence very carefully, and what’s emerging is there’s actually very little impact on virus spread from mass gatherings, particularly if they are in the open air. This is not a risk to the Scottish population in hosting [the men’s Six Nations] match.” Italy women’s home game with England, and their trip to Dublin’s Donnybrook to play Ireland, have been postponed, as with the corresponding men’s fixtures. England v Wales on Saturday is now the only Women’s Six Nations match going ahead this weekend.