When Liselotte Watkins moved with her family to Rome from Milan four years ago, it was in such a rush that she had time to look at only one apartment. The previous owner had lived there for 30 years, and wouldn’t let her take photographs, so “my husband, Jonas, had to take my word for it,” she says. It was painted dark colours and the layout wasn’t practical, but it was close to Jonas’s new job, a decent school for their children Wim, 10, and Ava, eight, and Villa Borghese park. Swedish-born Watkins, an artist, illustrator and designer who has collaborated with Prada, Marimekko, and the Italian porcelain company Bitossi, works from a studio at home. “It’s not your classic, elegant Rome apartment: the kitchen is small, the heating and water come and go, and there’s no storage. But it does have big windows, which can be hard to find here, and some lovely original flooring,” she says. “Though it turns into a greenhouse in summer.” Like most Romans, the family rent. But they were allowed to paint the flat white, and redo the kitchen and bathroom floors. Today, it’s a bright, colourful three-bedroom home, filled with vintage furniture and Watkins’ own pieces. Scandinavian and Italian design sensibilities clash happily: in the hallway, an original patterned tiled floor sits alongside a pair of graphic Marimekko curtains. Watkins moved to Dallas, Texas when she was 17 to study. There followed a spell in New York, followed by six years in Stockholm, before she moved to Paris, which is where she met Jonas. So where is home? “We lived in Milan for 12 years before moving here, so I do feel quite Italian now,” she says. “The kids were born here, and are extremely Italian. But the longer you stay away, the more romantic your idea of ‘home’ becomes. I miss the stillness of Sweden, the forests, the architecture. But it’s a tough climate, and it shows in the people – it took years for the lady in my local supermarket in Stockholm to say hello to me. Here, the weather allows people to be more open, more joyous. But I’ll never fit in completely. I’m always a bit on the outside.” Wherever she lives, Watkins loves picking up one-off finds, and the apartment is full of them: a retro Ikea sideboard, posters, oil paintings, a Thonet sofa, a bench and a steel cabinet, all from flea markets across Europe. “I am a collector, but there’s no intention behind it. Usually, I’ve no idea what things are, I just find cheap stuff I like.” This includes a pair of Eames chairs left out on the street on New York’s Upper East Side in the 1990s – sadly, no longer the fertile hunting ground it was. “People have wised up to the value of vintage now,” she says. The odd contemporary piece comes from Jonas. “He loves smart furniture – I bring the junk. It’s a reflection of who we are,” she smiles. Last autumn, Watkins collaborated with Swedish design company Svenskt Tenn on her first interiors collection – a series of colourful graphic vases, cushions, lamps, a tray, and a wall textile. She named it Via Sallustiana, after her address in Rome. It was a long-awaited dream to work with the company, which is still best known for its iconic textiles by Josef Frank from the 1930s onwards. “I just kept on asking, until finally, when I had a show at my gallery in Stockholm, they asked me,” she says. Since then she has worked with the British company, Established & Sons, on a collection of four vases. “I like these small collaborations, where the focus is on craftsmanship,” she says. “And I like the fact that what I’m doing is both art and design – I’ve realised you don’t have to choose.”