Rocket is immediately likeable. We meet her, properly, about a third of the way into the first episode. Her voice brightens as she tells listeners about her dog Ollie, about how, on the outside, he calms her down when she feels anxious. She laughs as she describes a jumper she bought for him, and offers more detail about herself: “I love surfing, I used to be a really good rollerblader.” Then: “This is my seventh time in this jail.” Released on Sunday, Birds Eye View is a new podcast focused on the women in Darwin correctional centre. Combining storytelling, poetry, satire and music, it features 22 tracks by 16 Northern Territory female artists, including a theme song, Worth It, by up-and-coming R&B singer Caiti Baker. The show offers a unique insight into prison life. Over the course of two years, executive producer Johanna Bell and a small team collaborated with imprisoned women to help them tell their stories in their own way. “The women were adamant at the beginning of the project that they wanted people to know the real them,” says Bell. “The three questions they came up with were: who are we really? How did we get here? And where to next?” Familiarity is built gently. Each of the 10 episodes spotlights the story of one, sometimes two women, but always ties into a bigger theme, with additional poems, interviews, vox pops and sometimes even spoof ads. It’s easy to make assumptions about people who are incarcerated and why they are there. But Birds Eye View challenges that. “The stereotypes that we hear about women who end up in prison as being worthless or broken, victims, irredeemable – they’re just not true,” says Bell. Rocket agrees: “There’s definitely a stigma attached to ‘I’ve been in jail’. I saw an opportunity to be counted as more than a number.” Being in prison means you are already cut off from the world, but for the women in Darwin correctional centre their voices are even more drowned out. While the jail houses more than 1,100 inmates, only 80 are women. “We are literally in the men’s prison,” says Rocket. It means little there is geared towards them, that they have less opportunities and less access to facilities, programs and activities. In the podcast, however, their voices are heard behind the scenes too, with the women having editorial input and the chance to take the reins on the kind of content to include. The stories they tell are in turns warm, shocking and generous. One woman speaks about her time touring with Yothu Yindi. Another plays a song she wrote for her grandson. Music is vital to Birds Eye View, with songs by Emily Wurramara and Stevie Jean, among other NT artists. Caiti Baker worked closely with the women in a series of workshops to bring the theme song to life. Alongside the vocals, Worth It is made up of samples recorded in the prison by Taise, another woman featured in the podcast. There are doors sliding, distant voices, guards radioing one another. The result is a piece of music that truly captures a sense of place. “I’m very grateful and inspired by the women I got to work with,” Baker says. “It feels like our song rather than my song.” Legally, Baker could not pay the women for their involvement, so she has arranged for 20% of royalties to go to a Darwin-based project called Women of Worth, a program that works to support incarcerated women both pre- and post-release. Likewise for Bell, while she couldn’t pay women while they were incarcerated, she has tried to provide employment opportunities wherever possible for those who have since been released. One of her occasional employees is Rocket, who is now out and doing advocacy work. One of the fears Rocket articulated on the podcast was the uncertainty women face on the other side of a sentence. “I’d like an advisory panel but made up of lived experienced people to help the jails help us, basically,” she explains. “We also need a lot more support when we get out of jail. Support to get a job, support to do a lot of things. There’s nowhere near enough support, if any, once you get out.” Both Rocket and Bell are equal parts excited and nervous about the podcast release. “I don’t sleep well at night because I wonder how it will be received. Prison is a very political space,” Bell says. “[But] these are women’s stories that wouldn’t have been heard otherwise and this is a really important, fun, interesting podcast. “Part of living in a fair and equitable society is being able to understand other people’s lot – and if you can’t hear the stories, if people don’t have a voice, then there’s absolutely no opportunity to diminish that gap between worlds of privileged and less privileged people.” • Worth It by Caiti Baker is out on 6 March. The first five episodes of Birds Eye View is out on 8 March. 