The joys and (mostly) traumas of parenting are laid bare in this new comedy starring Martin Freeman and Daisy Haggard as relatively new parents of two, reminiscing about their carefree, childless days in the midst of sleepless nights and rage-fuelled tantrums. The first episode follows a night during which Freeman deals with his nightmare-prone son while trying to prepare for a big work presentation. Tune in for Freeman on top form as the wry and exasperated Paul, channelling the sarcasm of his Office days. Ammar Kalia You are only as young as you feel, and in this new series Kate Quilton and Dr Javid Abdelmoneim look to see if they can turn back the inner biological clocks of eight volunteers over the course of five weeks of lifestyle changes. Can walking faster and getting more sleep help – or is a radical intervention needed? AK If the sight of a sad-eyed Bradley Wiggins dressed up as a giant gladiator while being baited by Tom Rosenthal is your fantasy, you need this new gameshow. Olympians are pitted against “mortals” in challenges, and in this gloriously silly opener there’s Chris Hoy on a pedalo. Hannah Verdier In search of a place they can be together, star-crossed lovers Callum (Jack Rowan) and Sephy (Masali Baduza) venture into a neighbourhood that’s dystopian even by the standards of this race-flipped thriller. With the home secretary plotting, nowhere in Albion is really safe. Not for a “Nought”, anyway. Ellen E Jones Bathe soothingly in other people’s extreme stress with this fine railway-strife documentary, filmed in and around Birmingham New Street. In the run-up to last Christmas, flooding stops trains, then a passenger goes into labour on the steps down to platform 1. It’s absolute bedlam. Jack Seale This documentary takes a look at the rapidly changing world of female fertility and the roles companies such as Apple and Google are playing in offering services including egg freezing as a workplace benefit, as well as startups such as EggBanxx commercialising American fertility. AK Cool Hand Luke (Stuart Rosenberg, 1967), 1.30pm, TCM MoviesPaul Newman was the blue-eyed boy of Hollywood when he starred in Stuart Rosenberg’s 1967 drama about the convict Luke Jackson, who maintains inner freedom despite the brutalities of a deep-south chain gang. Like the old Warner Bros melodramas, the action is lightened by humour. Paul Howlett European Tour golf: Kenya Open 8am, Sky Sports Main Event. Live from Karen Country Club in Nairobi. Racing: Cheltenham festival 1pm, ITV. Day three coverage, including the feature race at 3.30pm, the Stayers’ Hurdle Race. ODI cricket: Australia v New Zealand 2.30am, BT Sport 1. The first match at the SCG.