The enterprising imprint Dialogue Books was set up in 2017 to showcase marginalised voices. It’s tempting to see its publication of Ben Halls’s impressive debut, set around Quarry Lane – the Quarry – an outer London estate stranded by deindustrialisation, as an attempt to address the notion that discussions about inclusivity leave working-class men behind. The thwarted protagonists of these tender tales are often crushingly lonely, from 20-year-old shelf-stacker Jacky, grieving his boyhood abandonment by a feckless father who ran off to Marbella, to the long-serving pub bouncer in Little Ones whose thoughts of calling it a day to be closer to his wife and child take on new meaning at the story’s close. They dream of getting lucky, whether it’s with a barmaid or a fixed-odds betting terminal, but the hope kills them: any break is always too good to be true, as a Paddy Power clerk saving optimistically for a flat in central London finds when he falls in with a sharp-suited punter promising a glamorous job in exchange for inside information. About the best that can be hoped for is when envy of someone else’s apparently great life is tempered by a dawning realisation that we all have our struggles, as happens to overweight IT guy Nick, intimidated by an old schoolfriend’s bravado out on the pull in London’s West End. Halls sets a trap by cultivating sympathy for the narrator’s wounded sense of rejection The best stories thrive on uneasy comedy. In Tea, narrated by a John Lewis salesman who dresses as a woman for weekly trysts with Stephen, an abusive man in denial about his own sexuality, there’s a spectacularly awkward moment when, at work, the narrator realises that the new mother whom he’s helping to choose an oven is Stephen’s wife. Halls gives his flair for knuckle-chewing agony free rein in Fix, an emotional helter-skelter of hopes repeatedly raised and dashed, in which a serial bankrupt assures his partner he’ll pick up their son from school but ends up instead having to pawn his phone (really, her phone) in an increasingly desperate bid to recoup his gambling losses. Another standout piece, Exams, follows a call centre worker at a birthday party attended by an ex-girlfriend whose movements he can’t help monitoring on social media. Halls sets a trap by cultivating sympathy for the narrator’s wounded sense of rejection, before a knockout revelation. Halls can overdo the hopelessness: in Modernisation, a retirement-age postman struggling to cope with the demands of privatisation returns to the Quarry after a long absence, only for snarling, tattooed locals to brand him a paedophile. But overall, the highs here far outweigh the lows, at least for Halls’s readers, if not his characters. • The Quarry by Ben Halls is published by Dialogue Books (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15