This was an opportunity Arsenal could not afford to squander if the Champions League places were to remain a possibility and, by hook or by crook, they made it count. For the moment they will not care how, even though this was a flat performance and a lively West Ham side created enough clear chances to leave with a win that would not have been remotely flattering. Mikel Arteta was thankful for Bernd Leno, Alexandre Lacazette and the lines and vectors of VAR. Arsenal’s threat had been sporadic when, 12 minutes from time, Bukayo Saka cut in and fed Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang. His shot was deflected off Declan Rice and up to Mesut Özil, who nodded astutely across for the substitute Lacazette to sweep the ball home. Their celebrations were immediately cut short by an offside flag but, after a delay of several minutes and numerous different dissections of toe and elbow positions, the decision was correctly reversed. It could be a significant moment in Arsenal’s campaign, putting them within five points of the top four and giving at least the impression of genuine momentum. They had ridden their luck from the start. Given their lack of margin for error it did not bode well that they were lucky to survive two early blunders. The game had barely begun when Granit Xhaka, under no pressure, presented the ball straight to Jarrod Bowen. There was still plenty for the forward to do but, after a shimmy inside, he found the angle for a 20-yard strike that thudded against Leno’s right post. That was a close call but had nothing on the next opportunity West Ham were given. This time Pablo Mari missed an interception down the inside-right channel and Michail Antonio could bear down on goal with Sébastien Haller for company. The pair made a hash of it: Antonio’s lay-off was placed wastefully behind his strike partner, but Haller had made little effort to check his run and given David Luiz a chance to reduce the passing angles. Arsenal were open when out of possession and tentative with it. They were fortunate again when Dani Ceballos offered lightweight resistance to a challenge and Haller was played clear. His heavy touch allowed a sprawling Leno to rescue the situation but the manner in which Arteta’s side were being cut through was visibly causing the head coach concern. By the opening period’s midway point all the home side’s near-monopoly of the ball had produced was a snap shot from Özil that Aaron Cresswell blocked. But they began to threaten more concertedly and, when Aubameyang chipped into the middle, Sokratis Papastathopoulos thrust his neck muscles into a header that clipped the crossbar. It was as good as their first-half openings got, with a couple of twisting runs by Nicolas Pépé coming to nothing and Eddie Nketiah failing to convince Martin Atkinson he had been tripped in the box by Jeremy Ngakia. At the other end Antonio missed perhaps the best opportunity of all when, alone in front of goal after Issa Diop nodded down a corner, he swivelled and somehow shot wide. Pépé crossed beyond Aubameyang after the teams re-emerged but proceedings still felt, from a home perspective, distinctly flat. They were at least penning the visitors back and, in the 53rd minute, their pressure brought a clear chance. A dart infield from Saka brought an impeccably timed pass and put Nketiah up against Lukasz Fabianski, but the ex-Arsenal keeper saved well to his left. Leno surpassed that moments later. Antonio again had the freedom of the goalmouth after Haller had helped on a Cresswell cross; he tried to head beyond Leno, who had stood tall, but was thwarted by a firm right hand. Ogbonna then miscued a volley with Arsenal, never remotely convincing at the back, struggling to clear. Bowen stung Leno’s palms after a strong run and the concern for Arteta, who by now had enlisted Lacazette to replace Nketiah, was that Arsenal’s performance appeared to be deteriorating. But then Lacazette made sure that did not matter, the celebrations once the goal had been awarded demonstrating exactly how important it might yet be. There was still time for Leno to make another big save from Haller and West Ham, a threat until the end, departed shaking their heads.