Kathryn Hahn leads this American take on the Sex Education strand of randy teen comedy, starring as a single mother, Eve Fletcher, who rediscovers her sexuality – not least through online porn – after her son, Brendan, leaves for college. In this opening episode, Brendan is ready to move out, but not before an awkward encounter with an ex at a party, while Eve has a brush with inappropriate workplace behaviour. Adapted from Tom Perrotta’s 2017 novel, it is an unflinching coming-of-age tale – for both mother and son. Ammar Kalia The rugby union great barges into the burgeoning celebrities-on-canals market, sparring lightly with his wife Maureen as he goes. Leg one of the four-episode journey takes their narrowboat over the internationally envied Pontcysyllte Aqueduct. First shown on BBC Wales. Jack Seale Louis Theroux is in the tent for the opening episode of this five-part charitable special. His competition includes the comedians Jenny Eclair and Russell Howard and Love Island’s Ovie Soko, all battling it out for the coveted Hollywood handshake. AK Hannah and Nathan’s marriage appears to be in ruins, as her affair with Christie is now out in the open, and she battles to make amends with those she deceived. Meanwhile, a video of her celebrity client Fi’s drunken night has been leaked online, and there are yet more secrets to come ahead of next week’s finale. Ali Catterall The Ab Fab actor-turned-backpacker is off on another adventure, this time to the Caribbean. But don’t expect poolside piña coladas and late-night limbo contests. Across two hour-long episodes, she is visiting the lesser-touristed islands of Cuba and Haiti. Ellen E Jones If you think dating one man at a time doesn’t cut it, why not try five simultaneously? Such is the premise for this absurd new dating show, in which one woman invites five bachelors to live with her, whittling them down to the last man standing after a week. Up first is the recently divorced 34-year-old Amy. AK Good Kill, 1.35am, Channel 4Ethan Hawke is US Air Force major Tom Egan, who is fighting the Taliban in Afghanistan from an air-conditioned cubicle in Nevada. He’s a drone pilot, administering death from half a world away, and the work is eating away at his conscience. Andrew Niccol’s intelligent, persuasive film tallies the human cost. Paul Howlett World Cup Ski Jumping 3.50pm, Eurosport 2. From Lillehammer in Norway. Champions League Football: RB Leipzig v Tottenham Hotspur 7pm, BT Sport 2. The last-16 second leg from the Red Bull Arena. NHL: Toronto Maple Leafs v Tampa Bay Lightning 11pm, BT Sport 2. Eastern Conference game staged at Amalie Arena.