Governments across Europe have warned their citizens that the coronavirus outbreak could lead to months of serious disruption, as figures for deaths and infections rose sharply again on Monday and new measures were announced restricting large gatherings. In Germany, which reported its first two deaths from the virus on Monday, the health minister, Jens Spahn, appealed for people to work from home and walk or cycle rather than use public transport. Spahn asked people to make hard choices to help avoid the risk of overburdening the country’s health service. Advice and approaches have diverged widely across Europe and the Middle East as governments struggle to contain the rapidly escalating epidemic. In Italy, the death toll rose from 366 to 463 on Monday, six prisoners died in a wave of prison unrest linked to containment measures, and experts warned that the hospital system in some areas was in danger of collapse. In the Middle East, Israel took the extreme decision to place anyone arriving from overseas into quarantine for 14 days, Saudi Arabia closed off air and sea travel to 14 affected countries and Iraq banned all public gatherings and called on citizens to avoid visiting sacred cities. Authorities in Madrid announced that all kindergartens, schools and universities would be closed for two weeks, as the number of cases and around the Spanish capital jumped from 202 to 469 in 24 hours. Authorities in the Basque country also announced the closure of educational centres around the regional capital, Vitoria, where the second-worst cluster has been identified. Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the head of the World Health Organization, said that with the virus spreading in so many countries, the threat of a pandemic had become “very real” as he called for aggressive measures” to counter it. It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals. The virus can cause pneumonia. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. In severe cases there can be organ failure. As this is viral pneumonia, antibiotics are of no use. The antiviral drugs we have against flu will not work. Recovery depends on the strength of the immune system. Many of those who have died were already in poor health. In the UK, the medical advice is that if you have recently travelled from areas affected by coronavirus, you should: More NHS advice on what to do if you think you have been exposed to the virus can be found here, and the full travel advice to UK nationals is available here. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January, and there have been such transmissions elsewhere. As of 9 March, more than 110,000 people have been infected in more than 80 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering. There have over 3,800 deaths globally. Just over 3,000 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. 62,000 people have recovered from the coronavirus. We don’t yet know how dangerous the new coronavirus is, and we won’t know until more data comes in. Seasonal flu typically has a mortality rate below 1% and is thought to cause about 400,000 deaths each year globally. Sars had a death rate of more than 10%. Another key unknown is how contagious the coronavirus is. A crucial difference is that unlike flu, there is no vaccine for the new coronavirus, which means it is more difficult for vulnerable members of the population – elderly people or those with existing respiratory or immune problems – to protect themselves. Hand-washing and avoiding other people if you feel unwell are important. One sensible step is to get the flu vaccine, which will reduce the burden on health services if the outbreak turns into a wider epidemic. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars) and Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (Mers) are both caused by coronaviruses that came from animals. In 2002, Sars spread virtually unchecked to 37 countries, causing global panic, infecting more than 8,000 people and killing more than 750. Mers appears to be less easily passed from human to human, but has greater lethality, killing 35% of about 2,500 people who have been infected. Sarah Boseley, Hannah Devlin and Martin Belam Amid mounting anxiety, EU leaders also announced they would hold a teleconference on Tuesday to discuss their next steps to try to slow the epidemic. “The longer we can slow down the development of the virus, the better,” Spahn said at a press conference at a hospital in Berlin, warning that the restrictions people would face in their daily lives “would last for months rather than weeks”. “Every individual should weigh up and decide what is easier to avoid and what is harder,” he said, adding that going to work was more important than going to a football match. Spahn added that he was opposed to shutting schools and kindergartens because that would leave tens of thousands of medical staff unable to go to work, which would have a hugely detrimental effect on the health system. In the UK, meanwhile, Boris Johnson and senior advisers defended the government’s response to the crisis. The prime minister rejected calls for harsher quarantine measures and a ban on mass gatherings, arguing that the best advice so far was still simply for people to wash their hands. “Containment is very unlikely to work on its own and that is why we are making preparations for a move to the delay phase,” he said. Sir Patrick Vallance, the government’s chief scientific adviser, said lots of measures that “seem intuitive turn out to have very little effect” and one of those was screening travellers from high-risk areas at airports. In other developments on Monday: In the Republic of Ireland, all St Patrick’s Day parades, including Dublin’s main celebration that draws about 500,000 revellers each year from all over the world, were cancelled due to the risk of a further coronavirus spread. Cyprus, which was the last EU country to be virus-free, reported its first case. Vietnam decided to temporarily suspend visa-free travel for citizens from eight European countries – Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Norway, Spain, Sweden and the UK. Iran announced another 43 people had died, pushing the death toll to 237 amid 7,161 confirmed cases. The government said it had released 70,000 prisoners because of the coronavirus outbreak. Scores of foreign tourists and Egyptian crew remained quarantined aboard a Nile cruise ship, from which 45 suspected coronavirus cases have been evacuated. The Israeli move was interpreted domestically as a measure to avoid irking Donald Trump. The country already requires travellers arriving from more than a dozen countries to spend two weeks in home isolation, effectively killing off incoming tourism. Following outbreaks in the US, pressure had been building to add it to the list. But rather than extending the rules specifically on US travellers, and risk an angry backlash from the White House, Israel has instead broadened the policy to the entire planet. Italy’s government has imposed a virtual lockdown across much of its wealthy northern regions at the centre of the contagion in an effort to contain the virus. Its top sports body on Monday called for all sports events to be cancelled until 3 April. Tensions in its overcrowded jails erupted on Monday over new containment measures, with riots in at least two dozen prisons and the deaths of six inmates who broke into an infirmary and overdosed on methadone. Prime minister Giuseppe Conte cited Winston Churchill as evidence that great nations persevere when the going gets tough. “These days, I have been thinking about the old speeches of Churchill – it is our darkest hour but we will make it,” Conte told La Repubblica newspaper. In France, the worst affected European country outside Italy, the person in charge of one of the world’s busiest air transport hubs, Paris’s Orly and Charles de Gaulle airports, was among those to be infected. The two Paris airports are among the busiest air hubs in the world, with more than 100 million people passing through every year. The disclosure that Augustin de Romanet had tested positive followed days of rumours in the French media speculating whether Charles de Gaulle airport, Europe’s second busiest, may have been linked to the spread of the virus in France. Officials in France have been warning it is inevitable that the country would have to go to stage three in its epidemic response shortly. Reports suggested that would involve closing schools, putting its health system on an emergency footing, and perhaps even closure of mass transit systems. Meanwhile, in the US, where there have been a rapidly accelerating number of infections, federal and state officials in California were preparing on Monday to receive thousands of people from a cruise ship that has been idling off the coast of San Francisco, with at least 21 people onboard infected with the coronavirus. Additional reporting by Oliver Holmes and Patrick Wintour