Disney’s new streaming platform couldn’t arrive soon enough – and is rolling out the big guns to get under way. Set five years after the events of Return of the Jedi, this latest saga sees the gaps in the Star Wars universe continue to be filled. Jon Favreau directs, and Pedro Pascal stars as the titular bounty hunter exploring the galaxy.From Tuesday 24 March, Disney+ The female body is the battleground for this Glaswegian class-war drama starring Sophie Rundle, Martin Compston and Mirren Mack. Wealthy couple Dan and Emily hire Kaya, a surrogate mother from the other side of town. But is she going to stick to her side of the bargain?Sunday 22 March, 9pm, BBC One Nipsey Hussle was one of the good guys. He had used his success as a rapper to enrich his community, opening businesses and social enterprises. This made his 2019 murder both sadder and even less explicable. Ben Zand visits Los Angeles to meet Hussle’s associates and ponder motives.From Thursday 26 March, BBC Three A BBC pod exploring one of the more precarious moments in the United States’s space exploration programme. Kevin Fong talks to eye-witnesses and participants as he tells the story of the troubled Apollo 13 mission of 1970. How was disaster averted?Podcast Shortly after US counterculture peaked, the doors of perception started opening for the nation’s disabled people, too. This fascinating film tells the barely known story of Camp Jened, a ramshackle utopia in the Catskills where visitors could, in the parlance of the times, let it all hang out. What followed was often life-changing.From Wednesday 25 March, Netflix New series in which Jeff Goldblum essentially wanders around taking an interest in things. These things can be anything from ice-cream to tattoos; basically, if you like Goldblum, you will like this.From Tuesday 24 March, Disney+ One million bucks and a prestigious window display is at stake as Heidi Klum and Tim Gunn return with a sort of Dragons’ Den for the world of high fashion. They will be searching for the next big name in couture and offering them a hefty leg-up. But expect considerable melodrama along the way.From Friday 27 March, Amazon Prime Video The Byrde family continue their spectacular descent into perfidy as this dark but picturesque crime drama returns for a third season. Jason Bateman’s Marty originally specialised in money laundering. But as events have spiralled, he has been forced to branch out. With the Mexican drug cartel circling, how much lower might he go?From Friday 27 March, Netflix Director Diego Quemada-Díez, a cameraman on several Ken Loach films, brings a strong Loachian sensibility to this harrowing, compassionate drama. It’s the story of teenagers Juan, Sara and Samuel, and their journey from Guatemala City to a hoped-for new life in LA; their terrifying adventures are based on migrants’ experiences.Sunday 22 March, 1.40am, Film4 Since 2003, this stirring, affecting series has been following the lives of five children born with disabilities. As we rejoin them, they are preparing to enter the adult world, and beginning to explore the full dimensions of their potential – which seems happily boundless. Hamish is preparing for the Paralympics, while Zoe eyes a legal career.Thursday 26 March, 9pm, Channel 4