Rugby’s annus horribilis shows little obvious sign of easing. For the time being all roads no longer lead to Rome and the best scenario involves the Six Nations – both male and female – dribbling to a belated conclusion in the autumn. There are far more important things in life than a few postponed rugby matches but for the tournament organisers the problems are only just starting. Things will be appreciably simpler should the other remaining fixtures, not least France v Ireland on Saturday week, take place as scheduled, but it might be wise not to bet the château on that just yet. The coronavirus outbreak, if nothing else, has once again shown how unfeasibly tight the rugby calendar has been allowed to become. In 2001, when the foot and mouth crisis forced all three of Ireland’s home games to be postponed until September and October, it was still vaguely possible to find a spare Saturday without much else happening on the domestic front. Now, with England’s relentless Premiership stretching from 12 September to 26 June next season, there is next to no leeway, with perhaps only two vaguely practicable dates on which to play the Italy v England men’s match between now and Christmas. The first is Saturday 27 June, which is not absolutely ideal given England and Italy are due to be embarking on tours to Japan and the US respectively around that date. It may be those tours do not go ahead but in any event there would be a heap of scheduling problems to overcome with football’s European Championship set to be at the round of 16 phase. A more convenient date might be 31 October, the week before the November Tests begin, with England players already in line to be spared from club duty that weekend before the Test against New Zealand at Twickenham the following week. So that’s that sorted, then? Not so fast. While Eddie Jones’s side might theoretically fancy a hit out in Rome before the All Blacks arrive in London, it would commit them to playing five Tests on consecutive weekends, with many of their squad members also required for the opening two rounds of the European Champions’ Cup on the preceding two weekends. Yes, the team could potentially be rotated for the Tonga game but, from a player welfare perspective, it would sit uneasily, merely another example of the game’s guardians trying to squeeze a quart into an already patched-up pint pot. Blindly following the money, however, is the recurring habit to which rugby seems increasingly addicted. In the 1970s, when not every team travelled to Ireland because of the political situation, the organisers were resigned to the championship remaining an unfinished symphony. Not any more. The Six Nations is the northern hemisphere’s ultimate cash cow and calling off games has sizeable financial ramifications from a gate income and sponsorship perspective. Even if France do play their final two games, against Scotland and Ireland, furthermore, there is also the not inconsiderable matter of prize money. Any men’s team winning a grand slam is set to bank £6m, with the side finishing second claiming £3.5m and the third-placed country collecting £2.5m. Hence why all the unions are desperate to get the games played – and to win them – if at all possible. Add to that the consequences in terms of world ranking positions before the 2023 Rugby World Cup, with the pool draw to be made in late November, and a philosophical, laissez-faire shrug of the shoulders from the unions involved becomes even less likely, regardless of the extra strain on the players. It is entirely possible someone like Courtney Lawes may be required to play a full nine-month club season for Northampton, incorporating European games, plus 10 Tests (the postponed Italy game included) before heading off on a Lions tour that does not end until 7 August 2021. Those at the Rugby Football Union focusing on recouping the Rome hospitality package money they will have to repay due to next Saturday’s postponement should spare a thought for their gladiators. It is, in fairness, a devilishly tricky set of circumstances for any administrator to unpick. There is still the Ireland v Italy game to be fitted in somewhere, too, with no easy solution as presented itself in 2012 when a frozen Parisian pitch prevented France v Ireland from happening on the scheduled date. On that occasion there were fallow weekends, not a luxury currently available with the championship almost over. You could argue the Six Nations has simply found itself in the wrong place at the wrong time, as did Rugby World Cup’s organisers when Typhoon Hagibis swept through Japan last autumn. Epidemics and tropical storms do not stop to examine the fixture list. Trouble, however, seems to be following rugby around more and more and exposing scheduling fault lines that may otherwise be overlooked. The Greatest Championship? As the endless rain hammers down and the coronavirus bulletins keep coming, few will recall this year’s ill-starred tournament with much affection.