Prep 10 minCook 1 hr 45 minServes 4 2 aubergines (about 300g each)Olive oil For the almond sauce150g whole blanched almonds50g chopped shallot80ml sherry250ml chicken stock60ml double creamSalt and pepper, to taste1 pinch cayenne pepper, to finish For the lovage oil (optional)40g lovage or parsley leaves125ml extra-virgin olive oil, or pomace oil, if you can get hold of it1 garlic clove, peeled For the fried shallots1 shallot, peeled and cut into very thin rings1 tbsp cornflour125ml rapeseed oil Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/gas 4. Put the aubergines on a tray and bake for 40 minutes, until soft and cooked through. Roast the almonds in a medium oven for two to three minutes, until slightly toasted and golden brown. In a small pan, sweat the chopped shallot in 40ml olive oil until soft. Add the almonds and sherry, bring to a boil and reduce slightly. Add the stock, reduce by half, then add the cream. Season, then leave to cook gently on a low heat until everything comes together. Tip into a blender and blitz smooth. Put all the ingredients for the lovage oil in a small saucepan on a very low heat and, once the pan is warm, turn off the heat – you don’t want the garlic to brown. Season to taste, then blitz to a smooth emulsion. Dust the shallot rings in cornflour, then fry in rapeseed oil in a small pan until golden brown. Cut each aubergine in half lengthways. Heat a drizzle of oil in a small frying pan, then lay in the aubergines flesh side down and caramelise for 90 seconds, until golden brown. Turn over, cook the skin for a minute, then arrange flesh side up on a plate. Pour over the sauce to cover. Drizzle with the lovage oil, sprinkle with a pinch of cayenne pepper and top with the crisp shallots. Prep 15 minCook 45 minServes 4 2 leeks, white parts only, finely chopped 4 shallots, peeled and finely chopped4 garlic cloves, peeled and finely sliced2 bay leaves25ml olive oil150ml fino sherry200ml brandy500ml shellfish stock, homemade or bought in500g tomato frito, or passata 250g fresh white crab meatSalt and pepper, to taste1 pinch cayenne pepper1 pack puff pastryFlour, for dusting1 egg, beaten400ml rapeseed oil In a medium saucepan on a medium-low heat, sweat the leeks, shallots, garlic and bay in oil until soft but not coloured – six to eight minutes. Add the sherry and brandy, cook until the liquids evaporate, then add the stock and reduce until it’s almost evaporated and you’re left with a paste-like sauce. Stir in the tomato and reduce again to a paste, then stir in the crab and cook on a low-medium heat for six to eight minutes. Season, add a pinch of cayenne and leave to cool. Dust a flat surface with flour and roll out the pastry into a 50cm x 25cm rectangle about 2mm thick. Use a 12cm round pastry cutter (or ramekin) to cut out pastry circles (ie, two rows of four from the rectangle). Put a heaped tablespoon of the crab mix (about 40g) in the centre of each circle, then brush the edges with egg. Fold each circle in half to enclose the filling and form a semi-circle, then use the back of a fork to seal and crimp the edges about 3mm in from the sides. Save any excess crab mix to top toasts, or for pasta or rice. Put enough rapeseed oil in a small-medium frying pan to come 2cm up the sides, and put on a medium heat. Fry the empanadillas in two batches for 90 seconds a side, until golden brown, then use a slotted spoon to transfer to a plate lined with kitchen paper. Leave to cool for a few minutes before serving – they’ll be extremely hot. Prep 30 min, plus overnight soakCook 15 minServes 4 8 lamb cutlets (ie 2 per person) For the ajo blanco80g almonds300ml milk½ loaf bread2 garlic cloves3 granny smith apples150ml extra-virgin olive oil – Arbequina, for preferenceA drizzle of moscatel vinegar or apple cider vinegarSalt and black pepper, to tasteFor the mojo rojo1 red pepper, roasted, peeled and deseeded3 roasted tomatoes2 roasted garlic heads1 tbsp ground cumin1 tbsp spicy pimentón100ml extra-virgin olive oil – Arbequina, for preference60ml moscatel vinegar, or apple cider vinegar2 tbsp cayenne pasteSalt and black pepper, to tasteFor the saladSeeds of ½ pomegranate1 handful parsley leaves2 tbsp pistachios, roasted½ red onion, cut into very thin rings1 small handful coriander leaves15ml moscatel vinegar or apple cider vinegar25ml extra-virgin olive oilSalt and black pepper, to taste For the ajo blanco, put the almonds, milk, bread and garlic in a bowl, and leave in the fridge overnight. The next day, put in a blender with all the remaining ajo blanco ingredients, blitz smooth and scrape into a bowl. For the mojo rojo, put everything in a blender, blitz smooth and scrape into a second bowl. Put all the salad ingredients in a third bowl and toss to combine. Coat the lamb cutlets in the mojo rojo, then fry or grill on a plancha for a minute on each side (or until done to your liking). Spoon the ajo blanco on one side of a serving plate, and top with the salad. Arrange the cutlets on the other side of the plate and serve at once. Prep 10 minCook 30 minServes 4 For the jerusalem artichoke purée1kg jerusalem artichokes200ml milk1 bay leaf75g chopped shallot 1 garlic clove, peeled and thinly slicedOlive oil, for frying50g serrano ham, chopped750ml good chicken stockExtra-virgin olive oil, to finish – Arbequina, for preference For the peas1kg shelled peas (or use frozen and defrosted instead)Salt, to taste200g soft Bauma goat’s cheese – get it from Brindisa, or use a mixture of another soft goat’s cheese and ricotta 1 small bunch mint, picked For the nuts 150g cashew nuts1 tbsp olive oil1 pinch chilli flakes Peel the artichokes, put them in a pan, add the milk and bay leaf, then pour in enough cold water just to cover. Bring to a boil on a medium heat, cook gently until soft – about 15 minutes – then drain. In a medium pan, sweat the shallot and garlic in a drizzle of oil, until soft. Add the ham and cook, stirring, for two minutes, then add the artichokes and stock, and cook on a medium-low heat until the stock has nearly evaporated and the sauce is paste-like. Tip into a blender and blitz smooth. Blanch the peas in salted boiling water until soft. For the nuts, fry the cashews in the oil in a small frying pan until light golden brown, then sprinkle with the chilli and set aside. Gently warm up the artichoke puree in a small saucepan, then spoon on to a plate and top with the peas. Sprinkle over the nuts, crumble the cheese on top, drizzle with a generous amounts of good oil and scatter over the mint leaves. • Recipes by Nieves Barragán Mohacho, chef/co-owner, Sabor, London W1.