This podcast tackles the biggest business failures of all time. It’s very American, but once you get used to the host’s style, you really do learn something new about corporate crookedness in a way most of us can understand. It’s a collaboration with the University of Minnesota, so they know their stuff, although at times quite funny it’s clear they are very rigorous. The episodes about Trump’s Atlantic City Casinos and Toys R Us are the best. – Barbara1970 Entertaining “ramble chats’” with a wide variety of guests – comedians, authors, actors, musicians… Perfect for taking my mind off the torture of running. – titchyface Everything Richard Herring has done: RHLSTP, Me1 and M2 Snooker, in which he plays himself at snooker, and Stone Clearing. It’ll keep you going for ages and consider bunging him some cash for a huge amount of quality stuff. He’s also looking to raise cash for out-of-work performers. He’s an all-round good egg, and a funny one at that. – Zyxt12 If you like alternative music with a different theme each time (who among us doesn’t?), this is an excellent series of hour-long podcasts, covering stuff such as The Kraftwerk Influence and Female Post-Punk Icons. The chap hosting it has a very soothing Peel-like delivery, perfect for the commute or your enforced isolation. –merepseudmaged Obviously! The funniest podcast ever, and best listened to in private so people don’t keep looking at you as you burst out laughing or spluttering in horror. – Confinedtohouse About a terrible attempt at making an American-style sitcom in New Zealand in the 90s. It’s a funny story that turns into a meditation on failure and the twists and turns that life, and careers can take. Highly recommended. – CommanderMaxil From the History category, by Greg Jenner and guests. A comedian and a historian go over an event or person you think you know about from history or is undeservingly low profile. I learnt a bit and laughed a bit. – Always_Outraged Six episodes of Australian Gothic on the true life disappearance of Paddy Moriarty in the Northern Territory. Wry but haunting, think Fargo with Akubra hats. Best Australian narrative podcast ever. – Ozziecrobar