There was no need for Ole Gunnar Solskjær to issue a public apology after this visit to Goodison Park but the preservation of Manchester United’s unbeaten run, and with it their hopes of Champions League qualification, was thanks to VAR as well as another injection of quality from Bruno Fernandes. “You’re just hoping, fingers crossed, they make a decision that benefits you,” Solskjær said after the highly eventful draw. Given Carlo Ancelotti’s anger after the final whistle, and the red card that greeted the Everton manager’s red mist, they certainly did that. Everton believed they had soured Solskjær’s visit to Goodison yet again when their improved second‑half display led to David de Gea being beaten for a second time in the dying moments. Dominic Calvert-Lewin’s shot had deflected in off Harry Maguire with De Gea wrong-footed and the offside Gylfi Sigurdsson lifting his legs out of the way of the ball as it trickled in. The assistant referee spotted Sigurdsson’s quick thinking and awarded what would have been a 93rd‑minute winner only for VAR to rule the Everton midfielder was in De Gea’s line of sight and interfering with play. Sigurdsson was sat on the ground, having been fouled after shooting at the United goalkeeper, with De Gea standing above him. The incident was replayed on the giant television screens inside the stadium and Goodison erupted in fury at the latest subjective call and controversy involving VAR. It was left to the referee, Chris Kavanagh, to face the wrath of Ancelotti and the Goodison faithful on the pitch while the VAR referees in Stockley Park, Jon Moss and Edward Smart, turned off their monitors for the day. There could be little argument over the merits of the draw, however. United recovered impressively from a dreadful early error from De Gea, who gifted Calvert-Lewin his 15th goal of the season, and levelled when new signing Fernandes swept a shot from long range past Jordan Pickford too easily. Everton had the upper hand in the second half but both sides could have won in stoppage time only for the two goalkeepers to redeem themselves with vital saves. Last season United capitulated 4-0 in the heaviest defeat of Solskjær’s reign. Here they delivered the response he demanded, although De Gea’s form remains a cause for concern. The United keeper’s latest mistake arrived with only 160 seconds gone when he received a pass from Maguire and, seemingly unaware of the closing presence of Calvert-Lewin, delayed his clearance for too long. The Everton striker stuck out his foot when the clearance was finally taken and was repaid by De Gea’s kick striking the underside of his boot and flying in. It was the seventh goalkeeping mistake that has led directly to a goal from De Gea since the start of last season, the joint worst record in the Premier League. For the slapstick nature of the opener, and it was greeted with laughter as much as delight by the home fans, it was rather fitting that an Everton No 9 should be on the scoresheet on the 40th anniversary of the death of William Ralph “Dixie” Dean. The bona fide legend died at Goodison after a Merseyside derby. Calvert-Lewin almost scored a second in the fourth minute when a simple long ball from the recalled Michael Keane managed to pierce a static United defence. The striker left Victor Lindelof in his wake and steered a first-time shot towards the far corner only for de Gea to deliver a timely reminder of his quality with a fingertip save. Everton threatened to bypass Lindelof and Maguire at will in the opening exchanges. The danger soon evaporated, however, as United began to dominate possession and cut the supply line to Calvert-Lewin and Richarlison. Fernandes, floating between Everton’s rigid defensive and midfield lines, was central to the recovery. Nemanja Matic swept the visitors’ first chance against the crossbar after being picked out on the edge of the area by Fred, stationed on the left of Solskjær’s midfield diamond. Ancelotti was growing visibly irritated at his team’s inability to retain possession and his problems increased when Seamus Coleman hobbled off with a muscle injury. Coleman’s replacement, Djibril Sidibé, managed to remember to wear both socks this time – unlike when coming on against Crystal Palace – but he still made a clumsy introduction. Sidibé conceded possession with a wayward pass inside Theo Walcott, who was caught flat-footed, and United pounced ruthlessly. Matic released Fernandes in space and, with no Everton defender near, the attacking midfielder drilled an emphatic finish inside Pickford’s near post from 25 yards. Fernandes’s shot swerved and dipped just in front of the England international but, with Gareth Southgate looking on from the directors’ box, Pickford should not have been beaten so easily. Another goalkeeping error to balance things up. A procession of bookings diminished the game as a spectacle although Everton played with greater energy and control after the break. Sigurdsson struck a post with a free-kick while United threatened on the counter-attack. The excellent Leighton Baines prevented Fernandes finding Odion Ighalo in front of goal and the United substitute was thwarted in injury time when Pickford, having tipped away a Fernandes chip, threw himself in the way of the striker’s rebound. There was still time for Richarlison to set up Sigurdsson for a low shot that De Gea saved with his legs. Then VAR made its presencefelt yet again.