To the Woman | audible.co.ukThe Last Bohemians | thelastbohemians.co.ukDaughters of Reykjavik | acast.com Today is International Women’s Day, as you may be pleased (or not) to know: a nice “hello, why not try this?” hook for various women-friendly shows and podcasts. On Audible, June Sarpong has taken over presenting duties for the To the Woman podcast, in which various women read letters they’ve written to other women. The first series, in 2018, had Scarlett Curtis as presenter; Sarpong is more measured and professional, less saccharine. The format remains the same, with Sarpong explaining the concept of each episode and (sometimes) reading out a letter she herself has written, but for series two there’s a sense of highlighting women who have been publicly disparaged in some way. So we hear from Miranda Kane, ex-sex worker-turned-activist-and-comedian; from #MeToo activist and Weinstein accuser Rose McGowan; from model and activist Munroe Bergdorf. Others include poet Sabrina Mahfouz, critic Bonnie Greer and Laura Bates, founder of the campaigning website Everyday Sexism, who you might think don’t fit that remit. Though, as we all know, any woman who puts her head above the parapet will always be sneered at, or worse, by some harrumphing keyboard warrior. This is an admirably broad collection of lived female experience, and every story needs to be heard. Plus, To the Woman is easy to listen to, sometimes gripping, often emotional. But its strengths are also its weaknesses: when someone reads a letter, as opposed to just chatting, they are naturally more careful, more formal in their delivery. This ensures that no word is wasted, but it also means there’s a stiffness that only a few readers can overcome. Gina Martin, who worked to ban upskirting, is one, sounding upbeat and close to laughter, almost as though she’s speaking off the top of her head. Also – and I’m aware this sounds grumpy – every letter is a celebration, a thank you from one fabulous woman to another. A brilliant and worthy USP, but how amazing it would be to hear a celebration of women that acknowledges our awfulness, as well as our brilliance. Which brings me to The Last Bohemians, a far spikier and more nuanced celebration. This show talks to older women, cultural outsiders – the more eccentric and offbeat the better. In the opening episode of series two, presenter Kate Hutchinson meets the American singer-songwriter Judy Collins, whose 60-year career started in the 1960s Greenwich Village folk scene. We hear Collins describing how she told her husband she was having an affair while on magic mushrooms. “It was a very bad thing to do,” she says, laughing, before going on to cover addiction, activism, suicide; proper heavy stuff. Collins takes herself seriously, which is correct. “I think that one thing that helped me is focus,” she says. “My object was to be learning: learning songs, the piano, learning to show up, learning to perform. From the time I was four or five years old. The secret is to find something that drives you.” Collins still gigs, at 80. What a wonderful life. This is a very cheering production: future episodes will feature singer PP Arnold, designer Zandra Rhodes, film-maker Vivienne Dick and others. I was also cheered by a new podcast from the Daughters of Reykjavik, a nine-strong rap collective from Iceland. This is simply a series of conversations between young women, the Daughters and invited guests, and I found it both enlightening and heartening. The topics are inspired by songs on the group’s forthcoming album, Soft Spot, and they’ve only released two episodes so far – on female sexuality and need for approval – but there is a wonderful honesty and sweetness about their chat. Did they grow up thinking themselves sexually attractive? What do they think is sexy about themselves? What does applause mean to them? Or Instagram followers? How do they find working in the music industry? All the speakers are so open and aware, curious, uncertain, funny. I love this podcast. Best music breakfast show: The 1Xtra Breakfast Show With DottyThere were many deserving music-based winners at the 2020 Audio and Radio Industry awards last week: 1Xtra’s MistaJam (AKA the nicest man in radio) for best music presenter; Radio 3’s This Classical Life for best specialist music show, presented by the amazing Jess Gillam. But I am so pleased that Dotty won the music breakfast show award. Her upbeat presentation is pitched perfectly for her audience, her interview skills are exceptional, and her knowledge of music is unparalleled. Plus her show lasts four hours! It’s just a great way to start the day. Best community programming: Prison Radio AssociationThe PRA makes the programmes for National Prison Radio and puts experienced audio-makers to work with prisoners, training them in audio production and presentation. The resulting shows (which can’t be heard outside the prison system) help build a real community in UK prisons: giving information, answering questions, playing tracks, reading out letters. There’s a breakfast show (called, inevitably, Porridge), a request show, and a show that interviews ex-prisoners to see how they managed once they left. A wonderful, wonderful thing. Moment of the year: Iain LeeLee’s late-night phone-in show on talkRADIO, The Late Night Alternative, has long been controversial. Lee eschews the obvious divisive topics for debate and, instead, asks his listeners to talk about other stuff, leading to amazingly offbeat moments of humour and sadness. This award, voted for by the public, was given for the 30 minutes that Lee talked, live, to Chris, a man who had taken an overdose. His co-presenter and producer, Katherine Boyle, contacted the police, and listeners helped to find Chris, who was on the street, and get him to hospital.