Mercedes’s iron grip on the front of the grid shows no sign of weakening after six all-conquering years. Their car was impressively quick in both short and long runs, and especially strong through the slower corners of the last sector, a strength of last year. They even managed to throw an engineering curveball at their rivals, albeit one now banned for 2021. With stable regulations they caused a real stir with their innovative dual-axis steering (DAS) system, a manual device controlled by moving the steering wheel to adjust the toe angle of the front wheel to improve tyre wear and reduce drag. If it proves to be advantageous, it could make them uncatchable. The only chink is engine reliability. Lewis Hamilton, aiming for his seventh title, expressed concern, with Mercedes and customers Williams having two engine problems each in six days. Having opened recent seasons playing catch-up to Mercedes and Ferrari, Red Bull delivered exactly what they wanted, proving quick out of the box. Max Verstappen and Alexander Albon put in solid and quick runs, with the former looking immensely happy and confident in his ride. Their single-lap pace was not the quickest, second to Mercedes, but there is without doubt more to come. The car looked nailed on through the fast corners, especially the sequence of one, two and three, atlhough appeared to be a little bit of handful through the slower turns, with the drivers having to work harder apparently to control rear stability. Verstappen, however, dismissed concerns, declaring he was just pushing to find the edge. They were definitively in better form than Ferrari and look to be the main challenge for Mercedes in Melbourne in a fortnight. After a strong testing performance last year proved to be a false dawn, Ferrari were determined to follow a comprehensive testing plan to ensure they had their car’s measure across a variety of aero settings. Being quick in a straight line in 2019 but losing out in the corners set the Scuderia looking for more downforce, but with it has come greater drag and they have yet to reveal a really competitive setup. Sebastian Vettel conceded they had sacrificed straight-line speed for a better car across the season. Amid suggestions of sandbagging, the team principal, Mattia Binotto, insisted they had not been running with the engine turned down and that they were simply not as quick as their rivals. Ferrari may yet have much more to show and Charles Leclerc delivered race pace on the final day much closer to Mercedes but Binotto was cautious. “I don’t think we’ll be in a position to win in Australia,” he declared. Dubbed “the pink Mercedes”, Racing Point’s car attracted attention the moment it hit the track. The team have taken the design philosophy of last year’s Merc and developed their own version that looks, well, like the 2019 Merc. Other midfield teams were unhappy but unsurprisingly it has proved very successful, as they emerged as the best of the rest. In a consistently quick and reliable car, Sergio Pérez set the fifth fastest time and there will be more to come in Australia. The technical director, Andy Green, who was at the team when they were Jordan in the 90s, was bullish. “It gives me encouragement people are complaining about us,” he said. “That is a good indication we are doing something really good.” In what will be a tightly contested midfield, Racing Point have the edge. McLaren, fourth last year, were not enamoured by Racing Point’s car, with the chief executive, Zak Brown referring to them as “Copy Point”. McLaren can be optimistic, however, of challenging for honours behind the big three. Their car is more stable this year, with Lando Norris declaring it is less on edge but still in need of development. This will be a furious battle of attrition, with AlphaTauri (previously Toro Rosso) and Renault in close proximity. Daniel Ricciardo set the third fastest time for the latter but in overall pace the French works team will have expected more. They have targeted fourth and, with the manufacturer considering its future in F1, need to deliver. The aim for Williams is more modest. After two woeful seasons, at least this year’s car looks solid. They remain at the back but are close enough finally to compete, which was the minimum target they had set and promises the enticing prospect of George Russell mixing it up on track.