For Rosa Kornfeld-Matte, a United Nations expert on older people, there are a few bright sparks globally, and she thought New Zealand was one of them. “Sometime in the next decade, there will be more older people than children in this country,” said, Kornfeld-Matte, who has been trying to visit the country for five years, until an invitation was finally extended by Jacinda Ardern. With around 20% of the global population to be aged 60 plus by 2050, she’s spent the past 10 days on an extensive reporting mission, touring the north and south Islands, taking in Auckland, Wellington, Hamilton, Christchurch and Timaru. But the trip has not gone as she expected. Visiting marae, private homes, retirement homes and government offices, Kornfeld-Matte told the Guardian her visit has turned her initial assumptions about this progressive South Pacific archipeligo on their head. “This is something that has really negatively impacted me,” she said. Kornfeld-Matte says the government has the “intention” to improve the lives of older New Zealanders, but “on the ground” many are living meagre, twilight existences of poverty and desperation, especially older Māori. According to the minister of seniors, Tracey Martin, by 2034 there will be more than 1.2 million people aged 65 and over, with nearly 180,000 people aged 85 and over. “I find it hard to disagree with Ms Kornfeld-Matte’s initial findings,” said Martin. The 2019 Better Later Life strategy intends to address their needs, according to Martin, with the ageing demographic having implications for the economy, employment, housing, health and social services. “Every generation in this country needs to be valued and supported. We’ve managed to increasingly break down prejudices against race and gender; we can’t let age become an issue,” Martin says. While this strategy, and the superannuation payment draw praise, Kornfeld-Matte repeatedly observed many older Kiwis do not have enough money to cover life’s basics, including housing, nutritious food and heating. For many, the superannuation payment of NZ$350 a week is their sole income. “In my meetings with older people these complaints about the insufficiency of superannuation payments came up again and again – especially the question of heating in the winter,” says Kornfeld-Matte. “I see this as a serious problem … the pension should always cover the minimum of existence.” The plight of older Māori needs to be urgently prioritised Other problem areas included lack of adequate transport for older people in both rural and urban areas, the increasing digitisation of modern life, and “prevalent” loneliness and social isolation. Kornfeld-Matte also noted that “ageist rhetoric portraying older persons as a burden is pervasive and contributes to negative attitudes towards them” Widespread abuse and maltreatment of older persons is also “widespread”, especially economic abuse: “The pension that older persons have is often taken by family members or extended family members. Under-reporting of older person’s abuse is serious.” According to Kornfeld-Matte’s research, Martin has “no budget” to implement the policies of the Better Later Life Strategy, and a skeleton staff working on senior issues in the office for seniors. Though the existence of the office itself is good, it needs cash, Kornfeld-Matte says, and there is a “persistent lack of urgency” regarding older issues evident at every level of government. “I think the fact they have invited me exhibits that there is some political will as there is a long-standing request from my side,” says Kornfeld-Matte. “I see a lot of progress and initiatives but it is not a priority yet, and it needs to become a priority – that is definitely something I haven’t seen.” Before Kornfeld-Matte arrived in New Zealand, her understanding wasthat the country of 5 million was a pioneer in honouring the human rights of its Indigenous people. It therefore came as a “shock” to discover that Māori live on average seven years less than non-Māori, and their health-and well-being indicators are almost universally worse than non-Māori. Hornfeld-Matte describes older Māori in both the cities and rural areas as “extremely vulnerable and disadvantaged” people. “It absolutely upset me,” Hornfeld-Matte said. “To see how difficult life is for Indigenous people and how many challenges there are…the plight of older Māori needs to be urgently prioritised.” Diane Turner, the director of the office for seniors says New Zealand should be a country where New Zealanders can age “positively and well”, but according to Hornfeld-Matte this is not happening, and human rights abuses of older people are entrenched, and routinely ignored. Despite some disappointments, Hornfeld Matte says, she remains committed to New Zealand’s “good intentions”, and urges the country to take its rightful place as a human rights champion for all its people. “I still think New Zealand has a lot of wisdom to share in this area, because they are globally respected for their human rights work,” says Kornfeld-Matte.   