‘I’m often frustrated by the rhythms of naturalism,” EV Crowe has said and many of her dramas are located in otherworlds or hyperrealities. Shoe Lady is positioned somewhere between a feverish dream and a grownup, latter-day version of Alice’s descent into the rabbit hole. Katherine Parkinson is a delight as Viv, a harried working mother who loses a shoe on her commute. Its loss knocks her off-kilter. Shoes, as a dramatic symbol, have carried wondrous powers of enabling characters from Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz to the demon energy of Victoria Page’s red shoes in the Powell and Pressburger film. That fantasy is inverted here: Viv’s lost shoe leaves her existence wobbling on its axis as she is dragged along a central conveyor belt on stage into an ever more hallucinatory reality. The surprises in staging are a delight, too, from the first scene when a bed appears empty until Viv, and then her partner Kenny, emerge from beneath its sheets. The set, designed by Chloe Lamford, is full of dark spaces that contain below-ground cavities from which props are brought up, while Natasha Chivers’s lighting creates the too-bright effect of a dream at some points and the puppet-like shadows of a gothic fairytale at others. There is a boldness to Vicky Featherstone’s direction which fills the stage with intrigue and activity though this is essentially a monologue spoken by Parkinson, with a few ancillary characters (Kayla Meikle as a stranger, Tom Kanji as Kenny, Archer Brandon as their child) chipping in lines or standing silently in the shadows. But because this world is so unfixed, it takes time to decipher its meanings and even then, they do not always yield depth. Its critique of capitalism (the play quotes John Maynard Keynes in its opening page) is packaged in comic absurdism and its despair comes in occasionally powerful depictions of modern motherhood. It all feels a little too broad-brush and the writing ranges in quality, from some witty observation of contemporary life to tinny repetition. Crowe has said the play is an examination of “the middle-class experience” as well, and it does the opposite of Dominic Cooke’s old mission for the Royal Court to satirise the middle classes; it wrings pathos out of the middle-class condition. As a character, Viv is a puzzle, going from Pollyanna-ish stoicism and smiles to swooping despair; she resembles a comic sidekick one minute and a musical star the next with her bright eyes, blusher, pleated dress and cinched-in waist. Shoe Lady is entertaining despite its discombobulations, though it melts away a little too quickly afterwards, just like a fever dream. At the Royal Court theatre, London, until 21 March.