France has warned of a “fast-deteriorating” situation and Spain has requisitioned its private healthcare sector as European governments imposed closures and lockdowns rarely seen outside wartime to curb the spread of the coronavirus outbreak. Jérôme Salomon, France’s top health official, said on Monday the epidemic in the country was “very worrying”, with the number of cases doubling every three days. “There is a real worry the speed of the outbreak could saturate hospitals,” he said. “We must do everything to slow down the outbreak … Every Frenchman and Frenchwoman must ask themselves every morning: how can I reduce by a third or fourth the number of people I meet? Stay at home; it’s that simple.” France, which has reported 5,423 confirmed coronavirus cases and 127 deaths, closed all bars, restaurants and non-essential shops from midnight on Saturday and creches, schools and universities from Monday morning. Paris on Monday closed all its parks and gardens and authorities are reportedly considering introducing stricter measures including a general curfew. In Spain, where the coronavirus toll climbed to 309 on Monday with 9,191 confirmed cases, the government announced sweeping measures allowing it to take over private healthcare providers and requisition materials such as face masks and Covid-19 tests. The health minister, Salvador Illa, said private healthcare facilities would be requisitioned for coronavirus patients, and manufacturers and suppliers of healthcare equipment must notify the government within 48 hours. The Spanish government declared a state of emergency on Saturday, placing the country in lockdown and ordering people to leave their homes only if they needed to buy food or medicine or go to work or hospital. The transport minister, José Luis Ábalos, said it was “obvious” the measures would be extended beyond the planned 15-day period. The US Federal Reserve and other central banks unveiled sweeping emergency measures over the weekend to boost the global economy amid mounting fears that the epidemic, which has infected nearly 170,000 people globally and killed more than 6,500, may tip the world into a recession. Italy, which on Sunday announced 368 deaths over the previous 24 hours, the worst single-day toll for any country of the crisis and far exceeding the deadliest day in China, where the virus originated, said it was ready to intervene again if needed. The prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, told Corriere della Sera the measures unveiled so far were “not sufficient”. The country has reported 24,747 cases and 1,809 deaths. “Damage will be serious and widespread,” Conte said. “A true reconstruction plan will be needed … Scientists are telling us that the outbreak has not reached its peak, these weeks will be the most risky, and the maximum precaution is needed.” Conte said the results of the country’s lockdown, in which schools and non-essential shops were closed and people ordered to stay home except for certifiably necessary travel, would not be seen for a few weeks yet. Police have fined 20,000 people in four days for not complying with the rules. Germany, which has recorded 5,813 cases and 13 deaths, on Monday introduced border controls with Austria, Denmark, France, Luxembourg and Switzerland in an attempt to stem the outbreak, allowing through only those with a valid reason for travel, such as residents, cross-border commuters and delivery drivers. Schools and daycare centres in most German states were closed, with exceptions for parents in critical jobs who do not have alternative childcare arrangements. Bavaria declared a disaster situation to allow the state’s authorities to push through new restrictions faster, including possibly asking the army for assistance. The German president, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, urged citizens to limit their social contacts. “Restrictions on our lives today can save lives tomorrow,” he said on Monday. “We will conquer this virus,” he added. The foreign minister, Heiko Maas, said rights to coronavirus vaccine research were not for sale, after reports that Donald Trump wanted the US to buy exclusive access to a potential vaccine developed by the German biotech firm CureVac. “German researchers play a leading role in drug and vaccine development and we cannot allow others to seek exclusive results,” Maas said. The Dutch government decided in a crisis meeting on Sunday to close schools and daycare centres until at least 6 April, reversing its earlier position. Non-essential shops, restaurants, sex clubs and sports clubs will also be closed – as well as cannabis cafes, prompting large queues. Iran reported another 129 corona virus deaths on Monday, the largest one-day rise since it began combating worst outbreak of the virus in the Middle East, taking it overall death tally to more than 850. Russia on Monday announced the closure of its border with Belarus as a new government commission to coordinate the country’s response to the virus unveiled a 300bn rouble (£3.25bn) fund, including some relief for those who would lose wages while under quarantine. So far, Russia has reported 63 cases and no deaths. In the US, Los Angeles followed New York by announcing that bars, restaurants and entertainment venues should shut. South Korea, meanwhile, once the biggest outbreak after China, reported its third day when recoveries have outstripped infections. In the country as a whole, 74 new infections were reported on Monday, well below the peak of 909 in late February. “For three straight days, we have seen more numbers of discharged than newly confirmed, but we should not forget the lessons we’ve learned,” the vice-health minister, Kim Gang-lip, said. The country warned, however, that a new cluster of infections had surfaced in Seongnam city, south of Seoul, where at least 40 members of a Protestant church tested positive, including the pastor, after services were held on 1 and 8 March despite a government ban on mass gatherings.