If you’ve spent a few days juggling homeschooling with work then your lounge may already look like a circus. So why not invite a real clown in? Among the many theatre live-streams prompted by the coronavirus outbreak is this new children’s show from Tweedy, whose day job clowning with Giffords Circus is on hold, along with the latter’s postponed show The Hooley. It’s presented by Cirencester’s Barn theatre, an unsubsidised charity that is appealing for donations as it estimates it will lose more than £250,000 over the coming months, which could close the theatre permanently. My 10-year-old daughter, Aggie, thinks clowns are creepy but her six-year-old sister Hilda persuades her to join us, so we all crowd around the computer for the 20-minute performance (sorry girls – no interval ice-cream). Tweedy turns up in bowler hat, baggy grey suit and oversized shoes, with a red tie and lurid patch of hair the only loud colours. Why so drab? Because Tweedy’s working in a lost and found office. But, being a clown, he’s not used to life behind a desk, which is why he’s soon doing a forward roll on top of it and getting tangled with the telephone. “Clowns have to be very fit,” decides Aggie, who has yet to watch Joe Wicks online. Tweedy’s here to teach us about the power of the imagination to help us escape our current confinement, so he plays “the floor is lava” (one of Aggie and Hilda’s favourite living-room games). There’s a lesson in handwashing with a mischievous bar of soap and some quirky domestic props including a laptop with googly eyes and an iron named Keef who is dragged about by Tweedy. “It’s his dog,” laughs Hilda. The iron mostly just sits in the corner – why doesn’t it talk or something, I wonder. Aggie frowns. “Dad, it’s an iron.” A quickly ignored storyline comes courtesy of a special guest, Daisy May Cooper, in the role of Kerry Mucklowe from This Country. She’s lost her plums but Tweedy can’t find them (maybe William Carlos Williams snaffled them). It’s strange to watch these pratfalls without the roaring crowd of, say, Justin’s House. There’s just the odd bit of banter from the crew and Hilda shouting in my ear, plus the occasional sound effect. But there are plenty of laughs and a few ideas here to inspire your kids. Tweedy is back on April Fools’ Day. By then your own briefcase could have been turned into a burping, farting monster, too. Tweedy’s Lost and Found is part of the Barn theatre’s live-streaming service, Behind the Barn Door. The next show is on 1 April.