Matt Hancock and Boris Johnson say they are following scientific advice. To encourage us to trust them, they should share the data on which they stake their claim, and allow us to scrutinise the prognostic modelling techniques being used by the government’s scientific advisers. Is the government implying that those European governments implementing a quite different strategy have not been following the science? One gets the feeling that this government’s primary concern is not the protection of citizens’ health in and of itself, but rather how that health (or lack of) impacts the welfare of the economy and the subsequent damning exposure of austerity on the country’s beleaguered infrastructures (PM: many more families will lose their loved ones, 13 March). The vague, opaque “following the science” justification patronises the population, and erodes an already flatlining trust in politicians and the “experts” on whose recommendations they appear slavishly attached. The first duty of government is to protect citizens.Dr Michael SheardNorthallerton, North Yorkshire • There is no doubt that coronavirus presents the UK with an unprecedented public health crisis. In such a situation, trust in what the government is saying and doing is essential. Panic-buying is one indicator that their communication is falling short. Another is the mismatch of messages between the chief medical officer and deputy chief medical officer in terms of impact. Saying that the NHS is different from other health systems does not explain why Italy appears to have a higher mortality rate when, according to independent experts, it has one of the best health systems in the world. While the government is saying it will be driven by the science, the evidence behind such decision making has not been made public. UK epidemiologists have an excellent record of estimating the likely spread of diseases, acknowledging the uncertainties and the range of likely outcomes. There will always be a trade off between precautionary protective measures and other impacts. The decisions made as to how to manage those risks are political ones and, whatever the situation, these decisions need to be subject to challenge as to whether they are adequately protecting the public. That cannot take place, and public confidence cannot be assured, without greater transparency.Neil MartinsonFormer director of communications, Food Standards Agency • The government is telling us that its current recommendations on delaying the spread of Covid-19 are based on scientific recommendations. As a frontline healthcare professional, I would be interested on seeing the evidence that has informed these decisions. We are told that the peak number of infections may be three months away. This astounds me considering that in China, the centre of the infection, confirmed cases peaked well within this timeframe. The efforts of the Chinese government to lock down cities and enforce social distancing have been effective in bringing the outbreak under control there. The rest of the world, including some of our closest neighbours, seems to be taking heed of the Chinese experience, yet we are failing to do so. The government’s relative inaction may end up prolonging and exacerbating this epidemic, and bringing our health service to breaking point.Dr Milan DagliGP, Middlesex • This government’s approach is rather like saying to the over-60s: “Sorry, guys, but you’re going to have to take one for the team.” Suggesting that we’re all in this together when the risk to the over-60s is significantly higher than to the under-60s seems disingenuous. Add this to the fact that we’re most likely to follow the triage criteria adopted in Italy – which included the number of years of “useful life” the patient may have even if recovery is possible – and it’s beginning to looks as though one section of our society is being knowingly asked to accept an approach skewed heavily against its best interests. Speaking personally, I’ll happily accept the same risks as younger citizens, provided I’m guaranteed an opportunity to receive intensive medical care that reflects the increased risks I was required to accept.Roger HunterPerth • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 