A free trip to Tuscany would have been a dream a month ago, but now Australians on board the Costa Luminosa cruise ship fear it could cost them their lives. Elderly and immunocompromised Australians will be forced to isolate in Italy before being allowed to fly home after the Australian government failed to evacuate them when the vessel docked in France. “We feel like we’ve been kidnapped and are being taken into the heart of the pandemic, totally against our will,” said Elaine Gestavino, a Perth woman onboard. When the ship left Florida for a luxury tour around the Caribbean and Europe, the only travel bans related to China. By the time they made it across the Atlantic, nearly all of Europe had shut their borders. To make matters worse passengers who were medically evacuated earlier in the trip were confirmed to have Covid-19 and the disease spread quickly around the ship. The vessel was docked in Savona, Italy on Monday but was expected to travel to Tuscany to offload passengers in an area with less strain on hospitals. Rachael Maybury’s mother Margaret Connell is in her seventies. She came down with bronchitis at sea and was taken off the ship in Savona. “I don’t want to think about that, but I’m worried that my mum’s not gonna make it out of the hospital alive,” Maybury, who is in contact with her parents from Sydney, said. It has now been confirmed that Margaret and her husband David, who is still on the ship, both have Covid-19. Maybury expected her mother would be left behind in Savona when the Costa Luminosa departs for Tuscany. “If the virus does not kill my mother, being apart from my father will,” Maybury said. Passengers told Guardian Australia many onboard have a cough, and other elderly passengers had suffered fevers. Many are running low on medication and have struggled to get even painkillers sent to their rooms. “If we’re not sick already we will be very soon,” passenger Samatha Holt said. “We get served food through the door by staff in masks, gloves and sometimes hazmat suits.” Earlier this week Australian passengers were told they would disembark in France with the Canadian and US passengers. However, a note slipped under their door the morning of docking said their flight had been cancelled. Without a confirmed flight out of the country, EU travel restrictions barred them from disembarking. While Canadian and US passengers left via chartered plane Australians and passengers from several other nations were then forced to sail on to Italy, the only country that still accepts Italian-flagged cruise ships. When they arrived in Savona they were met with more bad news. “The view of the Italian authorities is that it is not possible to transport persons longer distances [to places like Australia] while maintaining effective isolation as required under the ‘health orders,” read an email sent to passengers from the Australian Embassy in Rome. “For this reason, we understand that they will be requiring persons from Australia and other distant countries to undertake isolation of approximately two weeks in Italy before leaving for their home countries.” Italy is currently the most heavily infected country in the world, with a health system nearing breaking point. Passengers and family members have been begging for help from the Australian government for days, some were even considering hunger strikes to try and get the government’s attention. “I feel like at the beginning no one was listening, I was ringing Dfat on a daily basis asking for updates, and the continuous response was ‘you just have to trust the cruise line and follow their instructions’,” Laura Bendlin, who’s father is onboard, said. These are some of the 39 Aussies abandoned on the Costa Luminosa ship with no help from their government other than to catch a commercial flight out of Italy (impossible) #scomobringthemhome @ScottMorrisonMP @PeterDutton_MP @dfat @SenatorWong @MarisePayne pic.twitter.com/UdgC9SvvBs “We needed government assistance much earlier … now it’s almost a little too late because they’re going to be there for 14 days,” she said. “It’s completely terrifying because if he got coronavirus on there I’m really not sure what kind of medical care he would be getting, given the situation … Worst-case scenario, he dies.” The Australian Embassy said in an email to passengers they will be placed in a hotel near the town of Grosseto. It appears Dfat will rely on Costa Cruises to organise transport to Australia after the two week quarantine. “Costa Cruises has assured Australian officials that it will arrange appropriate travel to enable Australian passengers to return home,” a spokesperson told Guardian Australia in a statement. “Dfat is ready to provide consular support to those Australians on board when they disembark the vessel.” They declined to comment on why Australians were not evacuated from the ship in France, or if arrangements will be made to assist Margaret Connell in hospital in Savona. Foreign affairs minister Marise Payne said in a statement today there were 3,000 passengers trapped on 30 cruises around the world. “If you are currently overseas … please take care of yourselves and support one another,” she said. “Many of our embassies are small and will be limited in what they can do directly, especially in countries that are imposing restrictions on movements. Costa Cruises have been approached for comment.