Last Thursday evening, Boris Johnson appeared at a press conference in No 10 flanked by England’s chief medical officer, Professor Chris Whitty, and the government’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance. Johnson looked uncharacteristically grave while the two experts stood expressionless, a choreography that was intended to project a sense of calm, reassuring authority during a national crisis. “I must level with the British public,” the Prime Minister said. “Many more families are going to lose loved ones before their time.” While he recognised that the spread of coronavirus now amounted to the “worst public health crisis for a generation”, Johnson wanted the UK to know the nation’s best experts – and its politicians – were in control of the situation. “We have a clear plan,” he said. Those with persistent coughs or fevers should, from that point on, stay at home for seven days. The elderly would soon be told not to venture out, and families soon be quarantined if one member had a cough. But if the message was clear, it is not obvious that it was shared and agreed by others. When asked whether mass gatherings should be outlawed, the two experts were adamant that this was not necessary, in the short term at least. Banning large crowds would not have a “big effect” on slowing transmission of Covid-19, said Vallance. Indeed, people were more likely to spread the virus watching football in a pub than at an open-air match, however big the crowd. But within a few hours, these calm assurances began to look shaky. The Premier League, Football League and Scottish Football Association announced they were suspending all their seasons until early April. The Wales v Scotland Six Nations Rugby match was also delayed. The government had little option but to follow, and Whitehall sources began briefing that mass gatherings would, after all, be banned from next week. This change of heart was also spurred by some robust interventions from a number of politicians and commentators. Former Tory minister Rory Stewart, who is now hoping to become mayor of London, called for schools to be closed. “Evidence from other pandemics is that closing schools and large gatherings earlier rather than later stops the peaks of this kind of disease,” he said. Richard Horton, editor-in-chief of the Lancet, said the government was “playing roulette with the public”, while Jeremy Hunt, a former health secretary, said the decision to hold off cancelling large gatherings was “surprising and concerning”. Look at Wuhan, the centre of the coronavirus outbreak, said the critics. There, Chinese authorities blocked all outdoor activities and halted the escalation, they argued. And, as the week wore on, and the number of deaths and sufferers across the world grew, more and more senior figures slowly began to question a British approach to coronavirus that began to look out of kilter with the responses of other countries including China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore. These criticisms were not just confined to politicians. “Social distancing has worked in China, Singapore and other countries,” said Alan McNally, professor of microbial evolutionary genomics at Birmingham University. “There needs to be a combination of social distancing and extensive testing, followed by the quarantining of infected individuals to contain the epidemic – and that quarantine should not be at home, where we will see large levels of familial transmission, but in dedicated quarantine facilities.” Significant disruptions need high population compliance. People already can’t be trusted to buy toilet roll properly Johnson has enjoyed public support for his handling of the crisis so far – as our opinion poll shows today, but now appears to be less confident in his strategy. Many experts fear that this poses a serious danger to the UK. They continue to dismiss the idea that Britain should proceed immediately with major shutdowns, maintaining support for carefully controlled interventions. However, in doing so, they expose an alarming schism in the nation’s attitudes to Covid-19 and the attempts to control it. A clear warning is provided by global health expert Dr Michael Head, of Southampton University. “The UK population have significant control over their daily life,” he said yesterday. “You choose when to pop out for a pint of milk or go to a concert. Significant disruptions greatly reduce that control and thus need high population compliance. You won’t get that over a long period of time. “People already can’t be trusted to buy toilet roll properly, so how about long-term compliance when significant levels of freedom are removed and there’s a need to stay indoors for long periods of time? The evidence, as we have it right now, suggests it will decline.” This point was echoed by Adam Kucharski of the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine. “It’s easy to say, ‘Let’s just do what Wuhan did’, but the actions there have involved a change to daily life that has been unimaginable in scale and impact.” Measures there included a lockdown on nearly 60 million people in Hubei and strict quarantine and travel restrictions for hundreds of millions of people – both citizens and foreigners. “China cannot sustain them indefinitely,” added Kucharski. In addition, the vast majority of the population in Wuhan is likely to remain susceptible to Covid-19, he added. “As soon as control measures are lifted, there is the risk of new introduced cases and another outbreak. In addition, countries such as Hong Kong and Singapore, which for so long have managed to contain Covid-19, now seem to be seeing a rise in transmissions, as infections continue to be introduced.” Professor Mark Woolhouse of Edinburgh University agreed. “It is now very difficult for those countries that have gone into total lockdown to know under what circumstances they can come out of it. And, to the best of my knowledge, none of those countries has a clear plan – an exit strategy – through which they can relax their measures.” Woolhouse added that the World Health Organization – which has been pushing for strict lockdown measures across the globe – had provided no advice on how these measures could be ended. The lesson for the UK is clear, say experts. Nevertheless, pressure is building on the government to act more forcefully. Yesterday, Labour’s health spokesman, Jonathan Ashworth, told the Observer that public confidence in the government’s handling of the crisis was fragile and questions were increasingly being posed about key aspects of its strategy. “Delaying the spread of this virus has to be a priority so as not to overwhelm our already overstretched NHS. But people are increasingly questioning if the UK is following international best practice. “Why are we no longer testing those with symptoms who are advised to stay at home, when the World Health Organization recommends continued testing, for example? The government must move into an ‘explain’ phase and publish its modelling, so it can be robustly peer-reviewed. We need total clarity to maintain public confidence.” In general, Johnson has steered clear of politicising the coronavirus scandal, although the tension between playing politics and managing a national emergency was evident in last week’s budget. For the first 10 to 15 minutes, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, struck a sombre note as he announced that every financial resource possible would be directed to minimise the coronavirus crisis. After that, however, Sunak turned the event into a pantomime of crowd-pleasing gestures for Tory MPs, which robbed it of the seriousness it merited. Last week, opposition parties –including Labour, the SNP, Plaid Cymru and the Lib Dems – began questioning the government’s approach and raised “genuine concerns” that the UK was not doing as much as other EU countries. And yesterday, a senior Labour source said that there was a gathering sense of unease among MPs that more needed to be done. “The political consensus is not going to hold for much longer at this rate,” said the source. The loss of that consensus could have dramatic and long-lasting consequences. This point was summed up by medical researcher Michael Head of Southampton University. “More stringent interventions will come, and potentially very soon,” he said. “We know that. Many people are vocal, saying gung-ho should be the UK response. The usual justification that comes with that is, ‘because they’re doing it over there’. That’s not providing the evidence base that supports those views.”