Domestic abuse in film and television is to be flagged up differently by the British Board of Film Classification. The BBFC said it would begin using the term “domestic abuse” instead of “domestic violence” in the information it issues to accompany ratings. It would also stop using the term “themes of” because some people felt it trivialised the issue. The changes are a response to research carried out with the help of charities Women’s Aid and Respect. The study suggests the BBFC is making the correct classification decisions on films and TV featuring domestic abuse. But too much detail in the information is “a minefield, as people’s sensitivities and triggers are complex”, it says. For that reason, the catch-all term of domestic abuse would be used “as it is considered broad enough to include psychological and economic abuse, gaslighting and non sexual abuse of children”, the BBFC said. The research used a number of case studies. For example, the BBC3 drama Murdered by My Boyfriend, which was classified 15 with accompanying information that included “strong violence, domestic violence theme”. The rating was broadly agreed with, but responses included one from a domestic abuse survivor, who said: “Well, it’s not a theme, is it? If you think through it, it’s real life.” The research indicates survivors can experience a negative emotional response after watching scenes of domestic abuse, especially if it is unexpected. This could be traumatising, the BBFC said. In response it promised to flag up domestic abuse in every case, even if the scenes were not category defining. David Austin, the chief executive of the organisation, described the research as timely and important. It was encouraging to hear that people thought the correct decisions were being made on classifications, he said. “What it has shown, is that we should bring our ratings info more in line with what people expect and understand, which is exactly what we’re going to be doing. These changes will give people the information they need to choose content well,” he said. “Most particularly in this case, the ratings info will highlight the issues to those that have been personally affected by domestic abuse, so they are forewarned of content which could trigger distress.” Adina Claire, the acting co-chief executive of Women’s Aid, said: “This research has given an important insight into what survivors, experts and the general public think about depictions of domestic abuse in films and episodic content. “We’re pleased that the BBFC has responded to the report and reflected the attitudes in their classification policies, meaning that anyone affected by domestic abuse will now have the clear and consistent information they need about what triggers content may contain.”