The EU and its member states have come under criticism from the Italian government for being slow in coming to the country’s aid over the coronavirus epidemic. As leaders held a summit by videoconference call and agreed that up to 70% of Europeans could be infected by covid-19, Italy’s ambassador to the EU complained of a lack of solidarity among the other 26 member states. Maurizio Massari said Brussels needed to “go beyond engagement and consultations” and devise “emergency actions that are quick, concrete and effective”. A flashpoint has been the failure of member states to respond to a call by Italy for extra supplies of medical equipment, including masks. Germany and France are among the EU countries to impose limits on the export of protective medical equipment while China has offered to sell Italy 1,000 lung ventilators, 2m masks, 20,000 protective suits and 50,000 swabs for coronavirus tests. “We must ensure, under EU coordination, the supply of the necessary medical equipment and its redistribution among those countries and regions most in need,” Massari wrote on Politico’s website. “Today, this means Italy; tomorrow, the need could be elsewhere. Italy has already asked to activate the European Union mechanism of civil protection for the supply of medical equipment for individual protection. But, unfortunately, not a single EU country responded to the commission’s call. Only China responded bilaterally. Certainly, this is not a good sign of European solidarity.” The EU’s leaders vowed to increase coordination during a two and a half hour “e-summit” on Monday evening and to release funds worth up to €25bn (£22bn). The commission will make €7.5bn available which could trigger co-funding by the national governments of €17.5- €18bn. The EU will also be flexible in the implementation of its rules on state aid to allow governments to subsidise industry where it as required. The European council’s president, Charles Michel, said member states had agreed they would “stand ready to make use of all instruments that are necessary” in order to tackle four priorities: limiting the spread of the virus, ensuring supplies of medical equipment, promoting research on vaccines and treatment, and handling the economic fallout. He added that the European commission would purchase personal protective equipment to supply member states. “It must be ensured that the internal market functions properly and any unjustified obstacles are avoided,” he said. “Particular attention must be given to masks and respirators.” The bloc failed to agree, however, on a co-ordinated fiscal stimulus beyond the use of piecemeal national funds to support their healthcare systems and economies. Asked whether the decision by Austria and Slovenia to close their borders to Italy was a proportionate response, the European commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, had said home affairs ministers would in future have daily calls to ensure that all the steps taken were appropriate. Speaking after the discussion with other leaders, Bulgaria’s prime minister, Boyko Borissov, spoke of his concern at the lethargic response to the epidemic given the scale of crisis. He posted on Facebook: “Today, at the videoconference with my European council colleagues, specialist analyses were quoted that said that coronavirus would affect more than 70% of Europe’s population.”