My first exposure to dried flowers was as dusty, pastel-shaded posies on doily-covered tables. So when my floristry-expert mate Chanel told me that dried flower arrangements were back in vogue, my reaction was a judgmental eye-roll. However, in their latest incarnation, dried flowers are simple and structural, in displays often of a single species, celebrating the forms of nature. The look is more “wabi-sabi” (the Japanese aesthetic appreciation for age and imperfection) than “potpourri” tweeness. Lasting for at least a year before they need replacing, they are, of course, far more sustainable, more affordable, and frankly less faff than buying fresh-cut flowers. I am now fascinated by the concept, especially as many species are at their most beautiful in their dried form. While the majority are bought ready-cut, most of them are easy to grow and dry at home, providing a steady source of new material with which to express creativity. Stepping away from bright blocks of colour, what I love about this new take is the celebration of texture. Fluffy sprays of feather reed grass (Calamagrostis brachytricha), or even its giant relative the pampas grass (Cortaderia selloana), are delicate and structural at the same time. If you have a decent-sized patch in full sun with well-drained soil, both are hardy perennials that will offer up a yearly harvest in exchange for very little work. But even if all you have is a container, there is a range of much smaller, annual grasses that are super simple to grow from seed. Bunny’s tail grass (Lagurus ovatus) lives up to its name, with bobbles of white fluff so soft you just want to rub them on your face. There are also the intricate, pendant inflorescences of greater quaking grass (Briza maxima), which despite being annual will often self-sow to give you years of new growth. If it is curious structure you are after, however, it doesn’t get much better than hops (Humulus lupulus) – a quick-growing climber whose dangling, cone-shaped flowers look and smell amazing. Opium poppies (Papaver somniferum) couldn’t be easier to grow. You don’t need space in your beds in pride of place; these tough candidates will spring up from seed sprinkled on the edges of gravel paths or driveways. Their urn-shaped seed heads are true things of beauty. If it’s all about colour for you, safflower (Carthamus tinctorius) has a blaze of orange at the centre of each papery whorl: ‘Kinko’ is a variety specifically bred for cut flowers. Craspedia is a great annual with yellow bobbles on the end of long sticks – in mild winters they may even return the next year as perennials. Finally, if you love the old-school look, strawflowers (Xerochrysum bracteatum) offer a mass of daisy-like blooms in dazzling colours and will last for years at a time. For all these flowers, drying couldn’t be more simple. Just hang small bunches upside down in a cool, dry place, such as a shed or garage, for a month or so and they’ll be ready to display. Follow James on Twitter @Botanygeek