Born in Nicaragua, Bianca Jagger, 74, studied at the Institute of Political Studies in Paris. She met Mick Jagger in France, marrying him in 1971 – the same year their daughter Jade was born; they divorced seven years later. She is the founder of the Bianca Jagger Human Rights Foundation, and has received international awards for her humanitarian and conservation work. Tomorrow, she will speak at #March4Women, the International Women’s Day march and rally in London organised by Care International, calling for gender equality and climate justice. She lives in London. When were you happiest?Walking in the rainforest with my mother, back in Nicaragua. She loved it, and inspired me to devote much of my life to protecting the environment. What is your greatest fear?To die before I have made a difference. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Perfectionism. I am overly demanding of myself. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Duplicity and cowardice. What makes you unhappy?To feel powerless. And I miss my parents: they have both passed away. If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose?The rainforests we have destroyed, and the irreplaceable biodiversity we lost. Having been born in Nicaragua, I’ve witnessed the irrational exploitation of natural resources and the destruction of the environment. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Bread, because I’m allergic to gluten. What does love feel like?Overwhelming. To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why?To my daughter, because she felt that I spent too much time saving other children. I would go to war zones and travel the world for human rights work, and she was missing me. Which living person do you most despise, and why?There are a few dictators and war criminals on my list. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party? The director of the film For Sama, Waad al-Kateab, Michelle and Barack Obama, Ahed Tamimi, Mark Ruffalo, Meryl Streep, Tracey Emin, Thaddaeus Ropac, Antonio Pappano, James Hansen, Anselm Kiefer and Caroline Lucas. Which words or phrases do you most overuse?“Shocked and appalled”, especially on social media. I use it, and I really feel it – but it happens too often. What has been your biggest disappointment?I was brought up Catholic, to believe that marriage is for life. And we failed. If you could edit your past, what would you change?I sometimes wish I had had the courage to be a politician – but I made the decision to be a human rights defender instead. I realised I cannot be both at the same time, because they may be incompatible. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?More sleep, less stress. What keeps you awake at night?The climate catastrophe. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?Never take yourself too seriously. Where would you most like to be right now?On a beach in Nicaragua, because it feels like home. Or any deserted beach, for that matter.