As anyone in the midst of a divorce, or indeed a comedian on a sunny day during the Edinburgh fringe knows: THE SHOW MUST GO ON, in spite of a lack of willing audience. During these times of social distancing, how do you make funny when nobody is watching? It is a question entertainers across the world are now being forced to consider. As one of the aforementioned two groups of people I can probably teach you a thing or two. Not divorced that is, although depending on how long this quarantine thing lasts I guess you never know. If I’m being honest, it would most likely be him who broke it off, after weeks of being confined with a comedian who has no measurable performance feedback and who after week one resorted to streaking through the flat naked screaming: “LOOK AT ME”! Could you really blame him? But in these troubling times, the real victims are, of course, the chatshow hosts, late-night monologists and quizmasters who are facing rows of empty seats. Won’t someone think of them for once? TV shows are continuing to be recorded for the time being, but most have taken the decision to go ahead without live studio audiences, so here are some tips for audience-free success. Make do with what you have. One year at the fringe, I performed my show Dictators to an audience of two. In this situation I find the best option is to divide and conquer. So I performed 30 minutes of my material making direct eye contact with the woman. Then the other half doing the same at the man, but more flirtily. Now any quiz show host can deploy this tactic, just perform directly at the contestants at full volume and performance level. If they don’t laugh at that pun about Gaddafi then shout: “WHY DID YOU COME HERE IF YOU DIDN’T WANT TO LAUGH, DARREN’ like I did. First you have to imagine them, of course. This is quite fun and it can take up to an hour to really fill those seats up, depending on how big your Edinburgh venue is … sorry i mean TV studio. You can do some of the work in your dressing room or between hand washes before you get to the set. Have fun with it: who is going to be in your audience tonight? Your local shopkeeper, your ex, that neighbour you try to flirt with or Jeff Goldblum. Once you’ve got them all seated within your mind palace then go ahead and individually disrobe them. What do you mean that sounds creepy? This is a very useful exercise that will distract you from the echo your words will make as they rattle around an empty room and ping off plastic chairs like faulty fireworks. Oh damp squib. Before the recording, spend some time on something crafty like sticking goggly eyes on a sock. Then stick the sock on your hand and every time you land a zinger (late night) or a dad joke (quiz show) it’s go time. Tip your sock hand back and let it guffaw. Maybe you could even do a little chat with the sock, back and forth. You could script this, of course: Host: Have you ever noticed that Corona is also a beer? Like don’t bring the wrong one to the party. Sock: Ah ha ha ha! Hilarious, I haven’t heard it, DO MORE! Host: Well, Boris thinks it hostile, ugly and needs to be isolated! And that’s just Farage … Sock: Boom! You are killing it! Host: What the virus? Oh wow! Ok over to Ian Hislop’s team. Instead cry one solitary tear at the end of every joke. You are allowed to be a sad clown, like Pierrot. Go with where the mood takes you. If they don’t like it then that is their fault. Every great artist is misunderstood Remember that breathing some levity into this very scary time is actually a privilege. That, at a time like this, art and entertainment comes into its own. What a gift to be able to provide a distraction even if fleeting. Can you make someone laugh at a time they really needed it? You can be the person that helps them get through this. So imagine everyone at home excited to watch this when it airs on TV or whichever streaming service it lands on. That every joke you say is a lifeline to people on a lonely island. Also for yourself: imagine that we will get through this. We will persevere and there will be more of a sense of togetherness than we have ever seen in our lifetime. • Tiff Stevenson is still running her new material comedy night Old Rope every Monday via Instagram live, @tiffstevensoncomic