I will always celebrate the combination of rhubarb and custard, whether it’s in a cake, crumble or even a chocolate. However, this year I’m expressing my love for this classic pairing through a Portuguese tart, with a cameo appearance from some ground almonds. It’s a real winner. You will need a 8.5cm round cutter, and a 12-hole muffin tin. Prep 15 minCook 1 hr 30 minMakes 12 400g rhubarb, topped and tailed100g golden caster sugar For the pastry3 tsp ground cinnamonZest of 3 oranges1 x 500g block all-butter puff pastryFlour, for dustingButter, for greasing For the custard8 egg yolks100g golden caster sugar 1 tbsp cornflour 250ml whole milk250ml double cream 1 tsp vanilla extract 1 tsp almond extract To finish 80g ground almondsA knob of unsalted butter, melted (optional) Heat the oven to 160C (150C fan)/gas 3. Put the rhubarb sticks in a baking tray, sprinkle over the caster sugar, then cover with foil and bake for 20 minutes. Remove the foil and cook for a further seven minutes, until completely soft; cut into 24 pieces. Combine the cinnamon and orange zest in a small bowl. Roll out the pastry a little on a lightly floured surface. Sprinkle over half the cinnamon mix, then roll again, pressing in the spice and zest until you have a rectangle measuring roughly 20cm x 50cm and about 5mm thick. Wrap and chill for 30 minutes. Turn the oven up to 200C (190C fan)/gas 6½. Make the custard: put the egg yolks, sugar and cornflour in a bowl, and mix smooth. Put the milk and cream in a medium-sized pan, add the vanilla and almond extract, and warm over a low heat until just below boiling point. Pour the warm milk over the egg mixture, stirring quickly. Once fully incorporated, transfer to a jug. Remove the pastry from the fridge and stamp out 12 discs using an 8.5cm round cutter. Press them into a lightly greased 12-hole muffin tin, pushing the pastry into the base and up the sides to form a cup. Pour the custard into the pastry cases, leaving a 1cm gap at the top, then carefully put two pieces of rhubarb on each tart. Bake for 20–22 minutes, until set with a crisp pastry edge and a slightly caramelised custard. Leave to cool for five minutes in the tray, then pop out each tart and put on a wire rack. While the tarts are still slightly warm, roll the edge of each one in ground almonds, brushing with a little melted butter to help them stick, if needed. Serve warm or at room temperature.