Irascible, uncompromising and the creator of the bestselling jazz album of all time, Kind of Blue, Miles Davis is a much mythologised figure. This documentary by Stanley Nelson uses extracts from Davis’s autobiography, masses of archive footage and interviews with collaborators such as Wayne Shorter and Herbie Hancock as well as his first wife, Frances Taylor, to attempt an encyclopaedic portrayal of his life. The racism he endured is probed, yet his own violence towards women is glossed over. Ammar Kalia The duo are back with more stunts, surprises and rounds of I’m a Celebrity … Get Out of Me Ear. Joanna Lumley is this week’s Star Guest Announcer, while the intergalactic Men in Brown discover which celebrity has the squits. And another viewer will be granted a coveted Place on the Plane. Ali Catterall Michael Portillo is still on the rails, this week exploring the Canadian province of Quebec. French speakers eat your heart out, as he takes the dinky Charlevoix train along the north bank of the St Lawrence River to La Malbaie, fishes for trout, and zipwires by the Montmorency waterfall. AK It’s knockout time as the first dozen acts who made it through the blind auditions and battle rounds must now compete for a spot in the live semi-finals. From their snazzy red thrones, kingmakers Tom Jones, Will.i.am, Olly Murs and relative newbie Meghan Trainor must zero in on their faves. Who will make the cut? Graeme Virtue This schadenfreude-fuelled special gawps at high-profile celebrity rifts, from the underlying tensions between 80s variety hosts Cannon and Ball to dirt-busters Kim and Aggie, and breakfast hosts Eamonn Holmes and Anthea Turner. Hangers-on and clips show where it all went wrong. AK It’s dark and gloomy business as usual in the Welsh drama, with the news that a man has been found dead at a petrol station on the outskirts of town. DCI John wants to bring wrong ’un Mia in for questioning, but she will have to track down Wales’s most elusive teenager first. Meanwhile, another wave of grief hits her home life. Hannah Verdier Guardians of the Galaxy, 7.25pm, BBC One Chris Pratt is space adventurer Peter Quill who gathers a ragtag crew – bark-covered Groot (Vin Diesel), slinky Gamora (Zoe Saldana), bag-of-muscles Drax (Dave Bautista) and a missile-packing raccoon voiced by Bradley Cooper – to save the galaxy. And what fun they have doing it. Paul Howlett Six Nations Rugby: Wales v Scotland 1.45pm, BBC One. The teams’ last match in the coronavirus-affected contest. Premier League Football: Aston Villa v Chelsea 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Top-flight clash from Villa Park. Formula 1: Australian Grand Prix 5.05am, Sky Sports Main Event. Opening round of the season at Albert Park, Melbourne.