It’s not unusual to feel the low-level churn of anxiety every day, and scrolling through news headlines and social media warnings is only fuelling it. Watching TV offers escapism, but what has really come into its own in the coronavirus crisis is radio. Just when the rise of podcasts and playlists had threatened to take the shine off linear shows, it has hit the perfect tone to get the country through the long weeks of isolation. Commercial radio is no stranger to the “we’re all in this together” spirit. On Heart, effervescent duo Amanda Holden and Jamie Theakston spent a long (but in hindsight really not that bad) January sharing stories of kindness and giving away large amounts of cash in their competitions. But this week they have taken on a new tenderness, and they are finding just the right note of empathy, not just by bringing in Dr Ranj to take listeners’ questions, but admitting that they are feeling anxious about their families, too. Their glossy, upbeat show has been transformed and their new-found rawness is a comfort to others in the same situation. Prescribed playlists are out of the window and the surprise songs that stop you in your tracks have popped up in random places. On Friday morning, the BBC joined radio stations across Europe to simultaneously play Gerry and the Pacemakers’ You’ll Never Walk Alone. Only the hardest of hearts could fail to be moved by BBC 6 Music’s Lauren Laverne dropping We All Stand Together by Paul McCartney and the Frog Chorus, or Huey Morgan playing Louis Armstrong’s It’s a Wonderful World. On pop stations, Kelly Clarkson’s survival banger Stronger is on heavy rotation. There are no guilty pleasures here, just music bringing everyone together. Great personalities are proving their worth more than ever, too. Sara Cox’s Radio 2 Drivetime is always a silly, uplifting afternoon treat, but she has taken it to another level with messages thanking NHS staff and pepping up listeners with happy 90s songs, from Westlife to Tom Jones. Nick Grimshaw’s impression of Annie Mac homeschooling her children (“Guys! DO rock on the chairs. History … this is trance, originated in ancient Germany”) was freestyle joy. Virgin Radio’s Chris Evans broadcasted from a boat at the end of his garden, bringing stories about elephants who had broken into a farm and got drunk on corn whiskey, but also making serious points about how the nation could turn a corner by staying at home. An LBC phone-in provided a sombre reminder of the stay home message when LBC’s Tom Swarbrick gave ICU consultant ‘Dr Jack’ the chance to lay out the facts about how overwhelmed his hospital was. It’s a clip that has been shared thousands of times, boosting the message like no official campaign could. Radio is also a useful tool to give the day structure and provide company if you are home alone. It has a togetherness and reassurance that is impossible to get from podcasts, even though there are some excellent ones out there focussed on coronavirus updates. But this isn’t about the latest developments, it is about managing feelings and recognising that you can’t stay calm all the time – and radio presenters have shown that they are concerned but carrying on, and not afraid to have a laugh. Less than a year after local radio stations were facing cuts, the crisis has shown how valuable the medium is, and over the coming weeks listeners will need that connection more and more. The days confined to our homes would be even longer without it.