Key developments in the global Coronavirus outbreak on Wednesday include: The number of reported coronavirus cases worldwide stood at 92,943, the World Health Organization said, with 3,160 people dead from the virus. The virus has reached 81 countries and territories around the world, with South Korea, Iran and Italy emerging as hotspots outside China. The number of confirmed cases in Italy is more than 3,000. The total number of confirmed cases in the UK increased by 34 to 85, according to the Department of Health and Social Care. Since then, two more cases in Northern Ireland took the total up yet further. UPDATE on coronavirus (#COVID19) testing in the UK:As of 9am 4 March 2020, a total of 16,659 people have been tested:16,574 negative.85 positive.For latest information visit:▶️https://t.co/CZh5JdyN2Q pic.twitter.com/Zlu9TSBUwH The news came as the government confirmed plans would be brought forward to allow the payment of statutory sick pay from the very first day someone is sick instead of after four days. The country’s prime minister said its health service risked being overwhelmed by the spread of the virus as the number of confirmed deaths rose to 107 from 79 and the number of cases surpassed 3,000. The mooted closure of educational institutions from 5 March to 15 March was confirmed on Wednesday afternoon. The German airline said 125 of the grounded aircraft were continental and 25 were intercontinental. Lufthansa has 752 aircraft, according to its website, so this amounted to approximately a fifth of its fleet. The case appears to have been in the European Defence Agency (EDA), according to this report. EURACTIV(@EURACTIV) First case of #coronavirus in the EU institutions: the European Defence Agency has cancelled all meetings until 13 March after a senior official tested positive for #COVID_19, according to an internal mail seen by EURACTIV.@gerardofortuna reports.https://t.co/T8mHPm0u4A March 4, 2020 Stock markets gave a lukewarm reaction to the emergency cut in US interest rates and new data showed growth in China and Hong Kong came to a virtual standstill in February. Saudi Arabia banned its citizens and other residents of the kingdom from making the pilgrimage in Mecca, while Iran cancelled Friday prayers in major cities. The Saudi move expanded a ban last week on foreigners visiting Mecca and Medina, home to the holiest sites in Islam. The national ceremony was due to be held in Tokyo exactly nine years after a powerful earthquake and tsunami killed more than 18,000 people. In Seattle, an Amazon employee tested positive for the virus. The US ​vice-president, Mike Pence, announced new screening measures, including for all travellers to the US on direct flights from South Korea and Italy. All nine US deaths from Covid-19 have occurred in Washington state. Amid reports of panic-buying and the manipulation of markets, there were concerns that supplies of protective gear would not be available where they were needed the most. The release of the upcoming James Bond film, No Time to Die, was pushed back seven months to November over coronavirus concerns. The film, Daniel Craig’s last as Bond, had been due for release last November. That was moved to February, then to April, before the latest delay.