UK Athletics allowed Mo Farah to remain with Alberto Salazar in 2015 despite some board members feeling “blackmailed” by the performance director, Neil Black, and other coaching staff, an independent report into the Salazar scandal has revealed. Black told his board at the time that he “greatly admired” Salazar and had seen no evidence to support allegations made by a damning Panorama programme that Farah’s coach had broken anti-doping rules with his Nike Oregon Project training group. He also warned that severing the relationship with the American, who guided Farah to four Olympic gold medals, would hit medal targets set by UK Sport. However a 130-page report by the leading sports barrister John Mehrzad, which reviewed UK Athletics’ dealings with Salazar, who received a four-year doping ban in October, says some board members were uneasy with the comments of Black and Barry Fudge, the head of endurance. “Black said he had not seen and was not aware of any wrongdoing concerning the NOP and Farah,” the report states. “He also greatly admired Salazar and had not personally seen any evidence to support the allegations levelled against Salazar by the Panorama programme. “Indeed, so strongly did Black and Fudge feel about the issue, they indicated that their positions would be ‘untenable’ if there was a knee-jerk severing of the relationship with Salazar by the board. “Having then been informed of that position, some on the then UKA board felt the stance taken by those individuals was ‘in effect blackmail’. However, those performance figures deny that to have been the case. Rather, they believed their position to be very straightforward: their ability to deliver against medal targets set by UK Sport would be hampered if Farah was forced against his will to split from Salazar.” Black left UKA after the world championships in October, while Fudge is still in post. Salazar, who guided Farah to four Olympic and five world titles between 2011 and 2017, has said he will appeal against the ban and no NOP athlete, including Farah, has been found to have taken a banned substance. Mehrzad’s report also concludes that a heavily criticised 2015 UKA internal review, which concluded it had “no concerns” about allowing Farah continue to be coached by Salazar, was reasonable. The report says in future such reviews should be led by those outside the organisation; UKA’s performance oversight committee was restricted by UK Anti-Doping not allowing it to consider any doping-related allegations made by Panorama. Mehrzad also found “no documentary evidence” that Nike had influenced or sought to influence the board’s decision about Salazar and his Nike Oregon training group. However he says the governing body’s handling of the scandal “could have been better” – and is particularly critical of the failure of the UKA board to keep proper records, including minutes taken of a special board meeting to discuss the Salazar case in 2015. Among Mehrzad’s recommendations is UKA should review its coaching code of conduct and ensure reviews are conducted by independent experts. “Of course, any organisation is entitled to manage itself but the carrying out of a review process ‘in-house’ may lead to accusations of a lack of real independence,” the report states. “That perception, however misplaced, cannot be truly alleviated unless a review is carried out, in whole or in part, by an external person or body who has no role or function with the UKA.” In a press release issued on Friday, UKA said it would implement all recommendations made in the report. The chair of UKA, Nic Coward, added: “The depth of insight provided by this independent review is timely support for a number of changes that need to happen, and which we are already getting on with. The sport has to meet the highest possible standards and we need to lead by example.”