If you’re ever on a train going north through Wolverhampton, look out of the window just after you pull out of the station and you’ll see the privately run HMP Oakwood, one of the largest prisons in the country. It was commissioned and built by a Labour government that lost to the Tories shortly after building work began. I pass that prison – so close to the railway you can clearly see the cell windows – on the train every couple of weeks and remember that the attitude of Priti Patel didn’t come from nowhere. New Labour also built Yarl’s Wood, the immigration detention centre for women and children. It built Brook House and Colnbrook immigration removal centres, near Gatwick and Heathrow airports, and turned Dungavel open prison in Scotland into a detention facility for people refused asylum. It revoked the asylum claim of Jimmy Mubenga, who died in October 2010 after being restrained on a flight intended to deport him from the UK to Angola. Labour did these things because it had decided that voters wanted a political culture defined by its cruelty and mean-spiritedness. In so doing, Tony Blair and Gordon Brown upheld a seam of deliberate brutality, both in rhetoric and policy. In my lifetime we have seen Margaret Thatcher speaking of “holding out the prospect of an end to immigration” in 1978 and, as prime minister, declining to offer her condolences after the deaths of 13 young black people in a house fire in New Cross, London, in 1981. In 1993, John Major responded to the death of two-year-old James Bulger by insisting that “society needs to condemn a little more, and understand a little less” and refusing to stand in the way of two 10-year-old boys being tried for his murder. Then came New Labour’s attempt to elide condemnation with understanding, and what the theorist Stuart Hall called the “double-shuffle” of entrenching Thatcherite ideology under the guise of pragmatism. The more we were encouraged to believe that Labour was being as tough on the causes of crime as on crime itself, the more politics became a game of seeing what you could get away with in plain sight. HMP Oakwood is run by G4S and Yarl’s Wood by Serco, a pattern of farming out the Home Office’s dirty work that began under Labour. I can’t imagine that, on the doorstep in 1997, 2001 and 2005, anyone promised to vote for the party on the condition that prisons were privatised. Yet Labour went ahead with the policy all the same, as it did with private finance initiatives – again, was this a compelling doorstep argument? – and the continual bullying of lone parents and council tenants as though they were, by definition, among the “causes” of crime. At least for council tenants, stigmatisation brought funding. Children’s centres, new school buildings and renovations under the Decent Homes Standard made estates better places to live in than they had been. For these reasons and a multitude of others, despite Labour’s loss in the 2019 election, it’s important not to capitulate to the notion that the party’s leftward turn was a fundamental mistake. It was necessary not only for the soul of the party, but for the soul of the society we live in – the one we seek to change in part by voting. For what it’s worth, I don’t think we did “win the argument”, as Jeremy Corbyn suggested. If we’d won the argument, we wouldn’t have lost the bloody election. The argument that did win in the 2019 election was the one for cynicism. When you grow up among cynics you imbibe a sense of what causes this mindset, and what it fuels in turn. Coming from a working-class background I’m always astonished when things work out or go well, as I always expect things to go wrong. (Years of good fortune haven’t done much to change this: it’s hard to unlearn.) Translate this sense of cynicism into a political context and the kinds of defeats, both large and small-scale, experienced by anyone who isn’t from a comfortable background living in comfortable circumstances can drive votes based upon resentment and the expectation of disappointment. The rightwing press is well aware of this potential – and has constructed a worldview that takes resentment as its starting point. Yet liberal and leftwing journalists ridicule the idea that Labour might win on a platform that doesn’t pre-emptively include hanging and flogging, just in case. A sort of belt-and-braces approach: we’ll accept the green new deal as long as you promise to press the nuclear button the first chance you get. That’ll show ’em! Since the turn of the 1980s, the electorate has colluded in this game with varying degrees of enthusiasm. Cruelty and reaction are seen as a necessary pretext for political communication: all appeals to “the people” must begin from the assumption that people in general are venal, tight-fisted and vengeful. The kinder interpretation of these impulses is that people are often afraid, and that fear makes them lash out. Fear and insecurity can’t be allayed by hanging and flogging. The lesson from the Home Office, for many years now, has been that you can always get someone else to do the jobs you don’t want to do. One of those jobs is understanding how class warps society: how disappointment and struggle curdles into a resentment that can never be remedied by “giving people what they want”. Class is the dirtiest laundry of all. No one wants to hang it out, let alone attempt to clean it. The consequence is that we’re all trapped on this grim recriminatory carousel until a party or movement obtains the power, and the courage, to reject cruelty as an electoral strategy. • Lynsey Hanley is a freelance writer and the author of Estates: an Intimate History and Respectable: Crossing the Class Divide