Listen, I know the drill with you, and this column: you read it over toast and OJ and eggs, and you read this bit distractedly in the few seconds left for the kettle to boil, and none of these words matter to you, they are just there. You’re not here for TV recommendations, are you? You’re just waiting for a nice jug of coffee to straighten you out before your Saturday proper starts. I know the game, you know the game. It’s fine. I don’t care. Apart from this week, when I insist – insist – that you listen to me. Watch this show. You are going to watch this show. Five Guys a Week (Tuesday, 9.15pm, Channel 4) is the latest in the new line of dating shows in which producers ask: “What Is The Most Deranged Way We Can Synthesise Intimacy? Do That” – following in the line of Naked Attraction (five people fly junk-first into a date, the success rate being surprisingly high); Love Island (frenzied 21-year-olds are locked in a sex prison for six weeks); and Netflix’s Love Is Blind (Americans who have only ever spoken through a wall but think they are in love). In Five Guys a Week, five men move into a woman’s house. They all get to know each other and, each morning after breakfast, she chooses one person to politely evict. At the end, there are two remaining challengers, and they have a bizarre three-way candlelit meal, then she picks the winner, with her as the prize. That’s the show. It’s carnage, by the way. This week, we meet Amy, a 34-year-old, far-too-normal-for-this mum-of-one who lives in an immaculately clean home in Hertfordshire, and then five men come over, one by one, and some sleep on the sofas and some sleep bunk-to-bunk in a spare room. And, slowly, things become utterly wild. You soon forget the format, instead watching the different approaches to wooing and flirting, the same human themes you see in all dating shows, across all age groups: the Man Without Any Instant Chemistry Who Just Barrages Her With Questions Until He Realises He’s Striking Out (Michael); Trystan, who’s got the casual handsome drape that suggests he’s never really had to try to attract anyone in his life, but also buzzes with the constant energy that he “doesn’t have a phone” or something equally infuriating; Christian, the geezer, who is either going to give you the shag of your life or who you’re going to have to make a statement about to the police; Glen, the soft-edged tryhard who Just Wants It Too Much; Scott, who is there. This is, when you think about it, every single man, distilled down into one (and I cannot imagine the smell of it) house in Hertfordshire. And then at the end, Amy picks one. I am not going to spoil it, but there is a scene halfway through, where Amy makes out with one contestant while three men watch on pretending they’re not seeing it, either doing close-eyed, play-it-cool, dancing-on-the-spot, run-to-the-bar panic or Just Look Like A Soft Sad Teddybear, and that’s masculinity, in a nutshell. That shot alone deserves every TV award going. Honestly, it deserves the Nobel. Do it, you cowards. Give Five Guys a Week the Nobel peace prize.