The comedian and actor Roy Hudd has died, aged 83. Best known for presenting the Roy Hudd Show and BBC Radio 2’s The News Huddlines between 1975 and 2001, he also starred in Coronation Street. His agent said in a statement on Monday: “After a short illness, Roy passed away peacefully on the afternoon of Sunday the 15th of March, with his wife, Debbie, at his side. The family would ask you to respect their privacy at this very sad time.” Born in Croydon, south London, Hudd began his comedy career in the 1950s, and performed as a Butlin’s redcoat in Clacton-on-Sea, Essex, where he worked alongside Cliff Richard and Dave Allen. First appearing on the David-Frost fronted shows That Was the Week That Was on ITV and Not So Much a Programme on the BBC, he made his name on television in the 60s in sketch shows including The Illustrated Weekly Hudd and The Roy Hudd show. On Radio 2, he hosted The News Huddlines, a satirical sketch show that also featured June Whitfield and Chris Emmett. Between 2002 and 2003, he starred in the ITV soap Coronation Street as the undertaker Archie Shuttleworth, returning for occasional guest appearances until the character’s death in 2018. He also appeared in Call the Midwife, Midsomer Murders and Broadchurch. As well as stage, variety and pantomime roles, Hudd was a music hall expert, writing several books on the Victorian music tradition, re-recording old music hall songs and appearing in the TV show The Good Old Days. As president of the British Music Hall Society from 1992 until his death, he chose the genre as his specialist subject when he appeared on Celebrity Mastermind in 2014. In January, it was announced he was to give more than 20,000 song sheets and posters to the University of Kent. The comedy writer Simon Blackwell, who began his career on The News Huddlines, described Hudd on Twitter as “a lovely bloke, a great comedian, excellent straight actor. And a comedy historian too … He was a total joy to write for.” The actor and writer Mark Gatiss who worked with Hudd on the 2000 remake of Randall and Hopkirk (Deceased), described Hudd as “one of those joyous people who feel like they’ve been with us for ever”. Hudd is survived by his second wife Debbie, and his son Max, from his first marriage.