The coronavirus pandemic is an unprecedented challenge, and we don’t yet know how things will develop. What we do know is that wherever possible, food banks will continue to provide the lifeline of emergency food for those in need. Of course, our main priority is ensuring the safety of everyone who comes to a food bank – whether it’s someone needing help, someone volunteering their time, or someone making a donation. We’re working out how we can best support people as the situation develops. But there is a limit to what food banks can do. We face logistical challenges of getting food to the thousands of people who need it most if the country goes into lockdown, as well as concerns around donation levels. All of this comes when food banks are already dealing with a record level of need for emergency food. As charities who respond to local emergencies, it’s not unusual for a food bank to have to adapt quickly – we saw this in Pontypridd just last month, when the local food bank acted quickly to help local people affected by the flooding. We saw it in London in the summer of 2017, when local food banks worked swiftly to help families facing the terrible consequences of Grenfell. And I know we will see it again in the coming months. The resilience of food banks is nothing short of outstanding – but each food bank in our network is a local charity, run by a community for their local community, and so each will be affected differently. South Liverpool food bank, for instance, already has a partnership with the British Red Cross and has said they have plans to work together to provide emergency provisions as we move through coronavirus. On the other hand, North Liverpool food bank receives a substantial amount of food from Fans Supporting Foodbanks. If football matches were to be played behind closed doors this could reduce their donations by about 25%. Generally, food banks sometimes run low on certain items, but we have not yet heard that any in our network are currently running out of all food donations. It never ceases to amaze me how generous all our volunteers are with their time – and how generous the British public is. I have no doubt that will continue to be true. A crisis can often bring out the best in people, and we encourage everyone to carry on donating, and to check with their local food bank which items are most needed. What has also become clearer through this awful and unparalleled situation, however, is the bigger picture. What has been highlighted yet again is just how much we depend on our country’s safety net being there to catch us in times of crisis. The NHS is the focus of much attention as staff work tirelessly round the clock dealing with coronavirus. We’re rightly proud in the UK of the systems we’ve created to protect each other. This week, the chancellor pledged an extra £500m hardship fund for local councils in light of coronavirus, which can play a key role in protecting the populace from poverty. The changes to the way people pay back universal credit loans, due to come into force from October 2021, are also welcome. However, many thousands of people have faced significant issues, waiting five weeks for a first payment, with no money for essentials. This wait is far too long. Our benefits system is the life-raft people need now. As the outbreak develops, more people than ever could need this help – especially those who aren’t eligible for sick pay or have unstable jobs. For many of these people, the five-week wait for a first universal credit payment will cause real hardship, despite measures announced in the budget. As more people look likely to move on to universal credit, the government must ensure people are protected. Universal credit first payments must be made available immediately on a non-repayable basis for anyone needing to claim. The five-week wait for a first payment could be ended by giving people grants, rather than loans that must be repaid. While thousands of our incredible volunteers continue to help people unable to afford the basics, we would ask the chancellor to take this essential step and end the five-week wait now. • Emma Revie is chief executive at the Trussell Trust