My Chemical Romance’s tour of Australia, New Zealand and Japan has become the latest casualty of the coronavirus, resulting in the cancellation of the Australian dates for the major punk/emo event Download festival, which the band was headlining in exclusive shows in Melbourne and Sydney. “It is with heavy hearts that we have decided to postpone our performances in Australia and New Zealand,” the band said. “We felt this was the right decision for our fans, our band, our crew, and our families given the current global situation. We apologise to our fans, but please know that we didn’t come to this decision lightly.” Download festival had been scheduled for 20 March in Melbourne and 21 March in Sydney; Deftones, Jimmy Eat World, Ministry, In Flames and Testament were also on the lineup, with Clutch, Alestorm and the Bronx playing exclusively for the festival. “Given that this [My Chemical Romance] announcement has come barely seven days prior to Download Australia we will not be able to secure an alternative headliner as there is insufficient time to secure visas and arrange the other relevant logistics that are required prior to the festival,” Download festival said on Friday. Full refunds will be offered to ticket-holders, with the festival “currently working” with My Chemical Romance and Deftones to schedule new Australian headline tours this year. The festival said they were “devastated” by the decision. “We appreciate that the decision to cancel Download Australia will cause huge disappointment and may create major difficulty for ticket holders, for which we sincerely apologise.”My Chemical Romance were the defining band of emo in the 2000s, and their sets – exclusive to Download – were part of a reunion tour that began in Los Angeles in December and which marks their first live shows since 2012. On Thursday the band announced they were postponing their Japanese tour: “We are working on rescheduling shows and will try to announce those soon. We are terribly sad to postpone and even more distressed about what is happening in the world over.” pic.twitter.com/H4QhRsAyEP The virus has already claimed major music festivals around the world, including South by South West, Coachella and Ultra, as well as tour dates for Madonna and Pearl Jam. In Australia on Tuesday, Miley Cyrus pulled out of a bushfire relief concert set for Friday in Melbourne. On Wednesday the Pixies cancelled the remainder of their Australian tour, and the Hobart festival Dark Mofo, scheduled for June, was also called off. The Dark Mofo decision, according to Monas founder, David Walsh, came down to “fear and uncertainty”, and the knowledge that a last-minute cancellation could impact the festival’s long-term survival. It resulted in speculation that other Australian festivals might follow suit. In a statement to patrons, the Bluesfest festival director, Peter Noble, said the April event was “going ahead as planned”. Splendour in the Grass has been approached for comment.