Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: There are currently more than 423,000 cases of coronavirus confirmed around the world with 18,916 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University. It says 108,578 patients have recovered from the disease. There was another strong rise in cases in the United States where more than 55,000 people have contracted the virus. Thailand also saw cases rise sharply with 107 new infections, bringing total to 934, a health official said on Wednesday. After several days of legislative wrangling, the US Senate leaders have agreed on a $2 trillion stimulus package with the White House. Democrats had been holding out for more help for the healthcare sector and states but party leaders declared a deal had been reached at 1am local time on Wednesday morning. Asian stock markets responded positively to the prospect of the help for US industry but futures trading points to a more subdued response on Wall Street. Earlier, US president Donald Trump said he wanted to open parts of the country “by Easter” despite the advice of experts to keep lockdowns in place and restrict the spread of the virus. Nouriel Roubini, the respected economist who foresaw the last financial crisis, says the world is seeing the fastest, deepest economic shock in history. Li Keqiang, China’s second most powerful leader, has told local governments not to cover up new cases of coronavirus as the apparent elimination of the threat of disease prompted the relaxation of travel restrictions in Hubei, the former epicentre of the outbreak. Li urged officials to report figures honestly and “not cover up reports for the sake of keeping new case numbers at zero”, according to Caixin Global. His comments came as Chinese health officials reported a fall in imported infections fell and zero locally transmitted infections. India’s population of more than 1.3 billion people has woken to the first day of a three-week lockdown designed to save the country from being overrun by the coronavirus. Narendra Modi, the prime minister, told Indians that he was banning people from leaving their homes in order “to save India, and every Indian citizen, to save you, and save your family”. Modi warned that if these next 21 days were not managed properly then the country’s development risked being set back 21 years. India has 562 cases and 11 deaths so far. Doctors in Australia have been told not to prescribe the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine and the similar compound chloroquine after some physicians gave it to themselves and their family members despite potentially deadly side-effects. The communist New People’s Army said on Wednesday they would observe a ceasefire in compliance with the UN chief’s call for a global halt in armed clashes during the coronavirus pandemic. The country of 5 million, which has more than 200 cases of coronavirus, heads into a national lockdown tonight for at least four weeks. Jacinda Ardern, the prime minister, called on every citizen to ‘act like you have Covid-19’ and warned that those violating compulsory stay-at-home rules would face “no tolerance”.