There was a time when Rebecca Solnit was a kind of underground secret, like a cult band you had to seek out in obscure venues and only the cognoscenti knew about; hearing her writing mentioned by a new acquaintance meant you knew you’d found a soulmate. I first encountered her through her 2000 book Wanderlust: A History of Walking, and her work reminded me of essayists of the 1960s and 70s such as Susan Sontag and Joan Didion, who wove together personal experience, academic research, cultural history and pop culture into a new kind of nonfiction that seemed energetic and flexible enough to encompass any subject and offer new ways of seeing it. Solnit reached greater prominence with the essays Hope in the Dark, written in 2003 at the start of the Iraq war, which became a manifesto against political despair, but it was her 2008 piece Men Explain Things to Me that catapulted her into the mainstream, gave rise to the term “mansplaining” (which entered the Oxford English Dictionary in 2014, though the neologism was not hers), made her an idol to a generation of young women and turned her into one of the US’s leading cultural and political commentators. Recollections of My Non-Existence is Solnit’s account of her formation as a writer, from her arrival in San Francisco in 1981 as a student, through the various shifts in her career as she discovers the themes that move her. Anyone hoping that this book, which is billed as a memoir, will offer a more intimate glimpse of the writer, might be disappointed in that regard; Solnit does not go in for soul-baring, and even in this personal history she keeps her gaze focused outward, on what her particular encounters can tell us about the prevailing culture of publishing, or the art world, or the environmental movement, or the city at the time. Her work has become increasingly concerned with stories: who gets to tell theirs, whose are given airtime “Becoming a writer formalises something essential about becoming a human: the task of figuring out what stories to tell and how to tell them and who you are in relation to them, which you choose and which choose you,” she writes. Over the years, her work has become increasingly concerned with stories: who gets to tell theirs, whose are given airtime, whose discredited, or erased so comprehensively that we do not even notice they are missing. The trajectory of her life has taken her from invisibility to prominence, and though she is careful to acknowledge her own privilege in certain areas, she has enough experience of being young, female and poor to speak with authority about what it means to feel powerless and nonexistent – sometimes even actively to choose nonexistence in the face of harassment, “since existence was so perilous”. This disappearance is primarily, for Solnit, a question of the erasure of women by men. Though her work initially explored the marginalisation of other groups – queer artists, Native Americans – her writing always circles back to this central, most personal iteration of silencing. She has written elsewhere about growing up with a physically abusive father, and though she doesn’t delve into great detail here, she mentions it more than once as an instance of early immersion in a culture of endemic inequality, where male aggression was the norm: “I am the daughter of a man who considered it his right to hit women and children and did as his father did before him.” Moving to the city in her teens taught her that this violence and entitlement was pervasive. One early chapter opens with a charming description of the elegant little desk given her by a friend many years ago, at which she has written most of her books. Then comes the sucker punch: “A year or so before she gave me the desk, my friend was stabbed 15 times by an ex-boyfriend to punish her for leaving him.” As a metaphor, it is critical to the writer she became: “Someone tried to silence her. Then she gave me a platform for my voice.” This question of whose voices are audible has become a central theme of Solnit’s writing in recent years, and at times Recollections does cover ground traversed in previous essay collections, most obviously as it catches up with her present work. But it is a rare writer who has both the intellectual heft and the authority of frontline experience to tackle the most urgent issues of our time. One of the reasons she has won so many admirers is the sense that she is driven not by anger but by compassion and the desire to offer encouragement, “a word that, though it carries the stigma of niceness, literally means to instil courage”. That voice of hope is more essential now than ever, and this memoir is a valuable glimpse into the grit and courage that enabled her to keep telling sidelined stories when the forces opposing her seemed monolithic. • Recollections of My Non-Existence by Rebecca Solnit is published by Granta (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15