In the face of more than 320 confirmed diagnoses of coronavirus, Britain has almost immediately become as British as possible. A very particular kind of panic now reigns. Last week, we started slow: as a nation, we all learned about this fun new thing called “washing your hands”, and got so into it that it was bordering on fetishistic. Now we’ve moved on from the “medically advised prevention” stage and crashed the car straight into “panicked buying of toilet paper, dry pasta and bleach”, and as a result Tesco and Waitrose have already had to limit how many essential items customers can buy at once. At one point Ocado limited shoppers to a maximum of 24 rolls of toilet paper at any one time, no more. How much more than that you can possibly need, I don’t know. I have a working theory about the root of this shopping stampede groupthink, and it’s the war. There is a prevalent mindset in Britain that a good old war (not one of these new wars, obviously; if a modern war happened right now we’d all be attacked by machine-gun drones and nuked to death in seconds, and the whole thing would be over in about a day and a half), but a proper Vera-Lynn-and-paint-your-tights-on war, would be good for us. Think how good a war would be. We’d all eat boiled grey mince for four years and solemnly rinse our underwear in our leftover bathwater like the martyrs we are, and we’d bloody well muddle through it, wouldn’t we, because we’re British. I don’t want to say that the people who think Old War Britain would be great are many of the same people who voted for Brexit, but only because I’m not YouGov, and me saying so would be a hunch not backed by data. But if you did the polling, you’d find out that I’m right. The Venn diagram of people who currently have a garage full of toilet roll, those who think national service would “sort the youth out, because they have too many iPads” and those who would ideally quite like a wall built between us and France, is basically a Covid-19 virus-particle shaped circle. As supermarket shelves start to clear of essentials, price-gouging has become de rigueur, and that classic marker of an impending crisis, essential items selling for 5,000% of the RRP on eBay, is now in full swing. You can, if you want to, currently buy 49p hand sanitiser for £24.99 a throw on an online auction site. May I offer my hearty congratulations to those eBaying while Rome burns. When the population is decimated and money becomes a meaningless token, I’m sure that £24.50 profit will come in handy in keeping the feral gangs of roadhogs away from your toilet paper fortress. I can’t shake the feeling that, to stay healthy, it makes more sense to let other people buy soap so they can wash their filthy hands with it instead of me having a stockpile of soap while everyone around me is sick. I mean, I’m no doctor. But then we live in an age of disinformation, and it’s inevitable that that will have a part to play in The Coronapanic. Last month, doctors had to issue a warning to refute a Facebook meme that claimed putting a frozen potato up your hole could cure haemorrhoids. It can be startling to realise that these people are out there, wandering among us, bums full of rosti and hands filthy with germs, and the health of the herd is as reliant on them as it is on you. “There is no medical evidence that putting frozen potatoes inside the anus can help cure piles,” Dr Diana Gall told WalesOnline, “so I would urge caution to anyone thinking of doing it.” Wise words indeed. Maybe, for some of us, those rolls of toilet paper will come in handy after all. • Joel Golby is the author of Brilliant, Brilliant, Brilliant Brilliant Brilliant