The British Horseracing Authority has confirmed that all meetings in England and Wales will be held behind closed doors from Tuesday, when Taunton and Wetherby will follow the lead set by Kelso on Monday by staging cards with no spectators and with restrictions on the number of attendees. In a statement issued on Monday afternoon, not long after the announcement that its High Holborn offices would be closed indefinitely after some staff members reported symptoms of coronavirus infection, racing’s said that with race meetings scheduled every day, “the aim is to agree a programme that is sustainable, in the light of possible staff absences, including in critical roles, in order to protect industry staff and support the wider effort to free up critical public services.” The statement added that the “intention is for scheduled race meetings to take place wherever possible but that the situation “is very fluid at present” and some meetings may need to be cancelled. “Racecourses and racing yards are embedded in their local communities and we are acutely aware of our responsibilities to protect public health,” Nick Rust, the chief executive of the BHA, said on Monday. “The restrictions we are putting in place to close racing to spectators and limit attendees will reduce demand on public services. We also have a range of measures in place designed in response to the government’s guidance on public health and we will continue to update these as appropriate. “We acknowledge that today’s decision will also impact on local businesses, especially hotels and restaurants, who are struggling at this time. We are following the government’s advice to strike a balance between protecting public health and maintaining business activity and will continue to do so. We thank our customers and staff for their support.” No spectators, no bookies, no Tote, no atmosphere. Jockeys in particular will soon be working in a very odd environment, at least for as long as it is possible to run a race meeting without breaching the government’s rules on mass gatherings. But they will be working, which is the crucial point, generating betting turnover both in betting shops and online, earning media rights payments for the tracks and rewarding winning owners with prize money, at least a proportion of which will remain in circulation within the sport, paying training fees, staff wages and being reinvested, eventually, in more horses. If racing stops, horses still need to be fed, mucked out and attended to by vets, all of which costs a great deal of money. Racing is also an industry with seasonal rhythms, built up over centuries. It would, of course, be possible to simply switch off the racing programme overnight – it happened for a week during last year’s equine flu outbreak, after all – and it may become essential at some stage. But every passing week would make it more difficult to switch it back on again, and deepen the hole from which the industry will eventually need to clamber, to get back to something approaching normality. Since racing supports around 15,000 jobs directly, mostly in rural areas, and as many as 50,000 indirectly, the BHA believes it has a duty to all those who depend on it for a living to keep the show on the road in some form, for as long as the government is content for it to continue. This is why the Authority has not followed the Premier League, rugby and other major sports by suspending all activity for the next few weeks at least. It will not be easy or cheap as far as racecourses are concerned, as they will be losing not only the gate money, but all the associated spending that goes with it. There are also practical matters to be considered like the integrity of the starting prices, which would normally be returned from the racecourse betting ring (albeit from the boards of bookies who are often just using Betfair’s exchange as a tissue and adding a smidge for themselves). Kelso’s meeting, and subsequent spectator-less fixtures, will have an “industry SP” generated off-course, as sometimes happens with races abroad. It will be interesting to see if there is any obvious disparity in the size of the margins when set against the meetings at Southwell and Hereford, which will be returning SPs in the normal way. Kelso might normally have expected to get between 1,500 and 2,000 paying spectators for this card, when Proper Ticket (3.40) would have been a popular choice to pay for a few drinks. Fergal O’Brien’s lightly-raced seven-year-old has run well without threatening to win in three novice hurdles to date and may have been let in a little light for her handicap debut on a mark of 108. Skyhill (3.10) also has decent prospects on the same card, while at Hereford, Demachine (3.20) is another handicap debutant on a fair weight and Angel’s Envy (4.20) should go well later on the card. Southwell2.00 Virnon 2.30 Twotwothree 3.00 Haasab 3.30 Exelerator Express 4.00 City Never Sleeps 4.30 Hang Tough Kelso2.10 Little Rory Mac 2.40 Duc De Grissay 3.10 Skyhill 3.40 Proper Ticket 4.10 Crixus’s Escape 4.40 Project Mars Hereford2.20 Loughan 2.50 Amateur 3.20 Demachine (nap) 3.50 Ballybreen 4.20 Angel’s Envy (nb) 4.50 The Edgar Wallace