This was a breathless contest but the lasting image belonged to the match-winner Allan Saint-Maximin, whose backflip in front of the delirious travelling Newcastle support earned him further adulation. Saint-Maximin struck just as it seemed Steve Bruce’s side would be left frustrated in their attempt to wrestle victory from 10-man Southampton, who had Moussa Djenepo sent off. Saint-Maximin expertly applied the finish after driving on to a wondrous first-time ball by the substitute Sean Longstaff. It was Longstaff’s first touch but a lasting contribution to earn Newcastle a first win in six league matches. A supercharged first half largely centred on the Southampton goalkeeper Alex McCarthy and the referee, Graham Scott. There were several flashpoints, notably the incident that led to Djenepo being sent off approaching the half hour after overrunning possession and inadvertently standing on the ankle of the Newcastle midfielder Isaac Hayden. It was a wincing challenge that looked worse in slow motion; Scott initially awarded Djenepo a yellow card but the video assistant referee, Peter Bankes, encouraged him to take a closer look. Scott ran to the referee review area, where he assessed a replay of the foul on the pitchside monitor and upgraded his decision to a red card. That disadvantage undoubtedly put Southampton on the back foot but for so long Newcastle struggled to make them pay. Jamaal Lascelles had a goal disallowed after straying into an offside position to divert Matt Ritchie’s free-kick beyond McCarthy but, just as Southampton basked in Federico Fernández picking up a caution for a clumsy tug at Sofiane Boufal’s shirt, Scott caused further consternation among home supporters. Scott signalled for another VAR check, this time for handball, and Boufal was penalised for nudging the ball away from Saint-Maximin inside the box with his right arm. Up stepped Ritchie from 12 yards but McCarthy got a strong left hand to his penalty kick. The returning Southampton full-back, Yan Valery, had his hands full with Saint-Maximin throughout and the Newcastle winger laid on fine cross for Dwight Gayle shortly after the hosts were reduced to 10 men, only for the striker to drag his shot wide. When Saint-Maximin switched flanks, Ryan Bertrand did well to eat back at his man as he surged towards goal, by which point Djenepo, Southampton’s jack in the box, had long been given his marching orders. The early sparring was exhilarating too, with McCarthy, who was at fault in defeat at West Ham last weekend, making a superb triple save after eight minutes. McCarthy twice denied Miguel Almiron from close range after keeping out Gayle’s initial effort from a nonchalant Jonjo Shelvey cross. Joelinton, dropped in favour of Saint-Maximin here, arrived on the hour mark and then came Valentino Lazaro, who scored his first Newcastle goal at West Brom in midweek. Southampton threatened, with Shane Long stinging the palms of Martin Dubravka after superbly swivelling away from the Newcastle captain Lascelles but, just as Newcastle toiled to convert their dominance into something more palpable, Saint-Maximin delivered. Longstaff swept a wonderful ball into the left channel, where Saint-Maximin seized on Valery’s vulnerability and slipped the ball beyond McCarthy, who was finally beaten.