Q Since graduation from art college in 2009, I’ve been able to live at home rent free so despite being on a lowish salary of £20,000 as a trainee teaching assistant, I have managed to save a total of £35,000. By the end of June when I graduate from teacher training, I will move on to a salary of £28,000 which will go up to £30,000 after a year. I’ve lived in Wanstead all my life and never assumed that I could afford to buy here but recently read that Pocket Living will be building 20 one-bedroom flats near Wanstead station. The flats will be priced at £275,000 in an area where flats are normally priced at upwards of £300,000. I fit Pocket Living’s eligibility criteria for buying as I will be a first-time buyer and I already both live and work in the borough.  Sadly, because my salary will be £28,000, the biggest mortgage I can get – if I borrow five times my salary – would be £140,000. I’m unsure of what to do for the future. If I don’t buy now, I will carry on saving – probably more than now after my salary increase – as my mother has no intention of moving or charging me rent. But I feel that for every year I save flat prices will increase and I will be forever playing catch up unless I take out a help-to-buy equity loan but I don’t know if that’s a good idea. I have no desire to live or buy in another part of London either and I wish to buy alone. I understand that I’m striving for the impossible but would be grateful for any advice or insight.EP A You are right that as a first-time buyer and resident of – and worker in – the borough where you want to live, you are eligible to buy one of Pocket Living’s affordable homes which are sold for at least 20% less than market value. You are also eligible because you earn what’s referred to as a “modest salary”, which is one which is less than than the mayor of London’s threshold for affordable housing (currently £90,000 per household). Those with earnings above that level need not apply, nor should you bother if you already own property or want to sub-let. However, you are also right in thinking that with your salary, you are unlikely to get the size of mortgage you need which means that you are also unlikely to pass Pocket Living’s affordability assessment. Even with your £35,000 of savings, you would need a mortgage of £240,000 which is £100,000 more than the £140,000 mortgage you think you might be able to get. To be able to buy one of the one-bedroomed flats that will be on offer at Gardner Close E11 (which I assume is the Pocket Living development you are referring to) your only option would be to make use of the London help-to-buy equity loan. A £100,000 loan would represent just over 36% of the price of the property which is just within the 40% limit set by London help-to-buy (elsewhere in England the limit is 20% of purchase price). More information on Pocket Living’s affordable housing developments across the capital is available at www.pocketliving.com.