Kitty EmpireFavourite pop criticI have to declare a deep professional envy for Ann Powers (NPR, LA Times, etc), who is much better at articulating my thoughts than I am. Favourite websiteThis sounds like a lie, but I try hard to avoid the surfeit of opinion out there until I’ve nailed down my own; the lyrics website Genius, though, is a key reference. Favourite young voiceThe Guardian’s Laura Snapes is the don. Favourite music bookGreil Marcus’s Lipstick Traces: A Secret History of the Twentieth Century (1989) lit a fuse in my brain. Another resourceA bit obvious perhaps, but Twitter knows everything, in real time; useful both for piece-sharing and outrage threads. Fiona Maddocks Favourite classical music criticJeremy Denk–he’s a concert pianist, but when he writes (on, say, Bach’s Goldberg Variations) you have to read. Favourite music websiteWhat did we do before Bachtrack, an invaluable resource for live performance round the world? Favourite music vloggersTwoSet Violin: violinists Brett Yang and Eddy Chen reveal home truths via daffy humour. Favourite music bookMozart’s Letters, Mozart’s Life (edited and translated by Robert Spaethling). All composers’ letters are interesting. These are a bible. Another resourceCD liner notes. Streaming is great, but nothing replaces this invaluable source of information, often written by the performer. Susannah ClappFavourite theatre criticI don’t have a favourite per se, but I look with interest at what Ben Brantley says in the New York Times, particularly when he reviews British shows. Favourite websiteI don’t invariably look at any, but often at Exeunt for extended pieces and adventurous argument. Favourite young theatre writerI admire Natasha Tripney in The Stage: judicious and independent. Favourite book about the theatreI often consult The Oxford Companion to Theatre and Performance by Dennis Kennedy (and reread The Swish of the Curtain by Pamela Brown and Ballet Shoes by Noel Streatfeild with nostalgic enthusiasm). Another resourceLooking at paintings and architecture gees up my eyes for the stage. Vilhelm Hammershøi’s pictures made me see light and space completely differently. Rowan Moore Favourite architecture criticOwen Hatherley is bracing in his anger, eloquent about his passions, and writes with a healthy dose of unreason, which are all good qualities in a critic. Favourite architecture websiteMunicipal Dreams is an unending trove of knowledge and stories about housing and public works Favourite young architecture writerOtto Saumarez Smith, author of Boom Cities, a book on postwar planning, writes with balance, perception and wit. Favourite book about architectureLondon: the Unique City, written by Steen Eiler Rasmussen in the 1930s, describes a city that is now so distant as to be dreamlike, and is wonderful on the interaction of buildings and society. Another resourceThe Architecture Foundation, of which I was once director, now runs a provocative and revelatory programme of events and talks, for which I can take no credit. Bidisha My favourite dance criticTobi Tobias, the stringent (some might say astringent) critic for New York Magazine. She died in February at 81 after a career that began with a feature on Twyla Tharp. Favourite dance websiteThe Huntley Film Archives is an extraordinary resource of vintage black-and-white clips that have preserved moments of dance from the 1890s on, including Anna Pavlova dancing the Dying Swan. Favourite young voiceIt’s a bit like the kids from Fame being transported to 21st-century London, but I like the student interviews from London Contemporary Dance School (also a venue for rising choreographers and dancers) on YouTube. Favourite book about danceIt all began with Noel Streatfeild’s children’s classic about ambitious stage sisters, Ballet Shoes. For a heavyweight read, I love Lucy Moore’s Nijinsky. And for pure inspiration, the young American star Misty Copeland’s memoir Life in Motion: An Unlikely Ballerina doesn’t disappoint. Another resourceI love footage of contemporary dance companies in rehearsal, and am currently obsessed with the young, hugely athletic Kenny Muntanga Dance Theatre. Laura Cumming Favourite art criticTom Lubbock at the Independent and Arthur C Danto at The Nation: original writers, who see art as an experience both in and of life. Or I should say “saw”, for both are alas now dead, but I never stop reading them on the net. Favourite websiteThe Art Newspaper – all human life is there: shows to dramatic showdowns, features, reviews, interviews, obituaries; the clue is in the word “newspaper”. Favourite young art writerAlice Spawls at the London Review of Books. Favourite book about artArthur C Danto’s four volumes of criticism, especially Encounters and Reflections (though there are many others: John Berger, Anita Brookner, Robert Hughes, Rebecca Solnit, Bridget Riley). Another resourceTyler Green’s The Modern Art Notes Podcast is indispensable. The wondrously eccentric Journal of Art in Society blog is stuffed with strange connections, and I’m addicted to the tweets of artist Jane Hoodless, – startling images and two-sentence stories. Mark Kermode Favourite film criticI’ve always been a huge fan of Anne Billson – her knowledge of horror is up there with Kim Newman, and her BFI book on The Thing is terrific. Favourite film websiteThe BBFC’s site not only provides comprehensive information on ratings, running times and cuts, but also often hilariously deadpan consumer advice (“strong language, violence, sex, all involving puppets”). Favourite film writerI first came across writer, director and vlogger Jack Howard through YouTube and Radio 1, and I’ve since recorded several podcasts with him. He’s sharp, funny, and very knowledgeable – and very young! Favourite book about filmI was given copies of the Dilys Powell Film Reader and the CA Lejeune Film Reader when I was starting out in film criticism. Both remind me how far I still have to go. Another resourceThe Cinematologists podcast. Film scholars Dario Llinares and Neil Fox host a podcast and film club that bridges the gap between criticism, academia, film-making, and fandom. It’s a terrifically welcome forum for informed film debate. Miranda Sawyer Favourite criticI always read, though don’t always agree with, Gillian Reynolds of the Sunday Times (for radio) and Fiona Sturges of the Financial Times (podcasts). Favourite audio websiteSearching for podcasts can be tortuous, but there are a few hubs if you’re stuck: Radiotopia and Gimlet for interesting, properly produced American shows and Wondery for true crime. BBC Sounds can be useful, but is still frustrating. Favourite young audio expertMatt Deegan is an audio obsessive. He runs Fun Kids Radio, works at audio consultancy Folder Media, and set up the British podcast awards with Matt Hill. He understands the ins and outs of UK radio and podcasting like no one else. Favourite book[There isn’t a reference book I use, mostly because the audio landscape is changing massively at the moment. I read other journalists’ collections for inspiration (Clive James, Lynn Barber) and dip in and out of the odd radio memoir: I enjoyed Eddie Mair’s A Good Face for Radio and John Humphrys’s A Day Like Today. Another resourceTwitter is an immensely useful resource. A simple question such as “What family podcasts are you enjoying?” will give you reams of answers worth checking out Plus I follow some great audio makers such as Helen Zaltzman, Eleanor McDowell, and Cathy Fitzgerald, so I can hear about their shows and the others they’re enjoying. Euan Ferguson Favourite TV criticAlison Graham in the Radio Times: alarmingly unafraid to challenge metro sensibilities. I think of her as my Vera. Favourite TV websiteI use, although don’t really like, Digital Spy. It’s a bit silly-gossipy but handy for TX dates. Variety is good for thoughtful, informed criticism of shows coming out of the US. Favourite young TV criticJanice Forsyth’s afternoon show on BBC Radio Scotland has many hugely informed young critics of both TV and films… and they get space, time and laughter to air their views. Favourite book about TVI have the entire Clive James canon behind me, funny and wise. Another resourceI was given Harold Evans’s Newsman’s English 35 years ago, part of a lovely silver-backed series on editing and design. It urges one to be clear and concise. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.