The perkiest song on Guerrilla, the debut album by the Angolan artist Nazar, is an ode to deadly military technology. “This is a restricted weapon,” we hear on FIM-92 Stinger, a shaky kuduro rhythm brightened by synth marimba. In the murky world of Guerrilla – part war diary, part family memoir – acquiring an anti-aircraft missile is cause for celebration. “That thing symbolised a good time for people in the rebellion,” Nazar explains. “They didn’t have to be so scared of airstrikes because they had an umbrella over them.” The son of a general in Jonas Savimbi’s Unita rebel group, Nazar was born in Belgium in 1993. He grew up in the relative safety of suburban Brussels – barring a foiled kidnap attempt on his sister and the spectre of street gangs – as the Angolan civil war raged. After the nation became independent from Portugal in 1975, it was engulfed in a war between the communist People’s Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) and the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (Unita), backed by Reagan and the CIA. Nazar’s mother worked two jobs to keep the family in a middle-class neighbourhood. When peace came to Angola in 2002 after nearly three decades of fighting and the loss of an estimated 500,000 lives, the family moved back and Nazar encountered his homeland for the first time. As we sit in the London office of his label Hyperdub, he recalls the overwhelming volume of the journey from the airport to his family home, “radios, taxis and minivans literally shaking, creating mini earthquakes when they passed”. In a country ruptured by civil war and longstanding ethnic tensions, the rhythms of kuduro – a dense, explosive electronic music that first emerged in 80s Luanda – is a powerful binding force. He calls it “part of the DNA of Angolan culture”. But for the young Nazar, kuduro’s jubilant mood jarred with his state of mind. “In Angola I was faced with another reality. It was much more grim.” An “alien with no friends” at school in Luanda – classmates were mostly children of the victorious MPLA – he occupied himself making beats on his dad’s laptop. Inspiration came from European music at first: the bombastic electro-house of Justice and Burial’s sample-heavy rave nostalgia, which got him through a long period of depression. But as he felt more at home in Angola and dug into his family history, he incorporated more African sounds. He calls the result “rough kuduro” – a caustic inversion of Angolan pride that packs the energy of kuduro down like gunpowder before blasting it apart, leaving distorted drums and pockmarks of dirt and noise, gun-cocks as percussion and whirring helicopter blades. As with Burial’s haunted memory scapes, it feels like a psychohistorical investigation, exposing the exhausted psyche underneath kuduro’s bright mask. Guerrilla is populated by many voices: his family; Nazar himself, pitched up to sound feminine; and the Hyperdub DJ Shannen SP, who adds a sullen rap to Bunker, a track about the bloody aftermath of Angola’s 1992 elections. On Diverted, Nazar’s father, Alcides Sakala Simões, reads from his war memoir, describing a tactical decision that could have cost him his life. “He knew he could die, but he accepted it without hesitation. I thought that was extraordinary,” says his son. In a pointed refusal of Portuguese colonial legacy, he speaks in Umbundu, the language of his people. The oral tradition is fundamental to African history, a process that Nazar is accelerating through music. “It’s like a bank of information for me – if I play the album, then I remember,” he says. “The more I know about my history, the more centred I feel.” An adored but absent figure during Nazar’s childhood, Simões looms large over Guerrilla. His battleworn face appears on the album’s sleeve, captured in a film still from 2002 that was circulated by the MPLA to humiliate Unita’s vanquished leaders. Nazar says he is reclaiming the image – he has even had it printed on T-shirts. A weird look given the bloody legacy of Savimbi’s army, but a reflection of a filial bond. Simões’s reputation has recovered substantially; he is now an elected politician. “Angolan society was very divided between people that supported the Angolan regime and the rest of us,” Nazar says. “Right after the war, stigmatisation, prejudice was extremely common to people that supported Unita. I’d grow up entering spaces knowing that my political affiliation would be despised. But also, I’d also go to spaces where it was admired – when I would just hang out with my dad, party events, regions of Angola that were strongholds. “So in that sense, the ‘official’ story of the bad guy never got to me,” he continues. “I’ve always regarded my dad as what he is, and not what the rebellion or the party did. Both sides had horrible individuals. Both sides had remarkable people who, regardless of their involvement in the fighting, were doing it for final longstanding peace. My dad is one of them. And both sides recognise that.” Having quit his studies to work on music, Nazar now lives in Manchester. “Culturally, there’s not much space in Angola for very abrasive songs,” he explains, plus the internet was too slow and expensive. Manchester also provided the isolation he needed to complete such a personal record. It has taken him most of a decade to process his family’s history and the war stories he heard on road trips around the country. “They would talk a lot about the war and they recalled it with a very upbeat approach, a lot of black humour. It comes from this perspective that if you’re alive to recount the story you should be grateful.”