When new books are published, PR companies often send copies out for review with a small title-appropriate gift attached – a little net bag of confetti or sugared almonds with a book about a wedding, for instance, or an envelopeful of spiders that can give you quite a turn to accompany a modern gothic thriller, and so on. Breeders (Sky One), starring Martin Freeman and Daisy Haggard as Paul and Ally, the beleaguered parents of two children, should be broadcast – depending on viewers’ own parental status – with either packets of Valium or birth-control products attached. The 10-part series is technically a comedy, but it hits so many pressure points so hard in such rapid succession that if you do laugh it will be through some quite considerable anxiety and pain. I mean that as a compliment. The first of the two opening episodes (shown back to back, possibly to ram home the unrelenting nature of parenthood) followed the bleak and unforgiving trail of a sleepless night for the family. Seven-year-old Luke is wrestling with his fear of fire – sparked, naturally, by a safety lecture at school – and his younger sister, Ava, is happy to keep him company in his wakeful hours. After some initial emotional blackmail and rigorous horse trading – and if you don’t recognise the truth of this in your bones, then keep rolling on those condoms and enjoying your lives – Paul and Ally settle into 90-minute shifts. Ally recites The Hungry Caterpillar from memory and a state of semi-consciousness. Paul – caught in the double bind of being tired from the sleepless night and enraged by it – finds it harder to maintain equilibrium and hisses profanities at the ticking clock. He is not much better with the children. Your mileage may vary, of course, but I did find the level of fury he expressed towards them frequently fell outside the margins of understandable and into “quite flipping frightening, actually”. And I had to wonder if any partner would have been quite so smilingly sympathetic, as Ally often was, to someone who had lost his rag so fully with their children. Another bum note, perhaps, came during one of the flashbacks to earlier, more halcyon days, and an IVF storyline whose inescapable sadness made the pursuit of gags feel tawdry. But the flashbacks themselves were a rare demonstration of the overlooked truth that the days of having a newborn, while obviously in a class of their own, can be easier in some ways than the years to come, when the novelty of creating a family has very much worn off. The second episode was a little more lighthearted – if still about as far from the essentially cosy delights of Outnumbered (which I love on its own glorious terms, by the way) as you can get. There were more standard tropes at work, including the annoyingly polished and successful couple on the school run (“With their fucking outfits. We’re best, aren’t we?” “We’re best”), a school production of Robin Hood and a parents’ evening. But the foraging for tiny embers of hope in the teacher’s bland words about a perfectly average child and attempting to fan them into flames has surely rarely been better captured. Similarly well handled was the evocation of the shifting sands on which parents try, uselessly, to build firm foundations for their children’s emotional, physical, professional, financial and any other kind of goddamn wellbeing you can think of. And doing all that before they can collapse into bed at the end of another brutal day. Paul and Ally’s differing and evolving attitudes to what to look for in an education for tiny children was emblematic of all. Interwoven with the day-to-day slog and the minutiae of parenting (the interruption of an intense, muttered conversation about the children’s schooling, for example, to quieten them in the bathroom, was beautiful) are larger, more intangible issues. What do you with the disappointments life inevitably hands you (Paul, who once wanted to be a cartoonist, loses out on a promotion at the charity where he has worked for 22 years)? And what forms do relationships take when, for most of the time, you feel like comrades in adversity at best (“Underneath all the madness,” Ally says to her colleague, Darren, “Paul and I love each other very, very probably”)? Take all the tablets you can, and watch. Even if you don’t enjoy, you will learn.