After all these years of Swedes working in French kitchens and Italian chefs moving to Denmark, you could be forgiven for thinking of European cuisine as one big homogenous offering, a pot not so much melting as melted into one big lump of Eurofood. But all it takes is a walk through a market in some new place for the untapped riches of the continental table to hit you. We asked 12 stellar chefs – some Michelin-starred, several of the World’s 50 Best, all passionate – to tell us about the local dishes they think we need to try. In Flanders we make waterzooi, a fragrant chicken stew. You boil a chicken with carrots, leeks and celery to make a stock. You take the chicken out and add a roux, to thicken up the stock into a white sauce, with a bit of cream and some fresh herbs, then you put the chicken back in and serve with potato or bread. Belgian cuisine is full of robust flavours and slow cooking.Peter Goossens, Hof van Cleve, Kruisem Everyone is eating semla right now – big fat cardamom buns with marzipan and sugar, topped with whipped cream. Traditionally, you would eat them on the last Tuesday of February or the first of March, for Mardi Gras. Nowadays, people eat them throughout Lent. Bakeries all over the country compete for the newspaper verdicts of whose is the best each year. I make the version my mother taught me.Niklas Ekstedt, Ekstedt, Stockholm I love roasted lemon-oregano rooster – garlic slices hidden in the thighs – with slowly baked potatoes, served with a side of freshly made slaw of fine-julienne lettuce hearts, lots of red wine vinegar, extra virgin olive oil, dill and barrel-matured feta cheese. Families usually have this as a Sunday roast, but you can find it on the menu in any decent tavern or restaurant.Nikos Roussos, Funky Gourmet, Athens and Opso, London I am a Berlin native, and eisbein is something I grew up with. My grandmother always made it for me. It’s a pretty ugly dish and very fatty, as it is traditionally made with ham hock; it comes with half a kilo of sauerkraut and half a kilo of yellow peas. At the restaurant we have brought it up to date. We have substituted the pork for suckling pig, so it’s less greasy. We flavour and cook it like my grandmother did, and then the Asian part of my cooking philosophy steps in and we deep-fry the meat, so that it becomes really crispy on the outside and juicy on the inside. We serve it with a hint of the cream from the yellow peas, and we substitute the sauerkraut for pickled ginger.Tim Raue, Restaurant Tim Raue, Berlin I have always loved the texture of sweetbreads, the dish’s gourmet side. Rather than braising it, my grandfather André would cook it in a vol-au-vent and combine with crayfish. Sweetbreads are still very commonly found in this form or in a bouchée à la reine, with a mushroom sauce, as a Sunday starter for many families in France. The textures and flavours of my grandfather’s dish, which has become a classic of gastronomy, were part of my childhood. These days, I poach the sweetbread in milk flavoured with beeswax and honey, then enclose it in a beeswax shell and leave it to mature. Once ready, I cook it in a pan with butter. Anne-Sophie Pic, Maison Pic, Paris Calabria is famous for stockfish – dried cod, which is generally prepared with pasta. You soak the fish in water for three days, then slice it and add capers, olive oil and lemon zest. It’s quite a typical dish for Christmas Eve dinner. The whole preparation of the fish is a sort of ritual. I was always fascinated by how it was my grandfather who looked after it and not my grandmother, who was usually in charge of the kitchen. From time to time, I have featured the fish on the menu, in particular with ziti (short pasta) and ’nduja. Anthony Genovese, Il Pagliaccio, Rome Like most Basques, I’m crazy about fish and seafood. Txangurro a la donostiarra is a stuffed crab dish created in the early 20th century by a local Basque chef. Crabmeat is mixed with onion, tomato and breadcrumbs and stuffed into the empty crab shell to be baked. Our yellow-crab dish is a nod to this classic, still redolent of the sea, but true to our philosophy. We use collagen, cauliflower, spider crab and an in-your-face fashion-yellow shell. We are always playing with the relationship between tradition and modernity.Elena Arzak, Arzak, San Sebastian Zur is a soup with a lightly sour flavour that is very popular in rural Poland. It is made from so-called white borsch: whole-rye bread and crusts placed in a jar and left in a warm place for two days to ferment. It can be stored for up to two weeks in tightly corked bottles in a cool place. The soup is prepared with a vegetable stock of parsley root, carrots, leeks, onion and crushed garlic cloves, with dried forest mushrooms. You add traditional rural sausage, which you remove once cooked and slice thinly before returning to the soup to serve. You can also add lean bacon, finely cubed and fried. You serve the zur with potatoes seasoned with onion fried in oil.Zbyszek Siemieniec, Restauracja Wentzl, Krakow Black bread with Baltic herring and boiled eggs is a fairly rustic dish that people usually eat at home on Sundays. The herrings are pickled with strong pepper and a bit of garlic, and the bread is savoury, salted and intensely malted. It makes for a beautiful dish, and will bring back memories for every Estonian person. It’s the first thing people miss when they are abroad.Orm Oja, Noa, Tallinn Frika is a traditional dish of potatoes and cheese cooked in pork fat and served with mountain herbs. Shepherds prepare it in the Slovenian Alps, but you find something very similar in the Italy and Austrian mountains, too. Which is the beauty of the dish: it doesn’t respect borders; it showcases the culture that we share. You heat pork fat in a pan, and throw in chopped potato to coat, then cover with offcuts from cheesemaking and cook slowly on one side before turning it all over and cooking on the other. The way the cheese caramelises with the potato is delicious. You serve it hot, finished with freshly picked herbs.Ana Ros, Hiša Franko, Kobarid The extremely ugly lumpfish comes close to the shore to breed around this time of year, so the roe is harvested and eaten fresh. It is classically served on a piece of toast with dill and some creme fraiche, as a light lunch or a starter. The produce is something you can only source right here, so it really is particular to Denmark. We have used it in many different ways at Relae, once with hazelnut milk and fermented celeriac. Christian Puglisi, Relae, Copenhagen Boxty is a semi-fermented potato cake you find all over Ireland, but I think it comes from Cavan, in the border region. You cook the potato out and mix it with flour and seasoning, then leave to age and dry for a couple of days or weeks, until it’s like a very firm gnocchi, which you can then slice. To eat it, you fry it in a bit of oil, finish with butter, if you want to go the full hog, then serve with runny fried eggs and smoked fish – kippers or haddock. It’s one of my favourite things to have for breakfast.Keelan Higgs, Variety Jones, Dublin