England’s Twenty20 World Cup campaign ended without a ball being bowled as persistent rain caused the abandonment of their semi-final against India in Sydney, leading their captain, Heather Knight, to call for the rules to be changed. ICC regulations dictate that in the event of a semi-final washout, the winners of each group automatically go through to the final in Melbourne on Sunday. England, having finished second to South Africa in their group, are therefore out of the tournament. India, meanwhile, who have had an unbeaten run over the past two weeks, progress to their first T20 World Cup final. “We’re obviously frustrated. There was no chance of getting out today, and the weather’s cost us,” captain Heather Knight said. “We’re gutted we didn’t have the chance to fight for a place in the final. “You put in a lot of hard work, you want to have the chance to showcase your skills and show you can perform on the biggest stage, in knockout games in World Cups. We’re just going to have to rue that first game and try and move on, but it’s going to be a bitter pill to swallow for a few of us for a while. “You’d hope now that there’s been this situation, that there will be a rule change moving forward, so that no other team will have to experience going out of a World Cup purely because of rain.” India captain Harmanpreet Kaur said that her team had been hopeful of a high-quality game against England, but added that they had gone into the tournament conscious of the need to top their group. “We knew from day one when we were going to start this tournament that we had to win all the games, because according to the rules if we don’t get a match because of any conditions then whoever is at the top is going to play the final,” she said. “It was very unfortunate that we didn’t get a game today, but these are the rules.” In the day’s second semi-final, Australia edged past South Africa under the Duckworth-Lewis-Stern method. The hosts scored 134-5 as the rain abated in Sydney, then returned during the innings break. There was time for South Africa to play 13 overs, chasing a revised target of 98 – and they fell six runs short. England’s hopes of a spot in the World Cup final were therefore effectively ended almost two weeks ago, when they lost their opening match of Group B against South Africa by six wickets. “We lost that first match against South Africa, which ultimately cost us, but our aim was to make the semi-finals and then play our best cricket towards the end, and we’ve had that chance taken away from us,” Knight said. The ICC has already drawn widespread criticism over the lack of a planned reserve day for the semi-finals. Both the women’s 50-over World Cup in 2017 and the equivalent men’s event in 2019 had reserve days in place for the semis. “The ICC T20 World Cups are short sharp events where reserve days are factored in for the final,” an ICC spokesperson said. “Allowing for any other reserve days would have extended the length of the event, which isn’t feasible. There is a clear and fair alternative should there be no play in any of the semi-finals with the winner of the group progressing.”