Each week my wife and I, both in our 60s, work on our allotment. The plot is on a large piece of land and at any one time there may be 20 people across the site, busy digging, watering and planting crops. We are separated by sizeable distances and in passing may say hello, but this is not a place of chat: it is a place of effort and exercise. We grow our own food, subject to ensuring that during March and early April we plant our preferred vegetable crops. It’s a healthy exercise in the fresh air, and one that contributes to the local environment and insect species, and helps us have a healthy diet. If the movement restrictions apply to the half-mile walk to our allotment and to working there for a few hours, not only will we fail to plant what is needed, but also anything planted so far will die (Coronavirus lockdown rules: what you can and cannot do, 24 March). We will lose the benefit of the land for a year – not just 12 weeks or six months. This is a plea to allow, whether for restricted hours or by rota to minimise numbers present at any one time, allotment holders to have access to their plots.Christopher JenkinsBarnet, London • My husband and I are in our 60s and we walk our dog along the Regent’s Canal towpath near Angel in Islington every day. In recent weeks the amount of joggers has increased tenfold. The path is mostly narrow. The joggers, often two abreast or in groups, come pounding toward us, sweat and saliva flying. To avoid the canal on one side and a stream of cyclists on the path, we have to pass very close to the joggers – less than an arm’s length as they pant into our faces. Almost without exception, the joggers are young and fit, totally unaware of the danger they are putting themselves and us into. Of course exercising is to be encouraged, but perhaps such strenuous workouts should be restricted to open spaces. Sarah MunroLondon • Our 17-year-old son, thwarted in his A-levels by coronavirus and facing his first day of lockdown, went skateboarding at a disused car park near a supermarket. He was verbally abused by a shopper who said he should be staying home. Please can we all accept that there is a range of exercise possibilities to keep people fit and happy during these difficult times, rather than adding to the distress of young people.Prof Andrew RussellDurham