The Rugby Football League has insisted it is still business as usual for the sport this weekend despite Leeds Rhinos deciding not to travel to Perpignan for their Super League fixture against Catalans Dragons after one of their players self-isolated when showing possible symptoms of coronavirus. The sport’s governing body have told the Guardian they will continue to follow government advice on the spread of Covid-19 and as such will not postpone the domestic league season unless things change. The Rhinos, however, have gone against that guidance and taken matters into their hands, saying they will not fulfil their fixture against the Dragons on Saturday, which was already due to be played behind closed doors. A member of Leeds’s squad is in self-isolation after displaying possible symptoms of the virus, and with the Rhinos due to fly to Barcelona on Friday morning for the game, they have taken the step of opting against travelling to the game. Leeds’s statement prompted an unusual retort from the RFL, who said their board would meet to consider sanctions for the Rhinos’ failure to fulfil the fixture. However, the Guardian understands that the possibility of Leeds being punished is highly unlikely due to the unprecedented situation the sport, and the rest of the world, currently finds itself in. “We are disappointed to be in a position whereby we have had to make this decision but the health and well-being of everyone is our paramount concern particularly with us having to fly to fulfil the fixture,” the Rhinos’ director of rugby, Kevin Sinfield, said. “We were travelling on a scheduled flight to Barcelona and with one of our players self-isolating, we felt it was the responsible thing to do both for our players and staff and members of the public who we would share the flight with. I would like to thank Catalans Dragons for their understanding.” The remainder of the weekend’s programme is scheduled to go ahead unchanged as things stand, however. Castleford host St Helens on Sunday in a Super League fixture, while the fifth round of the Challenge Cup will take place across the country. The governing body have made no commitments beyond this weekend, with the prospect of the sport either playing games behind closed doors or postponing the season altogether still possible. Meetings are expected to take place next week to clarify the sport’s long-term position.