UK consumers will spend more than £4bn getting their caffeine fix from high street coffee shops this year. Spending at big brand coffee shops, from Costa Coffee to Starbucks, will reach an all-time high this year, with sales up £1bn since 2015, according to research from Mintel. However, the rate of sales growth slowed by two-thirds between 2015 and 2019 as drinkers looked beyond high street coffee chains to buy hot drinks. A quarter of consumers buy hot drinks from fast-food chains such as McDonald’s, while a fifth buy them from a supermarket or in-store cafe such as Tesco and Ikea. One in six consumers seek out a traditional cafe to enjoy their hot drink. Nevertheless, the enduring popularity of the high street coffee shop chain is highlighted in Mintel’s research, which found that almost half (48%) of UK consumers bought a hot drink at Costa Coffee in a three-month period last year. Starbucks ranked second at 30%, with fast-food chains in aggregate third at 26%. The British love affair with popping out for a coffee began in the late 1990s when Starbucks arrived in the UK and made it cool, and Costa Coffee led the charge of the coffee shop on to high streets up and down the country. “Coffee drinking came out of the home at scale,” says Jeffrey Young, the chief executive of coffee research specialists Allegra. “Drinking coffee became a lifestyle experience, there were branded cups, you could sit in and take your time.” There are almost 26,000 outlets across the UK – from the main chains to independent coffee shops and cafes in supermarkets, service stations and retail stores – with the total market valued at more than £10bn. Costa is the biggest player, with 2,625 outlets, Starbucks has 995 and 1,048 of Gregg’s 2,000-plus stores fit the criteria of coffee shop, according to Allegra. Young says the UK coffee boom is in its “fifth wave” as different trends and tastes have emerged over the decades. The first wave was drinking at home. The second was the rise of the big branded chains across the UK, and the third wave was the arrival of antipodean influences with craft coffee. He points to pioneers such as Flat White, opened in Soho in central London in 2005, its name taken from the coffee drink popular in the southern hemisphere. Costa Coffee subsequently added the drink to its menus nationwide in 2010. The fourth wave was a science-like interest in coffee. The fifth, the current wave, is combining many of its predecessors with chains pushed to offer a more refined experience, including quality food. “It is a demand for a top-notch experience, whether that be capsule coffee at home or a more refined experience in a chain, or a boutique,” says Young. While coffee remains by far the most popular hot drink, accounting for 80% of all purchases out-of-home across the survey period, Mintel says tea is having something of a resurgence. The company found that 43% of those surveyed who bought a hot drink chose tea, up from 39% a year ago. Half of millennials selected tea as their hot drink of choice when they were out. While the classic “builders’ tea” retains its enduring popularity across all demographics, millennials are delving into specialty variants. “Specialty black, green and fruit, herbal and spice teas are particularly popular among 16- to 34-year-olds,” said Trish Caddy, senior foodservice analyst at Mintel. “Many of the latest ingredient-focused tea-based drinks, such as matcha green tea and herbal teas that give a sense of occasion, suit young consumers.” The report also found that 57% of consumers agree that more coffee shops should charge customers a fee for using disposable coffee cups. Mintel said that an outright ban could be harmful to the coffee-on-the-go crowd, citing the independent chain Boston Tea Party, which was hit by a fall in sales of £250,000 across its 22 cafes after it stopped using disposable cups. “There is no doubt that disposable coffee cups have been an essential component to the convenience of takeaway coffee,” said Caddy. “A total ban will alienate some coffee shop consumers who are motivated by convenience in the first place.”