Just after 7am on 20 February, a reader emailed to say the Guardian had “made a massive error by calling the Hanau tragedy a shooting and not correctly calling it a terrorist attack”. At about 9pm GMT the night before, Tobias Rathjen had killed nine people at two shisha bars in Hanau, near Frankfurt, before killing his mother and then himself. “Why on earth has this not been described as a terrorist attack? To me this shows a racial bias,” wrote another reader mid-morning. The Centre for Media Monitoring, a project of the Muslim Council of Britain, also contacted me at lunchtime over what it described as the Guardian’s initial reluctance to call the attack terrorism. “While we understand that you may have been waiting for confirmation from the authorities, there appears to be enough evidence for it to be called an act of terror,” said the CfMM’s director, Rizwana Hamid. She said that Rathjen’s manifesto revealed white supremacist views; counter-terrorism police were investigating; and Peter Beuth, the interior minister for the state of Hesse, had said federal prosecutors were treating it as an act of domestic terror. Not until it’s officially declared a terrorist incident would I call it that The CfMM is concerned that British media are quicker to say terrorism “where the perpetrator is identified as being a so-called Muslim”. Senior editors to whom I spoke at the Guardian explained that the same process applied for all attacks; as a matter of responsible reporting they wait for authorities to declare an act as terrorism before adopting the term. The international editor, Jamie Wilson, points out that in the immediate aftermath, facts are often unclear and caution essential: he would rather be too slow to use the “terrorism” label than too quick and be wrong. The priority is reporting what is happening. Vikram Dodd, the Guardian’s crime correspondent, says that in the hours afterwards, he interprets language: “You may hear that counter-terrorism are ‘involved’ … then that they are ‘leading the investigation’, but not until it’s officially declared a terrorist incident would I call it that.” Early lines of inquiry can be fluid. Dodd recalls how a mass stabbing in Russell Square in London in 2016 was initially investigated with support from counter-terrorism officers but within hours a terrorist motive was discounted. In the case of Hanau, German authorities appear to have raised “suspicion of terrorism” at about 9am the next morning, although the chancellor, Angela Merkel, did not use the term when she spoke later of the “horrific murders” and their racist motive. The Guardian specifically referenced terrorism from about 5pm onwards, while the newspaper of 21 February would carry a double-page spread on the attack, calling it terror or terrorism in articles and headlines. In a span of coverage that exposed fully the horror of the Hanau attack, I do not believe any lag with terminology should be blamed on double standards – the threat from far-right terrorism is well understood – but on caution around uncertainty. Nevertheless, words carry weight and any perceived asymmetry of language deserves ongoing scrutiny. • Elisabeth Ribbans is the Guardian’s readers’ editor (guardian.readers@theguardian.com)