Let’s be honest: Love Is Blind (the Netflix dating series it’s OK to admit you watched) was created for no other reason than to let audiences see what true love looks like, in the form of Lauren and Cameron. The show – which sees complete strangers go from dating to marriage within three weeks, without ever having seen each other’s faces – was not “a blind love experiment”, as the hosts, Nick and Vanessa Lachey, continuously told us. The word “experiment” conjures images of Bunsen burners and lab coats, not a beauty queen and her 90s crooner husband shepherding strangers towards nuptials with people they have just met. But it did provide some significant results. Cue Lauren and Cameron: the way they opened up to each other, even when they couldn’t see each other, was unlike any other couple on the show. And their genuine excitement when they finally met was so palpable you could almost reach out and touch it. It presents love as pretty straightforward, and usually able-bodied, heterosexual, conventionally attractive and slim There are numerous ways in which the show contradicts its egalitarian title. What this terrible, immoral, addictive, brilliant show actually teaches us is that love isn’t “blind”, it is in fact black and white, and regularly attends the gym. But largely, it presents love as pretty straightforward, and usually able-bodied, heterosexual, conventionally attractive and slim. Yet we tuned in – because we too crave companionship, and watching the show allowed us all to have an opinion and join a lively conversation. Something very special happens when a group of friends watch their new favourite show at the same time. And that co-watching experience only gets better when it’s shared with people all over the world, connected by social media and our desire to see Amber successfully trap Barnett and become the housewife she has always dreamed of being. Our shared disgust at Jessica letting the dog drink red wine from her glass was just one standout moment in the social media discourse. At a time when so much divides us, this bizarre series – even if just for a moment – bonded us together. I’m a fan of reality television. I don’t attempt to diagnose why I love the chaos it provides – I just know I have a subscription to hayu, a streaming platform solely dedicated to grade-A trash reality television. I, like many seasoned reality binge-watchers, am used to a certain level of closure at the end of a particularly good season. So while this first season of Love Is Blind sent a drug-like euphoria punching through my veins, the show’s reunion episode left me lukewarm, as I sought the kind of reality star scrutiny maybe only Andy Cohen, the creator of the Real Housewives and Married to Medicine franchises, is equipped to provide. On reuniting a year later, much was still left unsaid. I wanted Jessica and Amber, two contestants who were feuding over the same mediocre man, to really have it out. After fiances Carlton and Diamond had a viral-moment fight, during which he lost his temper and called her a bitch, I wanted someone to secure the fulsome apology she deserved. Simultaneously, it felt sad that the argument was sparked by him coming out as bisexual – and I wanted someone to wrap their arms around Carlton and tell him it wasn’t his fault the show didn’t cater to the complexity of his sexuality. I was shocked but not surprised by the way the fight played out, because black women are often treated as collateral damage, even as others rightly grapple with their own self-realisation. We’ll have to wait and see whether Netflix can reproduce the success of this first season of Love Is Blind. But like much good reality TV, it’s clear that we can get on board with this bizarre format as long as the resulting show is packed full of characters we can root for, those who leave us arguing and conflicted – and others we collectively agree we dislike. • Daniellé Dash is a TV development executive and writes about race, gender and popular culture