Amy Klobuchar, the senator from Minnesota who campaigned as a pragmatic and moderate midwesterner, has dropped out of the race to become the Democratic presidential candidate for the 2020 US election. Two Klobuchar campaign officials told the Guardian she plans to endorse her rival Joe Biden, in an apparent effort to unify moderate voters behind the former vice-president’s White House bid ahead of the crucial Super Tuesday primary elections. She is flying to Dallas and is set to join Biden at his rally Monday night. Klobuchar’s endorsement was the latest in a string of dropouts. Former South Bend mayor Pete Buttigieg decided to end his campaign Sunday evening, and was also reported to be considering endorsing Biden on Monday. Billionaire Tom Steyer dropped out over the weekend after a disappointing showing in the South Carolina Democratic primary. Klobuchar had argued that she was the best fit to face Donald Trump in the general election because of her experience and history of statewide wins in Minnesota, including in the more conservative parts of the state. Despite a high profile endorsement from the New York Times, however, Klobuchar failed to break through into the very top tier of the primary field. She qualified for more debates than most of her competitors and outraised other Democratic candidates who have won competitive races. But Klobuchar, 59, never polled beyond the high single digits or low double digits, and failed to rally the support of broad swaths of the electorate to remain in the race beyond the earliest primary contests. On policy, Klobuchar refrained from leaning to the left in an effort to win over early state activists. She did not support Medicare for All, arguably the most popular policy position of hardcore progressives such as Bernie Sanders, who is currently considered the frontrunner in the race. Instead, she focussed on pledges to improve mental health care, infrastructure projects, antitrust enforcement and lowering drug costs. That decision was characteristic of her approach to the 2020 race: run as a candidate who could appeal to the Democratic party at large rather than just one wing, and also make sure not to alienate Republicans or general election voters. She also hoped to break out of the field with a strong showing in Iowa, arguing that being a native of the midwest made her especially competitive. But it was not her night. Klobuchar was dogged by persistent allegations that she was cruel to her staff. Even when the New York Times endorsed her, the paper’s editorial board noted that those reports were problematic. “Reports of how Senator Klobuchar treats her staff give us pause. They raise serious questions about her ability to attract and hire talented people,” the Times endorsement said. “Surrounding the president with a team of seasoned, reasoned leaders is critical to the success of an administration, not doing so is often the downfall of presidencies. Ms Klobuchar has acknowledged she’s a tough boss and pledged to do better.” On multiple occasions, Klobuchar contrasted her record as an experienced lawmaker with that of Buttigieg. Klobuchar at times took aim at the 38-year-old mayor for being young and comparatively inexperienced. “I have been very clear that I respect the mayor’s experience very much in the military,” Klobuchar said during a debate in Iowa. “I just have different experience.”