Spoiler alert: this blog is published after Westworld airs on HBO in the US and Sky Atlantic in the UK on Sunday night/Monday morning. Do not read unless you have watched season three, episode one. Pity poor Jurgen Klopp. Not only has the football season been suspended with his Liverpool team on the verge of the title, but he has also been murdered by an android looking for access to a super-powerful artificial intelligence. Or, at least, someone who looks a lot like him has. The hair, the specs, heck, the German accent were a little discombobulating, but then that is Westworld for you. The sci-fi drama that often seems to revel in its ability to baffle viewers is back for a third run, and this time it has gone well and truly off the reservation. In the opening scene, we see the Klopp-a-like murdered by an android once known as Dolores. Soon we see the same robot pitching up at a tech company in Los Angeles called Incite, apparently the new beau of an executive called Liam. Their relationship doesn’t look as if it is set for life – Dolores is more interested in the AI developed by Liam’s dad than his affection. By the end of the episode, she is up to her elbows in the blood of Incite employees. The last shot of the hour sees Dolores collapsed in the arms of a former soldier by the name of Caleb. I’ll admit, when Aaron Paul appeared on screen, wearily getting out of bed in a dystopian (but lovely and sunny) LA, I let out a little cheer. For all the plot machinations of previous series, Westworld had a significant gap where the heart should have been. Already, Paul has changed the tone. He is also our guide through a significant new aspect to the story. For most of the first two seasons, the action was confined to Westworld, the theme park and AI lab. This season, we move into the world outside. Caleb is our guide, a former soldier on his uppers, both in terms of cash and mental health. We see him being given counselling to deal with his trauma. The problem is that the counselling is compulsory and, if Caleb drops out, his “score” will drop. That score, perhaps a twist by the creators Lisa Joy and Jonathan Nolan on the social credit system being rolled out in real-life China, is a means of structuring society. Without a good score, you can’t get a good job; without a good job you cannot legally survive; without a good score, all that is left for you is taking on random criminal activity. It is arranged through an app called Rico and Caleb is a registered user. It is because he takes on a Rico job (it is a “personal” – code for assault or murder, and he feels tricked into doing it) that Caleb finds himself holding Dolores in his arms at the end. He is not the first man to have taken pity on her, of course. In previous series, both cowboy Teddy and enthusiastic Westworld tourist William have held her in their arms, assuming they were consoling a delicate victim and not being entrapped by a powerful protagonist. Let’s see what happens to Caleb. I enjoyed seeing a new world laid out, one with electrified clothing, designer drugs, driverless motorbikes and nightclubs that seem halfway between an orgy and an art school graduate show. Oblivious to all this, however, is Bernard, the android host who came the closest to being the show’s conscience in the first two seasons. Bernard, who should really be known as Fornard, as he shares brain space with a simulated version of Westworld’s founder, Dr Robert Ford (I know, it is complicated), has been working as a labourer on a farm that is a combination of the bucolic west and terrifying agro-gigantism. Tending to calves, then carving massive trunks of lab meat, it is a calm-enough life, but eventually Bernard has to quit it when he is recognised by two colleagues as the man responsible for the massacre of 113 people. That massacre, of course, was the reckoning that took place in Westworld last season, as the robots faced off against the humans (and won rather convincingly) in the park. Bernard was not responsible for it; if anything, he was trying to protect his fellow robots from harm. But that is by the by now, so Bernard presses a button, releases his inner Ford and murders his accusers before they can nab him. By the end of the hour, Fornard is boarding a Chinese fishing boat, set for a return to Westworld. He is going there to look for a friend, whose identity is unknown. It may well be Maeve, another noble robot who was killed in the last series, but has appeared in the trailers for this one. Whoever it is, the audience – as ever – is in need of answers. • Who is occupying Charlotte Hale? We know the human is dead, but the android version of the Delos executive is still around and running the corporation. She wants to keep Westworld open despite all the advice. Whose artificial brain – AKA control unit – is behind it? • Who is Serac? Liam’s gruff Scottish security guard coughs up the name as Dolores does him in; he is the power behind Incite. But is it someone we have seen before? • Which other characters, currently absent, do you expect to make a comeback? Have control unit, will travel after all. • Would you take on small crime jobs for immediate social credit if the user experience was seamless? The guys behind Rico would like to know.