Mounting concerns over a possible global recession have sent financial markets around the world plunging, despite a coordinated effort by central banks to protect growth and jobs, amid the widespread disruption caused by the coronavirus outbreak. In an escalation of the worst turmoil since the 2008 financial crisis, stock markets suffered further sharp losses despite dramatic action taken by the US central bank late on Sunday. The Federal Reserve slashed interest rates to near zero in an unprecedented attempt to shore up the US economy amid travel bans and quarantine measures. Andrew Bailey, the new governor of the Bank of England, dropped a heavy hint that Threadneedle Street would step in with further support for the British economy after slashing interest rates last week alongside the government’s expansionary budget. Speaking on his first day as governor after replacing Mark Carney, Bailey said the Bank wanted to minimise the lasting damage to Britain, adding: “That’s why you saw prompt action last week, that’s why you will see prompt action again when we need to take it. The public can be assured of that.” In London the FTSE 100 index tumbled almost 8% in early morning trading, taking it below the 5,000 level to 4,898, its lowest since October 2011, before recovering some ground to trade down around 6.5%. As investors rushed to buy assets considered as safe-havens in times of stress, including US and German government bonds, shares across Europe fell under heavy selling pressure. Stocks in Germany tumbled by 7.5% and there were losses of more than 8% in Spain, Italy and France. Asian stock markets had plummeted earlier, with Japan’s Nikkei down by almost 2.5%, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng by 3.7% and Australian shares by almost 10%. On Wall Street, futures for the benchmark S&P 500 Index fell 5%, triggering a halt in trading as trading systems struggled to match buy and sell orders. “As the last few weeks have unfolded there has been a growing fear that the world faces a perfect storm,” said Paul Markham, global equities portfolio manager at the asset manager Newton Investment Management. “A strong nerve will be required and it may well get darker before we see the light.” After the second emergency rate cut by the Fed, economists warned there was little central banks could do to prevent a global recession as efforts to contain the virus disrupted company supply chains and dragged down consumer demand. With interest rates still close to the lowest levels on record following the financial crisis a decade ago, there are concerns central banks have limited ammunition left to provide further support, as the economic downturn intensifies amid fears the Covid-19 outbreak could last until spring 2021. The Fed slashed rates to 0-0.25%, the lowest rate in its history, and said it would buy $700bn (£560bn) in government bonds as it attempts to head off a severe slowdown. In coordinated action between major central banks around the world, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and Bank of Japan also stepped in with emergency measures, while the Bank of England was among six global central banks to unleash combined efforts to smooth volatile trading on financial markets. Neil Shearing, group chief economist at the consultancy Capital Economics, said governments and central banks could do little to stop a recession, but could prevent it from turning into a repeat of the 2008 financial crisis or the economic depression of the 1930s. Stay at home for 7 days if you have either: This will help to protect others in your community while you are infectious. Do not go to a GP surgery, pharmacy or hospital. You do not need to contact NHS 111 to tell them you’re staying at home. People who are self-isolating with mild symptoms will not be tested. Source: NHS England “Things are getting ugly,” he said, adding: “History suggests that equity markets are only likely to bottom out when it becomes clear that the flow of new cases of the virus has peaked. Until this happens, we should expect stock markets to remain under pressure.” Data from China showed industrial production declined by 13.5%, with investment levels in the Chinese economy tanking by a quarter and retail sales falling by a fifth in February, as the coronavirus outbreak brought the country to a standstill. The pandemic is taking a mounting toll on businesses, with a number of warnings from companies on Monday. Airlines and travel companies led the fallers on the blue-chip FTSE 100 index, with holiday travel company Tui collapsing in value by 38%. Over the weekend Tui announced it was temporarily suspending the “vast majority of all travel operations until further notice”. Ryanair, Europe’s largest short-haul airline, cancelled 80% of its flights until May and said it had not ruled out a “full grounding of the fleet” in the wake of the coronavirus crisis. The owner of British Airways, IAG, and easyJet, Europe’s number three and number four airlines respectively, also said they would cut capacity drastically. UK retailers and Kingfisher warned the coronavirus pandemic will hit sales following store closures in Europe, while betting company Flutter issued a profit warning.