Last year, Women in Music’s survey of major classical concerts confirmed that classical music is a man’s world. Only 2.3% of works programmed in the 2018-19 season by 15 of the world’s major orchestras were written by women. A survey of the same 15 major orchestras for this current season reveals a tiny improvement – of 3,997 works being performedin 2019-20’s concerts, 142 have been written by female composers, ie  3.6%. Progress is glacially slow, and the gender imbalance is too often framed as a problem for women alone to grapple with. (I am reminded of Marin Alsop, who, when asked why there are so few women conductors, will reply “I dont know. Ask the men.”) And so, on International Women’s Day, we asked 10 of the UK’s leading male conductors to nominate a female composer whose music deserves wider recognition. Their responses have been fascinating, and prove that there is a vast wealth of music out there that can enrich our musical lives. Imogen Tilden I came across Germaine Tailleferre when researching French orchestral music of the early part of the 20th century and was shocked that I hadn’t heard of her before. The Ballade for Piano and Orchestra is a beautiful woven tapestry, but for me the great works lie in her chamber music; a string quartet full of colour, perhaps overlooked because of its brevity. Listen to Valse Lente and Arabesque, both miniatures that have a surface of the nonchalant style that’s so reminiscent of that period of French music, but with an undercoat of wistful pain. Image is a gem, with an orientalist slant that reminds me of her friend and mentor Ravel and a harmony that looks forward, like Boulanger, to Messiaen.• Edward Gardner is the principal conductor designate of the London Philharmonic Orchestra. Betsy Jolas is one of those people I used to read about. She formed the Domaine musical (a concert society) with Pierre Boulez and took over Messiaen’s position as composition professor at the Paris Conservatoire. I would think, “[Hers] must be interesting music”, but I’d never had the opportunity to hear a note of it. That is, until I met Betsy at a dinner party. I was sat next to her and fell completely in love! When you start talking to her, she tells you about when Varèse came to dinner, and when she sang the Verdi Requiem conducted by Toscanini. She’s truly a walking encyclopaedia. “If her music is one tenth as extraordinary as she is, then we really have something,” I thought. That evening I was able to hear some of her music on YouTube, and by the end of the next week I had commissioned a piece from her for the Berlin Philharmonic, as part of the Tapas series. She came up with a beautiful 13-minute composition called A Little Summer Suite. It’s full of depth, humour and thought. I’m not sure it’s the kind of piece a young person could write. It has a wisdom of a certain age. The Berlin Philharmonic leapt on it with joy. We realised immediately how well she could hear everything and how she knew exactly what she wanted. Her music is wonderful. I was thrilled to have introduced her to the Berlin audience, and to be able to bring her music to London three years later in a concert in February 2019.• Simon Rattle is music director of the London Symphony Orchestra. This week I conducted the music of Franghiz Ali-Zadeh with the Minnesota Orchestra. Franghiz is one of Azerbaijan’s leading composers, and the roots of her music lie in the traditions of her native country. She often combines modern symphonic traditions with the folk art form called Mugham. Using her unique musical language in the symphonic, chamber and choral compositions, she continues the tradition of her teacher, the iconic composer of Azerbaijan, Kara Karayev (1918-82), who himself studied with Shostakovich in Moscow. Franghiz’s work is a unique blend of European and eastern music. At Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra we’ve recorded Karayev within our exploration of repertoire from former Soviet countries, Voices from the East. I discovered this music through my late father, the Ukrainian composer Ivan Karabits; it means a lot to me, to bring these voices to UK audiences. • Kirill Karabits is chief conductor of Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra. The next concert in the Voices from the East series is on 6 May. As a child, Bacewicz was a violin prodigy and highly proficient pianist, who aged 23 went to study composition in Paris with Nadia Boulanger. Bacewicz became one of Poland’s leading composers, paving the way for other female composers from younger generations, while simultaneously performing as leader of the Polish Radio Symphony Orchestra. I’m planning to programme her Music for Strings, Trumpets and Percussion in my first season as chief conductor with the Finnish Radio Symphony Orchestra. Written in 1958, it’s a blistering piece; acerbic, virtuosic, full of rhythmic drive. It’s for a very unusual lineup; the string writing alongside percussion is reminiscent perhaps of Bartók, but Bacewicz adds five trumpets on top – I imagine them placed around the back of the strings, inviting us into some kind of infernal dance.• Nicholas Collon is founder and principal conductor of Aurora Orchestra. I greatly admire the music of Ella Milch-Sheriff, a composer from Israel. Last week I premiered a work of hers at the Gewandhaus Orchestra in Leipzig that was a huge success. Her music is important for political and social reasons: she represents second generation holocaust survivors and she lives and breathes controversial Israeli society. Hebrew is her mother tongue but her closeness to the German language is dominant. In her operatic work she constantly deals with specific German-Jewish-Israeli complexities and puts them in human context – and that is very important in today’s world. Her music reflects a melting pot of Arab, Mediterranean and Israeli culture through her use of various instruments from different backgrounds and playing with colours in beautiful and very unique orchestrations, making the listener aware and conscious of conflict, but also of unity.• Omer Meir Wellber is chief conductor of the BBC Philharmonic. Louise Farrenc’s music was widely performed and celebrated during her lifetime but has largely fallen into obscurity since. Well-known as a concert pianist, she taught at the Paris Conservatoire and composed a wide range of works, including three fantastic symphonies and a large assortment of chamber music. As musical director of Royal Northern Sinfonia, I was excited to have Farrenc’s unapologetic and powerful Third Symphony brought to life earlier this season. There is no doubt that she faced an enormous challenge in having her ability recognised, but Farrenc’s work firmly stands its ground among the symphonic greats that dominated music of the mid-19th century.• Lars Vogt is music director of the Royal Northern Sinfonia. Numbers is a great title for a piece: a series of sung numbers and overlapping time signatures that is funky to conduct and fun for the singers. Its Indian-American composer, Shruthi Rajasekar, was one of three young female composers (out of four) on the National Youth Choir of Great Britain Young Composers Scheme last summer. They all wrote pieces for the choir during the course, but this one stood out to me because it was very different from vocal music with expressive text to worry about. The lack of that freed the singers to listen even more and to have fun. The numbers reference our current digital ones and zeroes, also the decimal system (leading to a nicely lopsided section in two groups of a fast five) and even the Babylonian system of 60, thus the constant appearance of “59”. But the numbers aren’t academic – they’re fun: along with some unusual instructions to the singers such as “imperious, but less certain”. I researched some of her other pieces on her website and enjoyed the Indian rhythmic influences, but still I come back to this enjoyable piece that does what it says on the tin.• Robert Hollingworth is director of I Fagiolini. Russian-born Ustvolskaya’s legacy is an example of almost ultimate existential expressionism, an individual cry against life’s circumstances, and a search for spiritual comfort in very uncomfortable living conditions. In her music she was, probably, a direct descendant of Mahler and Shostakovich. She also had an exceptional and unusual life, living almost as a hermit for many years.• Vasily Petrenko is chief conductor of the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic. Dora Pejačević was a largely self-taught Hungarian-Croatian composer. Her musical output consists mostly of songs and piano music, but she also wrote what is considered the first symphony by a Croatian composer. Her Symphony in F sharp minor (1916-1917, revised 1920) is a very ambitious, large-scale work and shows the composer in complete control of her means: the form is unorthodox but compelling with some very interesting kaleidoscopic moments, the orchestration quite dark in colours and the expression very passionate. The first complete performance was in Dresden in 1920 and was very favourably reviewed. Pejačević was a member of an important noble family but later became distanced from her class and embraced modern ideas of a merit-based society, as opposed to the old ways of aristocratic entitlement. In her development as a composer, she made her way from the earlier, salon-like small-scale pieces to her later music, such as the Symphony and the Phantasie Concertante for piano and orchestra.Her creative life was cut short by complications from childbirth in 1923.• Sakari Oramo is chief conductor of the BBC Symphony Orchestra. For most people, Finnish music means one thing: Sibelius. But since his time, new generations of composers have taken Finnish composition forward in a number of directions. The most prominent of those is Kaija Saariaho. To say she is a modern-day Sibelius wouldn’t be right, but, with a shared history and culture come themes that you find from a lot of Nordic composers: the landscape of the north, journeys and storytelling. Kaija’s music tells stories from all over the world – and even from beyond the stars. From her electronic works in the 1980s in Paris, to her more recent pieces such as her clarinet concerto D’Om le Vrai Sens, her music always draws me in to its narrative, with its vivid details. Where other composers can get lost in sound effects or structure, she always lets her music breathe and paint a picture. Rather than her operas, it’s her music for orchestra that I have been conducting for years. One memory that is particularly special is my debut with the Orchestre Philharmonique de Radio France in Paris in a programme of all-Finnish music, including the French premieres of three of Kaija’s pieces: Asteroid 4179: Toutatis, Laterna magica and Leino Songs (sung by the Finnish soprano Anu Komsi). I’ve been proud to conduct Kaija’s music at both orchestras where I am chief conductor, in Tampere, Finland, and Gothenburg, Sweden, so I look forward to bringing her music to London.• Santtu-Matias Rouvali is principal conductor designate of the Philharmonia. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.