The owners of a clothing store straddling the border between Belgium and the Netherlands have been forced to close half of their shop and cordon it off to halt the spread of the coronavirus – while cheerfully keeping the part on Dutch territory open for business. The Zeeman store in the municipality of Baarle-Nassau, where the border splits streets in half, took the unique approach after the Belgian federal government ordered the shuttering of all non-essential stores. None of the clothes on the Belgian side of the shop are available for purchase but the half of the store in the Netherlands continues to welcome customers as the Dutch government has only called for physical distancing. A cordon has been erected within the shop to ensure that customers respect the respective national measures. Marjon De Hoon, the mayor of the Dutch municipality of Baarle-Nassau, told the Flemish broadcaster VRT: “The square metres in Belgium just follow the Belgian measures. The square metres in the Netherlands follow the Dutch measures.” Symptoms are defined by the NHS as either: NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home. After 14 days, anyone you live with who does not have symptoms can return to their normal routine. But, if anyone in your home gets symptoms, they should stay at home for 7 days from the day their symptoms start. Even if it means they're at home for longer than 14 days. If you live with someone who is 70 or over, has a long-term condition, is pregnant or has a weakened immune system, try to find somewhere else for them to stay for 14 days. If you have to stay at home together, try to keep away from each other as much as possible. After 7 days, if you no longer have a high temperature you can return to your normal routine. If you still have a high temperature, stay at home until your temperature returns to normal. If you still have a cough after 7 days, but your temperature is normal, you do not need to continue staying at home. A cough can last for several weeks after the infection has gone. Staying at home means you should: You can use your garden, if you have one. You can also leave the house to exercise – but stay at least 2 metres away from other people. If you have symptoms of coronavirus, use the NHS 111 coronavirus service to find out what to do. Source: NHS England on 23 March 2020 A spokesman for Zeeman said that many of the big-selling items, including baby clothes, were available on the Dutch side while men’s shirts were on the Belgian side and therefore strictly not for sale. She said: “We show our solidarity with Belgium by keeping our store closed on that side. It is definitely not ideal, but we are happy that we can now provide customers with the necessary things.” Asked by the regional television broadcaster Omroep Brabant about the availability of the goods on show on the Belgian side, the spokesperson said: “Those people have to [buy] that via the website or another store, unfortunately. These are crazy times, we have looked for a solution in which we can still be of use to society.”