They are one of the highest profile Hollywood couples who attract wellwishers and autograph hunters in droves. So when it was discovered that Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson had tested positive for coronavirus while in Australia, the premier of Queensland let it be known that anyone who came into close contact with them should self-isolate. Social media shows the celebrity couple came into contact with quite a few people, though how many of those would qualify as “close contact” is unclear. Close contact is defined as being face to face with someone for at least 15 minutes, or being in the same enclosed space for at least two hours, so it is highly unlikely any quick chance encounters would lead to a transmission. Here is a timeline sourced from publicly available information of where Hanks and Wilson had been in the days leading up to their diagnoses. On Thursday, Hanks and Wilson confirmed that they had tested positive for Covid-19, and were currently in a hospital on the Gold Coast. Hanks had been in Queensland filming for an as yet untitled project about Elvis Presley, directed by Baz Luhrmann. “Tom has been having a wonderful time on the Gold Coast and we are so lucky to have Tom in Queensland,” Palaszczuk said on Thursday. Hello, folks. Rita and I are down here in Australia. We felt a bit tired, like we had colds, and some body aches. Rita had some chills that came and went. Slight fevers too. To play things right, as is needed in the world right now, we were tested for the Coronavirus, and were found to be positive. Well, now. What to do next? The Medical Officials have protocols that must be followed. We Hanks’ will be tested, observed, and isolated for as long as public health and safety requires. Not much more to it than a one-day-at-a-time approach, no? We’ll keep the world posted and updated. Take care of yourselves! Hanx! A post shared by  Tom Hanks (@tomhanks) on Mar 11, 2020 at 6:08pm PDT Three days earlier, the couple shared multiple shots of a cruise they took on Sydney harbour. Despite the pair posting photos with fans, Palaszczuk said that only people with “over 15 minutes of being in very close contact” were at risk, and “a selfie wouldn’t count as that”. Can’t get enough of Sydney! A post shared by  Rita Wilson (@ritawilson) on Mar 7, 2020 at 11:32pm PST Wilson also appeared on Channel Nine’s Today Extra show, as seen in this photo posted by hosts David Campbell and Belinda Russell. Hey @ritawilson thanks for coming on our show and singing! A post shared by  David Campbell (@davidcampbell73) on Mar 8, 2020 at 8:27pm PDT Hanks was at Sydney’s Bondi Beach on 8 March. Kids sock, washed ashore. Lost ashore. Bondi Beach. New South Wales. Hanx. A post shared by  Tom Hanks (@tomhanks) on Mar 7, 2020 at 5:52am PST Wilson performed at the iconic venue on the night of 7 March. The Opera House confirmed that Wilson performed in the Utzon Room, a performance attended by approximately 207 people, including Hanks. “Following news that the couple have tested positive for coronavirus in Queensland, the Opera House is in touch with NSW Health and Queensland Health and will be acting on their advice,” a spokeswoman said. Oh, @Sydney You are beautiful and @sydneyoperahouse you made a dream come true tonight. Performing at this iconic place is unlike any other. And, the warmth of the audience made me feel so welcome. Thank you from the bottom of my heart. A post shared by  Rita Wilson (@ritawilson) on Mar 7, 2020 at 4:26am PST Hanks and Wilson walked along the beach and then had a drink at the North Bondi RSL, according to footage captured by photographers. Two days earlier, Wilson had also performed in Brisbane’s South Bank. Thank you , Brisbane, Australia! SOLD OUT! I am humbled by your support. Can’t wait for this show! @EmporiumHotel pic.twitter.com/WppiMuTZEP A week earlier, Hanks was spotted by fans while on a Gold Coast beach. Day at the beach and got to meet @tomhanks proper legend too! Clocked him early on my walk but didn’t want to catch him in front of so many people so ran ahead and he’s like I knew you got me 😂😂😂😂 #tomhanks A post shared by  Frankie Jay Lee (@frankiejaylee_) on Feb 28, 2020 at 8:24pm PST It’s as yet unknown when Hanks and Wilson entered Australia, but it is clear the Wilson was in Los Angeles as of 28 February – at a charity event for breast cancer research. LA , you blow me away with your generosity. We raised so much money for breast cancer research tonight! @wcrfcure @bcrfcure THANK YOU! @jonasbrothers performed and rocked the house. Everyone dancing! @nickjonas @joejonas @kevinjonas thank you so much! Our emcee , real life doctor and fantastic actor @kenjeong you’re the best! @tomford #richardbuckley you’re the most fun dinner partners #reneezellweger Your speech was so beautiful. Thank you for being our Woman of Courage recipient tonight. @mozellamusic @rodaworld so happy you we’re both there shining your lights! Let’s find a cure. We can never give up! A post shared by  Rita Wilson (@ritawilson) on Feb 27, 2020 at 11:30pm PST Similarly, Hanks and Wilson were in Los Angeles on 24 February. Hanks and Wilson attended the Oscars awards ceremony in LA, where Hanks was nominated for best supporting actor for A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood. However, it is unlikely he had contracted the virus at this point, a month before his diagnosis. Got to have some fun last night. I used to bring my real camera now I just use my iPhone. 1. @tomhanks and I at beginning of the @theacademy Oscars. 2. My neighbor @penelopecruzoficial who I simply love!!3. @salmahayek checking out the #GlennSpiro earrings I got to wear!4. Screens of Best Supporting Actor category 4. Tom@and his director #MarielleHeller for @abeautifuldaymovie still SMH why she wasn’t nominated 6. The ever sweet and kind #keanureeves whose generous spirit is a breath of fresh air 7. #mayarudolph #kristenwiig Can they host next year? Are they not the best?!? 8. @chrissymetz crushing her song from Breakthrough written by 11 time Oscar nominee #dianewarren Give this woman an Oscar! 9. Tom , #bradleycooper and I chatting it up. Bradley can do it all. Act, direct and he produced The Joker. 10. The big surprise @eminem who won an Oscar for his song Lose Yourself. A post shared by  Rita Wilson (@ritawilson) on Feb 10, 2020 at 12:33pm PST However, it is clear that Hanks was also in Australia prior to his attendance at the Oscars, with Brisbane’s Courier Mail reporting that he shared a meal of 50c chicken wings on the Gold Coast with some fans. Again, it is unlikely the Oscar-winning actor had contracted Covid-19 at this point. Similarly, the actor posed for this photograph at a restaurant in NSW as early as 2 February.