In the days after Manchester City received their two-year Champions League ban for overstating their sponsorships, Uefa’s “financial fair play” concept became a target of some misdirected fury, accused of stifling clubs’ ambitions by limiting the subsidies of owners. While that ire was playing out, the EFL’s review into the calamitous collapse of Bury, 10 miles up the road from City, was concluding that reliance on an owner’s subsidies was the prime reason for the club’s demise, a painful illustration of the need for FFP. Jonathan Taylor QC, commissioned to review the process leading to Bury’s expulsion from the Football League after 125 years’ membership, determined that the club crumbled because its last owner but one, Stewart Day, funded excessive players’ wages, creating a terminal crisis when his money ran out. Many clubs across Europe have fallen to this most basic financial danger, and Uefa gave a lead by introducing FFP in 2010-11, encouraging clubs to spend not much more than the revenues they make. While City’s sanction led to an onslaught from some against the “break-even” principle, all three EFL divisions are engaged in work to tighten their FFP rules. Salary caps have been suggested for the Championship, whose clubs in 2017-18 spent 106% of their collective revenues on wages, and in Leagues One and Two, where Bury’s demise has injected urgency into the search for stronger cost management. Taylor’s review is understood to have cut through the outrage Bury fans understandably feel towards Steve Dale, who bought the club from Day for £1 in December 2018, and as the end approached, said in an interview: “I didn’t even know there was a football team called Bury.” Taylor concluded in his report, which the EFL will soon publish, that Bury were in terminal crisis when Day handed over the club, because he had steepled the wage bill far above the revenues, bankrolling the losses from his own money. The fatal flaw in this method of funding football clubs’ ambitions is that when the owner runs out of money – which many do, not blessed like Manchester City’s ownership with the limitless fortunes of a Gulf state – the players’ contracts still need to be paid and the club is stricken. The crisis at Bolton Wanderers, another historic club up the road from Manchester, was similarly caused after Eddie Davies, a very wealthy owner, had bankrolled excessive wages and losses for years. Shortly before he died in 2018, Davies announced he could no longer do so, and although he wrote off the extraordinary loss of £180m, Bolton were almost immediately insolvent, collapsing into administration in May 2019. Bury, taken over by Day in 2013, funded to win promotion from League Two in 2015, then for another push following relegation in 2018, were doomed when his property companies collapsed into administration. After seeing the figures submitted to the EFL, Taylor is understood to have concluded that Bury were committed to wages so far beyond the club’s revenues that Dale’s grim few months as the owner only delayed inevitable insolvency. The maddening reality of this, the needless destruction of a football club, genuine distress caused to its loyal supporters and a heart-shaped hole left in a town, is that this expulsion happened during the richest period by far in football’s history. Bury, formed in 1885, endured through economic depression, recessions, the collapse of Lancashire’s cotton industry, two world wars, football’s bleak 1980s, only to finally implode in an age of billions. Rather than pay players from its fabulous revenues, the game still allows clubs to be perilously dependent on limited extra funding from owners, and the financial vagaries of their own industries. Day is said to have put £9m into Bury, yet the club and its 134-year-old Gigg Lane home have literally nothing to show for it, only ruin. Such existence-threatening overspending is the bottom-line reason why Uefa gave a lead and introduced FFP, as it saw a majority of Europe’s clubs in the red, owing money everywhere including to each other, during football’s greatest boom. The Premier League sneered at first, then suffered Portsmouth’s hideous collapse in 2010 and rather quickly after that introduced rules limiting owner-funded losses. The Championship’s system allows clubs to lose £39m across three seasons if bankrolled by an owner, but the division’s finances are English football’s most stressful, distorted by parachute payments for clubs relegated from the Premier League, and a review is under way. In Leagues One and Two, a “salary cost management protocol” limits wage spending, to 60% of turnover in League One, 50% in League Two, but owners are allowed to put in unlimited extra money as “football fortune” money, which can all be spent on wages. The system is almost designed to inflate wages beyond clubs’ means – Bury signed players from competitor clubs last season by offering fabulous pay packages they could not then afford – and it has a fundamental hole in it. Owners are required only to guarantee funding for a season, but players’ contracts are for two, three, five years; in Day’s case, they outlasted his ability to pay. It seems to be seductive for some to allege that financial restraints were finally introduced only to thwart Manchester City’s rise, fuelled by fortunes from an oil-rich state. At the bottom of the League One table this season, the asterisks tell a different story: Bolton deducted 12 points, Bury expelled.