One of the things I need to remedy is is not having spent enough time in Greece. I’ve been there only twice (both times to the islands), but I find myself daydreaming about being there more than any other place. I think that’s why I cook so much Greek food. This potato stew, rich with tomatoes and lots of olive oil (like a potato version of gigantes plaki), made a very pleasing dinner with a side of lemon sauteed greens. It’s a stew that’s comforting, punchy and fresh. It’s great cold the next day, too, when I’d eat it with a green salad and this whipped feta dip. It’s the dip I make most often, and I know I’ll be doing so right though the summer. Serve with warm bread or anything dippable. This is my approximation of patates yahni; I’m sure there are lots of ways to make it, but I think the secret is adding a good amount of olive oil – it might be more than you are used to, but it is the key to the richness of this stew. This works with other roots, and butter beans too. Prep 15 minCook 1 hrServes 4 Extra-virgin olive oil1 onion, peeled and finely chopped2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely sliced800g medium waxy potatoes, cut into 3cm pieces1 x 400g tin chopped tomatoes1 tsp dried oregano1 good pinch dried chilli flakes1 good pinch ground allspice or 2 crushed allspice berriesSalt and black pepper100g kalamata olives, stoned and torn in half1 small bunch parsley, roughly chopped1 tbsp black onion seeds100g feta (I use a vegetarian one; optional)Flatbreads, to serve Heat a large pan on a medium heat, add a splash of olive oil and the onion, and cook for 10 minutes until soft and sweet. Add the garlic and cook for two minutes. Add the potatoes, tinned tomatoes, four tablespoons of olive oil, the oregano, chilli flakes, allspice and a generous amount of salt and black pepper. Add 300ml boiling water, so that the potatoes are almost covered, and bring to a simmer. Turn down the heat to low and continue to simmer for 30 minutes, until the potatoes are cooked through. Stir through the olives, spoon into bowls, and scatter with the parsley, onion seeds and feta, if using. Serve with warm flatbreads. This is my version of tirokafteri. If you are vegetarian, check if your feta uses rennet – authentic Greek ones usually do but plenty (most supermarket ones) are available without. Prep 20 minServes 8 200g block feta (I use a vegetarian one)4 tbsp thick Greek yoghurtLemon juice and zest½ garlic clove, peeled and gratedDried red chilli flakesSalt and black pepper1 tsp toasted cumin seeds1 tsp Greek oregano (or other dried oregano)Extra-virgin olive oilFlatbreads, to serve Put the feta in a food processor with two tablespoons of the yoghurt and a squeeze of lemon juice, and blitz to loosen. Empty into a bowl, fold through the remaining yoghurt, add the garlic, a pinch of chilli, and season with salt and pepper. It should be a similar thickness and texture to hummus – add a little more yoghurt to thicken, or lemon juice to loosen, if need be. Top with the cumin, oregano, a generous zesting of lemon, another pinch of chilli and a good glug of oil. Serve with flatbreads or toasted traditional bread.