I think of herbs as like a group of friends. Parsley, the one everyone likes, who holds the crew together. Mint is sparky, always first on the dancefloor. Coriander splits opinion, isn’t to everyone’s taste. Basil is a lovable extrovert and livens things up. Tarragon is opinionated, and usually best in small doses. Dill is another live wire, also best in short bursts unless you really want to party. But, together, the group is a perfect blend. Using herbs bravely, in large quantities, is the best way to eat them – think tabbouleh, piles of herbs next to Vietnamese pancakes, delicate omelettes aux fines herbes. If you dislike one, leave it out and add more of another: this is your dinner. I, however, am friends with them all. Filling and fresh all at once, a slice of this is my dream lunch. I use a mixture of herbs here, about three-quarters soft-flavoured herbs, such as parsley and coriander; the rest tarragon and dill, with their stronger tastes. Prep 20 minChill 40 minCook 1 hrServes 8 For the pastry250g plain or light spelt flour1 tsp saltA few sprigs fresh thyme, leaves roughly chopped125g butter, cold from the fridge 4-6 tbsp ice-cold water 1 egg, beaten For the fillingOlive oil2 shallots, peeled and finely sliced3 large eggs350ml milk (whole, soy, almond, oat – your choice)Salt and black pepperNutmeg, for grating150g hard cheese, grated (cheddar, gruyère, comté), plus extra for topping3 large handfuls soft herbs (about 50g; I use a mixture of tarragon, dill, parsley and coriander), any harder stalks removed and roughly chopped You can make the pastry either by hand or in a food processor. Start by mixing the flour, salt and thyme, then pulse in the processor or mix with a wooden spoon. Add the butter and either pulse or rub with your fingers until you have a rough breadcrumb consistency. Add the water, drop by drop, pulsing or mixing each time, until the mixture forms a dough. Shape into a disc, wrap in baking paper and refrigerate for 30 minutes or so. Once the pastry is chilled, roll it out on a floured surface into a 3mm-thick large disc just wider than a 24cm, loose-bottomed, fluted tart tin. Roll the pastry on to a rolling pin and lay it over the tart tin. Push the pastry into the edges of the tinwith your fingers, then put back in the fridge . Pop it into the fridge for another 10 minutes if you have the time. Heat the oven to 210C (190C fan)/gas 7. Cover the pastry with baking paper and fill with baking beans , rice or old dried beans to weigh it down. No need to trim the sides yet (I do this at the end, as that way you’ll be sure your pastry doesn’t shrink down). Bake for 15 minutes, then remove from the oven, lift out the beans and paper, brush the pastry with a little beaten egg and return to the oven for 10-15 minutes. When it’s ready, take it out, and leave the oven on. Once cooled, trim the edges of the pastry with a sharp knife so you get a nice flat edge to your tart before you add the filling. Meanwhile, make the filling. Heat a splash of olive oil in a large pan, add the shallots and cook for eight to 10 minutes on a medium heat, stirring occasionally, until soft and sweet. Set aside to cool. Break the eggs into a measuring jug and beat well. Pour in the milk, add a good pinch of salt and pepper, a grating of nutmeg (about a quarter of a seed) and the grated cheese, and mix. Once the shallots are cool, fold them into the egg mixture, add the herbs and mix well. Put the tart tin on a baking tray (to catch any leaks), pour the filling into the blind-baked pastry case and level the top. Grate over a generous layer of cheese, and bake for 30-35 minutes, until golden and just set. I buy herbs at my local greengrocer, where the bunches are bigger, better and cheaper than in supermarkets. Use whatever soft herbs you have and love here, but be mindful that some – such as dill and tarragon – are much more punchy, so I like to balance them out with milder herbs to make up the bulk of the leaves. Prep 10 minCook 2 minServes 4-6 1 large bunch coriander, leaves picked1 bunch parsley, leaves picked1 bunch dill, leaves picked1 bunch mint, leaves picked1 bunch basil, leaves picked For the dressing 4 garlic cloves, peeled and finely sliced1 pinch dried red chilliJuice and zest of 1 limeSalt and black pepper4 tbsp olive oil100g skin-on almonds, toasted and roughly chopped Wash the herbs well, then dry them in a salad spinner or by spreading them on clean tea towels. Keep in the fridge until you need them. For the dressing, heat the oil in a frying pan, add the garlic and cook until it begins to brown around the edges. Transfer the crisp garlic to a plate and pour the oil into a heatproof bowl or jug to cool. Once cool, mix the chilli, lime zest and juice and some salt and pepper into the oil. When you are ready to eat, dress the herbs, tossing to coat everything, and top with the crisp garlic and almonds.