France’s hopes of a first Grand Slam for a decade were ended by their own indiscipline and Scottish performance that blended defensive grit with attacking invention. An early yellow card for François Cros was followed in the first half by red for Mohamed Haouas and while those two losses did not make the defeat inevitable, they contributed to an out-of-sorts display at odds with the form that had produced three consecutive victories. Failure to pick up even a losing bonus leaves them level with England on 13 points at the top of the Six Nations table. They now have to pick themselves up for their home game against Ireland on Saturday night, while England have to await news on the rearrangement of their match against Italy in Rome. For their part, Scotland will travel to Wales with hopes of at least holding on to third place. Their win against Italy a fortnight ago was not seen as hugely significant given the modest nature of the opposition, but this was altogether more impressive. Unlikely as it sounds after their defeats by Ireland and England, a win in Cardiff would take them to the top and even if that lofty status were temporary it would provide compelling evidence of real progress after a difficult campaign without their playmaker Finn Russell following his falling-out with the head coach, Gregor Townsend. Sean Maitland will receive plaudits for his two tries – one either side of half-time – while Stuart McInally showed a poacher’s instinct to score later on off a misfiring lineout. Adam Hastings added his team’s other points with the boot, but the key ingredients of their success were the well-drilled defence that has been the most significant feature of this campaign and the indomitable will to win of Stuart Hogg, for whom this was a first victory as captain. France, who had to bring Peato Mauvaka on to the bench after Camille Chat was injured in the warm-up, lost Romain Ntamack to a head knock early on. They were deprived of Cros for 10 minutes for a dangerous tackle on Grant Gilchrist – although Paul Willemse seemed to be the real culprit – then worse followed for them close to half-time, when Haouas was sent off for punching Jamie Ritchie. A man down at the first scrum, France were penalised for not driving straight and Hastings opened the scoring with a simple effort from 25 metres. The stand-off added another, longer effort near the midway point in the half, but a moment of genius from Antoine Dupont put the visitors ahead with the scrum-half’s perfectly weighed punt being collected and touched down in the right corner by Damian Penaud. Mathieu Jalibert, Ntamack’s replacement, converted from the touchline. Scotland tried to counter immediately, but their momentum was halted when a brawl involving several players from each side broke out close to the France line. Haouas’s offence was the most blatant – at least after several reviews of the incident – and he was sent off for the right hook on Ritchie. Another penalty in front of the posts produced another three points for Hastings and Scotland and in the last play of the half Maitland added a try. Gilchrist made the initial opening as the defence was stretched to breaking point, Hogg took the attack on, then Sam Johnson put the winger in at the right corner. Hastings missed the conversion, but a 14-7 half-time lead against 14 men was an excellent position for the home team to be in. That became 21-7 five minutes into the second half with Maitland again touching down and Hastings converting. Hogg was the instigator this time, breaking from midfield after Hamish Watson had turned over a France attack and some slick passing involving Chris Harris and Ali Price ended up with Johnson again giving the winger the space he needed to score. The arrival of the rain made handling trickier and another France attack was stopped just short. A Jalibert penalty took them into double figures and briefly revived their chances of mounting a late recovery until McInally, just off the bench, scored. The hooker threw in poorly, but the ball bounced off a French lock, allowing him to collect and race clear from 20 metres out. Hastings converted and at 28-10 down France realised the game was up. Their captain, Charles Ollivon, got a score back five minutes from time, with Jalibert converting. Another try would have produced a losing bonus point and give France the edge going into the final round of fixtures, but it was Scotland who came closer to scoring in the dying moments of the match.