Europe has become the global centre of the coronavirus pandemic, according to the World Health Organization. In France, where I am writing from, President Macron has put the country in a “health war” lockdown. Cafes, restaurants, theatres, public parks are closed and all non-essential activities have stopped. In living memory there’s never been anything like this: under Nazi occupation, as we know, Paris culture and nightlife kept functioning rather well. Covid-19 is upon us now, and many of our continent’s large cities feel like they’re fast sliding into one of those dystopian movie scripts with empty streets, face masks, surgical gloves and self-isolation the new normal. With hospital emergency units bracing themselves for much worse yet to come, it feels almost irrelevant to dwell on what this moment says about our place in the world as Europeans, or which feelings we are able to muster – or not – for one another and for others overseas. Postwar Europe’s institutional set-up was meant to epitomise international cooperation and solidarity, and to set a form of global example in the process. Will any of that survive now as countries start to wall themselves in? And what can we citizens do about it? Postwar Europe’s institutional set-up was meant to epitomise international solidarity. Will any of that survive now? After Donald Trump signalled last week that the US wanted to de facto seal itself off from Europe, I remembered an oped by two of his senior team members published in 2017. “The world is not a ‘global community’, but an arena where nations ... compete for advantage,” they’d written. With Covid-19, that “arena” is put into even sharper focus. And nationalist reflexes are hardly a Trumpian monopoly these days. (Reports that Trump offered a German biopharmaceutical company a fat sum of money to secure a vaccine exclusively for the US only added to a general go-it-alone picture.) There isn’t much official coordination or sticking-together on display in Europe itself. National governments, including Germany’s, have sealed their national borders to neighbouring states or are increasing controls. The rationale for much of this can be mind-boggling. Borders don’t stop the virus. Some of what’s at work is that rightwing populist credos have in recent years infected entire swaths of our continent’s politics. For them, there is only one single measure of collective self-identification and solidarity: the ethno-national level. Hungary’s prime minister Viktor Orbán, to take an example, lost no time holding “foreigners” responsible for the pandemic. As events spiralled and with the death count mounting, I wondered about empathy and solidarity: what triggers them? What does a pandemic crisis say about our capacity for such feelings and modes of action? And could grassroots, citizens’ initiatives possibly course-correct some of the egoism of states? In his book Ordinary Virtues, Michael Ignatieff quotes a speech Eleanor Roosevelt gave at the United Nations in 1958. She was speaking about human rights conventions, but the gist of her text can apply to the notion of human solidarity at large. “Where, after all, do universal human rights begin? In small places, close to home – so close and so small that they cannot be seen on any maps of the world. Yet they are the world of the individual person ... Without concerted citizen action … we shall look in vain for progress in the larger world.” Being the global centre of the pandemic means we in Europe hold a specific responsibility in the way we react to this situation, and in how we behave also towards others beyond our shores. Perhaps it helps to think a bit about how we approached the climate crisis as a collective cause for mobilisation (think of the Paris climate agreement). Why couldn’t we now clearly identify Covid-19 as another danger that needs to be addressed collectively – and take up the task as citizens to make that message loud and clear? However different, both these perils have this in common: they transcend all national boundaries and they threaten lives. The “us” versus “them” logic of nationalists and populists becomes absurd in the face of these phenomena. So here’s a question. While governments scramble, is it too early to think of launching a Europe-wide citizens’ online campaign for solidarity in the age of the coronavirus? Could people create a movement that says, let’s help each other as much as we can, and in ways that cut across the national divides many of our governments are resorting to? Videos of Italians in lockdown singing from their balconies to keep their spirits up have been admirable. Could some of that gusto spread and morph into a Europe-wide flurry of videos chanting our empathy and willingness to show solidarity with one another? Wherever we may live and whatever language we may speak, sending that kind of message across our “Corona-centre” continent would hold special meaning, surely not just for ourselves now, but for others also, and perhaps for the future as well. To be sure, for the moment we are stunned by the shock of what’s unfolding and bewildered by what is yet heading our way. Also, still too many people seem confused or in a form of denial as to the exact extent of what we’re facing. Until just days ago, some people in Paris thought best to keep partying, or to attend crowded public protests. Likewise in Ireland, videos of people celebrating in packed bars last weekend have caused outrage. Trust in institutions and resistance to fake news are being put to the test. Pessimists will say our European capacity to come together and show generosity, or even elementary openness to others, has already been entirely blunted by the crises of the past decade (our numbness to Syria’s killing fields is, to me, the greatest case in point). We are no doubt now in severe, introspective, fear-and-fragmentation European mode. But for those who still believe we can be a community of a kind, and that our continental space (or the world beyond) should not be turned into an “arena”, now is the time to ask ourselves how we will want to look back at this phase of our collective history. How will we want future generations to look back at us, and what kind of message do we want to send to the rest of the world? And please note, with every mention of Europe I include the UK. We are one continent, and the virus is among us all. Discord or “social distancing” among nation-states makes no sense in the face of an invisible enemy in our midst which makes no distinction about its victims. And look around: ordinary virtues aren’t absent at all. Gestures of empathy and solidarity are multiplying at a local level – medical students volunteering to help hospitals, or neighbours helping the elderly get food. Why not invent something symbolically similar at a wider, transnational level, and by making use of digital tools? Politicians have done little of this. But citizens can show the way. Artists, creators, start-ups, activists, anyone or any network that’s part of the fabric that binds us together in beautiful, meaningful ways under ordinary circumstances, could take a stand for cross-border solidarity in these extraordinary circumstances. Scientists and medics are of course sharing and coming together. Why not extend that to other parts of our societies? It’s obvious that our only chance to somehow mitigate this catastrophe is to act together, or at least to act in ways that are closely attentive to others, not blind or negligent towards them. Many of us are now hunkering down at home, and it’s all but natural that we focus on immediate day-to-day needs, the health of loved ones, saving our work or our livelihoods, in our entirely up-ended lives. But if our claims to human empathy have any meaning at all, then now is a good time to think of building up a pan-European chorus of voices for solidarity. Sure, it won’t in itself bring us any closer to a vaccine, nor immunise us against the virus, but it could help immunise us against something else – the nasty undercurrents of nationalism that are lurking under the surface. As we Europeans stand at the epicentre of it all, it’s up to us to make solidarity viral. • Natalie Nougayrede is a Guardian columnist 