Inevitably, the big story to come out of last week’s budget were the measures to tackle the pandemic. But if we were living in anything even vaguely resembling normal times, things would have been different. Just weeks ago, Boris Johnson’s government presumed that the most eye-catching, headline-grabbing, media-friendly budget announcement would be the pledge to triple investment in roads, railways, research and broadband, with some money also for housing. Over the five years of this parliament, more than £600bn is to be invested, with around £120bn being spent each year. When it comes to infrastructure spending – though to not much else – the age of austerity is well and truly over and the once elusive magic money tree has finally been located. Despite having been in the post for just a few weeks, and despite delivering his first budget in the midst of the most serious public health crisis for a century, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, set out to address one of the most intractable issues that has confronted every recent administration: Britain’s ageing, creaking and, in some cases, literally Victorian infrastructure. But the government’s ambitions are even grander. This, Sunak claimed, was “a budget for people right across the country” in which “no region will be left behind”. “By investing historic amounts in British innovation and world-class infrastructure,” he told parliament, “we will rebalance opportunities and lay the foundations for a decade of growth for everybody.” London is not just the biggest city in the UK, it is the biggest city in western Europe We were further informed by the chancellor that this was the “levelling up” budget. What he promised was not just gleaming new railways and roads, but, more, that the process of constructing them and the benefits that would arrive once they were in place would be shared by the whole country. But if we as a nation really want to see the inequalities between the regions reduced, we need to level with ourselves about the scale of the disparity between the wealthy south and the “left behind” towns, in the north and elsewhere. We also need to ask to what extent increases in infrastructure alone, important though it undoubtedly is, address the problem. Not only does the UK have the highest levels of regional inequality among the major economies, the imbalance is widening, not narrowing. The accountancy firm EY has forecast that, unless such imbalances are tackled, the north will continue to fall behind the south until 2023. And this is not just a north-south divide issue. The small towns of the disadvantaged regions are faring particularly badly and are likely to see far lower levels of growth than the bigger northern cities. Beyond north v south and big cities v small towns, there is the urban elephant in the room – the sheer scale of London and the privileged position it and the south-east has long enjoyed when it comes to capital investment and infrastructure spending. While everyone knows that London is both big and overprivileged when it comes to spending, the scale of its dominance is poorly understood. London is not just the biggest city in the UK, it is the biggest city in western Europe. It is also the richest region. London’s population is around 160% the size of the next 10 British cities combined and, historically speaking, that figure is comparatively low. In the 1750s, London was 282% the size of her next 10 rivals. There are now several boroughs in the capital with populations of more a third of a million. Croydon has a bigger population than Leicester, Newham more than Sunderland and Lambeth is more populous than Aberdeen. But London bias is not just a consequence of its size; it is baked into the political system. The guidelines that influence decisions on which infrastructure investments are deemed value for money, the so-called “green book” rules, favour the capital and the south-east, where returns will be highest. The effects of such formula amount, at times, to a national disgrace. As Dan Jackson points out in his brilliant book The Northumbrians, transport infrastructure spending for London in 2014 stood at around £2,500 per head, according to the Institute for Public Policy Research. The corresponding figure for the north-east of England was just £5 per head. Little wonder that region is where some of the highest levels of antipathy towards the capital are to be found. So £600bn is a lot of money, but not that much when set against decades of under-investment and centuries of London bias. Over the past half century there have been around 40 initiatives that have attempted to narrow the economic and infrastructural inequalities between the UK regions. Most were short-term and few have had any significant effect. It will take more than this increase in infrastructure spending, or the government’s commitment to HS2, to shift the dial. If levelling up is to be more than an election slogan, the government’s infrastructure strategy, published later this year, will need to be more revolutionary. As Lord Kerslake, chair of the UK2070 Commission, warned last month, if government can’t “go big, it should go home”. He added: “It’s almost better not to raise people’s expectations if you don’t intend to follow through.” David Olusoga is a historian and broadcaster