A teenage girl says she suffered serious burns and lasting injuries when Phoenix police officers pinned her to scalding hot asphalt during a heatwave last year, the latest brutality claim against a department that has faced growing backlash over its use of force. On 20 August 2019, Phoenix police were responding to calls of a fight between a group of high school students when Roniah Trotter, 17, said a policeman grabbed her and held her face down on the sidewalk while trying to arrest her, placing his knee on her back. By the time officers allowed her to get off the ground, she had suffered second-degree burns across her shoulder and arm, her medical records show. There were record-breaking 113F (45C) temperatures that day. “My face was burning,” Trotter, now 18, told the Guardian one year after the arrest left her with permanent scars. “When they did eventually get me off the floor, the pavement had burned my skin off.” Trotter, then a junior in high school, was jailed and charged with assaulting an officer. The teenager, who filed a formal lawsuit against the department on Monday, is speaking out and sharing photos of her injuries at a time when police across the US are once again under scrutiny for the ways they assault, abuse and kill Black Americans. In Phoenix, a 28-year-old man died in police custody last month after police held him down on hot asphalt for several minutes. In July, the Guardian obtained footage of an officer in the city slamming a 23-year-old woman to the ground within seconds of a traffic stop, and in August, two women shared accounts of sexual abuse by police. An officer in another case is facing sexual assault charges. “Breonna Taylor lost her life. Thank God that wasn’t me. But I’m still hurting,” said Trotter. “The cops have to be held accountable for what they did to me.” Brutal summer heat waves have created an annual and worsening public health crisis in Phoenix, which is considered America’s hottest city. The problem is so bad that homeless people living outside sometimes burn their feet, and the city has made it illegal to walk dogs on hiking trails when temperatures climb above 100F (37.8C) and encourages owners to put shoes on dogs. On the day of Trotter’s arrest, the National Weather Service warned that excessive heat was creating “rare, dangerous and deadly” conditions. But the officers did not appear to have considered these hazards when they approached the girl, according to her complaint. Trotter, a dancer who hopes to become a nurse, said she was riding the bus home from school when she got caught in an argument with a classmate, which escalated into shouts. The driver ordered a group of students off the bus and called dispatch. Once she got off the bus, Trotter said, she and another girl got into a physical fight. The altercation was relatively short and ended without any serious injuries, according to her complaint. Then police arrived. There were several officers on the scene, and one of them handcuffed a girl who was shouting, Trotter recalled. Then an officer grabbed Trotter. He brought her to the ground, and Trotter, who was wearing a sleeveless top, immediately felt the burning pavement on her skin. “I have never felt nothing so hot,” she recalled. She begged the officer to get her off the ground before she started to feel faint, she said. “I felt like no one could hear me, like I was really going to pass out.” Trotter remembered she cried for her mother, who was not at the scene. “I was just like, ‘Mom, mom’, saying my mom’s name.” After officers got her off the ground she became aware of her injuries: “I was like, ‘Is my skin gone?’ My skin was literally hanging off of my forearm.” Police called medics to the scene, who she said bandaged her with some type of gauze. She was not, however, seen by a doctor or given burn treatment, despite the fact that the sidewalk had burned through a layer of skin, leaving her arm with bright pink exposed flesh, photos show. “I didn’t get medical help, nothing.” Instead, police took her to the precinct, booking her for resisting arrest and assault against multiple officers on the scene. Her mother later took her to the emergency room, where she was diagnosed with second-degree burns. In police reports, officers described Trotter as “erratic” and violent, saying they had to take her down to the ground due to her behavior and that she was kicking at them. Police said Trotter admitted to physically fighting another girl and that she later apologized for her behavior with police. The reports did not document any injuries to the officers, and there were no allegations that the other girl suffered serious injuries. In a 22-page incident report, there is only a single mention of Trotter’s injuries: “It appeared Trotter sustained a scrape to her left shoulder as well as her right arm.” Phoenix police spokeswoman Mercedes Fortune said in a statement that Trotter was “aggressive and refused to listen to the officer”. Fortune said Trotter was “taken down to the sidewalk and within 33 seconds was handcuffed”. Fortune also said fire personnel treated Trotter and “officers were advised Trotter did not need to be hospitalized”. Police completed a “use of force” report and found there were no policy violations, she said. Trotter is not the first Phoenix resident to be arrested in a questionable manner during a heatwave. Last month, Phoenix police released body-camera footage showing the arrest of Ramon Timothy Lopez, 28, who died in custody after he was held on asphalt for several minutes in 100-degree heat. Police have not disclosed a cause of death. A 911 caller had said Lopez was “acting kind of funny”. His brother told KNXV-TV, a local TV station, that he wasn’t surprised he was resisting the officers as they held him down, saying, “Who wouldn’t be fighting? He was fighting for his life, and he lost.” Heather Hamel, a civil rights attorney representing Trotter, said the fact that Phoenix police allow civilians to suffer burns “reflects the sheer cruelty of this department”. “They have this idea that the ends justify the means, no matter how brutal those means are,” she added. There doesn’t appear to be any policy to prevent these kinds of injuries, continued Hamel: “In a city that is aware of the danger these temperatures pose to animals, it’s absurd to me that they haven’t also created specific policies within their department to protect residents.” Hamel said it was also hard to imagine this type of brutal arrest against white high schoolers: “The response would’ve been to laugh it off and say, ‘You guys are done now.” I don’t think it would escalate to violence … White youth are seen as innocent and in need of nurturing and care. All children should be seen that way.” Studies have repeatedly shown that Black youth are more likely to be criminalized for typical adolescent behavior, and a recent Arizona Republic analysis found that although Black residents make up 7% of the Phoenix population, they were subject to 19% of police force incidents. The department, one of the deadliest in the country, also disproportionately kills Black and Latino residents. Hamel argued that the best way to minimize this kind of violence is to reduce interactions between police and civilians, which is a key part of the growing calls across the country to defund police agencies. “A police officer shouldn’t have been responding to a call of an after school fight between teenagers.” Phoenix, however, has rejected calls to defund its department. In June, the city approved a $24m increase for police. It took about a month for Trotter to recover from her injuries, and the healing process was painful, requiring a procedure where doctors had to scrub off dead skin, she said. The police assault charges also caused her significant stress: “I was the victim … but I realized the cops can just make the story be what it really wasn’t.” She worried about her dreams of nursing school: “No one’s gonna wanna hire a nurse who beats the police.” She was also put on juvenile probation for the fight with the other girl. Court records show the charges of resisting arrest and assaulting police were dismissed in October. Fortune, the police spokeswoman, insisted the charges weren’t dropped, but did not provide further information. A spokesperson for the prosecutor’s office said it does not comment on juvenile charges. But Trotter still lives with anxiety. For a while, she didn’t want to dance or wear clothes that showed her skin, at times even wearing turtlenecks in summer: “It bothers me a lot. My family has been a big help, reminding me I’m beautiful, [saying] ‘Don’t let that stop you from showing off your beautiful skin.’” Some days, however, Trotter is plagued by memories and can’t get out of bed. Anytime someone asks her about her arm, she relives it. And when she learned George Floyd was killed after an officer kneeled on him, she thought of the policeman’s knee on her back. “It replays and replays in my head all the time,” she said. “It’s never going to go away.”