As a town more renowned for tea rooms and sulphur springs than football, it is perhaps no surprise publicity is somewhat thin on the ground for the Football League’s newest club. The main roads surrounding Harrogate’s modest, refurbished stadium do not feature signs pointing out its location and Harrogate, it seems, has not yet realised that after 91 years in non-league, it boasts a team among the elite. “I tried to get us a road sign after being here a couple of years, but the planning people said no,” says Irving Weaver, Harrogate’s chairman. Ten years ago Harrogate were spared relegation from the National League North only because of financial irregularities elsewhere. Three years ago they went full-time and after defeating Notts County at Wembley last month, they will play their first competitive fixture as a league club on Saturday when they visit Tranmere in the Carabao Cup. Because they have to replace the 3G pitch and install natural grass their first home game will be on 17 October. Until then, they will play at Doncaster’s Keepmoat Stadium. An unexpected football revolution has taken place in this affluent part of north Yorkshire, and fittingly an unusual partnership has led the way. “When I found out that I’d be working under my dad, I felt sick,” says Simon Weaver, Harrogate’s long-serving manager and son of the chairman. “I forged my own path as a footballer and was trying to do the same as a manager. Not wanting to let your dad down, as well as the fans? That extra pressure is intense.” Both are quick to point out that Simon was at Harrogate before Irving. Weaver Jr was appointed in 2009, two years before property magnate Irivng assumed control of the struggling non-league club from the former Leeds director Bill Fotherby. “The fans were nervous but the alternative was dropping Harrogate down two levels,” Irving says. “We knew we could be walking into something we didn’t have the answer for. So I’m pleased it’s gone OK for 10 years.” That is an understatement. Irving has rebuilt Harrogate off the field – we are sitting in the new £400,000 main stand – while Simon has retained the core of his squad who turned full-time together to reach unprecedented heights. They are proud that Harrogate have not bulldozed their way into the league via costly, big-earning players. But what if the fascinating father-son dynamic had not worked? “If we’d failed, we’d have failed together,” Irving says, as his son nods in approval. “Similarly, we succeed together and we always wanted to leave the club in a better place than how we found it. I guess it’s open to interpretation as to whether I’ve succeeded but you can’t deny Simon has. Look at the results.” Has Simon ever felt the urge to test himself at a higher level away from his father? “Not yet,” he says, laughing. “We never talk about the nepotism thing – that word is thrown around a lot, especially by away supporters; we operate in a traditional manager-owner way. “It was great in the early years, with Bill, finding my feet as a manager, but to be able to celebrate at Wembley with your dad and do something like this together. I’m not sure that can be beaten.” In Irving’s first season as owner Harrogate sold seven season tickets. This season they hope to push 1,000: modest by Football League standards but a significant growth in the past decade. “We’ve been a lower non-league club for so long, most people around here watch York and Leeds,” Irving says. “We’re looking at building something now that future generations can be involved with. This is the start for Harrogate Town.” Harrogate have made a handful of summer signings, relying on the players who have made the journey with them through non-league. But that has not stunted their ambition. “Look at Burton and Accrington,” Simon isays. “Clubs who’ve come up and done it the right way and established themselves in the league. Why can’t that be Harrogate? “If we can be in the top half, that would be incredible this year but the most important thing is for it not to change us as people and as a group. Football and money can change you, so I want everyone to stick to the principle of togetherness that has got Harrogate this far.” One thing will hopefully change, though, in the run-up to their first home game with supporters in attendance come October. “We’re going back to the council now and asking for our road sign, because we think we’ve earned it,” Irving says with a smile. “We want to put the town on the map and do you know what? I think we might just get it this time.”