The Manchester Arena bomber was spotted “praying” at the venue 50 minutes before he carried out the attack and asked what he had in his rucksack, the inquiry into the bombing has heard. It was one of two possible “missed opportunities” to stop Salman Abedi in the hour before the bombing on 22 May 2017, the public inquiry into the attacks heard. Opening the inquiry on Monday, its chairman stressed he was “not looking for scapegoats” but searching for the truth about how Salman Abedi planned and executed the suicide attack, which killed 22 people and injured a further 260. The inquiry, which is being heard in a modified court room at Manchester magistrates court, could not begin until Abedi’s younger brother, Hashem, was tried and convicted of helping to plan the attacks, after being extradited from Libya last year. He was sentenced to at least 55 years in prison in August. The inquiry opened with a minute’s silence to commemorate the 22 people killed in the May 2017 attacks, after their names were read out by Paul Greaney QC, counsel to the inquest. Families of the bereaved attended the hearing, with others watching from an annex and many others via YouTube, with spaces restricted due to Covid-19. Greaney reassured them that the inquiry will “leave no stone unturned”. To investigate how, and in what circumstances, 22 people died in the attack at the Manchester Arena on 22 May 2017 and to make any such recommendations as may seem appropriate. Sir John Saunders, a retired high court judge, was originally set to hear inquests into the deaths of the 22 people killed in the attack, as well as the bomber, Salman Abedi. But last year, the home secretary, Priti Patel, decided the inquests should become a public inquiry in order to keep some evidence secret. A public inquiry allows evidence to be heard in closed sessions. No. Saunders ruled that certain evidence from MI5 and the police should not be made public on national security grounds. Hearing it in open court could “assist terrorists in carrying out the sort of atrocities committed in Manchester”, he said. The rest of the inquiry will be streamed live – sometimes with a short delay – on YouTube. The inquiry could not begin until all criminal proceedings relating to the attacks had finished. In March, Hashem Abedi, the bomber’s brother, was found guilty of planning the attacks and later sentenced to a minimum of 55 years. Though police are still searching for suspects, no further trials are imminent, meaning the inquiry could finally begin on 7 September 2020. Coronavirus also delayed the start. It will establish how the attack unfolded, whether it could have been prevented, how Abedi was radicalised, whether the emergency response to the attack was adequate, and what steps may be taken in future to prevent a recurrence. It will also consider whether lessons have been learned from previous terrorist attacks and whether the right lessons have been learned from this tragedy. Witnesses include officers from Greater Manchester police and the British Transport Police, representatives of the fire and ambulance services and security staff from the Arena, as well as survivors. A number of people who witnessed someone fitting Abedi’s description acting suspiciously in the hour before the attarck will also be called, including one man who says he asked Abedi what was in his rucksack and another who claims to have seen him “praying”. As yet unclear, but “spring 2021”. Saunders will then write his report, which will be all made public except a chapter on whether the attack could have been prevented by the security services. The inquiry, set up by the home secretary last year, will establish “how that attack came to occur, whether it could have been prevented, whether the emergency response to the attack was adequate, and what steps may be taken in future to prevent a recurrence”, said Greaney. The inquiry will hear evidence which shows “that at least once, and possibly on two occasions, someone drew attention to Salman Abedi acting suspiciously” said Greaney.Two people working at the Arena as part of an “anti-bootlegging operation” both described seeing a man matching the appearance of Abedi at 21.41, 50 minutes before before he detonated his bomb in the City Room foyer, said Greaney. One, William Drysdale, remembers seeing someone with a large backpack sitting down in the mezzanine overlooking the City Room and “believed that he was praying”, Greaney said. CCTV footage shows Drysdale approaching an officer from British Transport Police shortly afterwards.Two further witnesses, a couple who had taken their daughter and her friend to the concert and returned to pick them up, remember seeing a man thought to be Abedi who they thought “looked suspicious”, said Greaney. CCTV shows them approaching a member of security staff, who then went to talk to a colleague at 22.23, eight minutes before the detonation. The father said he approached a man matching Abedi’s description and asked: “What have you got in your rucksack?” The man didn’t reply, so the witness told him: “It doesn’t look very good, you know, what you see with bombs and such, you with a rucksack like this in a place like this. What are you doing?” The man responded: “I’m waiting for somebody, mate, have you got the time?” The witness said he raised his concerns with Mohammed Agha, an Arena security guard, but felt “fobbed off”.“Whether these represent missed opportunities to prevent what happened that night or reduce its scale is, as will be perfectly obvious, an issue of very considerable importance,” said Greaney. The inquiry was shown CCTV footage of Abedi carrying out “hostile reconnaissance” at the Arena on three occasions in the days leading up to the attack. He had landed at Manchester airport on 18 May from Libya and travelled into Manchester, first checking on a vehicle in which he had stored explosives and then arranging to rent a flat at Granby House, near the Gay Village, from where he would later assemble the bomb. That evening, Abedi was caught on CCTV going to the Arena and to the City Room foyer, where he eventually detonated the bomb. Dressed all in black, he waited there for several minutes, hands behind his back, staring at queues building up outside the box office in what Greaney called a “chilling” image. “He was getting a feel, no doubt, for the general area,” said Greaney, describing hostile reconnaissance as “purposeful observation by terrorists or other criminals with the intention of collecting information to inform the planning of a hostile act against a specific target”. “None of this behaviour that we’ve seen would necessarily have been identified as suspicious on this occasion. But the security experts are of the opinion are of the opinion that this was, without doubt, an initial general reconnaissance by Salman Abedi, which he used to identify CCTV locations and the ingress and egress routes from the arena and he may have spotted on this occasion that the raised level of the City Room was at that stage a CCTV blind spot,” said Greaney. The inquiry, which will last into spring 2021, is being chaired by Sir John Saunders, a retired high court judge. He has been criticised by families of the bereaved, as well as survivors, for agreeing to hear evidence behind closed doors relating to whether the attack could have been prevented – particularly as Abedi was known to the security services and counter-terrorism police. Justifying the decision, Saunders said: “To do otherwise would damage efforts to prevent further attacks and further tragedies such as this one and put more innocent lives at risk.” Much of the inquiry will examine “what led Salman Abedi to do what he did” said Saunders: “We will try and get a picture of the sort of person he was, how he may have become radicalised, if he was, and if we can, who radicalised him. Whatever we find out about Salman Abedi we will never be able to understand why he set out to kill so many innocent people, including children, and cause the devastation he did.” Saunders added: “This is an exercise in establishing the truth … if I conclude on the evidence that things went wrong, then I shall say so. But we are not looking for scapegoats, we are searching for the truth. “Let us always remember as we consider the evidence that the person who is directly responsible for this tragedy is Salman Abedi. He, together with his brother Hashem, killed 22 people and intended and hoped to kill many more.”