The Football Association has revealed that it pays women the same appearance money as men when they play for England. Parity on match fees and on bonuses for games outside major tournaments has been in place since January, the FA said, in response to whether it would follow Brazil in paying male and female players the same for a senior international cap. On Wednesday the Brazilian football federation joined Australia, Norway and New Zealand in publicly committing to equal pay. “The FA pays its women’s players exactly the same as their male counterparts for representing England, both in terms of match fees and match bonuses,” the FA said. “This parity has been in place since January 2020.” England’s players are understood to receive a match fee of about £2,000, which is donated to charity by all the men and some women. Despite the equal pay committed to by the FA, the money England’s male and female players can earn from major tournaments differs enormously because of the gender disparity in prize money offered by Fifa and Uefa. Had England won the women’s World Cup last year the players would have received £50,000 each in FA bonuses. By contrast, the men would have got £217,000 each for winning the 2018 World Cup. The bonuses are paid out of the Fifa prize fund. Whereas the French FA got $38m in prize money for its team’s triumph at the 2018 World Cup, the US Soccer federation received only $4m for winning the 2019 women’s competition. In total, Fifa awarded $30m to the competing women’s teams and $400m to the men. England’s female players will have received equal match and bonus pay from the FA for the first time in March at the SheBelieves Cup in the US. They are also on central, FA-funded contracts on top of club salaries. This covers about 30 players, with the majority paid about £30,000 in a tiered system that starts at £15,000 and reflects age and seniority. Pay in the Women’s Super League, England’s top tier, has increased markedly but whereas leading players can earn up to £200,000 a year, salaries start at approximately £20,000. Such wages are dwarfed by the pay senior male internationals receive. The average Premier League salary was put at more than £3m by the Global Sports Salary Survey last December, and many England players earn substantially more. The push by female international footballers for equal pay has been most vigorously pursued by the US. Their players have been involved in a bitter dispute with US Soccer and have appealed against a judge’s decision in May to dismiss their claim. A group of 28 US women’s national team players had been seeking $66m in damages under the Equal Pay Act, citing “institutionalised gender discrimination”. When Brazil’s FA announced its move to equal pay the coach of its women’s team, Pia Sundhage, said: “This is historic. Being a part of this is very special.”