Ocado has trumpeted a “successful switchover” from Waitrose to Marks & Spencer as customers bought more M&S-branded groceries and grabbed slots for the weeks ahead. The launch of the service at the start of this month was marred by complaints after a surge in demand led to some customers having their orders cancelled. However, Ocado said shoppers had responded positively to its new grocery partner, with demand for M&S food, including its popular ready meals and bags of Percy Pig sweets, “driving both an increase in the number of products in customer baskets and strong forward demand”. The M&S launch has been closely watched by the retail industry after Ocado and Waitrose ended a 20-year partnership. The huge operational challenge presented by the overnight switch to M&S had gone very well, said Duncan Tatton-Brown, Ocado’s chief financial officer. “Overall, we and our customers have been very pleased by the transition,” he said. When the tie-up with M&S was announced last year some analysts suggested the online grocer risked a customer exodus as shoppers were loyal to Waitrose and did not see M&S products as an adequate replacement. Waitrose has embarked on a marketing push of its own to persuade customers to move to its website. A fortnight in there is no sign of that prediction coming true. Tatton-Brown said the number of shoppers turning their back on its service was “very, very low”. “Amongst our loyal shoppers it is tiny numbers and as yet we don’t really know whether they are among the lucky few who have got away for a holiday for a couple of weeks,” he said. The initial range of 4,400 M&S food products replaced about 4,000 from Waitrose, with online grocer billing them as “high quality alternatives at the same or better prices”. Excitement around the launch saw shoppers typically buy five more items with the average basket containing more M&S products than had been the case with Waitrose, Ocado said. The coronavirus pandemic has triggered a boom in online shopping with online grocery sales up 77% over the past four weeks, according to industry analysts Kantar. At the height of the pandemic online food sales nearly doubled but, despite the recent slowdown, they now account for 12.5% of total grocery sales versus about 7% pre-crisis. In July Ocado said there were 1 million customers waiting to join its service. Tatton-Brown said it had been unable to make dramatic inroads into the list as its delivery service, with orders picked by robots in centralised warehouses, was already running at full pelt. Sales at Ocado Retail, Ocado’s joint venture with M&S, were up 52% in the 13 weeks to 30 August. The Shore Capital analyst Clive Black said the 52% sales rise was “considerably ahead of the wildest optimism that may have been around at the time of the creation of the joint venture” in 2019. The quarterly update sent Ocado’s shares up 5% to £24.72 while M&S gained 4% to 109p in the morning session. While rival supermarket chains were able to expand their online services, Ocado’s automated warehouses quickly reached capacity. It is currently handling 345,000 orders a week, up from 315,000 a year ago, with much riding on expansion of its new delivery hub in Erith, south-eastLondon. When it is fully operational Erith is expected to handle 200,000 orders a week, which is nearly double the current rate. But this new capacity could not be added overnight, Tatton-Brown said, as keeping its robot-powered warehouses running smoothly was more complex than managing air traffic control at Heathrow. “This is a highly, highly complex operation and we have to do millions of calculations a second to ensure thousands of robots, moving around at really high speed, don’t run into each other,” he said.