It had not – really not – been a pleasant experience. Queuing for their banh mi and bibimbap, sushi or Thai salad outside the fast-food takeaways of the Rue Saint-Lazare, young office workers in central Paris spoke with one voice. “I thought I wasn’t going to last an hour, it was so uncomfortable,” said Egé, gesturing at her blue surgical mask. “Hot, sweaty, the smell of your own breath … Just very unpleasant. But you get used to it. In any case, we have no choice.” The new French law requiring almost all employees to wear face masks in the workplace was reportedly so difficult to draft that it was finally published just before 9pm on Monday night, less than 12 hours before it came into force. With coronavirus infections surging to an average of more than 5,000 new cases a day and evidence showing the workplace is the biggest source of transmission, the law made masks mandatory “in all shared and enclosed spaces” from Tuesday morning. “The only exception for office workers is if you happen to be alone in a room – or you’re lucky enough to have your own enclosed office,” said Jean-Philippe, who works alongside Egé in the Paris headquarters of a mobile navigation app developer. In areas where the virus is most active, such as the greater Paris region, workers may remove their face coverings for short periods – but only when there is an approved ventilation system, and no more than one employee for every 4 sq metres of office space. Anne-Laure, an accountant at the head offices of the BHV-Galeries Lafayette retail group on the Rue du Châteaudun, said that, like many employers, hers was now encouraging staff to work from home two days a week. “That way, no more than half the workforce is in the office at any one time and it should all be a bit more bearable,” she said. “You have to adapt, don’t you? My top tip: a cotton mask is way easier. I tried a surgical one, but only for half an hour. Horrible.” Face masks covering the nose, mouth and chin were made obligatory in all public areas – indoors and outdoors – throughout the French capital and surrounding region last Friday, meaning a quick mask-free breather on the street is also now banned. “You can take it off to drink or eat, though,” said Martin, a cybersecurity technician, sitting down in front of a plate of steak-frites on the terrace of the brasserie on the Rue Taitbout and tearing off his mask with visible relief. “Look, I used to be a policeman. I think rules are there to be obeyed. But I also think I’m going to be eating out a bit more than I used to for the next few months. I know it’s for the common good, but wearing this all day long is not easy.” Laurent Pietraszewski, France’s junior minister in charge of health and safety at work, said on Monday that companies – and employees – would be allowed a few days’ grace to ensure the new rules are adhered to. Thereafter, they should expect the inspectors to be checking on them.