Gareth Bale has set his sights on silverware after returning to Tottenham on loan from Real Madrid. The 31-year-old rejoins Spurs on a season-long deal seven years after he moved in the opposite direction in a then world-record transfer and is determined to bring success to the club where he first established himself. “I think by going to Madrid, winning trophies and going far with the national team I feel like I have that kind of winning mentality, how to win trophies,” said Bale, a Euro 2016 semi-finalist with Wales who won the Champions League four times with Madrid, scoring in two finals. “You don’t realise it until you’re there and in those situations, in finals, know how to deal with the situation, the nerves, the pressure, and I think that all goes with experience. Hopefully I can bring that to the dressing room, bring a bit more belief to everybody that we can win a trophy, and the target is to do that this season, to be fighting on every front possible. I want to bring that mentality here, back to Tottenham. “It’s an exciting time for everybody here, the club continues to progress every year and I want to contribute to that again and try to get us to the next level, which is winning a trophy. It’s such an important thing for this club, to win trophies. As players, we want to win trophies in our careers, and to be doing it at Tottenham now would be a dream come true.” The news of Bale’s move came shortly after Tottenham announced they had completed the signing of the Real Madrid left-back Sergio Reguilón. The 23-year-old has signed a contract until 2025 and moves for an undisclosed fee but with a £27.5m buy-back clause. Having come through the youth system at Real, Reguilón went on to make 22 appearances and won his first cap for Spain this month. On a busy day for transfers, Liverpool completed the signing of Diogo Jota from Wolves. The 23-year-old Portugal striker has signed a long‑term contract at Anfield, believed to be a five-year deal. Jota, the club’s third major signing of the summer, arrived a day after Thiago Alcântara joined from Bayern Munich.