As chief executive of Islamic Relief, it is my privilege to preside over one of the UK’s leading international aid charities, widely respected for operating effectively in some of the world’s most difficult and dangerous places. For the Ministry of Defense in Israel, however, Islamic Relief is a supporter of terrorism – a charge that we categorically refute and will be appealing against in Israel’s supreme court next month. The Israeli authorities designated us as a terrorist organisation as long ago as 2014, claiming that we were a front for Hamas. It has taken six long years for us to pursue a legal challenge to this designation. Our case will finally be heard on 12 October. Contrary to the allegations against us, Islamic Relief is a purely humanitarian organisation that delivers aid in strict compliance with humanitarian and international legal principles. Last year we assisted more than 9.5 million people of all faiths and none across five continents, working with numerous western governments and UN bodies who value our ability to operate in hard-to-reach areas. In Yemen, which is suffering what the UN calls the world’s worst humanitarian crisis, I saw for myself on a visit last year how we are feeding 2.2 million people each month as the main partner of the UN World Food Programme. The reality is that Islamic Relief is actually a victim of terrorism, not a supporter of it. We have lost eight brave staff to bombs and bullets in six countries, including Syria, Yemen, Somalia and Afghanistan. Our legal action in Israel has been costly and time consuming, but the courts were the only place left to defend our good name and stand up for the communities we serve in the West Bank and Gaza. All efforts at dialogue with the Israeli authorities in London and Tel Aviv, attempting to understand and address any concerns, had fallen on deaf ears. Before the designation we were providing aid to more than 70,000 people in the West Bank, where poverty can be life-threatening and 2.5 million people rely on outside aid. We are now prevented from operating there. We are thankfully continuing our extensive work in Gaza, which is not affected by Israel’s ban. Our £10m programme there supports a variety of education, health, shelter and employment projects benefiting nearly 400,000 people. Islamic Relief is not the only aid organisation grappling with Israeli government restrictions. As long ago as 2011, research by the Association of International Development Agencies (AIDA) – which represents more than 80 international organisations working in the occupied territories – found that access and movement restrictions were combining to “deny the most vulnerable populations from needed assistance” and contributing to the “growing impoverishment” of Palestinian communities. The leading Israeli human rights lawyers representing us are rightly challenging the assertion that we are a terrorist organisation. What is alleged, as we see it, is not that we materially support Hamas but rather that our humanitarian work makes Hamas look good in the eyes of the local population, and that this is tantamount to supporting terrorism. I am a humanitarian, not a lawyer, but for me this is an affront to the integrity of the entire humanitarian aid community, effectively branding every aid organisation assisting the people of Gaza as a terrorist entity. Our lawyers are also challenging the allegation that we are wilfully supporting the families of deceased Hamas fighters through our orphans programme. In reality this programme operates precisely as it does in any other country we work in, and as other aid organisations operate such programmes in Gaza and elsewhere. The choice of beneficiaries is determined solely by needs assessments carried out by skilled staff to identify those most in need. In the course of our legal proceedings, we have made several proposals to the Israeli Ministry of Defense to address their concerns. We have offered not to use funds in the West Bank or Gaza that have been donated to Islamic Relief by organisations considered “unlawful associations” by Israel. We have offered to expose every project to additional external scrutiny, and to submit our annual work plan for Gaza to the Israeli authorities. Unfortunately, we have not been able to reach any agreement. Another allegation we strongly refute is that Islamic Relief has ties to the Muslim Brotherhood. We have no political affiliations of any kind. I attend every board meeting, every senior management team meeting, and I can personally vouch that no external organisation influences or controls Islamic Relief. Multiple sign-off in our financial systems protects against any individual with an agenda spiriting money away. In the past decade more than 500 audits of our programmes have been conducted, in many cases mandated by governments and other institutional donors. Not one has found a shred of evidence of links to extremism or terrorism, and that includes more than 20 audits in the West Bank and Gaza. Our major donors would not support us if allegations of terrorism links were remotely credible. We have recently demonstrated, in swiftly and decisively removing two trustees responsible for offensive social media posts, that we will not hesitate to do the right thing if or when legitimate concerns are raised. Whatever the court decides about our operations in the West Bank, we cannot and will not be deflected from our lifesaving and life-changing humanitarian mission in Gaza and around the world. • Naser Haghamed is chief executive of Islamic Relief Worldwide