Tesla is aiming to raise up to $5bn (£3.7bn) in its biggest issue of new stock in a decade, as the electric carmaker takes advantage of an almost 1,000% surge in its share price over the last year. The move comes a day after Tesla completed a 5-for-1 stock split which sparked a share price rise that saw co-founder Elon Musk overtake Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg as the world’s third-richest man. The investor-pleasing stock split, the first since Tesla’s flotation a decade ago, saw Musk’s paper fortune hit more than $115bn, allowing him to join the exclusive club known as the world’s centibillionaires. Musk, 49, joins Amazon founder Jeff Bezos, Microsoft founder Bill Gates and Zuckerberg, who joined the club just last month, as the only people who have a net worth of more than $100bn. The car maker gave few details about how it planned to use the $5bn, but in a stock market filing it said: “We currently intend to use the net proceeds from this offering to further strengthen our balance sheet, as well as for general corporate purposes.” Tesla shares have climbed to record highs in 2020, making the company more valuable than traditional car makers such as Toyota, which it passed as the world’s biggest car company in July. It has also leapfrogged some of the world’s biggest listed businesses including Visa, Walmart, the largest US company by revenue, and Johnson & Johnson. The share sale represents about 1% of Tesla’s $464bn market capitalisation. Musk, who is currently in Germany as part of a multi-stop European trip that has included a stop in the UK, has used Tesla’s share price as a cheap means of raising money to continue to fund its expansion plans instead of tapping debt markets. The company has a number of capital intensive projects in train, including the construction of its first European manufacturing and battery centre in Germany and a new factory in Texas, while another new production facility recently came online in China. The stellar share performance over the last year reflects an improving financial performance. Last summer Tesla’s shares tumbled after the company reported a $400m second quarter loss following a $700m loss in the first three months of the year, despite record car sales. Investors questioned the future of Tesla, which had lost more than a dozen executives over the previous year. But since then it has recovered and in July it reported a profit for the fourth quarter in a row. “Now in a clear position of strength and out of the red ink, Musk and his red cape are raising enough capital to get the balance sheet and capital structure to further firm up its growing cash position and slowly get out of its debt situation,” said Dan Ives, analyst at Wedbush. “This is a smart move at the right time for Musk & Co. after the parabolic rally in shares and with the appetite strong among investors.” Musk is in line to receive a record $55.8bn (£40bn), the largest corporate pay deal ever stuck between a chief executive and a company’s board, if he can continue to drive Tesla’s performance. Musk has a penchant for pitching crowd-pleasing products such as the “cybertruck”, a futuristic armoured vehicle unveiled in November in a glitzy cyberpunk-themed launch. Musk also has a habit of getting into hot water. Last year he was sued for $190m in defamation damages over derogatory tweets about British caver Vernon Unsworth, who was helping to rescue 13 people trapped in a Thai cave. A jury found the tweets did not reach a legal standard for defamation, and Musk was not found liable for damages. A decision to smoke marijuana on a live web show two years ago resulted in Tesla’s share price falling and the departure of two of its executives. The same year the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) fined Musk and Tesla $20m over his tweets that he planned to take the company private at a substantial premium, which caused the stock price to surge.