At least 15 people have been arrested at Melbourne’s Shrine of Remembrance and Albert Park after at least 200 protesters defied the city’s stage-four lockdowns to hold an anti-lockdown rally on Saturday. Police in New South Wales also arrested three people at an unauthorised protest in Sydney’s Hyde Park while another protest was held at Sydney’s Olympic Park. Smaller protests were also held in Townsville, Brisbane and Byron Bay. Organised by a broad coalition of online groups linked by a mish-mash of conspiracy theories, Saturday’s Melbourne protest was planned in defiance of lockdown restrictions, mandates on mask-wearing in Victoria, 5G, vaccinations and “child trafficking and pedophilia”. Victoria police took a hardline approach to the protests in the lead-up to Saturday, charging five people with incitement for their alleged involvement in organising the protest. Among them was Fanos Panayides, a prominent member of Australia’s conspiracy movement and one of the organisers of a similar protest held in Melbourne in May. Another, James Bartolo, who runs conspiracy website The Conscious Truth Network, posted footage of his arrest online on Saturday. “Woke up this morning, jumped on the dunny, heard some knocks on the door,” Bartolo wrote on social media. “It was all the cops, they broke down the door, arrested me, they took computers, laptops [and my] phone. “It is a bit of a pain in the ass. They stole my shit. Whatever. I’m fine.” The arrests prompted wide-spread confusion among followers in the lead-up to the protest. After he was charged, Bartolo told supporters to not attend the rally because he believed it was “a trap”. “It is the worst possible thing to do. It is a set-up from the get go. It is all just terrible.” That confusion appears to have prompted many to stay away from the protest. On encrypted messaging services on Saturday morning, supporters were divided about whether the protest should be cancelled, and attendance in Melbourne was well below what organisers had hoped for. Nonetheless, footage from the Shrine of Remembrance on Saturday morning showed at least a few hundred protesters, many not wearing masks, chanting “freedom” and hurling abuse at police and media. A large contingent of riot police and mounted officers clashed with protesters in intermittent melees. Officers were punched by one man before he was fitted with a mask and placed in handcuffs. While Victoria police had not released arrest numbers early on Saturday afternoon, footage showed dozens of people being detained. After mounted officers drove protesters from the Shrine of Remembrance, footage online showed streams of protesters marching to Albert Park. Once there, a large police contingent, including officers from the public order response team, surrounded small groups of protesters, arresting them one by one. In one small group, protesters, some holding QAnon signs, called for officers to “stand with us” and threatened to sue police because they were “protected by the Australian constitution”. At Sydney’s Hyde Park, two men, aged 44 and 54, were arrested for allegedly assaulting police, while a woman was arrested for failing to comply with a move on direction. In Byron Bay, in the state’s north, eight people were arrested at an unauthorised anti-lockdown protest earlier on Saturday, with charges including assault of police officers. Earlier, the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, labelled the protesters “selfish”. “It is not smart, it is not safe, it is not lawful, in fact it is absolutely selfish to be out there protesting,” he said. “The only fight we should be engaged in is against this virus.” Victoria police said the protests were “disappointing” and were “putting the lives of Victorians at risk”. They said more than 150 infringement notices were issued. Fourteen of the arrests were for breaching the chief health officer’s directions, while one was for allegedly assaulting police. “Our investigations into this protest will continue, and we expect to issue further fines once the identity of individuals has been confirmed.”