Game of Thrones co-creators David Benioff and DB Weiss are to adapt a series of hit science fiction novels by Chinese author Liu Cixin for Netflix. Together with Alexander Woo, who has worked on television series including True Blood, Benioff and Weiss’s first project in a reported $200m (£164m) deal with the streaming giant will see the showrunners bring The Three-Body Problem and its two sequels – known as the Remembrance of Earth’s Past trilogy – to television. Netflix’s Peter Friedlander described the books as having “changed what science fiction meant to me for ever”, saying: “[Cixin’s] ability to interweave science with fiction made his vision of the future and extraterrestrial contact feel more realistic than any other science fiction I’ve read. I was also drawn in by the story of all of humanity [being] vulnerable to the same external threat and how this both unifies and divides humans.” He described the creative team, which includes executive producers Rian Johnson and Ram Bergman, who have worked together on films including Star Wars: The Last Jedi, as “fierce advocates for the source material”. Benioff and Weiss said the books were “the most ambitious science-fiction series we’ve read, taking readers on a journey from the 1960s until the end of time, from life on our pale blue dot to the distant fringes of the universe”. Woo called it an “elegant and deeply human allegory”. The Three-Body Problem, which won the Hugo award for fantasy fiction in 2015, and its follow-ups are international bestsellers; fans include Barack Obama, Elon Musk and Mark Zuckerberg. The first Chinese science-fiction novel to be translated into English, its success has been credited with sparking a new wave of Chinese fantasy writing. In a 2016 interview with the Guardian, Cixin said the success of his books “supports an idea I once had: sci-fi as a literary vessel is the most global, the most universal [storytelling], with the capability to be understood by all cultures. Sci-fi novels are concerned with problems faced by all of humanity.” Cixin will act as a consulting producer for the series, alongside Ken Liu, who translated the first and third books of the trilogy. Benioff and Weiss were creators, writers and showrunners of Game of Thrones, adapted from George RR Martin’s hit novels. The series aired for eight seasons until 2019. The pair were previously attached to a Star Wars film trilogy slated for 2022, but left the project to concentrate on their Netflix commitments.