The Duchess of Cornwall has urged anyone worried that a loved one or friend could be suffering from domestic violence to “reach in” and help them, as the coronavirus pandemic may make it impossible for them to reach out. Writing in the Guardian, Camilla cited “deeply troubling” statistics showing a sharp increase in domestic violence since March, with cases globally escalating by 20%. More than a third of specialist services in the UK have reported an increase in requests for support. Camilla wrote: “Six months ago, our country went into lockdown. Almost immediately, we saw both the best and the worst of human behaviour. For many, charity truly began at home, with family members caring for shielding relatives, and neighbours pulling together in new and different ways. But for some, it was abuse, rather than charity, that began at home.” The duchess said she feared for the two-thirds of victims who say they feel unable to seek help for fear of repercussions from their partner or because of the restrictions imposed during the pandemic. She added that as patron of the charity SafeLives she had read “heartbreaking” stories from people living in abusive relationships over the last few months. They included one woman who wrote: “His emotional and verbal abuse is escalating the longer we’re isolated, and I’m concerned that mentally I won’t survive this.” Another said of her partner: “Every so often he gets on his high horse and pushes me or spits in my face and he shouts and scares us.” The duchess wrote: “Far too often, those living with abuse do feel there is no one to help. I have learned how vital it is to spread the word about the help that is available. For any readers in that situation, please know that you are not alone.” She pointed to national helplines and highlighted the work of the UK Says No More campaign, which has set up a network of safe spaces in shops including Boots, Superdrug and Morrisons pharmacies. “If you request a private appointment in a consultation room, you will be given information about how to access national advice lines and local specialist services,” she said. But she also appealed to anyone who might be worried for someone’s safety. “In these situations a simple enquiry can be incredibly powerful. Simply asking ‘are you all right?’ can be the right place to start.” Camilla said she was “deeply grateful” for the Guardian’s coverage of domestic violence issues. “I have often said that domestic violence is characterised by silence: of the abused, of the abuser and of those who don’t know how to intervene. But the media have the ability to break this corrosive silence: bringing us the voices of victims; shattering the taboo; and raising awareness of what we can all do to stop this heinous crime.”