Cardi B has filed for divorce from rapper husband Offset. The filing was made in Georgia, with an initial hearing set for 4 November. The couple married in 2017 in a secret ceremony. “Our relationship was so new breaking up and making up and we had a lot of growing up to do but we was so in love we didn’t want to lose each other, was one morning in September we woke up and decided to get married … No dress no make up and no ring,” Cardi B said on social media in 2018. Their daughter, Kulture, was born in July 2018 – Cardi B’s first child and Offset’s fourth. Cardi B is reportedly seeking primary custody, and child support from Offset. Their relationship has had high-profile ructions. Following rumours of Offset’s infidelity in 2017, Cardi B said: “No, it’s not right … But what you want me to do? Start all over again and get cheated on again? This shit happens to everyone.” The couple stayed together but briefly split in December 2018, with Cardi B saying: “Things just haven’t been working out between us for a long time … we just grew out of love.” Offset publicly pleaded for a resolution, saying: “I was partaking in activity that I shouldn’t have been partaking in, and I apologise. For breaking your heart, for breaking our promise, for breaking God’s promise and being a selfish, messed up husband.” They reconciled in January 2019. Their divorce ends one of the highest-profile celebrity relationships in the US. Cardi B is among the world’s most successful and respected rappers – after breaking through in 2017 with US No 1 hit Bodak Yellow she has had three other No 1 singles, more than any other female rapper. The most recent of those is WAP, her controversial, sex-positive hit with Megan Thee Stallion, which is currently No 1 in the US and UK. Her 2018 debut album Invasion of Privacy won a Grammy for best rap album, and she appeared in the acclaimed Jennifer Lopez film Hustlers. Offset is a member of the Atlanta rap trio Migos, influential for their distinctive triplet-time flow and numerous ad-libs. Their albums Culture and Culture II reached No 1 in the US, as did the single Bad and Boujee. They collaborated with Cardi B on the 2017 single MotorSport. Offset has also released a successful solo album, Father of 4, featuring a hit track, Clout, with Cardi B. He has also guested on US Top 10 hits with Kodak Black and Tyga.