Thomas Middleditch: It’s all people I’ve been fortunate enough to rub elbows with: Kumail Nanjiani and Hannibal Buress come to mind. Ben Schwartz: Most recently I’ve loved I Think You Should Leave, but growing up, SNL was enormous for me. I can’t think of one particular sketch but remember sitting in front of the TV in heaven that I could watch live comedy. Thomas: I grew up on the Kids in the Hall, so they hold a special place. “Screw You, Taxpayer” or “My Pen”. Later on, Mr Show had some great ones, too. Thomas: The British version of The Office and also Extras. The way it was so brilliantly funny but mixed with hidden sadness. They’re perfect. Ben: The Larry Sanders Show is one of my favourite television shows of all time. The writing, acting, directing: all of it helped change the landscape of TV. Garry Shandling will always be a legend. Ben: Dumb and Dumber is a work of art. Thomas: I don’t think I’ve ever laughed during a movie as hard as when that puppet barfed for five minutes straight in Team America. Thomas: Demetrius Schwartz, Ben’s evil twin brother. He’s hellbent on destroying Ben’s career so I’m not really supposed to bring him up, but man oh man does he have some choice zingers. Ben: Rupert Middleditch, Thomas’s kind chef uncle. He writes most of Thomas’s jokes, so I probably shouldn’t bring him up, but man oh man if you look up funny in the dictionary, there is a photo of Unky Rupert, cooking a soufflé. Ben: A woman, who was not sober, once got out of her seat, walked on stage, and opened one of the fake stage doors thinking it was a bathroom. Again … not sober. Thomas: One time I dressed up as a lady and got super drunk, went to a comedy show and had to take a leak but it turned out the bathroom door was on stage. Thomas: That time I dreamed my friends actually texted me during quarantine instead of ghosting me every time I sent them a funny TikTok. Ha ha, joke’s on you, I’m used to being alone! Ben: Sorry … having trouble concentrating after reading Thomas’s answer. Worried about him. Ben: Farts. It boggles my mind that someone can work on funny dialogue for days, to make it just right and someone else could just fart and somehow that is always funnier. Ben: Knock, knock. Thomas: Sir, I’m in the shower. Middleditch & Schwartz: Completely Improvised Comedy Specials are available on Netflix