Manchester United have confirmed the signing of two-time World Cup winner Tobin Heath for the 2020-21 season. She will be joined at the club by her USA teammate Christen Press Heath has the greater experience of the two. The 32-year-old winger has been a key player in a USA team that has won two World Cups and two Olympics titles. On the domestic front, Heath has won two NWSL titles in the US with the Portland Thorns. Press, meanwhile, played alongside Heath in the USWNT’s victorious World Cup campaigns in 2015 and 2019. The 31-year-old forward has 58 goals in 138 appearance for the US. “Manchester United is an exceptional club and I’m thrilled to be joining them,” said Heath, who has won 168 caps. “I’m looking forward to the challenge of competing in England, playing with and against some of the best players in the world. I have big ambitions for this season and can’t wait to get on the pitch with my new team and start this next chapter.” Press also spoke of her excitement at signing for United. “I’m grateful to have the opportunity to play for such an elite club and beyond ready to get back on the field, I feel blessed to have the opportunity to continue to strive to be my best and to compete for trophies this year. I look forward to this new challenge and I can’t wait to start training with the team.” Manchester United head coach Casey Stoney said Heath’s experience and skills would be a huge asset. “We are all excited to have Tobin join the club; she is an outstanding player who brings a wealth of experience to the squad,” said Stoney. “She is extremely skilful and possesses so much quality on the ball; her speed and intelligence in one-v-one situations will be a real asset that will push the team forward this season, and I can’t wait to see her make her mark on the league.” Stoney added that Press’s eye for goal would be a boost for United. “She’s a ruthless striker who scores so many different types of goals, and I know she can add some real quality to our squad,” said Stoney. Heath has played in Europe before, having spent two spells with Paris St-Germain in France. Press’s experience across the Atlantic is even more extensive and she has played for Göteborg FC and Tyresö FF in Sweden. Another player leaving the US for England is Denise O’Sullivan, who has joined Brighton loan from North Carolina Courage until 31 December. The midfielder is a Republic of Ireland international. “O’Sullivan will change Brighton’s whole way of playing,” said NC Courage head coach Paul Riley. “She has a massive impact on tactics because she controls the tempo, dictates the tempo.”