The Minnesota Vikings quarterback Kirk Cousins, a man uptight enough that his wife once said he is “the type to go the beach and leave his shoes on”, appears to have a rather more laidback approach to a virus that has killed more than 180,000 people in the US alone. During an interview on Spotify’s 10 Questions With Kyle Brandt podcast, Cousins was asked to rate his concern about Covid-19 on a scale of one to 10 “if one is the person who says, ‘Masks are stupid, you’re all a bunch of lemmings’ and 10 is, ‘I’m not leaving my master bathroom for the next 10 years.’” Cousins responded that he is “a 0.000001”. He elaborated: “I want to respect what other people’s concerns are. For me personally, if you’re just talking no one else can get the virus, what is your concern if you could get it, I would say I’m gonna go about my daily life. “If I get it, I’m gonna ride it out. I’m gonna let nature do its course. Survival-of-the-fittest kind of approach. And just say, if it knocks me out, it knocks me out. I’m going to be OK. You know, even if I die. If I die, I die. I kind of have peace about that.” While Cousins’ comments indicate he may not be too concerned about the dangers to himself, he did say wearing masks are “really about being respectful to other people.” He added: ““It really has nothing do with my own personal thoughts.” The two-time Pro Bowler was also asked about the reaction if a teammate sneezed in the huddle. “I even think within the building, there’s gonna be a dichotomy of people who couldn’t care less about the virus, have no concern about it, have never lost a minute of sleep about it,” he said. “And then you get people on the other side of the spectrum who, every second of every day, they’re consumed with fear about it. What you don’t know is who’s where on the spectrum when you first go back.” The Vikings open their season on 13 September against their NFC North rivals, the Green Bay Packers. The NFL said 10 players and staff across all 32 teams tested positive for Covid-19 in the latest testing period, which ran from 21-29 August.