Earth, 2020: humanity faces an existential threat and, perhaps even worse, a slowdown in our TV content pipeline. So the BBC iPlayer box set debut of Battlestar Galactica (BSG) – a mid-00s reimagining of Glen A Larson’s 1978 disco-ball space opera – should be a cause for celebration. The initial 2003 miniseries depicts a thriving colonial space empire reduced to a rag-tag fleet of just 50,000 stricken souls, the result of a brutal terror attack orchestrated by a race of AI constructs rebelling against their human creators. How to survive in a state of seemingly perpetual crisis is BSG’s central, and regrettably timely, theme. As well as featuring cool space dogfights with Cylon killbots and their inglorious Basestars, this hard-boiled sci-fi series asks thorny questions about the rights and wrongs of armed insurrection, and who or what should be sacrificed in order to avoid extinction. The push-and-pull relationship between the veteran military commander Adama (Edward James Olmos from Blade Runner, gravelly as all hell) and the fast-tracked new president, Roslin (Mary McDonnell), is also coloured by the fact that certain Cylons can pass for humans, creating a nervy background hum of paranoia. With such elevated stakes, no wonder a new sci-fi swearword – the versatile “frak!” – is so essential to the project. When it launched, low expectations helped BSG become a talked-about hit. The showrunner, Ronald D Moore, had cut his teeth on various Star Treks, but no one really expected much from a thrifty US/UK co-production peppered with mostly unfamiliar faces. That Moore and his writing team managed to turn a cheesy 70s Star Wars homage into something gritty, thrilling and politically resonant became part of an irresistible underdog story. But, in 2020, everyone is aware that BSG is supposed to be some sort of 21st-century TV classic. Does it still hold up? Some longstanding fans recommend newcomers should skip the three-hour miniseries altogether. Jumping straight to episode one is an easy iPlayer option, but you would miss out on some useful scene-setting and a priceless insight into the mind of Dr Gaius Baltar (James Callis), the self-regarding and deeply cowardly scientist whose libido dooms his civilisation. Armando Iannucci, no stranger to creating brilliantly craven characters, has cited Baltar as one of his favourites, which should be recommendation enough. While the miniseries can sometimes feel a little plodding for such an apocalyptic tale, the full series hits the ground running. Adama and his crew on the creaky flagship Galactica are desperately trying to chaperone their enervated convoy of survivors beyond the reach of the Cylons. But every time the fleet makes a faster-than-light jump to flee, their relentless pursuers turn up 33 minutes later with murder on their mind. It boils down to sleep-deprived human fortitude versus implacable Terminator-style ruthlessness. From that nervy, ticking-clock starting point, the emergencies just keep piling up. The refugee caravan is resource-starved, frightened, fractious and in dire need of the right leadership. Despite the sprawling ensemble, everyone seems messy and alive in a way that is all too rare The headlong, cliffhanger-heavy plotting gives BSG its impressive momentum, not least because it is shot with a raw, handheld energy that still feels unusual more than 15 years later. But what will ultimately sell you on the show or not is whether you click with the characters. As the highly strung Baltar, Callis is a magnificent bounder matched at every turn by his poised scene partner, Tricia Helfer, vamping it up as Cylon sexbomb Number Six. Katee Sackhoff crackles with unfiltered emotion as hotdogging space cowboy Starbuck – originally a smarmy ladykiller played by a pre-A-Team Dirk Benedict – while the bullet-headed Canadian character actor Michael Hogan takes the creaky stereotype of the boozy bulldog colonel and finds heartbreaking new nuances within it as the abrasive Saul Tigh. Despite the sprawling ensemble, everyone – from pilot-with-a-secret Boomer (Grace Park) to baby-faced political aide Billy (Paul Campbell) – seems messy and alive in a way that is all too rare. That emotional connection will keep you invested as the writers take bigger and bolder swings over the course of four seasons. The Cylon mythology and religion is deeply explored. A classic Bob Dylan song is audaciously co-opted. An abrupt time-jump reframes the entire show. In the opening credits sequence, the patient Cylons are said to “have a plan”, but the show often feels fleet-footed, instinctive, almost improvised. Maybe it went a little too far: opinions certainly vary about whether it stuck the landing or not. But it is never less than boundary-pushing sci-fi with immensely relatable characters, which is what makes it still so frakking great. Battlestar Galactica is on BBC Two and iPlayer from 5 September