His honesty and Yorkshire bluff is a shining light amid that rather tedious Tottenham All Or Nothing series and this will come as little surprise to anyone who has sat through its moribund charms but Danny Rose wants to leave White Hart Lane. And English football, too. His destination, though, remains unknown, not least to him, but a return to Newcastle, where he spent a few months on loan, is not on the cards. By contrast, John Stones, who has been odd man out at Manchester City for some time, wants to stay and fight for his place despite the expected arrival of Kalidou Koulibaly. The reason for that may be the news that Barcelona want to sign Eric García who had lately been ahead of Stones in the Pep Guardiola reckoning. Barća, with Lionel Messi’s wages still to foot, have offered a paltry £7.2m. Manchester United, as ever, are linked with all and sundry though one player they may not be signing is David Brooks, for whom Leicester is the likely destination. Reserve goalie Sergio Romero, on a reported £100,000 a week, is also for the off, with Aston Villa a potential destination, though Emiliano Martínez of Arsenal, presumably on lesser bunce, is the main target for Dean Smith. Chelsea may instead beckon for Romero. Meanwhile, United’s move for Sergio Reguilón has hit the snag of parent club Real Madrid wanting a buy-back clause. Saúl Ñíguez has meanwhile reacted to the suggestion by Rio Ferdinand that he would be ideal for United by responding with some classic eye-fluttering: “‘I am very flattered that a club like Manchester United, or other teams that ask about me, take me into consideration. For me it is very positive.” Textbook stuff from the Atlético Madrid midfielder. There may be a couple of PSG émigrés in the Premier League with the news that Leeds Leeds Leeds would like to sign Julian Draxler, while Arsenal have been offered goalkeeper Alphonse Areola on a season-long loan, to fill the Martínez-shaped gap. Everton’s spree looks to be continuing, though their latest move is to try and borrow Fikayo Tomori from Chelsea. Tomori’s path to a regular first-team spot has been closed off by Thiago Silva’s arrival at Stamford Bridge. Another Chelsea player set for a loan is the midfielder Conor Gallagher, for whom Leeds and West Brom are the destinations after Crystal Palace’s Michy Batshuayi loan closed off Gallagher’s chance of staying in London for the season.