When swaggering towards victory at the Open Championship of 2014, Rory McIlroy teased observers with news that he was focussing only on two words when in the heat of battle. Upon collection of the Claret Jug, McIlroy offered “process” and “spot” as the somewhat unremarkable detail. There can be no doubts relating to the terminology at the forefront of McIlroy’s mind as he approached the 120th US Open. Fast starts, or the lack of them, have been repeatedly highlighted by the Northern Irishman as key to a wait for a fifth major triumph as now stretched to six years. Job done. A 67, three under par, is precisely the kind of platform McIlroy has been in search of. On the previous three occasions McIlroy opened a major with a round of 67 or better, he won. “I’ve maybe been putting myself under a little too much pressure to get off to a good start,” Mcilroy said. “First round of a major you’re always anxious to play well and maybe I’ve overthought it at times. I just went out today and just took what was given to me. I was a little more relaxed and played really nicely. “I took a couple of my chances today. It was one of those rounds I felt like could have been a little lower than it was, but at the same time, 67 is a really good start.” McIlroy birdied his 1st hole at Winged Foot – remarkably, the first time he has done that in a US Open – and shaved the cup on the next. The tone had been set by a player curiously absent from the forefront of pre-tournament chatter. The Northern Irishman missed a glorious opportunity to move to four under at the 6th, his 15th, but save par nervelessly at the next two holes. McIlroy must wish the US Open runs a twos sweep; he birdied three of Winged Foot’s four par threes. The clear and present dangers to McIlroy are two-fold. Justin Thomas posted an effortless 65, as only endorsed widespread theories he should be the Winged Foot favourite. It may also be the case – and history suggests so – that the United States Golf Association won’t take kindly to Thomas and company scoring relatively freely on day one. The next three rounds may well resemble bare knuckle golf. As Justin Rose put it after signing for a 73, the course is likely to be “cranked up.” Thomas converted from 24ft for a glorious birdie at the last. Having won four times in the last 13 months, he knows what do to from here. Thomas is entitled to believe his career is worthy of more than the one major title that has been returned thus far. “It was a really, really solid round of golf,” said Thomas. “It’s one of the best rounds I’ve played in a while tee to green. There are a couple of things here and there that definitely could have been better but I made sure all of my misses were in the right spot and that’s what you have to do at a US Open. “It’s helpful with three days left but this is not even remotely close to being over. As great of a round and fun as it was, it’s over with now, and I need to get over it because I’ve got 54 more holes to try to play well and shoot some good scores.” Patrick Reed’s 66 was notable for a hole-in-one at the 7th. “It was a scramble out there, my short game kept me in it,” said the 2018 Masters champion somewhat modestly. Reed claimed the ace is only his second as a professional. Tiger Woods didn’t look particularly comfortable when en route to a 73. An early morning start in New York in mid September isn’t helpful for a player who now openly admits to recurring back stiffness. Woods actually birdied five holes but troubles elsewhere were emphasised by a fluffed chip on the 18th. Woods closed bogey, double bogey. “This is a marathon of a tournament,” said Woods. “We have a long way to go. I just wish I could have finished off my round better.” Martin Kaymer, the 2014 champion, continued his return to form with a 71. Matt Wallace is one stroke better off, having recovered admirably from the position of two over after three. Tyrrell Hatton briefly held the Thursday lead but subsequently slipped to a 74. Another number, from an unsurprising source, leapt out; Bryson DeChambeau’s opening tee shot flew 385 yards.