Major oil companies are lobbying the United States to pressure Kenya to change its world-leading stance against plastic waste, according to environmentalists who fear the continent will be used as a dumping ground. The request from the American Chemistry Council to the Office of the United States Trade Representative came as the US and Kenya negotiate what would be the first US bilateral trade deal with a country in sub-Saharan Africa. That deal is expected to be a model for others in Africa, and its importance helped lead to the Kenyan president Uhuru Kenyatta’s White House visit with Donald Trump this year – a rarity for an African leader during this administration. In 2017 Kenya imposed the world’s strictest ban on the use, manufacturing and import of plastic bags, part of growing efforts around the world to limit a major source of plastic waste. Environmentalists fear Kenya is now under pressure not only to weaken its resolve but to become a key transit point for plastic waste to other African countries. The 28 April letter from the American Chemistry Council’s director for international trade, Ed Brzytwa, seen by the Associated Press, urges the US and Kenya to prohibit the imposition of domestic limits on “production or consumption of chemicals and plastic” and on their cross-border trade. “We anticipate that Kenya could serve in the future as a hub for supplying US-made chemicals and plastics to other markets in Africa,” the letter says. It was first obtained by Unearthed, an affiliate of the Greenpeace environmental organization. The council repeated its request in a public commenting session in June. China’s ban on imports of most plastic waste in 2018 has forced companies to seek new places to send it, but other countries including African ones increasingly are saying they don’t want it, either. Plastic waste meant for recycling has piled up in dumps in Kenyan cities. Meanwhile, oil companies are under pressure as more countries aim to shift away from fossil fuels. The American Chemistry Council in a statement to the AP said “it is well understood that a bilateral trade agreement between the United States and Kenya will not override Kenya’s domestic approach to managing plastic waste or undermine its international commitments under the Basel Convention”, a global agreement which, as of January, will make it much more difficult to ship plastic waste to poorer countries. Nearly 190 countries have agreed to it, but not the US. The council added: “In fact, ACC never mentioned Kenya’s approach to single use plastic bags even once in our comments.” The Office of the United States Trade Representative did not respond to a request for comment. Kenya’s government did not comment. But the Kenyan trade minister, Betty Maina, in comments published on Tuesday by the local Star newspaper said Kenya will negotiate with the US “guided by Kenyan laws” and talks continue. The idea that Kenya’s government might weaken or do away with its ban under pressure from the US or oil industry has upset the country’s environmentalist. “They want Kenya to reverse its strict limits on plastics, including 2017 plastic bag ban! It’s a NO!” tweeted James Wakibia, who pushed hard for Kenya’s plastic bag ban. Griffins Ochieng, who leads the Center for Environmental Justice and Development in Kenya, said any attempt to change the laws on plastics would be hazardous. “Africa is looking like a new dumping ground, we are not going to allow that,” he said. “If true, it would be outrageous and unconscionable,” Inger Andersen, the executive director of the United Nations Environment Program, based in Kenya, tweeted. “We ⁦‪@UNEP‬⁩ are so proud of our host nation #Kenya’s strong lead on reducing plastic waste and forcing a shift away from single use plastic.” Bans on single-use plastics are growing worldwide. A global review by UNEP in mid-2018 said 127 countries had adopted some form of regulation on plastic bags.