Marcus Rashford has rebuked a Conservative MP on Twitter for suggesting that parents who need help to feed their children are failing in their parental responsibilities. The Manchester United star responded to Kevin Hollinrake, the MP for Thirsk and Malton, suggesting that he talk to struggling families before tweeting. The discussion began after Hollinrake tweeted that 186,000 discounted meals had been claimed via the government’s “eat out to help out” scheme in his North Yorkshire constituency. A Twitter user responded to say that it was “undoubtedly a success, Kevin, and I’m sure warmly welcomed by the hospitality industry. Credit where it’s due. Whilst we’re discussing food, why does it take footballer @MarcusRashford to make a stand for the hungry children in our society? Is that not the government’s job?” Hollinrake replied: “Where they can, it’s a parents job to feed their children.” This prompted a firm reply from Rashford, who has 3.3m Twitter followers. Put to the side that this comment came from an MP. It’s comments like this that prevent people from speaking their truth and asking for help. We need to start uplifting each other. I would have had the same response to anyone tweeting this... Last week, Rashford unveiled the “child food poverty taskforce” that he has formed in concert with brands including Aldi, Tesco, Deliveroo and Kellogg’s, three months after he forced a government U-turn on summer holiday school meal vouchers. “Food poverty is contributing to social unrest,” he wrote, reflecting on a series of recent meetings with families in need of the support that he counted on as a child. He described “watching a young boy keeping it together whilst his mother sobbed alongside him, feeling like he has to step up to protect his family and alleviate some of that worry. He was nine years old.” “I know that feeling,” he wrote. “I remember the sound of my mum crying herself to sleep to this day, having worked a 14-hour shift, unsure how she was going to make ends meet. That was my reality.” Steve Mason, a Liberal Democrat councillor from Hollinrake’s constituency, said: “It’s remarkable how Kevin seems to ignore the plight of so many. As our MP, he should be aware of the issues faced by some residents here in Ryedale. Just because he has not experienced it, is not a reason to dismiss it. Time to wake up and smell the coffee.”