Every team has had it tough since the coronavirus pandemic struck. And then there is Catalans Dragons. Eight Super League clubs have not played a home game since mid-March, but Catalans have played all of theirs in another country. A run of four successive weekend flights to England was ended last week by an outbreak of Covid-19 among their squad, forcing the postponement of their clash with Wigan. They have won five of the first seven games and another victory would have taken them above Wigan to the top of the Super League table, with a game in hand. Steve McNamara has a star-studded squad but Catalans winger Tom Davies believes they made the most of their one big advantage. “We were fortunate because lockdown started sooner in France and we got out of it sooner, so we had a bit longer together to prepare for the restart, getting used to the speed, the calls, getting rid of the rustiness. Our form is all down to the coaching staff and conditioning team Steve brought in. He wanted to change the culture. Rather than the Brutus being a fortress and then losing most away games, he wanted consistency.” Davies was looking forward to facing Wigan, his former club, over the weekend but the game was postponed due to several Catalans players testing positive. The enforced 14-day isolation has also meant the postponement of Catalans’ planned return to Stade Gilbert Brutus on 7 September against Leeds. By the time they host Wigan in Perpignan on 12 September, Catalans will have five games to catch up and will still have up to three Challenge Cup matches to play within a month this autumn. With several midweek rounds already planned, another postponement would put Catalans’ future in the competition at serious risk. To come through this and make the Grand Final – let alone win it – would match the achievement of last year’s surprise finalists Salford. That the bookies have Catalans fourth in the betting to win the competition reflects their obstacles rather than their ability. “It’s really frustrating,” says Davies, who was not among the players who tested positive. “We were just starting to build some consistency and got a couple of wins under the belt. When we come back our main aim is to take off from where we left. We’re not able to train yet, just stuff around the house. Our conditioning coaches are sending through things to keep us fit and well at home, but we can’t do anything until we serve our 14 days. “We have a big squad with great depth, so Steve and the rest of the coaches will be able to rotate well and make sure we always have a competitive team no matter how many games are in that week. The big challenge is going to be all the midweek games, but Steve has been planning for that for weeks: he mixes up the combinations a lot in training, tries different things so we build that familiarity. It helps that whatever centre is inside me – Israel [Folau], Sammy [Langi] or Meady [David Mead] – is world class. Catalans had a reputation for players coming here for a holiday. Steve changed that mentality and all the lads have brought into that.” With Dom Manfredi, Joe Burgess, Liam Marshall and Bevan French all competing for places at Wigan, Davies decided to take up McNamara’s offer of more playing time and more creative control at Catalans. “I love doing a lot of exit work, getting us out of yardage, and I like a free rein when I’m carrying the ball, not having to get us to a certain field position or getting at a certain defender” he says. “If I see space or a mismatch I want to go for it, play my own way. And that was exactly what Steve wanted. He said ‘carry the ball, do your thing’. That’s what lured me to the club.” At 23, Davies is among the youngest players in an extremely experienced Dragons squad that contains senior internationals such as Sam Tompkins (England), James Maloney and Folau (Australia), Sam Kasiano (New Zealand and Samoa) and David Mead (Papua New Guinea); players at their prime such as the reborn Josh Drinkwater and Ben Garcia; and a small group of French youngsters. “We’re a tight-knit bunch,” says Davies. “There’s real diversity, but we are a united group, with no cliques. We enjoy being together, from the really experienced players to the French boys coming through, like Arthur Morgue and Arthur Romano, who bring energy to the group. We’re comfortable with each other. We don’t get under each other’s feet.” It is a good job considering they spend so much time together. On matchdays they meet for breakfast in Perpignan, fly out on a private jet, arrive in England around 11.30am, have lunch, play the game and fly home. “You get used to the travel. It’s become the routine. We’re very lucky in that our owner Bernard [Guasch] looks after the boys. He’s paying to make everything as easy for us, as comfortable as possible: a chartered plane, and on our first two trips there was a room full of beds for those who wanted a sleep. The last two trips we went straight from Manchester Airport to the stadium, so there was a lot of time to kill and you have to make sure you don’t get pumped up too early.” The Dragons’ half dozen English players have had the frustration of being within an hour of their family homes four times and not being able to see anyone. “It is strange driving past places you know and not being able to get out,” admits Davies, whose parents went to stay with him in France instead and are now quarantining. “It would be nice to stay over for the weekend in Wigan, but on the other hand I can be on the beach in Canet the next day instead!” After drawing the short straw to become caretaker boss of the hapless Brisbane Broncos until the end of the season, Peter Gentle can add “NRL head coach” to a CV that also includes a season playing for a cult member of rugby league’s Dead Clubs Society. Gentle joined Mansfield Marksman from Western Suburbs on 28 September 1986 – the day Mansfield beat Fulham at Notts Country’s ground Meadow Lane – and played 10 games over the Australian off-season. He returned to England 25 years later to coach Hull FC. Mansfield’s timing makes Toronto’s look as good as Peter Kay’s. Launched as the miner’s strike was tearing communities apart, the Marksman (the seemingly grammatically incorrect singular suffix is due to the club being named after a Mansfield Brewery lager) set themselves the futile task of gaining support in Nottinghamshire for a unfamiliar sport played by a team mainly drawn from the striking coalfields of West Yorkshire. By the time Gentle arrived, they were already sofa-surfing their way around Nottinghamshire’s sports grounds, somehow surviving nine seasons before being relegated from the semi-pro game in 1993. Seventy years have passed since the first rugby league match was played in Italy. A group of union players from Turin played their first game in March 1950 before forming Torino XIII in June, playing three friendlies against French teams and planning a UK tour. Masquerading as “Italy”, their first game was at Central Park on 26 August, where nearly 15,000 spectators saw them being outclassed 49-28 by Wigan. They conceded 74 at St Helens before closer defeats in South Wales and Huddersfield, a thrashing at Leigh and a crazy points-fest at Leeds. More friendlies against top French teams followed for Torino before a national league and a proper national team were formed. Sadly, there is no rugby league happening in Italy at the moment at which to celebrate. Just as the Super League War ripped apart the code’s centenary, the celebrations to mark 125 years since the Northern Union was formed have been wrecked by Covid-19. The RFL have done their best to mark the occasion but it’s a smattering of applause compared with the standing ovation originally planned. Given that seven of the founding clubs were in action last weekend, it was a shame match-ups were not arranged on Saturday to help celebrate the actual birthday. Instead, the only founders to play on the day – Wigan and Leeds – did not face each other; while the four founding clubs who were in action over the weekend played on Sunday. A missed opportunity. Wigan were due to play at Catalans on 7 September – the date the new league kicked off in 1895 – but that is off, too! Perhaps Shaun Wane should have his England v Exiles game to celebrate the 125th the week after the Grand Final and play a proper Test match next June instead. Of the many surprisingly naive mistakes made by Toronto Wolfpack’s experienced administrators, arguably the most damaging was not paying transfer fees on schedule. Forcing rival clubs to chase their money created foes immediately and, to make matters worse, most of those clubs happen to be concerned about relegation. If Toronto are reluctantly voted back into Super League 2021 under new ownership, they will have it all to do to recruit a competitive team. The non-payment of wages for three months has presumably made all of their remaining players free agents. And there is little chance of those on loan – such as Gareth O’Brien at Castleford and Bodene Thompson at Leeds – returning. Whether any of their high-end 2021 recruits follow Leeds’ hat-trick hero Richie Myler in deciding to stay put remains to be seen. Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook