The best of the best. Forgive our boldness but in the past months we have been doing a lot of searching through the OFM archives. Finding comfort in cooking. Looking through our library. And here we are. Twenty brilliant dishes, each perfect in their way, faultless, near timeless, the ones that will always work. And what a top 20. Some are favourite dishes from favourite restaurants, some old-school classics, some new, commissioned specially for this series. Others are from a few of our best-loved books and cookery writers. Look to the stellar list below. Every dish you will ever need for autumn. With love. This quintessential autumn pudding is best made with foraged fruit – to make it even simpler, use good readymade pastry. A genius, quick vegetarian recipe where cooking the pasta creates the sauce, too. The nation’s favourite curry is rich and tomatoey with layers of spice – and is easy to make at home. Make this hearty Ukrainian beetroot soup – with a twist – when cold autumn nights close in. This signature dish from the authority on Italian cuisine shows that when it comes to risotto, simple shines. A Turkish classic, and a perfect start to the day – spicy, satisfying and simple to put together. Crisp edge and a squishy centre, dotted with good chocolate – the ultimate cookies from the queen of baking. The definitive way to cook every family’s favourite – for best results, pair it with tagliatelle. Lush, ripe figs baked in wine and served with a crisp nut biscuit makes a simple but elegant finish to any meal. Hot, squishy, moreish – the best cheese toastie might just be Italian. A favourite for so many people, here’s how to make the classic roast perfect every time. This classic dish from the Sichuan repertoire showcases the cuisine’s complex flavours and, despite its name, is vegan. A vegetarian lentil recipe, full of rich and earthy flavours, that gets better the longer you give it. Often imitated but never bettered, this deceptively simple flourless cake gets its unique moist texture from boiled citrus and ground nuts. A vegetarian dinner that’s creamy and comforting, with layers of fresh and warm flavours. Sweetly pickled beetroots and bitey horseradish are tied together with a creamy, mustardy dressing in this autumnal salad. For light beer batter and the crispest chips, forget the chippie and make the Friday night classic at home. It’s not hard to master this essential Spanish recipe – you just need good eggs, good potatoes and a little patience. Found all over west Africa, this version of the one-pot rice recipe is by a super-chef from New York (via Sweden and Ethiopia). An easy, thrifty and vegetarian dinner that’s more than the sum of its parts.