There was no chance of Jürgen Klopp relaxing, even when Liverpool were closing in on a polished victory over one of the sides hoping to reel them in this season. No technical area could hold the manager of the Premier League champions. Every time Klopp saw complacency setting in, he marched down the touchline to bellow at his players, who could have been forgiven for checking the scoreboard just to make sure that they were still ahead. But perhaps this demand for perfection is what it will take for Liverpool to keep the chasing pack at bay. Maybe Klopp wanted to kill the idea that his red machine is in need of some servicing. Either way, there does not appear to be anything wrong with Liverpool, who were hungry and intense as they swatted Chelsea aside, giving Frank Lampard’s side a nasty reality check two games into the new campaign. In the end suggestions Chelsea are ready to remove Liverpool’s crown looked premature. While Lampard has spent more than £200m on new signings, Kepa Arrizabalaga remains a problem in goal and his side’s defensive frailties flared when Andreas Christensen received a red card on the stroke of half-time for a clumsy foul on Sadio Mané, who went on to settle the contest with two sharp goals. The sense of a bitter rivalry stirring again had upped the ante. There has long been animosity between the clubs and there have been plenty of barbs since Klopp and Lampard clashed at Anfield in July. Lampard jabbed, complaining about Liverpool breaking a touchline code of conduct. Klopp hit back, talking about having to be different to clubs with oligarch owners. Yet Klopp’s observation about Chelsea’s transfers was a tad disingenuous. Liverpool have spent plenty of money and it was hard to buy into the idea of them as underdogs when Klopp reacted to Christensen’s dismissal by introducing Thiago Alcântara, who enjoyed a promising debut after his move from Bayern Munich. Liverpool, who have also signed Diogo Jota from Wolves, only need a few tweaks. Lampard is the coach with it all to prove after being backed so heavily by Roman Abramovich. Chelsea finished fourth last season, 33 points behind Liverpool. They are developing under a coach in his third season of management, whereas Klopp has a settled unit. Still, Liverpool had a point to prove after a shoddy defensive display in their 4-3 win over Leeds. Impertinent opponents have glimpsed holes of late. A statement was required and Klopp roared with delight when Liverpool’s pressing forced Kurt Zouma to slash a clearance out for a throw. Chelsea were restricted to counterattacks during the first half. They wanted to use the pace of Timo Werner, trusting that the German would have the beating of Fabinho, who was pushed alongside Virgil van Dijk in the centre of defence because Joël Matip and Joe Gomez were injured. It looked like an avenue for Chelsea to explore, especially when Werner darted past Fabinho in the third minute. By the 20th minute, though, the makeshift centre-back had the upper hand. When Mateo Kovacic released Werner, a shot seemed certain until the German ran into Fabinho. Liverpool could afford to step up. They were stronger. Chelsea’s midfielders, Jorginho, Kovacic and N’Golo Kanté, were too ponderous in possession, while Mason Mount and Kai Havertz were quiet on the flanks. While Chelsea threatened when Werner fired wide, their defence did not inspire confidence. Andy Robertson miscued a volley and the game changed when Jordan Henderson’s pass released Mané, who was hauled down by Christensen 30 yards from goal. Paul Tierney, the referee, showed a yellow card before deciding that the Dane had denied an obvious goalscoring opportunity after consulting the pitchside monitor. It was a reminder that Chelsea remain neurotic at the back. Lampard had to adjust. Havertz, struggling with an injury, made way for Fikayo Tomori during the break. Klopp added a touch of refinement, bringing on Thiago. Chelsea cracked in the 50th minute. Roberto Firmino raced behind Marcos Alonso after a one-two with Mohamed Salah and crossed for Mané, who got in front of Reece James before heading past Arrizabalaga. Worse was to come when Arrizabalaga dithered on the ball, allowing Mané to block his pass and tap into the empty net. It was another dismal error from the Spaniard and bad timing given that Chelsea are on the verge of signing Édouard Mendy from Rennes. Chelsea, who left Antonio Rüdiger out of their squad, gave themselves hope when Werner’s run drew a foul from Thiago. But Alisson had other ideas, saving Jorginho’s weak penalty. Klopp screamed at his players before the penalty, urging them to keep the ball. Chelsea are striving to reach those standards and will surely improve. Havertz is finding his feet after his move from Bayer Leverkusen, while Lampard is still waiting to give Ben Chilwell, Hakim Ziyech and Thiago Silva their debuts. On this evidence, Chelsea have a long way to go before reaching Liverpool’s level.