Though the Labor Day holiday typically marks the end of summer in the US, the west coast is bracing for record-high temperatures over the weekend. California, which has been dealing with weeks-long wildfires, will be the hardest hit by sweltering temperatures. The National Weather Service (NWS) of Los Angeles said that temperatures in the region could reach up to 110F on Saturday and Sunday. Temperatures are expected to drop by Wednesday or Thursday. Here we go, this is where it gets real. The heat really starts to ramp up today where there will be widespread triple digit heat away from the beaches. PLEASE take caution and stay inside with AC if you can! This heat can be DEADLY! #CAwx #LAheat #heatwave pic.twitter.com/GmbbWzckVy “This is a very dangerous situation. Heat can really creep up on you quickly,” said Eric Boldt, an NWS meteorologist in California, on Twitter. The NWS is recommending that people stay inside where there is air conditioning during the hottest times of the day, but the pandemic has forced many places that offer the relief of air conditioning, including malls and public libraries, to close. Cooling centers have opened around Los Angeles to provide the public with places to avoid the heat with social distancing requirements and capacity limits. Temperatures in California have been rising over the last decade, with deadly consequences that many experts link to the global climate crisis. Air quality in the state is some of the worst in the country as heat leads to increased smog, which can damage lungs and increases respiratory and heart diseases. Heatwaves also lead to serious cases of dehydration, heatstroke and heart attacks, which can ultimately lead to death. During an extreme heatwave last month, so many people cranked up their air conditioning to try to stay cool that the state agency that oversees much of the power grid turned off power for hundreds of thousands of customers. A combination of high temperatures in arid conditions and lightning strikes recently led to a series of wildfires across the state, including the second – and third – largest in the state’s history, that firefighters are still trying to put out. Nearly 14,000 lightning strikes have caused 900 wildfires across California, burning more than 1.5m acres and have killed at least eight people. Thousands of people are still evacuated from their homes because of the fires.