Captain Sir Tom Moore is getting the big-screen treatment. The life story of the centenarian, who raised more than £32m for the NHS by walking laps of his Bedfordshire garden, will be shot next year. The film will be made by Fred Films and Powder Keg Pictures, whose credits include Fisherman’s Friends, about the Cornish fishermen who signed a record deal, and Finding Your Feet, starring Imelda Staunton. According to a statement from producers, the “uplifting” and “life-affirming” biopic will focus on the former British army captain’s “close relationship with his family and explore how his strength, wisdom and humour changed the way they viewed the world”. The film will “draw on his military career and dramatise how personal grief and the horrors of war shaped his life and inspired him to keep walking”. Moore made headlines in April by walking laps of his garden in the run-up to his 100th birthday, amid the pandemic, to raise funds for the NHS. He also broke two Guinness world records, scored a No 1 single and was knighted by the Queen. Writer-producers Nick Moorcroft and Meg Leonard said in a joint statement: “This is a story about the power of the human spirit and Captain Sir Tom personifies that. We are honoured to be telling this unique and inspiring story and are excited about audiences getting to know the man behind the headlines.” Producer James Spring added: “At a time of fear and uncertainty, 161 countries around the world embraced the beacon of hope that Captain Sir Tom provided. We are privileged that Tom and his family have entrusted us with their story.” Moore was an officer in the Royal Armoured Corps during the second world war. He left the army in 1946 and subsequently worked for a concrete manufacturing company. He said: “I don’t know of any 100-year-old actors but I’m sure Michael Caine or Anthony Hopkins could do a wonderful job if they were prepared to age up!” Moore’s daughter Hannah Ingram-Moore said: “We received so many offers but what it boiled down to was trust. The family are big fans of the films James, Meg and Nick have written and produced, and we hope that our story connects with audiences in the same way their previous films have done.” Benedict Cumberbatch has been installed as bookies’ favourite to take the role, with Tom Hardy and Tom Hiddleston also in the frame.