I’ll never forget trying to feed myself and my son on £10 a week. I was a single mum, absolutely skint and living hand to mouth, even after I started working as a trainee reporter for the Southend Echo, following 18 long months of looking for a job. So, for those first shifts until a pay cheque arrived, food meant a Tupperware tub of cold pasta with a spoonful or two of cheap pasta sauce from a jar, which, weirdly, is cheaper than buying tinned tomatoes to make your own. And, when you’ve got no money, every pinch of herbs or flavour becomes a luxury. Our taxes are bailing out the poverty-level wages paid by corporations who pay their shareholders, rather than staff Years later, although my circumstances are better now, I still feel guilty about using too many ingredients in one dish, and I hoard dried pasta and canned tomatoes for rainy days – a whole monsoon, judging by my store cupboard. Dried pasta can be had for 20p to 30p for half a kilo and if, like me, you were feeding two mouths for £1.40 a day, every penny saved was a penny towards something else. Britain is a country where food poverty is an almost invisible national scandal. Almost invisible because, although we see the food bank boxes at the end of the supermarket checkouts when we shop, the people who are going hungry tend to tuck themselves away. The stigma and shame of poverty, and of not being able to afford to feed yourself and your family, means that people sometimes don’t seek help, they don’t talk about their situation. I hid my circumstances from friends and family for almost a year before one of my blog posts went viral and they found out. People were upset that I hadn’t asked for help, but I didn’t want to admit how much I was struggling. I was worried they might think I was an unfit parent, and I was just about keeping up appearances, or so I thought. In Britain right now it’s about to get a whole lot worse. Figures released last week have trumpeted falling shopping prices but these are entirely on non-food items. Fresh food prices are creeping up slowly and “ambient foods” – the stuff we put in our cupboards, shelf-stable and able to be kept without the need for a fridge or freezer – are going up in price at between two and three times the rate of inflation, jumping 2.8% in August. It may not sound much but, to anyone already struggling to feed themselves or their family, that 2.8% means one thing: hunger. Back in the days of my £10 weekly food shop, that rise would equate to £14.56 a year or, if you prefer, a week and a half with no food for me or my son. You see the difference small rises can make? Ten million adults in England, Wales and Northern Ireland face food insecurity every year; 2.5 million young people in Britain are estimated by Unicef to live in “food-insecure” households. “Food insecure” – it’s such a sterile way of describing the disgusting reality that, in 21st-century Britain, millions of us are afraid of going hungry. These figures predate the coronavirus pandemic, which, of course, has only made things far worse. Food transport costs have gone up because there are fewer flights operating. Unemployment is on the rise and, for those lucky enough to have jobs, wages have been cut and job security in many sectors is shaky. Here’s another thing. When Britain completes the next stage of its never-ending European divorce on 31 December, prices are expected to go up again. Importers will have to deal with new regulations, hauliers will face new delays and, unless there’s some remarkable 11th-hour trade agreement, tariffs will be slapped on food imports. Experts who drew up the recent Affordable Food Deal report estimated that the price of basic foods such as pasta and tinned tomatoes could go up by 10-20% in the event of no deal. Where on earth are people in poverty expected to find an extra 20% in their food budgets? It should not be necessary for figures such as the footballer Marcus Rashford to fight on behalf of hungry children. It should not be necessary for charities such as the Trussell Trust to feed families via food banks. And while Covid-19 has caused a spike in food bank use, the figures have been growing alarmingly for the last few years – and the welfare and support system has been broken for a long time. Food banks and charities supporting food aid are, at best, a short-term fix. They shouldn’t be a replacement for a decent support structure in our society. We need to implement long-term changes, and fast. Changes such as the increase in Healthy Start vouchers championed in the government’s National Food Strategy, which can be done literally at the push of a button, would transform lives overnight by giving more people more money for fruit, vegetables and milk. We can help resolve food poverty by supporting a living and livable income for people who are employed, between jobs or receive state benefits. That isn’t a straightforward categorisation in itself: most benefits are paid to people in work, which means our taxes are bailing out the poverty-level wages paid by corporations who dole their profits out to shareholders rather than their staff. Think about that for a moment and see how messed up it is, and then join the campaigns for paying living wages. If you’re in employment, join a union, because organising yourself and your colleagues against unfair working conditions is going to be crucial as the next wave of recession hits. The government can also avoid actions that drive food prices up, such as allowing our trade to default to a position that imposes needless and expensive tariffs on the basics and staples in our shopping baskets. Not that that’s a concern of many of those in power, but I suggest, before they continue with this act of national harm – because it will cause serious harm to millions of people – that everyone responsible for the trade negotiations should try feeding two people for a tenner a week. I also suggest they get some pasta in before the prices go up again. • Jack Monroe is a campaigner, columnist and author