Basketball is not the most high-profile sport in the UK, somehow seen as an American phenomenon, but a thriving community of young Londoners ardently follow and play the sport. With competitive games on hold, basketball player Nhyira Asihene, known as Heish, decided to organise an impromptu tournament in south-east London. With the official London basketball league postponed until November, it seemed that a street tournament would be the perfect way to get players together enjoying their sport. As the tournament progresses the games become ever more intense “A lot of people were itching to get back on the court and were happy to get active again,” says Nhyira. “I wanted to create an atmosphere of peace, love and positivity among the young people in our community. We are aware of what’s been happening with all the protesting, and this comes to show how we can all get along and be united as one.” Clockwise from top left, a player aggressively pushes his way to the basket during the play-offs; a player dunks the basket; the defence was aggressive in every fixture; reaching for a rebound The tournament took place on a sunny morning on Monday 31 August. At the call time of 11.30am, the players had arrived at the street court in Curlew Close. The court had a palpable buzz, full of players warming up and practising their shots. Some were already dunking the ball to the cheers of their competitors. I wanted to create an atmosphere of peace, love and positivity amongst the young people in our community Heish Players were divided into teams of four. One one side of the court were those who play together in local teams such as the Greenwich Titans; on the other, those who had only just met, having seen the tournament advertised on Facebook, TikTok or Instagram. No player is given an easy time on the court The games were played in half-courts, and as soon as the whistle blew, the environment became charged with tension and excitement. Joe fights for position as the game becomes ever more intense The teams played short, intense matches, battling to be the first to 15 points, in a fashion typical of street tournaments. As the intensity of the games increased, the court grew louder and livelier. Suddenly, a hush descended in a moment that revealed how hard the guys had been playing; one player had dislocated his knee and an ambulance was called. Everyone clapped and shouted encouragement as he was wheeled away on a stretcher. Clockwise from top left, Jordan fights his way through the defence; some players still have the energy for one more game; Emmanuel, in centre, helps keep track of the scores; the eliminated teams remain to watch the end of the tournament As teams were eliminated, players that had been knocked out remained around the court to watch the drama unfold. The final game finished at around 4.30pm and the atmosphere courtside was as though people had witnessed the final of the NBA, all impassioned shouting and dedication. A player fights hard to reach the basket “Due to this pandemic, a lot of people haven’t been as willing to go outside and take part in team sports such as basketball,” says Asihene. “But basketball and other sports have provided and continue to provide our young ones with role models to look up to.” The last few months must have felt like an eternity to these young players, but they certainly can still play hard. The winning team: left to right, Afeez, Joe, Samson and Emmanuel