It’s Bear Grylls meets Hanna in this comedy starring Maisie Williams as Kim Noakes, a mysterious misfit raised in isolation by her survivalist mother, Tina, (Fleabag’s Sian Clifford) after her father is murdered. Now all grown up and venturing out into the real (built) world, Noakes soon runs into a pair of hapless brothers whose prank to make her believe the apocalypse is coming triggers a set of deadly consequences. It’s heavy-handed and blunt, but Williams is entertaining as the lethal protagonist. Ammar Kalia The people of Brithdir Mawr near Newport in Pembrokeshire have just six months to raise the money to buy their landowner out before he puts their self-powered, sustainable off-grid community on the open market for £1m. This follows their attempts to save it, in the year of Covid-19. Ali Catterall Michael Portillo and his retina-burning trousers continue their adventures retracing the journeys chronicled in George Bradshaw’s Continental Railway Guide. In this penultimate episode, he travels from the Austrian city of Linz, where Hitler lived as a boy, to Bratislava. Hannah J Davies A whopping 22nd series for this heart-thumping, hospital-based stalwart, filmed at St George’s hospital in south London. Tonight’s opener takes the theme of parents and their children, featuring 22-year-old police officer Hazel, who is involved in a motorbike crash while out riding with her father. AK Season two of a factual series that tells its stories with cinematic immediacy, fuelled by incredibly close access. We are on both sides of the US/Mexico border, following the path of migrants in each country: Magda flees Honduras, dreaming of reaching the States; meanwhile, in Colorado, Victor faces deportation. Jack Seale Still reeling from a £26m loss in 2017/18, fast fashion brand Missguided has put into place lofty sales targets to ensure future financial success, namely making the most of Black Friday. The brand is about to launch its first skiwear range, which means sending Treasure to Austria for a shoot. AK Time Bandits (Terry Gilliam, 1981), 12.40pm, Film4A riotous fantasy from the days before Terry Gilliam became embroiled in his Don Quixote project: Craig Warnock is Kevin, a lad whose wildest daydreams come true when David Rappaport and his gang of time-travellers take him on adventures from ancient Greece to Napoleonic Europe. Paul Howlett Cycling: Tour de France 12.05noon, Eurosport 1. Stage five from Gap to Privas. Caribbean Premier League Cricket: Trinbago Knight Riders v St Kitts & Nevis Patriots 2.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. T20 clash from Trinidad. T20 Blast Cricket: Birmingham Bears v Gloucestershire 6.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. North Division match at Edgbaston.