Arsenal will travel to Leicester City in the Carabao Cup third round, while Liverpool, Tottenham and Manchester United all face potentially tricky away ties after the draws for the second and third rounds were made on Sunday. North: Burnley v Sheffield United; Burton v Aston Villa; Bradford v Lincoln; Leeds United v Hull City; Everton v Salford City; Wolves v Stoke; Rochdale v Sheffield Wednesday; West Brom v Harrogate Town; Middlesbrough v Barnsley; Derby v Preston; Newcastle v Blackburn; Morecambe v Oldham; Fleetwood v Port Vale South: West Ham v Charlton; Ipswich v Fulham; Oxford v Watford; Bournemouth v Crystal Palace; Leyton Orient v Plymouth; Southampton v Brentford; Bristol City v Northampton; Reading v Luton; Millwall v Cheltenham; Brighton v Portsmouth; Newport v Cambridge; Gillingham v Coventry Bradford/Lincoln v Liverpool; Bristol City/Northampton v Burton/Aston Villa; Morecambe/Oldham v Newcastle/Blackburn;Reading/Luton v Man Utd; Derby/Preston v Brighton/Portsmouth;Ipswich/Fulham v Rochdale/Sheffield Weds; Man City v Bournemouth/C Palace; Millwall/Cheltenham v Burnley/Sheffield Utd; Chelsea v M'brough/Barnsley; Wolves/Stoke v Gillingham/Coventry;Leicester v Arsenal; West Brom/Harrogate v Southampton/Brentford;Newport/Cambridge v Oxford/Watford; Fleetwood/Port Vale v Everton/Salford; Leyton Orient/Portsmouth v Tottenham;West Ham/Charlton v Leeds/Hull Jürgen Klopp’s side will face either Bradford or Lincoln City, while Tottenham could face a short trip to Leyton Orient – or a much longer journey to Plymouth, who knocked QPR out on Saturday. United will visit either Luton or Reading, while Chelsea will welcome the winner of Middlesbrough v Barnsley in round three. Manchester City, who have won the trophy three years in a row, will host Bournemouth or Crystal Palace, who meet in one of the headline ties in the second round draw’s southern half. West Ham will host Charlton, the Premier League returnees Fulham take on Ipswich and Brighton face Portsmouth in a south-coast derby. In the northern section, the EFL newcomers Harrogate Town have earned a tie at West Brom after beating Tranmere on penalties. Aston Villa face a short but testing trip to Burton Albion, Salford City go to Goodison Park to play Everton, and Burnley take on Sheffield United in an all-Premier League tie. On Sunday, Brentford beat Wycombe on penalties in the first match at their new stadium to set up a second-round trip to Southampton. The Bees defender Ethan Pinnock headed in the first goal at the Brentford Community Stadium but his poor pass allowed Daryl Horgan to equalise for the Championship newcomers. In the shootout, Luke Daniels saved Scott Kashket’s spot-kick to give Brentford the advantage, and Marcus Forss scored to earn a 4-2 win on penalties.