Emma Cline’s debut, The Girls, came wrapped in notoriety. It was a novel about a Manson-like cult, seen through the eyes of a teenager: a heady evocation of girlhood going bad in the heat of a long California summer. It was also a novel that won an unknown 26-year-old a reported $2m advance and a heap of hype. The reviews – perhaps inevitably – both recognised the talent that prompted it and occasionally turned their noses up. Cline used the Manson murders as a high-stakes backdrop against which to display her real themes: female relationships and the fraught forging of female identity under a male gaze. She also proved herself a distinctive stylist – The Girls was ripe with descriptive writing (air “candied with silence”, spaghetti “mossed with cheese”). It could be brilliant; it could also be overcooked. She’s largely curtailed those excesses in her new short story collection, Daddy, aside from Marion, first published in the Paris Review in 2013, which occupies the same universe as The Girls. Two teenage friends are given free rein by weed-selling parents. An erotic charge develops between them, culminating in a disturbing scene of invited mutilation that will have you clenching your thighs as you read, breath held. Elsewhere, however, a coolness of observation replaces such fervid, fetid atmospheres. But neglectful or narcissistic parents are everywhere, especially, as the title suggests, fathers. Cline is reckoning with a post-#Me Too landscape: burrowing inside the minds of the sort of privileged men who assumed they’d always get away with it. Who believe they couldn’t possibly be one of the “bad” ones. Who perhaps haven’t, technically, done anything wrong, but whose attitude to women, and controlling impulses towards their offspring, speaks volumes. There are stories about a disgraced magazine editor, a nanny who had an affair with her Hollywood boss, a scriptwriter with a much younger girlfriend. In the final story, A/S/L, a woman in not-quite-rehab tries to attract the attention of a bloated, Weinsteinian figure. Perhaps surprisingly, Cline often chooses to inhabit these ageing men rather than their screwed-up offspring. But throughout, she is exploring something her own millennial generation is often accused of: entitlement. And the grown-up children we see through the judgmental eyes of their fathers are often wildly entitled – it’s just that Cline makes clear they learned this from the boomers and Gen Xers who raised them. Whether confronted with failures at work, with women or as parents, these men are usually defensive, self-deluding and numb with pills and drink. I’ll be interested in how convinced middle-aged male reviewers are, but I found Cline’s insights persuasive, even if the territory does become repetitive. Throughout, Cline is exploring something her own millennial generation is often accused of: entitlement The relentless privilege on display ultimately flattens out the reading experience, interest waning as a story introduces another rich old man or media player, another private school or house in the hills. But Cline tracks shifts in power and influence – the desire to hold on to and wield them and the pathetic “whiff of insecurity” in those that have lost them – very well. Son of Friedman, in which a fading movie director meets a more famous friend before his son’s film screening, is painfully perfect in this regard, the father internally scorning his child for the very insecurity the reader sees in him. Several stories do offer the perspectives of ennui-ridden young women and prove that men don’t have a monopoly on compulsive, ill-advised behaviour. Here we have women actively pursuing more powerful men. The stickier, trickier reaches of sexual desire can’t be divided into female victims and male perpetrators as simply as we might now wish, Cline seems to suggest. Still, there’s also always an awareness of economic imbalance in these interactions and the pressure put on women to be sexually available and “not waste [their] prettiness”. As in The Girls, Cline is acute at exposing how women internalise the expectations of men. There’s an uneasy ambiguity and a jittery, hollow anxiety running through Daddy that reflects a certain modern malaise, a vacuum in understanding how to live in the world, created by its vacuity. The internet, and the way it fractures and fragments desire, doesn’t help. The woman at the rehab centre became addicted to chatroom sex; a shop assistant sells her used panties to men she finds online. “It seemed insane at first. And then, like other jokes, it became curiously more tolerable,” she observes. Cline is also adept at swirling little eddies of unease into motion. In the opening story, a father is astounded at his children’s selfishness when they gather for Christmas, but ominous details soon tug at his happy-family narrative. In Arcadia, a sibling relationship intersects with a romantic one in a way that thrums unnervingly. Occasionally, Cline is too coy, refusing us gory details of what, exactly, a son did to get expelled from school in Northeast Regional. But mostly, the undercurrents of the unspoken, the unspeakable, carry you along. • Daddy by Emma Cline is published by Chatto & Windus (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15