Second seed Dominic Thiem edged a first-set tiebreak before turning up the heat to romp into the US Open quarter-finals with a resounding 7-6, 6-1, 6-1 victory over Canadian youngster Felix Auger-Aliassime at Arthur Ashe Stadium on Monday. Top seed Novak Djokovic’s disqualification on Sunday for striking a line judge with a ball has left Thiem as one of the favourites and the Austrian gave a composed performance to reach the last eight in New York for the second time in his career. He was helped in his quest for a maiden grand slam title by a below-par performance from Auger-Aliassime, who beat Andy Murray in the second round but was well off the pace against Thiem, making 51 unforced errors compared to the second seed’s 24. Thiem won 74% of his first serve points and was near flawless at the net, while also sending down 22 winners as he wrapped up the contest in a shade over two hours. “The first set was very important for sure,” Thiem told ESPN after the match. “I was really nervous before the match I have to say. I knew I was going to play against an amazing opponent.“I had a chance to serve for the first set missed it pretty poorly. The tiebreak was really good I started to miss less and less. Set two and three were 100% the best sets so far in this trip for me. I’m really happy with this one because I just beat an amazing opponent upcoming superstar. I hope I take everything with me from this match and take it to the next round.” Thiem’s victory set up a meeting with Australia’s Alex De Minaur in the quarter-finals. De Minaur had notched an impressive straight sets victory over Vasek Popisil earlier on Monday. Daniil Medvedev booked his place in the quarter-finals with a dominant 6-4, 6-1, 6-0 win over a listless Frances Tiafoe. The Russian third seed, who lost an epic five-set final to Rafa Nadal at Flushing Meadows last year, barely broke a sweat in the evening match as American Tiafoe’s resistance crumbled after going down a break in the second set. Medvedev is backed to win his first grand slam title in New York and will face 10th seed and fellow Russian Andrey Rublev for a place in the semi-finals. Rublev fought back from a set down to beat Matteo Berrettini 4-6, 6-3, 6-3, 6-3.