I think I have found my calling in life. I love to make dishes that are typically savoury and transform them into sweet, glorious delicacies. Here’s a banger of an example: apple pie tacos. They’re super-easy and make for the perfect sharing food. Prep 30 minCook 30 minMakes 14 For the filling5 granny smith applesJuice of 1 lemon75g unsalted butter60g caster sugar½ tsp ground cinnamon¼ tsp freshly ground nutmeg For the spiced sugar150g caster sugar1 tsp ground cinnamon½ tsp ground cloves For the tacos2 tortilla wraps100g unsalted butter, meltedFor the cream500ml double cream200g Lotus Biscoff spread1 tsp vanilla extract, or vanilla bean paste50g Lotus Biscoff biscuits, crushed1 tub vanilla ice-cream, to serve (optional) Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Peel and core the apples, then put them in a large bowl filled with water and the lemon juice (this will stop them going brown). Thinly slice the apples one at a time and return to the bowl of acidulated water. Melt the butter in a medium saucepan over a medium heat. Add the drained and dried apple slices, sugar, cinnamon and nutmeg, and cook, stirring, for 10-12 minutes, until the apples are soft, then turn off the heat. Combine all the ingredients for the spiced sugar in a bowl and set aside. To make the taco shells, use a 10cm cookie cutter to cut out 14 small circles from the tortillas. Brush these with melted butter, then coat with the spiced sugar. Place the tacos in the cups of an upside-down muffin tin, to help them hold their shape, then bake for 10-12 minutes, or until golden brown. Leave to cool until they are easy to handle. For the cream, loosen the Biscoff spread in small saucepan over a low heat, then set aside and leave to cool. Whip the double cream to stiff peaks, making sure not to over-mix. Fold the spread, vanilla extract and crushed biscuits into the cream, then transfer to a piping bag. Spoon the apple pie filling into the taco shells, then pipe a line of spiced cream on top. If you want to go all out, add a dollop of vanilla ice-cream, dust with some extra ground cinnamon and serve.