WH Auden believes A Certain World is the nearest to an autobiography that he will ever write. It has just been published in New York and is due out here in spring. “Biographies of writers are always superfluous and usually in bad taste. No knowledge of the raw ingredients will explain the peculiar flavour of the verbal dishes he invites the public to taste. His private life is, or should be, of no concern to anybody but himself, his family, his friends.” But the Commonplace Book (as he calls it), with its 173 entries, is at any rate an account of his intellectual and spiritual life. The gargoyle face, the green baize blazer, the carpet slippers – WH Auden seems to shamble into the room. But the untidy shuffle is deceptive. He is no gentleman to tolerate fools. He is sharp and crisp and severe. A recorder he won’t allow. He recalls that Truman Capote was interviewed by a man whose tape recorder broke down, and when Capote offered to continue the man said, “But I’m not used to listening to the answers.” Auden crows with laughter, then says sharply: “Besides, if there’s anything memorable in what I say, you should remember it.” Auden has written about“the earth in 1969 – not a world that I’d call mine,” which referred to “useful gadgets but profane.” And in the The Dyers Hand he sketches out his own version of Eden: “Means of Transport: Horses and horse-drawn vehicles, narrow-gauge railways, canal barges, balloons. No movies, radio, or television.” It’s a surprising list for one who chooses to live in America, but all that he will say on record is that he finds England much more vulgar. These things make him sound more estranged from today’s scene than he is. “I don’t go along with all this talk of a generation gap. We’re all contemporaries. Anyone walking this earth at this moment. There’s a certain difference in memories, that’s all. We’re all contemporaries, facing contemporary problems.” To a question about the relation between politics and art, Auden answers emphatically: “As a poet – not as a citizen – there is only one political duty, and that is to defend one’s language from corruption. And that is particularly serious now. It’s being so quickly corrupted. ‘Speech is the mother of thought, not the hand-maiden.’ When it is corrupted, people lose faith in what they hear, and that leads to violence. As a citizen obviously one has a host of political duties. The issues are too obvious to go into. But that’s as a citizen. My only duty as a poet is to defend the use of language. Language is under dangerous pressure, but so are artists. “Now this is something I’ve got alarmed about. We are making the reverse of Plato’s mistake. Plato tried to take artistic fabrication and use it as a model for society. What now seems to happen is that people take political action as model for artistic creation. You get this appalling thing of asking yourself all the time, ‘is this relevant to 1970?’ I’m sure that it is significant that the founders of modern art grew to manhood before 1914. When they were growing up society was much as it had been in the nineteenth century. This stability meant that the pressure they were under was an artistic pressure, not a political one. This slavery to the moment is infinitely more tyrannous than constrictions I can think of. The artist ceases to ask the personal question of ‘what is right for me to do?’ and instead asks ‘what is right for 1970?’ I am not talking about engagé writing. To be engagé is different. It’s quite all right to write about politics as long as you don’t have the conceit to think you will change the course of history. I think that is only possible in a situation where there has been no freedom of the press, ever, like in Russia. The fact of risking his life gives a moral authority to try and change things. Otherwise there are only two courses to be taken over political and social evil: either direct political action, or a journalistic type of reportage. Not art, in effect.” But in his early work Auden had wanted direct change? “Yes, I think this is a reaction from my early experience. There are certain things in my history that rather embarrass me. I don’t withdraw them or deny them, the things I wrote – about Hitler and so on. But what embarrasses me is the question ‘Who benefitted?’ And the answer is me. It did not make a difference for a single Jew, or change one thing about the war. But I got a kind of kudos out of it. I don’t withdraw it, I’m just suspicious of it. It’s not very nice to feel that you have made capital out of writing about these things.” I ask about the revival of poetry readings – Auden read at this year’s Poetry International: “On one side I think these public readings are a good thing. Poetry is the spoken word. It should be read aloud, even when you read it off the page. But there is a danger you may start to think of the audience, to go for the dramatic effect. I try to think I’m reading to one person. But what could be better for a poet than to do what he wants to, and get paid for it?” Auden goes back to the point he feels is most important, the defence of language. “It can only be done by personal example. First you must master your own language. Karl Kraus, who was an absolute master of German, said a marvellous thing: ‘The public doesn’t understand German, and in journalese I can’t tell them so.’” He recalls the dilemma he expresses in The Dyers Hand: “‘My language is the universal whore whom I have to make into a virgin’ (Karl Krauss). It is both the glory and shame of poetry that its medium is not its private property, that a poet cannot invent his words and that words are products, not of Nature, but of a human society which uses them for a thousand different purposes.”