For anyone antisocial, wearing a mask is great – people are less inclined to make conversation. Alas, they (masks not strangers) steam up glasses, muffle pores and recirculate your breath to give you “maskne” (niacinamide and salicylic acids help). We’ve also had to eschew lip colour and up our eye game. If you’re doing lipstick, team a (silk) mask with a matt texture (dark berry shades as per Fendi AW20 are all the rage). It’ll stay put and is easier than a convoluted eye look. 1. MAC Powder Kiss Liquid Lip colour in Burning Love £19.50, maccosmetics.co.uk 2. Victoria Beckham Posh Lipstick in Play £34, victoriabeckhambeauty.com 3. Illamasqua Ultramatter Lipstick in Fiction £20, illamasqua.com 4. Chanel Le Rouge Duo Ultra Tenue Liquid Lip Colour in Passionate Red £31, chanel.com 5. Fenty Stunna Lip Paint Longwear Fluid Lip Colour in Underdawg £20, harveynichols.com Considering how much niacinamide has been bandied around of late, you’d think it was a new ingredient. It’s not. We’re talking about it because it combats many of the skin issues people are dealing with: breakouts, enlarged pores, irritation… Yes, wearing face masks has had a part to play but there are other factors: change of weather, stress levels, more time indoors, excessive use of products. (I am constantly reminding people, myself included, that while there are tons of efficacious products out there, using them all at once is counterproductive.) Still, I’d argue that niacinamide is the skin saviour we all could use right now. And when I say ‘we’, I mean that – it is powerful but gentle enough to use on all skin types. It soothes inflammation; improves the appearance of fine lines and discolouration; has antibacterial properties to clear congested pores; balances oil production; and helps to retain moisture, so is excellent for dehydrated and mature skin types – the list goes on. Q&A’s no-nonsense toner – use it after cleansing, pre-moisturiser – is a straightforward way in. Toners of old had a reputation for stripping the skin, but this alcohol-free option combines hyaluronic acid and aloe vera, which means it brilliantly combats breakouts, uneven skin texture and other skin issues while also being incredibly hydrating. And it’s under £10. Who can argue with that? Q&A Niacinamide Daily Toner, £8, feelunique.com Banish dry skin If you have oily, blemish- prone, dehydrated skin, this oil-free moisturiser is excellent. It disrupts bacteria that causes breakouts and hydrates without clogging pores. Murad Clarifying Oil Free Water Gel, £38, johnlewis.com Wipe away skin woes These exfoliating pads incorporate a wealth of acids to improve skin texture and the look of discolouration but are gentle enough for daily use. Strivectin Daily Reveal Exfoliating Pads, £39, strivectin. co.uk Bring the garden in Jonathan Anderson, creative director at Loewe, was inspired by a vegetable garden for this new home fragrance and candle range. Loewe Tomato Leaves Home Fragrance, £82, liberty london.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto