The French president, Emanuel Macron, is expected to lay out a plan to tackle a rising tide of coronavirus infections after the country’s highest ever one-day total. It came as the UN called for an immediate quantum leap in funding to fight the virus, which the secretary general described as the “number one global security threat”. France on Thursday recorded 9,843 new cases of Covid-19, bringing the number in a week to nearly 50,000. The French newspaper Le Monde said the proportion of positives among those tested was 5.4% in the first week of September. Macron said he would announce measures on Friday for France to “adapt to the evolution of the virus”. “We will have decisions to make but we must continue to be demanding, realistic, without giving in to any panic whatsoever,” he said. France’s scientific council warned this week that the government will be forced to take action to control the rising infections. In August the daily average of new cases was 3,003 but in September it has been 7,292. France has already classed nearly a third of its regions as “red zones” because of the virus. On Wednesday officials announced 20 new Covid testing centres would be opened in Paris after a huge rise in demand as people return from summer holidays. Cases also skyrocketed in India which has set a global one-day tally of new coronavirus infections with 96,551 recorded on Thursday. The total number of recorded cases was more than 4.5m, according to the health ministry. Infections are growing faster in India than anywhere else in the world. The death rate has remained relatively low but appears to be trending upwards with more than 1,000 reported every day for the last 10 days and total fatalities standing at 76,271. The United Nations secretary general, Antonio Guterres, urged countries to find $15bn over the next three months to fund the ACT-Accelerator programme, a global collaboration for a vaccine and treatments led by the World Health Organization. “Either we stand together or we will be doomed,” Guterres said, calling the virus the “number one global security threat”. “We need a quantum leap in funding to increase the chances of a global solution to get the world moving, working and prospering again,” he said. He said the near $3bn contributed so far had been critical but $35bn more was needed to shift from start-up to scale-up. In the US, Donald Trump claimed the country was “rounding the final turn” as coronavirus deaths in the country neared 200,000. He went on the offensive over Bob Woodward’s new book, Rage, which brought to light recordings of Trump admitting he played down the virus publicly while privately knowing it was very serious. At a rally in Michigan, Trump called Woodward a “whack job” and also accused Joe Biden of not wanting a vaccine for political reasons. Thousands attended the rally, many without masks, and with little social distancing. Earlier the US’s top infections diseases official, Anthony Fauci, warned a Harvard Medical School panel that the US “needed to hunker down and get through this fall and winter because it’s not going to be easy”. Fauci warned against underestimating Covid’s power to cause destruction. “We’ve been through this before,” he said. “Don’t ever, ever underestimate the potential of the pandemic. And don’t try and look at the rosy side of things.” He also warned that some parts of the US would see rises in cases after last weekend’s Labor Day holiday. The Memorial Day holiday at the end of May was also blamed for surges in June and July. In other coronavirus developments: Intensive care medics were significantly less likely to have been infected with Covid-19 than cleaners and other healthcare workers in departments that had been deemed lower risk, according to a study of several British hospitals at the peak of the pandemic. South Korea’s Center for Disease Control and Prevention reported 176 new cases of Covid-19 as of midnight Thursday, bringing the total number of infections to 21,919 with 350 deaths. New Zealand reported one new Covid case, linked to an existing cluster in Auckland. Germany recorded 1,484 new cases of coronavirus, taking the total confirmed to 2567,850 and 9,342 deaths.