Shane McCrae is a mixed-race American poet, who, at the age of three, was taken to Texas by his grandparents – who were white supremacists – away from his black father who had, until then, been bringing him up. It was an unhappy childhood and he stopped paying attention at school until he discovered poetry (responding, as many unhappy teenagers do, to Sylvia Plath’s work). His faith that he would one day become a poet was unswerving – even after dropping out of formal education. And perhaps it was as simple as this: he knew he would become a poet because he was one. Now, he is a teacher at Columbia. That is the potted biography ­– but there is nothing potted about his unusual and unbridled poetry. Many poems in The Gilded Auction Block address the US directly, alongside its president. The idea is in a great tradition (think of Allen Ginsberg’s America, Danez Smith’s Dear White America or even, in its less embattled way, Walt Whitman’s One Song, America, Before I Go). The collection opens with The President Visits the Storm, demonstrating Trump’s imperviousness towards the victims of Hurricane Harvey. A few pages in, Everything I Know About Blackness I Learned from Donald Trump almost does not need the poem to unpack its title. The sense, throughout, is of an America with selective hearing and Trump as a complacently grotesque Goliath, against whom a poet must aim a particularly sharp stone. Purchase – one of McCrae’s best poems – confronts an America in which McCrae, passing a building site, is asked by a white man: So are you guys just drying out the floor here The pauses in the poems are political: they interrupt the narrative, the stalling powerfully suggestive of an imperfect freedom of speech. Remembering My White Grandmother Who Loved Me and Hated Everybody Like Me concerns a car accident (it would seem his grandmother was driving): And I remember    after the explosion I said I saw a black man in the trees In the bushes      on the traffic island with a Black .45      I didn’t I was lying His false sighting of the black man – his grandmother’s sworn enemy – was opportunistic; the hope was that his grandmother would buy him a gun for self-defence. There was so much from which McCrae needed to defend himself, his grandmother included. In Sometimes I Never Suffered, the title’s quarrel between “sometimes” and “never” prepares one for conflict. He goes beyond recollected hardship into a vertiginously Miltonic vision. In his raggedly imperfect creation myth, a “hastily assembled angel” falls from grace, only it turns out to be more push than fall: Before the other angels shoved him      had Started combining words      but nobody Would name the things he saw the way he named them And to the other angels all his naming Was noise they shouted      as they shoved him. Inarticulacy becomes a form of eloquence in this exploration of being cast out and an outcast. In McCrae’s hands, poetry is reclamation. It is also transport: writing a way out and through. In Seawhere, he explains: The problem isn’t      that I don’t see faces Like mine it’s that      I don’t see inner lives Like mine I mean the way      a person’s inner Life is expressed      partly by the public spaces He has to “borrow an inner life” in a white-supremacist world. The gain, for his readers, is that he has chosen to make poetry the public space in which to express – and to own – his inner life. America I was born incapable Of owning what I work for      even      but It doesn’t      it never mattered doesn’t mat- ter where I went to school      or where I teach Or who      America still my life belongs to Somewhere a some white person who can’t live it Because I’m living it      America And they would live it      better      easier  The way the maybe the      professor would Or maybe he was staff      at Oberlin The white man who     as I was walking to Wearing a hoodie      to a meeting in A building which was at the time a crew was Repairing      he stepped up      to me and asked So are you guys just drying out the floor here How but with my life      can I answer him  Who calls me down from the gilded auction block • The Gilded Auction Block by Shane McCrae is published by Corsair (£10.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15 • Sometimes I Never Suffered by Shane McCrae is published by Corsair (£10.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15