For most people, the idea of waking up in unfamiliar surroundings after a drunken night out is horror enough, but in the fifth episode of Lovecraft Country, that was only the beginning. A panicked woman wakes up in a strange bed. (Black satin sheets? Red flag.) The bed belonged to William, but did you recognise the woman (Jamie Neumann), last seen in episode two, issuing veiled threats about black bears? She’s back, only she seemed … different. As gradually became apparent, this was Ruby (usually played by Wunmi Mosaku), in a different skin. Confused and terrified by this magical transformation, White Ruby makes her way back to her South Side neighbourhood, where she stumbles from doorway to doorway until the police turn up. (It’s the walk of shame to end all walks of shame.) The cops assume she’s the victim of assault by a random, passing black boy and “rescue” her by returning her to her captors house on the other side of town. White Ruby finds William in a get-up that can only be described as “1950s Patrick Bateman” – polythene sheet on the floor, rubber gloves up to his elbows and a huge hunting knife. Ruby is not soothed by William’s reassurances that “metamorphosis isn’t death”, but her screams are drowned out by a TV news report about a swarm of 16bn Kenyan locusts. The species goes “through five moulting stages where they lose their skin and develop their wings”, according to the newsreader. Notice a theme developing? This was the goriest episode yet. But also the sauciest. If previous instalments might just about pass as suitable viewing for mature teens, this was certainly 18-rated, with scenes of a sexual nature and strong violence. Even the usually peaceable Tic (Jonathan Majors) beat his father, Montrose (Michael K Williams), to a pulp after discovering he had killed Yahima and destroyed Titus’s pages. No wonder Leti (Jurnee Smollett) believes these pages are “the devil’s tools … corrupting all of us”. A question for those complaining of two-dimensional characterisation: has this episode set you straight? It seems beautifully believable to me that Leti and Tic’s mutual attraction would be grounded in their shared childhood trauma. Majors, in particular, has earned an Emmy nom this week, with the scene where he opened up about his father’s physical abuse and his own propensity for violence. This is a role that could easily have been heroic without nuance, but Majors’ performance demonstrates Tic’s vulnerability too. You see the boy in him, as well as the man he has become, and the monster he fears he might one day turn into. It was really Ruby’s episode, though. After listening to William’s account of how he cooked up their metamorphosis potion (“disgraced professor” yada yada yada “essence of the butterfly” yada yada …), she concluded she might as well have some fun, and took her white-lady suit out on the town for an ice-cream. (This, by coincidence, is exactly the sort of carefree day out I have planned after the Covid vaccine arrives, vanilla cone and everything). What Ruby really wants to do, though, is get a job at that fancy department store. Now, finally, it’s happening. Calling herself Hillary Davenport, she strolls right in and secures an assistant manager position. And as an attractive, qualified white women, even rushing off to the ladies room halfway through the interview doesn’t ruin her chances. A nasty case of the runs? No, it was actually the metamorphosis potion wearing off; even more messy, if anything. The bloody trail down the wall, the bone-crunching sound, the gooey puddle of peeled skin left on the floor in her wake … if you didn’t enjoy these completely OTT transformation scenes, can you even call yourself a horror fan? Ruby was back in a maid’s uniform before long, however. Holding up her end of William’s bargain involved serving devilled eggs (geddit?!) to lodge members and hiding a magical totem among Capt Lancaster’s belongings. She was interrupted during the commission of her secret mission and forced to hide in the same cupboard as some unfortunate prisoner. This was another scene with difficult-to-follow dialogue, but the general gist is that Lancaster is also after the orrery, and Cupboard Guy is being tortured until he gives up the location of some stolen loot. Predictably, Ruby soon discovers her dream job isn’t a dream at all. She is irritated by her boss’s sleazy attentions and the trio of racist ninnies in the break room, but the biggest obstacle is arguably her own misguided compulsion to mentor her only black colleague, Tamara (Sibongilie Mlambo). The exchanges in which Ruby advised Tamara on how to be “a credit to your race” were revealing on the limits of respectability politics, and ultimately resulted in that awkward work night out at Denmark Vesey’s (AKA Sammy’s bar) during which Ruby witnessed Tamara narrowly escape an attempted rape. This was the provocation for a retribution so shocking it shall henceforth be known only as the Stiletto Scene. Is Sammy’s bar the only licensed premises on the whole of the South Side? Apparently not. There is also the drag club, where Montrose experienced his own metamorphosis into a beautiful butterfly. (Even Leti’s wardrobe has nothing to match that scarlet chiffon blouse). His murderous spree may be over, but Ruby’s is only just beginning. To be fair, she went through a lot this episode. Not least the revelation in the penultimate scene: William = Christina! Christina = William! But why chose that moment to metamorphose, Christina? Did the potion run out? And what is in the basement? Lovecraft readers may have some idea. Credit to xYungJx, peteashton and yoimmaletyoufinish – you called it! Embarrassingly, I must confess I did not see the William/Christina twist coming. In retrospect, all the hints were there. “William is the rightful heir to this lodge. The captain tried to kill him to take his seat. He shot him in the back and dumped his body in the river like he was a piece of trash …” When did that happen? Also, have Christina and William always been the same person? Or did Christina simply assume his form after the captain killed him? Capt Lancaster’s head seems to have been been transplanted, Frankenstein’s monster-style, on to a black man’s body. A rudimentary form of the Armitage’s methods in Get Out, 60 years later, perhaps? (I feel another wild fan theory coming on …) This week’s assigned reading is Lovecraft’s The Thing on the Doorstop, about souls inhabiting other bodies and the occasional putrefying corpse. “There was a girl when I was over in Korea. It ended in a strange way …” I’m expecting this much-teased part of Tic’s backstory to finally come out in the next episode. The inherent creepiness of Tonight You Belong to Me by Patience and Prudence has already been utilised in episodes of American Horror Story and Bates Motel. For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow Is Enuf by Ntozake Shange – Lovecraft Country continues its spoken-word tradition in style with this ideal soundtrack for Hillary/Ruby’s stroll. Looking to break up all that back-to-back Barry White on your “business time” playlist? Return to Love by Black Atlass plays during Tic and Leti’s steamy scene. Bodak Yellow by Cardi B is the Louboutin-worshipping soundtrack to the Stiletto Scene – talk about “bloody shoes”! Her track Money accompanies Ruby’s triumphant entrance to the department store. Lonely World by Moses Sumney – now that Montrose has had his euphoric disco coming-out party, will he finally be able to stop murdering people and reconnect with his only son-nephew, Tic? Well … it seems almost voyeuristic to keep watching at this point, doesn’t it? “That’s the currency of magic. Unmitigated freedom.” Christina’s words suggest magic as a metaphor for whiteness in the show.