Another ineffective performance from Paul Pogba in Manchester United’s midfield, another day of speculation linking the Old Trafford outfit with a midfield enforcer worthy of the name. The French midfielder looked a disinterested passenger during the 65 minutes he spent playing in a deep-lying role against Brighton before getting hauled off on Saturday, prompting The Mirror to speculate United could make a move for one of his World Cup-winning French teammates. United are reported to have set their sights on N’Golo Kanté, but will ask the Chelsea pocket dynamo to take a substantial cut in his £300,000-per-week wages to move to Old Trafford. Italian side Inter are also reported to be interested in Kanté and will offer one of Milan Skriniar or Marcelo Brozovic in part exchange. Apparently surplus to requirements at United, Juan Mata and Andreas Pereira could be off to Lazio before the transfer window shuts next Monday night. Manchester City are ready to part company with left-back Oleksandr Zinchenko, who may find a new home at Barcelona’s Camp Nou. Despite the turmoil which surrounds them, Ronald Koeman’s side got their La Liga campaign off to a winning start with an emphatic 4-0 win over Villarreal on Sunday but the Dutch manager hopes to bring in new recruits in the form of Zinchenko and Ajax right-back Sergiño Dest. Having been nicknamed “Dani Alves” by his Norwich City teammates following Barcelona’s interest in taking him on loan, Max Aarons is now reported to be the subject of interest from Milan and Bayern Munich. “You have to stay grounded, keep feet on the ground and remember Max’s task is to wear the yellow shirt and deliver performances,” said Daniel Farke, when asked if his young defender’s head has been turned by interest from so many big clubs. Farke may also have to plan for a future without Todd Cantwell, who has an admirer in Marcelo Bielsa at Leeds. Aston Villa are ready to offer £9m for 21-year-old Copenhagen central defender Victor Nelsson, while Leicester City are also in the market for a central defender and are ready to make a Premier League player of Torino’s Gleison Bremer. The 23-year-old Brazilian is also wanted by Everton, who need cover for Mason Holgate, after the defender was sidelined for at least three months with a toe injury. Lyon have rejected an offer just shy of £33m from Arsenal for midfielder Houssem Aouar, but the north London club are expected to up their bid with by offering a further £9m worth of add-ons. Meanwhile at Stamford Bridge, Antonio Rüdiger is wanted by on loan by West Ham, who face a struggle to hold on to Declan Rice. With a week to go in the transfer window, Chelsea are expected to bid £40m for the England midfielder. Liverpool striker Rhian Brewster is a player in big demand, with Crystal Palace, Sheffield United and Aston Villa all reported to be interested in securing his scrawl. The 20-year-old is believed to favour a move to Palace, with a fee of £20m being mooted. Should Sheffield United fail in their efforts to sign Brewster, they could move for the comparative veteran Daniel Sturridge, who is without a club since being released by Trabzonspor back in March.