Lewis Hamilton took the first pole position in Formula One at the Mugello circuit for the Tuscan Grand Prix. F1 has never raced here before and Hamilton wrote his name into the history books with an imperious lap in the hills of Scarperia. His Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas was second, with Max Verstappen in third for Red Bull. His teammate Alex Albon was fourth with one of his best performances. Ferrari, celebrating their 1,000th F1 race, had a mixed afternoon, with Charles Leclerc in fifth but Sebastian Vettel finishing 14th. Bottas had looked to have the upper hand over the weekend but Hamilton moved closer and closer to his teammate and when it really mattered pushed the Mercedes to the limits of this supremely challenging circuit. He went quickest on the first hot laps in Q3 with a time of 1min 15.144sec. It was five-hundredths up on Bottas but there was little to chose between them over the first two sectors. When they went out again Hamilton pushed though he had done enough; his time did not improve but yellow flags in the first sector, where Esteban Ocon had gone off, meant Bottas had to back off his final quick lap. Hamilton now has seven poles this season and Mercedes have maintained their unbeaten record with nine from nine races. Hamilton has edged closer to reaching 100 career poles with this his 95th and his fourth in a row in 2020. This weekend has been a learning process for all the drivers and Hamilton had to build toward putting in the laps that earned him pole when it mattered. He said on Friday after practice it was a “very serious track” and praised the challenge it presented. However he admitted he had time to find in the first and second sectors, which he would study overnight. Clearly the homework paid off. The lap at Mugello is technical but fast: drivers do not go below third or fourth gear through the predominance of medium and fast corners and there are only six braking sections, while the sequence through turns six to nine, Casanova – Savelli – Arrabbiata 1 and 2, is fearsomely intense. The latter are taken flat out with drivers pulling in excess of 5G, while the old-school gravel traps wait to catch any who push too hard. It is physically demanding as well, putting additional strain on drivers coming to the end of another triple-header of races. Nonetheless they were all gushing in their praise for the circuit but racing on Sunday may be a different affair. The track is narrow and the current cars heavy and wide, meaning overtaking is likely to be extremely difficult. There is only one heavy braking zone, at the end of the start-finish straight. The track is abrasive on tyres and the repeated high-speed cornering will put a lot lateral load though the rubber but Pirelli have brought their hardest compounds here and the likely intent from the top teams will be to try to make a one-stop strategy work. All of which suggests that Hamilton’s pole will be absolutely vital in contributing to him potentially taking the 90th win of his career, one short of Michael Schumacher’s record. Bottas had led the first two practice sessions and was on top in the final runs on Saturday morning but only just. Verstappen was just two-hundredths down on the Finn, with Hamilton in third. Hamilton already enjoys a commanding lead in the championship, 47 points clear of Bottas and 54 from Verstappen, despite last Sunday’s hiccough at Monza. For Ferrari, completing the race with at least a creditable performance will be paramount at the team’s celebration of their remarkable history in F1, especially after both cars failed to finish at Monza. The only team to have competed in every world championship since the inaugural one in 1950, where they made their debut at the second meeting in Monaco, they have since gone on to win 16 constructors’ titles and 15 drivers’ championships. They have 238 wins and 228 poles. Their records are rightly celebrated but this year does not look like adding anything significant to their honour roll. Their car remains underpowered and suffering from drag and although it was somewhat better suited to Mugello than it was to Monza and Spa the Scuderia were still struggling. They are running their car in a deep burgundy this weekend to mark the livery used by the first Ferrari, the 125S, with the drivers wearing overalls in the same hue. On Sunday morning Michael Schumacher’s son, Mick, will do a demonstration lap in the Ferrari F2004 with which his father took his seventh title. Sergio Pérez finished in sixth place for Racing Point but will take a one-place grid penalty for colliding with Kimi Räikkönen during practice. His teammate Lance Stroll was in seventh. McLaren’s Carlos Sainz was in ninth and Renault’s Daniel Ricciardo and Ocon were in eighth and 10th. Lando Norris was in 11th for McLaren, Daniil Kvyat in 12th for AlphaTauri. Alfa Romeo’s Raikkonen was 13th with Haas’s Romain Grosjean in 15th. The winner of last weekend’s Italian GP, Pierre Gasly, did not have the follow-up he wanted, finishing in 16th for AlphaTauri. Antonio Giovinazzi was in 17th for Alfa Romeo. George Russell and Nicholas Latifi were in 18th and 19th for Williams, with Kevin Magnussen in 20th for Haas.