As a young Valencia fan Ferran Torres’s heroes were David Villa, Juan Mata and David Silva when they played for the club he joined as a six-year-old. Now 20 and at Manchester City after his €27m (£24.5m) transfer last month the winger will wear the recently departed Silva’s No 21 shirt and is at ease comparing himself to Leroy Sané, who left for Bayern Munich in July. Smiling, as he does throughout a Zoom chat, Torres says: “Sané is left-footed and I am right-footed. Apart from that, we may share some similarities in our game. He likes playing wide, going one against one, dribbling and helping the team with goals and assists. That’s the same as me.” In Spain Torres played against Lionel Messi, who considered joining City before deciding to stay at Barcelona. Torres is relaxed the Argentinian superstar is not one of his new teammates. “We have a fantastic side [without] Messi – a group of players ready to compete against any opponent and we are able to do great things in the Champions League,” he says. “About [the] potential arrival of Messi, it is not my job to make any comments about that.” City’s signing of Torres may prove to be the deal of the window. To replace the silky class of Sané is a big ask but Valencia’s stricken finances meant the manager, Pep Guardiola, could land a player for a bargain price who will add requisite verve and who made his Spain debut this month. “I like to run in behind the back of the defence but I also ask for the ball to my feet. I want to give the manager many options and be ready for any moment the team needs me. My aim is to play as many games as possible.” Guardiola’s ability to realise talent was key to Torres’s decision to join. “Pep is a manager that knows how to get the best from any player. That made me feel absolutely sure Man City was the right step in my career. Everyone knows that City is a great club, one of the best clubs in the world. Since the day City was in contact I did not have any doubts. “When Pep spoke to me this was also very important. He told me to come to Manchester – that my arrival would be important for the team and that he envisaged the club as a great place for me. From that point, I was absolutely convinced to come.” After arriving from Valencia in 2010 Silva’s contribution was a decade as a driving force in City’s four Premier League titles, two FA Cups and five League Cups, which convinced many he is the club’s greatest ever player. “I haven’t had the chance to speak with him but he has always been a role model for me since I was a kid,” Torres says. “When I arrived at Valencia he was a key part of the first team, alongside David Villa and Juan Mata. He’s been a reference – I’ll try to follow his steps in this club. “I had several pictures in my bedroom of that Valencia squad. It was a great team for a number of years and I like them for what they meant and for the great seasons they gave to the club. I also have a lot of memories of when we waited for the first-team players to come out from the training sessions. We would be waiting for that moment to ask them for pictures and signatures. I remember looking for David Silva above the rest. “It was a huge honour when the club told me I could choose the 21 shirt – for what it means here. I will try to give my best and be a part of the history of this club. Speaking about reaching what David Silva did in Manchester are very strong words, but obviously it’s an honour to inherit his number.” Beach work was part of Torres’s preparation for becoming a City player. “I went to Portugal for some time so I hadn’t to quarantine here in Manchester. I travelled there with my personal fitness coach – I wanted to be in the best condition for the Spanish national team and then arrive well in Manchester to work during pre-season. “I did some physical work to help me prepare for the level that was required. I knew that in a matter of days I had to be playing an international game – you have to be ready. This season it will be even more important to be in a good condition because with the Covid situation there will be a lot of games in a short space of time. Preparation is key in order to avoid injuries. “In Portugal I ran on the beach, I worked in the gym and also started training on the pitch with my boots on to get used to it again. My stay in Portugal was basically a week-long training camp to get ready – holidays were over.” David Silva is the standard-bearer for successful Spaniards at City and Torres will hope to adapt to English football’s muscular environs with the same ease. “The Premier League has a different style,” he says. “Here it is more contact, tougher and more physical. That’s what football is about: trying to adapt the quickest you can to new ideas. I try to absorb fast the mechanisms and systems the manager requires so I can be ready as soon as possible for him. I think I am on the right track and learning from all the coaching staff ask for.” Of his former club, Torres says: “I just can be thankful to Valencia. They gave me everything. They trained me and taught me from when I was little to today. The only thing I can do is thank the club for what they have done and tell them they will be always a part of my heart.” City start their campaign with a visit to Wolves on Monday and from a squad studded with quality players such as Raheem Sterling, Sergio Agüero and Bernardo Silva, Torres picks one teammate who particularly impresses. “There are fantastic players but maybe the figure of [Kevin] De Bruyne. He’s one of the leaders of this team and probably one of the players that have impressed me the most. He’s world-class.” Since he landed in Manchester on Monday there has been a pleasant surprise. “Before I arrived here everyone was telling me the weather is very different from Spain but that hasn’t been the case, it’s been sunny and hot. I am adapting to my new surroundings. I have also been told it’s not going to last for ever, but it doesn’t matter.” City’s domestic quest for 2020‑21 is to wrest the title back from Liverpool. Torres is confident. “They are a really strong team. At the same time I think we have a squad to win back the Premier League.”