She is one of the most talked-about footballers in the world and her name has been written into the history books, but when Matildas captain Sam Kerr was asked about her favourite football moment at the launch of Nike’s new Australian national team kits, her answer was not about her own achievements. It was not a goal, nor a game, nor one of her many individual accolades. Instead, it was watching the rise of the Matildas over the past two years: the sold-out home stadiums, the growing love and passion of the fans and Matildas jerseys being worn in the street. True to character, Australia’s skipper highlighted the importance of her colleagues and the community around her, all of whom have helped build the Matildas up to become Australia’s most-loved sporting team – a team she has been part of for over a decade now. “Back then, I didn’t even realise how special it was,” Kerr says of her early days with the national team. “It’s only as more and more things have happened, or I’ve played more and more for the Matildas, that it’s really sunk in how special it is to be able to wear this kit. “Now, when I see young girls and young boys wearing this kit around with Matildas’ names on it, you still have to pinch yourself. It’s a dream come true to be able to represent my country and wear these amazing kits when we play.” The new kit has a sense of the old and the new about it; a classic design that harks back to the early 2000s while also being constructed with 100% recycled polyester from plastic bottles in a nod to to football’s greener future. It is a fitting metaphor, then, for the legacy and aspirations of a team that hopes to build on the historic achievements of the women athletes who came before them. “We always talk about the 2000 Olympics,” Kerr says. “I remember Cathy Freeman still to this day. One of the most amazing moments [was] watching her run on home soil. So hopefully this team can have that impact on young boys and girls growing up now, and we have more and more kids growing up wanting to play for the Socceroos and the Matildas. “I hope that we can be in 30 years what Cathy Freeman [was] to kids like us.” Thursday’s kit launch went ahead virtually due to Covid-19 protocols but despite their physical distance, there was a sense of camaraderie as several Matildas and Socceroos logged on from around the world, forming a patchwork of faces in green and gold. For Kerr, the chaos created by the pandemic has been a reminder of how precarious life as a professional woman footballer can be. “It’s kind of crazy but this is a normal thing for the Matildas; you never really know when your next game will be, you never know when you’ll be next picked for camps,” she said. “You never know when your last chance in a Matildas jersey will be. They always say, ‘play like it’s your last game’, and that last game we had in Vietnam, we definitely made it a memorable one.” It has been six months since the Matildas were last in camp together, defeating Vietnam to qualify for the now-rescheduled Tokyo Olympics. As global shutdowns brought sport to a halt and scuppered international windows, Kerr said the team quickly found ways to improvise and stay connected. “We’ve really stayed together as a team; we’ve been doing zoom calls, analysing other teams, trying to do things that maybe other teams haven’t thought about,” she said. “But at the same time, we’ve also been at our clubs and been trying to kind of focus on our own thing. Most of us are competitors now so we haven’t been sharing too many secrets. But when we catch up – when we support each other – it’s honestly not about football, it’s just about us personally. “The next camp’s going to be a big one. We obviously have to find out who our next coach is, which is exciting times for the Matildas; it’s going to be a bit of a fresh start. We’re just looking forward to getting ready for whatever’s next – hopefully it’s this year – but we’re really unsure. “Personally, my main focus right now is Chelsea. We’ve got to keep winning and we’ve got a lot of games coming up this year. That’s the best way that we’ll be prepared for the Matildas when it starts back up: being fit and ready for our clubs.” Now joined in London by six other senior Matildas, Kerr has playfully drawn some battle-lines, but has still made time to catch up with her compatriots as they settle into their new clubs. “We’ve known each other since I can remember. I’ve spent more time with these girls than my family. We’re teammates and we’re competitors, but at the same time, we’re just a big family. I saw [Caitlin] Foordy and Macca [Arnold] on the weekend […] It’s nice to see a familiar face. It was my birthday the other day so we went out for dinner and it was really nice. It’s easy when you’ve spent so much time together; it feels like one big family.” As more international stars flock to Europe, Kerr says having so many Matildas plying their trade in the region is the best possible preparation for the major tournaments that lay ahead. “There are more and more games in Europe – there’s the FA Cup, Champions League, all those things that add more games to your calendar. That’s the most important thing as a footballer: to get as many games in as you can so when you go to these tournaments, you’re best prepared to play six games in two or three weeks. “That’s really the main thing, playing as many games as you can and also being in professional environments day-in, day-out. I think we’ve already seen the progress from all the Matildas, including myself, which has been an amazing experience and a real eye-opener to European football.”