Republic of Ireland captain Shane Duffy left it late to ensure Stephen Kenny’s first game in charge did not end in defeat as his side fought back to secure a 1-1 Nations League draw in Bulgaria. Kenny’s team looked destined to end in a disappointing Group B4 defeat until central defender Duffy, who this week sealed a loan move to Celtic from Brighton, headed home his fourth international goal in the third minute of stoppage time in Sofia. In the process, he cancelled out Bozhidar Kraev’s 56th-minute opener at the Vail Levski Stadium, and will have been relieved to do so having had to take a share of the blame for it. It was no more than Ireland deserved on a night when a new-look side promised much but looked set to come up short as they began their preparations for next month’s Euro 2020 play-off in Slovakia. There were some nice touches and impressive link-up play from 19-year-old debutant Adam Idah, while fellow former Under-21 international Aaron Connolly and Callum O’Dowda caused problems for the Bulgarians. Ireland were enjoying the better of the game without creating chances despite Connolly and O’Dowda seeing encouraging amounts of the ball, and were working hard to pin the Bulgarians back deep inside their own half for long periods. However, 11 minutes into the second half Todor Nedelev was allowed time and space to slide a pass between central defenders Duffy and John Egan for Kraev to stab a shot through Randolph’s legs. But Duffy who rescued the Republic at the death when he rose to thump a downward header into the net from Brady’s injury-time corner to snatch a draw. In Thursday’s other games, Ukraine have the early initiative in Group A4 after Manchester City’s Oleksandr Zinchenko scored the winner in a 2-1 victory over Switzerland. José Luis Gayà struck late for Spain to draw with Germany in the group’s other match. Artem Dzyuba struck twice for Russia in a comfortable 3-1 win over Serbia in their Group B3 opener. Fulham striker Aleksandar Mitrović had made the score 2-1 in the 78th minute before Dzyuba responded three minutes later to take the match out of reach. Dominik Szoboszlai’s free-kick gave Hungary a 1-0 win over Turkey in the group’s other game. Group C3’s opening round ended with honours even across the board, after Moldova drew 1-1 with Kosovo and Slovenia ended goalless against Greece. Brandur Hendriksson Olsen struck a late winner to give Faroe Islands a 3-2 win over Malta. They are now the eye-catching leaders in Group D1 after Latvia and Andorra played out a goalless draw.