Matt Hancock has said a pause to the Oxford coronavirus vaccine trial after a volunteer suffered an adverse reaction is not necessarily a setback. The UK health secretary said he was not overly concerned about the decision by the pharmaceuticals firm AstraZeneca to halt vaccine trials, adding that it had already overcome a similar delay. “This is a normal part of a vaccine development that, when you find a problem, the system is paused while you investigate that particular problem,” he told LBC radio. “What it underlines is that we won’t bring forward a vaccine unless it is safe, no matter how enthusiastic I am for a vaccine.” Hancock told Sky News: “It is obviously a challenge to this particular vaccine. It’s not actually the first time it has happened to the Oxford vaccine and it’s a standard process in clinical trials.” Asked if it was a setback, Hancock said: “Not necessarily – it depends on what they find when they do the investigation. There was a pause earlier in the summer and that was resolved without a problem.” He told LBC the UK had “other irons in the fire” and had 340m doses of different vaccines on order, which was “far more” than was needed for the UK population. “This is a pause not a stop so I am hopeful (AstraZeneca) will be able to resume but only if it is safe to do so.” A spokesman for AstraZeneca, the company working with a team from Oxford University, told the Guardian the trial had been stopped to review the “potentially unexplained illness” in one of the participants. The spokesman stressed that the adverse reaction was only recorded in a single participant and said pausing trials was common during vaccine development. An anonymous source familiar with the situation told the New York Times that the person with a suspected adverse reaction had been enrolled in a phase 2/3 trial based in the UK. The volunteer had received a diagnosis of transverse myelitis, an inflammatory syndrome that affects the spinal cord and is often sparked by viral infections, according to the individual. It is still unknown if this diagnosis is directly linked to AstraZeneca’s vaccine. Prof Sir Jeremy Farrar, the director of the Wellcome Trust and a member of the government’s scientific advisory committee Sage, said the pause was the right move as the public must have absolute trust that any vaccine is safe and effective. “In the end we must absolutely know these vaccines are safe and we must know that we can trust the regulator and independent investigation,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. It was inevitable some of the 30,000 to 40,000 people given the vaccine would have illnesses unrelated to it, he added. An independent investigation would look at whether the illness in the trial volunteer is related to the vaccine or placebo and, if not, the trial can restart safely, he said. It was crucial, he added, that data was shared internationally between vaccine trials. “In the end the public must have absolute trust that these vaccines are safe and of course effective, and in the end will hopefully bring the pandemic to a close,” he said.