Prep 15 minCook 10-15 minServes 4 Grated zest of 1 lemon, plus all the flesh, separated into individual segments8 tbsp gin8 tbsp olive oil400g very fresh salmon fillet, skinnedSea salt and black pepper1 small cucumber, cut into small dice2 gherkins, cut into small diceDill or fennel herb, to garnish Cut the lemon segments into small pieces. Put the gin and oil in a bowl and combine to make a dressing. Slice the salmon as thinly as possible, lay it out on four plates and season with salt. Spoon the dressing equally over the four servings, and scatter the cucumber, gherkin and lemon segments over the top. Finish with black pepper and dill sprigs, and serve immediately. Prep 10 minCook 1 hrServes 4 as a starter or light lunch 4 corn cobs, husks removed75g unsalted butter6 tbsp olive oil, plus extra for cookingZest and juice of 1 limeSea salt and black pepper12 fresh scallops, shelled and cleaned, with roes retained if in good condition4 tsp coriander leaves, chopped Hold each sweetcorn cob upright and, with a sharp knife, cut downwards to strip off the kernels in long strips, then separate the kernels and set aside. Heat a drizzle of olive oil and the butter in a large saucepan over a medium heat and add the sweetcorn. Cook for 15-20 minutes, until the corn toasts at the edges, but do not let it catch and burn, so adjust the heat as necessary. Pour in enough water barely to cover the corn, bring to a simmer and leave to cook for about 15 minutes, until the corn is tender. Meanwhile, in a small bowl, whisk the six tablespoons of olive oil with the lime zest and juice. When the corn is ready, tip it and its cooking liquid into a blender and blitz for three to four minutes, until smooth. Return the soup to the pan – if it seems too thick, loosen with a little water – season to taste and keep warm over a low heat. Heat a large, nonstick frying pan over a medium heat and add a drizzle of olive oil. Season the scallops with salt and place them one by one into the hot pan, remembering which one you put in first. Sear for two minutes, until golden, then carefully turn over the scallops in the same sequence in which you put them in the pan. Take the pan off the heat and leave the scallops to finish cooking in the residual heat for a couple of minutes while you get ready to serve. Bring the soup back to a simmer and divide between four warmed bowls. Place three scallops seared side up on top of each bowl and scatter over some chopped coriander. Finish with a drizzle of the lime and olive oil dressing, and serve immediately. Prep 15-20 minCook 10 minServes 2 as a starter or light lunch 1kg live mussels, washed and beardedA drizzle of cold-pressed rapeseed oil2 small white onions, peeled and thinly sliced8 sage leaves, finely sliced100g Cornish clotted cream200ml medium-dry perry1 pear, peeled, cored and sliced2 tbsp flat-leaf parsley, choppedBlack pepper Discard any mussels with damaged shells, or that are open and refuse to stay shut when pinched back together. Put a large pan for which you have a tight-fitting lid over a high heat. When hot, add the oil, followed by the onions and saute, stirring frequently, for three minutes, until they begin to singe at the edge. Add the mussels, sage and cream, cover the pot and leave to cook for 30 seconds. Lift up the lid, pour in the perry, re-cover the pot and cook for three minutes. Check to see if all the mussels have opened; if not, replace the lid and cook for 30 seconds more, until all, or most of, the mussels have opened (discard any that do not). Add the diced pear and parsley to the pot and toss to mix. Divide the mussels between two warmed bowls and pour over the cooking liquor. Serve at once with lots of crusty bread and butter. • Recipes by Nathan Outlaw, chef/owner of Outlaw’s Fish Kitchen and Outlaw’s New Road, both in Port Isaac, Cornwall. His book British Seafood is published by Quadrille at £14.99. To order a copy for £13.04, go to guardianbookshop.com