In the online disinformation age, churning out a vaguely credible daily transfer gossip column is a hard enough task without the likes of Thomas Tuchel ruining our fun. Only yesterday, we gave you the big news that Matteo Guendouzi might be off to PSG. With speculation mounting, Tuchel was grilled by reporters after his side’s surprise loss to Lens. Is the impish Arsenal outcast on his radar? “No.” Er, OK. Well what about (checks notes) Roma utility man Alessandro Florenzi? “I’m confident in Florenzi signing. He’s not in Paris today but hopefully tomorrow.” This kind of transparency from an elite manager is refreshing, but it threatens the Mill’s very existence, so we’re thankful Tuchel wasn’t asked about Eduardo Camavinga. The teenage Rennes midfielder is reportedly in line for a move next summer, with PSG and Real Madrid in the frame. Zinedine Zidane has something of a winger problem at the Bernabéu, with Gareth Bale still knocking about and Eden Hazard reportedly still some way off full match sharpness. If Real can offload Bale, rumour has it they want to replace him with Manchester City’s Riyad Mahrez. That would leave Pep Guardiola’s stockpile of tricky attacking talent dangerously low, although City are ready to battle Liverpool for Anderlecht up-and-comer Jérémy Doku. Arsenal have been given fresh hope of landing Houssem Aouar this summer, with L’Equipe reporting that the midfielder wants out of Lyon immediately. City, PSG and Juventus are all keen but Arsenal are the only club with an offer on the table. New manager Mikel Arteta could put the £15m Aston Villa will pay for Emiliano Martínez towards a move, or he could chuck the cash at Brentford for keeper David Raya. It’s up to him; he’s in charge now. Another manager taking control of his club’s transfer dealings is Ronald Koeman. The Barcelona boss has thrashed out personal terms with Lyon’s Memphis Depay, but needs to sort a transfer fee with Lyon. Koeman also wants to bring in Stefan de Vrij from Internazionale – but what about a big-money move for his clubmate, striker Lautaro Martínez? “For now, he is not going.” Inter vice-president Javier Zanetti, you’re joining Tommy Tuchel in our bad books. Leicester City want to sign centre-back Wesley Fofana quick smart, so are hoping Saint-Étienne won’t drag out negotiations. Who’s their manager these days? Ah. It’s Claude Puel. If that move doesn’t work out, the Foxes have a Plan B in Leverkusen defender Jonathan Tah. Fellow top-four chasers Wolves haven’t quite finished clearing out the Porto locker room, so are going back in to collect Mexican winger Jesús Corona. The Juventus dressing room is about to get a whole lot more handsome, with Olivier Giroud set to complete his move from Chelsea imminently. Luis Suárez is set to follow him to Turin, which means there’s no room for Gonzalo Higuaín. The Argentinian is set to take his talents to South Beach and join David Beckham’s Inter Miami. And now, a final hit of gossip to kickstart your Friday! Porto have offered full-back Alex Telles to Manchester United, who have said they’ll think about it. Newcastle could continue their spending spree with a move for Lille midfielder Boubakary Soumaré; Tottenham fancy Salzburg forward Patson Daku, and will let Danny Rose leave for, er, Genoa. Also leaving London: Jack Wilshere. The injury-plagued midfielder’s West Ham contract is set to be cancelled a year early.