Guardian writers’ predicted position: 9th (NB: this is not necessarily Andy Hunter’s prediction but the average of our writers’ tips) Last season’s position: 12th Odds to win the league (via Oddschecker): 200-1 One team were in genuine trouble during the final game of the season at Goodison Park – bereft of quality, effort, character and in urgent need of additions to inject all three – and it was not the one heading into the Championship. Bournemouth’s relegation spared Everton greater scrutiny that day and an empty stadium spared their players from the justified scorn of a crowd, but the impression deepened that Carlo Ancelotti must have underestimated the scale of the task he accepted last December. Yet another rebuild is required to end the spiral of diminishing returns under Farhad Moshiri. Acquiring a manager of Ancelotti’s stature represented Everton’s finest result of last season and confirmation their owner will dig deep to deliver a Hollywood name. One criticism that cannot be levelled at Moshiri is unwillingness to back big ambition with big investment since his arrival in 2016. The impulsive, damaging transfer business conducted on his watch, however, ensured stardust was strictly limited to the technical area at Goodison last time out. There was a chasm between what Ancelotti expects and demands and what he witnessed on the pitch. There is a responsibility on Everton’s hierarchy to deliver what the Italian was promised when enticing him to become their fifth permanent managerial appointment in less than four years. After a discouraging few weeks of close season when two transfer targets – Pierre-Emile Højbjerg and Gabriel Magalhães – opted for north London over Merseyside, Everton are closing in on three experienced, captivating and much-needed signings. Ancelotti is close to being reunited with his former Napoli midfielder Allan, a fee of about £20m has been agreed with Watford for Abdoulaye Doucouré, and another player the Italian knows well and he would be singularly responsible for luring to Goodison – James Rodríguez of Real Madrid – is also expected to arrive. Everton’s mood and prospects will be transformed should those deals be completed. That Ancelotti has prioritised midfield for an immediate and almost complete restructure is no surprise given the paucity in that department last season. The trio, should they arrive, would address glaring weaknesses that were compounded by serious injuries to André Gomes and Jean-Philippe Gbamin. They would also have to inject the personality, leadership and commitment conspicuous by its absence from a squad that coasted through some games last season. Many teams can have a dire day but Bournemouth was not an isolated case for Everton, although it was the first time Ancelotti admitted the players lacked motivation. Following a fine start to his tenure, when 17 points from a possible 24 switched talk from relegation to European qualification (both were an exaggeration), a 4-0 defeat at Chelsea in the final game before lockdown jolted the Italian. It was the joint-heaviest defeat of Ancelotti’s managerial career but typical of what Everton have served up away at leading clubs in recent years. Restart followed a similar pattern. The manager oversaw another good start – with Michael Keane blossoming under the Italian’s defensive organisation – but there was a marked decline as Everton won one of the final six games. The amount of times Ancelotti cited a lack of character was telling, although the most damning verdict came from the captain, Séamus Coleman, after a pathetic 3-0 defeat at Wolves. “Around the place I think we need more commitment on a daily basis,” he said. It was no great stretch to imagine overpaid, mediocre players swanning around Finch Farm on the evidence of recent seasons. Everton, sailing close to breaching FFP rules, would need to crowbar several players off long-term, lavish contracts to fund the improvements required to meet the club’s and Ancelotti’s stated aim of European qualification. There is a glaring lack of goals in the team. Bernard was Everton’s third-highest scorer in the Premier League last season with three. Moise Kean, signed for an initial £29m from Juventus, started six league games and scored twice. Alex Iwobi, signed for a scarcely believable £34m last summer, managed one Premier League goal. There is also need for a new goalkeeper to challenge Jordan Pickford. His hold on the No 1 spot should be under threat, not only with England. “We have to improve everywhere,” Ancelotti said. The introduction of Anthony Gordon, who has signed a new five-year contract, and the unexpected emergence of Jarrad Branthwaite, an 18-year-old central defender acquired from Carlisle in January, were among the few positives for Ancelotti during restart. His first full season may prove one of the Premier League’s most intriguing tales. St Domingo’s Church established a cricket club in 1876 before branching into the emerging winter sport of football two years later. St Domingo’s FC soon became Everton FC who, after spells at Stanley Park and Priory Road, resided at Anfield Road when accepted as founder members of the Football League in 1888. The first of the club’s nine league titles - a tally bettered only by Arsenal, Liverpool and Manchester United - was won at Anfield before a rental dispute prompted a move to Goodison Park in 1892. Given what’s happened at their old ground subsequently, many Evertonians say their forebears should have just paid the rent. On the touchline Cool, stylish and collected; until Iwobi shanks another cross-field ball to an opponent or Pickford errs again. That’s when the full range of Italian hand gestures begins and his body language says more about Everton’s level than he would voice in public. On Zoom Brief and to the point. In normal press conferences Ancelotti can be engaging and humorous but the stunted nature of Zoom calls has produced a more businesslike approach. Now it’s a case of quick, short answers and get it over with. Richarlison. Far and away the team’s best player. The Brazil international was Everton’s joint-leading scorer last season with 13 goals – the same as his debut campaign – and injects much-needed pace and ability into the attack. Ancelotti will be seeking even more this term. Everton’s long wait for serious investment ended in 2016 when Moshiri, a British-Iranian billionaire and business associate of Alisher Usmanov, purchased 49.9% of the club, rising to 77.2% last year. Moshiri has injected more than £350m and overseen a proposed stadium move to Liverpool’s waterfront but, due to a series of awful signings, Everton are further away from the leading pack than when he arrived. Gordon. The 19-year-old sufficiently impressed Ancelotti in training for the restart to be handed a full Premier League debut in the first game back, the goalless Merseyside derby against Liverpool. The attacking midfielder made eight more appearances before the end of the campaign and clearly has his manager’s confidence. No signings at the time of writing. Everton dazzled the Victorian era with a range of styles. They played in blue and white stripes, black, black with a scarlet sash, salmon pink and ruby with dark blue shorts until the famous royal blue jerseys arrived in 1901-02. A switch to light blue a few years later prompted a public outcry (See? It’s nothing new) and a demand to revert to the colours we see today. Taking ideas from their fans’ forum, Everton decorated the lower Bullens Road with flags representing the nationalities of all first-team players and the upper Gwladys Street with a huge banner of legendary manager Howard Kendall. Dominic Calvert-Lewin. The 23-year-old took a major step forward last season with 13 goals and performances that fuelled talk of an England call-up before lockdown. He was less succesful after the but, now established, the centre-forward has the platform to push international claims.