Aaron Pedersen returns as Indigenous Australian detective Jay Swan in this second series TV spin-off of Ivan Sen’s feature films Mystery Road and Goldstone. Where Sen’s films traded in a gritty, brutal vision of the Australian outback, the TV series takes a more procedural tone, laced with Pedersen’s noir-referencing performance. In tonight’s double bill, Swan is sent to the quiet coastal town of Gideon, where a decapitated body is found in the mangroves, leading him to suspect the presence of drug traffickers. Ammar Kalia Tess Daly and Claudia Winkleman, home videos and a whole load of face paint: this is the taste of Strictly the world needs. Movie Week always provides the strangest moments of the competition, so it’s good to see Stacey Dooley jiving while painted yellow and dressed as a Minion. Hannah Verdier As Britain’s longest-reigning monarch, Queen Elizabeth II has seen her fair share of prime ministers come and go: 14, from Winston Churchill to Boris Johnson. This wide-ranging documentary unpicks the various dynamics, from her admiration for Churchill to Brexit unease with May. AK During these bleak times for live performance, it’s good to see new comedy faces getting primetime exposure. Tonight, Ross and his wingman Mawaan Rizwan open the floor to Nigel Ng, Bec Hill and Jordan Brookes, while Kerry Godliman will be trying out new material. Phil Harrison Celebrating the then 40th anniversary of the Brit-ska band Madness comes sax player Lee “Thommo” Thompson’s 2018 documentary. Injecting the usual talking heads format with a dose of surreality, he charts the band’s rise from post-punk to 2-Tone luminaries alongside the Specials. AK This superb six-part series sees Indigenous Aussie film-maker Warwick Thornton decamp to a remote shack on a windswept peninsula to try to live off the land. The opening double bill is exquisitely shot, mildly profane and unexpectedly moving, as Thornton reflects on his life. Graeme Virtue I, Tonya, 9.30pm, BBC Two Margot Robbie rages round the ice-rink as US figure skater Tonya Harding. Raised by an abusive mother (Allison Janney), she became a skating star, then notorious when her (also abusive) husband arranged an attack on her rival, Nancy Kerrigan. Director Craig Gillespie tells the grim tale as a mockumentary. Paul Howlett Rugby League: Challenge Cup Quarter Final 4.30pm, BBC Two. Castleford Tigers or Hull FC face the Wigan Warriors. Premier League Football: Manchester United v Crystal Palace 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Followed at 7.45pm by Arsenal v West Ham United. World Series of Darts Finals 8pm, ITV4. Day two coverage from Austria.