“In wildness,” declared Henry David Thoreau, “is the preservation of the world.” But what does wildness mean in the Anthropocene, an era in which, by definition, humanity’s influence reshapes the entire planet? In the Melbourne suburb of Elwood, the lawns of the old Elsternwick golf course no longer look quite so manicured, as the council implements a long-term plan to re-create the pre-colonial wetlands, right in the heart of an urban community. For Gio Fitzpatrick, the project represents the culmination of an old dream. As a 15-year-old exploring St Kilda’s Elster Creek – once central to a coastal marsh ecosystem but since reduced to a concreted canal – he stumbled upon a flock of eastern rosellas, a species of birds thought long vanished from the area. “I started making regular trips,” he says, “trying to document what other wildlife might be preserved.” The green expanses of the Elsternwick golf course obsessed him. Its nine holes lay on reclaimed marshlands, with remnants of the old landscape tantalisingly visible through its wire fence. When friendly golfers allowed him to investigate, he uncovered an amazing variety of creatures sheltering in the badly managed links. “About a third of all the bird species known from Victoria pass through that one patch,” he says. Eventually, the declining popularity and profitability of a private golf course created an unexpected opportunity for his Friends of Elster Creek, with Bayside council persuaded in 2018 (“it was a tough two-year battle,” Fitzpatrick says, “with the public spilling out into the hallway during every meeting”) to transform the links into a wildlife sanctuary, featuring open water, tall marsh, scamp scrub, damp sand, grassy woodland and native lawn. Although initial construction of the reserve commenced only a few weeks ago, the land already occupies a strange, liminal state, as the ancient wetlands slowly re-manifest beneath the old bunkers and greens. But why might a community want to restore a swamp that their great-grandparents assiduously drained? In the Queensland town of Ipswich, the environmental scientist Ben Walker has an answer. In 2016, he helped revive Small Creek, a meandering 1.6km watercourse sealed into a drain back in the early 1980s. “That was considered best practice at the time,” he says. “But we’ve since realised how much damage it does to our waterways.” By restoring the creek, the council sought, first and foremost, to improve water quality. But the project also facilitated the restoration of a wetland ecology still hinted at by the massive Queensland blue gums surviving amid the concrete. For Walker, the intervention succeeded because it engaged the community, though an elaborative consultation process allaying locals’ understandable concerns that wetlands made floods more likely (in fact, it helped manage them) or would attract snakes or mosquitoes (in reality, both flourished in old-style concrete drains and were more controlled in a healthier ecosystem). The results have exceeded all expectations. “Within a few years, we’ve gone from zero fish to counts in the hundreds,” Walker says. “Eels, turtles, spoonbills, all kinds of birds. There’s now even some resident kangaroos.” But nature’s return hasn’t displaced people so much as facilitated a new relationship between them and their environment. The area still serves as a thoroughfare from a local neighbourhood to the nearby school. Now, though, the kids walk along a flourishing ecology rather than a bare drain – and stop and look at their surrounds. The rewilding of urban areas can take many different forms. At Sydney’s North Head at Manly, Dr Viyanna Leo, a wildlife ecologist from the Australian Wildlife Conservancy, works to reintroduce locally extinct bush rats, antechinus and pygmy possums, as part of the conservancy’s partnership with the Sydney Harbour Federation. “It’s to restore biodiversity on the headland,” she says. “And then also create a protection for the population, particularly with the endangered eastern pygmy possums.” The team’s intensive monitoring shows the bush rats increasingly outbreeding the invasive black rats. That’s exciting, because small native mammals can also help with the pollination of local flowering plants, many of which are themselves endangered. Not all restoration projects rely quite so much on formal scientific expertise. For instance, Senka Pupacic volunteers with the Inner West Environment Group, which coordinates locals to restore native bush accidentally preserved by the light rail corridor running through Sydney’s Hurlstone Park, Dulwich Hill, Lewisham, Summer Hill, Haberfield and Leichhardt. “They’re remnant areas, vertical strips,” Pupacic says. “Where they were weed-ridden, we’ve gotten rid of the weeds and the native species have a chance to breathe and grow now. And we’re actually still discovering plants that would have been in the forest before the settlers came.” Even these relatively tiny spaces make an area more habitable for wildlife, with group members reporting sightings of the endangered inner-west long-nosed bandicoot, as well as an array of birdlife including sacred kingfishers, brown goshawks and superb blue wrens. In later life, Thoreau rethought his earlier exultation of the wild. He no longer imagined nature as entirely separate from humanity, saying: “It is in vain to dream of a wildness distant from ourselves. There is none such.” Instead, he concluded, when we delight in the wild, we are recognising something about our own species, identifying a human quality in the freedom of birds and animals. Pupacic has noticed that Covid-19 has created a new interest in local ecologies and the creatures that inhabit them. “People are using the parks again,” she says. “They’re laying in the sun watching the birds. They’re noticing the flowers, being mindful of their surroundings. You know, they’re living again.” Ironically, the Elsternwick park nature reserve edges onto Glenhuntly Road, known originally as Typhus Road after the ship Glen Huntley arrived with that disease in 1840. Today, as a very different infection grips Melbourne, the area is proving itself a lifesaver. “The visitation has gone through the roof,” Fitzpatrick says. “I reckon it’s now probably one of the most heavily used green spaces in the area. There were a lot of locals that didn’t know about the place but now do, and have absolutely fallen in love with it.”