Frustration has been a largely foreign feeling at Salford City in recent years but after a mid-table finish in their first Football League campaign, a fifth promotion in seven seasons is the explicit aim. They are fiercely ambitious and continue to put their money where their mouth is, with Ian Henderson, one of several eye-catching summer signings, the latest player to state they will be going for the jugular. Henderson, prolific for Rochdale in League One, found the net from the penalty spot on debut in the cup and is one of several players to drop down the pyramid in search of success, with Ashley Hunter joining from Fleetwood and the former Preston captain Tom Clarke strengthening Graham Alexander’s defence. Ten miles up the road, Bolton are desperate to reverse the direction of travel after back-to-back relegations. They have won only 23 of their past 126 league matches but, following a refreshingly chaos-free close season, they look well-equipped for an instant return. Another mass turnover of players means Ian Evatt, who led Barrow to promotion from the National League, must gel 17 new faces, though the arrival of Eoin Doyle, who won the golden boot as Swindon were crowned champions last season, and Antoni Sarcevic, who won promotion with Plymouth, should stand them in good stead. Mansfield, too, have lured players from higher up the chain to push for promotion, signing goalkeeper Marek Stech to plug a leaky back line. Exeter City have tasted play-off final misery for a third time in four years and their hopes of promotion rest on a typically vibrant squad, with attacking midfielder Joel Randall one of several academy youngsters to make an impression in pre-season, and rampaging full-back Josh Key and defensive midfielder Will Dean also progressing to the first team. Keeping Randell Williams will be key but the exciting 16-year-old Ben Chrisene has joined Aston Villa. Cheltenham, who lost in the play-off semi-finals, have made Matty Blair, twice promoted out of this division, their marquee signing following the departure of Ryan Broom. Grimsby could get a whiff of the top six if Ian Holloway’s aggressive recruitment drive – more than a dozen players – pays off. Tranmere will be desperate to bounce back after what they perceived as an unjust relegation and appear armed for a promotion push. In James Vaughan and Jay Spearing they have signed players with pedigree at League One and above, but will have to challenge without serial promotion winner Micky Mellon, who has been replaced in the dugout by his former assistant, Mike Jackson. Port Vale, who narrowly missed out on the play-offs and are steadily building under John Askey, and Bradford are primed to go close, while Walsall could be in the mix if Josh Gordon can replicate his form before lockdown (seven goals across 12 matches), with Darrell Clarke only tweaking things after overhauling the squad last season. Forest Green need to return reinvigorated under Mark Cooper after two wins from 12 matches before last season was curtailed. They have snaffled striker Jamille Matt from rivals Newport County but perhaps the most intriguing addition is Héctor Bellerín, with the Arsenal defender becoming the club’s second-largest shareholder. Stevenage were planning for the National League when Macclesfield’s off-field woes came back to bite in August and need to significantly improve to avoid the drop after winning three games last season. The arrival of the former Colchester captain Luke Prosser should beef up a porous defence but they are relying on Tyrone Marsh and Inih Effiong, both of whom were in non-league last season, to remedy goalscoring troubles. Relegated Southend are also on a slippery slope; Mark Molesley, who juggled coaching Bournemouth’s Under-23s with leading Weymouth to successive promotions, is no stranger to working with youth but faces a daunting task to stop the rot. Scunthorpe and Cambridge endured uninspiring ends to last season and this campaign will be a challenge for rookie managers Neil Cox and Mark Bonner, with both likely to lean on youth, though Cambridge can call on the craft of the 38-year-old former Norwich midfielder Wes Hoolahan. Oldham, who appointed Harry Kewell their seventh permanent manager in three years, are never too far from crisis but have bolstered their backline and Morecambe, too, have moved to address their soft centre. Harrogate Town, led by a father-and-son double act in owner Irving and manager Simon Weaver, can heed the experience of Jon Stead and, unlike Barrow, who return to the Football League after 48 years away, they begin with the man who made it possible. James Wilson, Salford Still only 24, it feels as though the former Manchester United striker has been around forever. He scored twice on debut at Old Trafford six years ago and repeated the feat against Plymouth in January after joining Salford from Aberdeen but has since struggled for form and fitness. Charlie Kelman, Southend Plundered 61 goals at youth level before breaking into the first team, and the 18-year-old forward finished as the club’s top scorer last season. Since scoring from inside his own half on debut last year, he has attracted bids from Tottenham and Swansea. Jamie Cumming, Stevenage Third-choice goalkeeper at Chelsea last season, the 21-year-old is primed for his first league action. Cumming, who has been capped by England at youth level, has trained regularly with Frank Lampard’s squad.