The former world middleweight champion Alan Minter has died aged 69, the British Boxing Board of Control has announced. Minter won Olympic bronze at Munich in 1972 and went on to capture the British and European middleweight titles before he was granted his opportunity to fight on the world stage. He claimed the WBC and WBA titles with a split decision win over Vito Antuofermo in March 1980 in Las Vegas but Minter’s reign lasted a matter of months as he was beaten by the great Marvin Hagler at Wembley Arena. The Sussex southpaw ended his professional career the following year after being stopped inside three rounds by his compatriot Tony Sibson, retiring with a record of 39 wins, nine defeats and one no-contest. “The stewards and staff of the British Boxing Board of Control are very saddened to hear of the passing of former world middleweight champion Alan Minter,” a brief BBBoC statement said. “Our sincerest condolences are sent to his family at this time.” The former world heavyweight champion Frank Bruno paid tribute to Minter on Twitter, writing: “I would ask people to look at the old footage of him fighting – a sad day for British Boxing RIP Boom Boom.” Ricky Hatton, another former world champion, added: “Our boxing family has lost one of our own in Alan Minter. You’ll always be a British boxing legend and a gentleman. My love and very best wishes go to Ross the whole Minter family at this time.” Minter earned his opportunity to face Antuofermo by winning eight fights in a row and the Briton was crowned world champion at Caesars Palace after a contentious points win in which the scorecards differed dramatically. But he dealt with his Italian rival decisively in their June 1980 rematch at Wembley Arena, with Antuofermo retiring after eight rounds because of cuts around his eyes. Minter was a national hero by this point and he returned to the London venue to face Hagler in September of that year, only to be over-matched against his American foe.Minter fought three more times, outpointing Ernie Singletary before a split-decision defeat against Mustafa Hamsho was followed by another loss to Sibson in September 1981.