The chief jailer of Cambodia’s Khmer Rouge regime, Comrade Duch, who oversaw the mass murder of at least 14,000 Cambodians at the notorious Tuol Sleng prison, has died. Duch, who was 77 and in poor health, died at a hospital in Phnom Penh in the early hours of Wednesday. The commander had been the first Khmer Rouge figure to be held accountable by a court for atrocities committed under the ultra-communist regime, which killed an estimated 1.7 million people, a quarter of Cambodia’s population, between 1975 and 1979. As head of Tuol Sleng, Duch presided over the torture and executions of thousands of men, women and children who were brought to the jail in the late 1970s, where prisoners made to write detailed confessions outlining their disloyalty. Most were forced to confess to crimes they couldn’t possibly have committed, before they were driven to the notorious killing fields of Choeung Ek, where they were bludgeoned to death. Sometimes, victims were forced to dig their own graves. He was convicted of crimes against humanity in 2010, and was later sentenced to life after a UN-backed tribunal rejected his appeal that he was a junior official following orders. Duch, whose given name was Kaing Guek Eav, had by the time of his trial expressed regret for his crimes, stating that he had acted out of fear for his life and his family. He told a court in 2009: “I am solely and individually responsible for the loss of at least 12,380 lives.” Days later, however, he asked to be acquitted and released, enraging victims’ families and causing some to doubt his contrition. The prison, which was based in a former secondary school in the centre of Phnom Penh, and remains as a museum, and as a symbol of the brutality of the Khmer Rouge regime. Everyone who was arrested and sent to the prison, also known as S-21, was presumed dead already, he testified in 2009. Guards, mostly teenage boys from poor backgrounds, were instructed to “smash to bits” traitors and counter-revolutionaries. Anyone from intellectuals, identified as such for wearing glasses, or those who spoke a foreign language, to young children, were targeted.Only a dozen prisoners are believed to have survived. Duch – a former maths teacher – had an obsessive eye for detail and kept his school-turned-jail meticulously organised. “Nothing in the former schoolhouse took place without Duch’s approval. His control was total,” wrote photographer and author Nic Dunlop, who found Duch in 1999 hiding near the Thai border, two decades after the Khmer Rouge fell. Detailed records were kept by jailers, who measured and took black-and-white photographs of every prisoner. “Not until you walk through the empty corridors of Tuol Sleng does Stalin’s idiom that one death is a tragedy – a million a statistic, take on a terrifying potency,” Dunlop wrote in his account of Duch and his atrocities, The Lost Executioner. Norng Chan Phal, one of the few people to have survived S-21, was a boy when he and his parents were sent to Duch’s prison and interrogated on suspicion of having links to the Khmer Rouge’s mortal enemy, Vietnam. His parents were tortured and killed but Chan Phal survived to give testimony at Duch’s trial in 2010. “He was cooperative, he spoke to the court frankly. He apologised to all S-21 victims and asked them to open their hearts. He apologised to me too,” Chan Phal told Reuters. “He apologised. But justice is not complete”. Since Duch’s trial, the tribunal has convicted two senior Khmer Rouge leaders, while two other defendants died before their trials could be completed. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this article