Watching Sue Perkins present a programme always brings to mind the moment in Blackadder when Edmund, in financial straits, is showing prospective buyers around his home. “You’ve really worked out your banter, haven’t you?” says one of them. “No, not really,” replies Blackadder. “This is a different thing – it’s spontaneous, and it’s called wit.” Wit is Perkins’ USP. All presenters have warmth and intelligence, though both can vary in degree and kind, and in the proportions in which they are blended. But it is Perkins’ ability to think on her feet – and, I suppose, the willingness of her editors to keep it in and not flatten her into traditional affectlessness – that marks her (and the likes of Grayson Perry and Paul O’Grady when he lets rip) out. It adds zest to proceedings. This is always welcome, even when – as with last night’s opening episode of the two-part Sue Perkins: Along the US-Mexico Border (BBC One) – the programme’s subject matter is notably colourful stuff on its own. Perkins began in Tijuana, home of the busiest border crossing in the world – a dangerous place and fantastic party town. So goes the human heart, especially when you add tequila to it. Which is how Tijuana has been enticing Americans particularly intensively since the 1930s, when Prohibition made it the destination of choice (which is to say the nearest) wherein to purchase hard liquor and get absolutely hammered. Perkins was guided skilfully through the Friday night sights (including a zebra strolling the streets) and sounds (mariachi bands, mainly) and into an all-tequila off-licence. The many wares she sampled with her guide, Matthew, included a salty, viscous white shot called Sexy Cream. “That’s a taste from long, long ago,” said Perkins, an out lesbian of many years’ standing. Deeper, darker issues were of course unavoidable, as Perkins – once recovered from her hangover and flashbacks – continued her journey along the border. In a hastily-built shelter for 40 single mothers and their children, she met a Honduran woman and the three young children – one hospitalised with dehydration when they arrived – with whom she had fled her home country in search of a better life in the US. Now, in accordance with current US government policy, she and everyone like her must wait in Mexico while seeking asylum across the border. “But thank God nothing bad happened that we could regret,” she says, as her three children sleep safely – all terms at the border are borderline themselves – around her. A short drive away, Perkins meets a group of 60-somethings who have chosen to live in Mexico for the cheaper healthcare and better quality of (beach-based, marijuana-smoothed) life. Some have the right papers, some don’t. But being an illegal economic migrant is apparently only a problem if you’re coming from the other direction. To them, the wall emerging nearby from the Pacific (a stretch built under the Clinton administration rather than part of the more recent infamous construction) is just somewhere to rest your joint or martini. In Friendship Park, back in Tijuana, it is everything. The park is the designated point where families separated by lack of documents and the threat of deportation and often caught up for years in the byzantine processing system can meet. Again, a borderline word – when they mass at the fence they can just about see each other through the thick metal and touch each others’ fingertips through the unyielding mesh. Onward, then, 350 miles through Arizona and Perkins’ introduction to the patriotic sheriff of Pinal County, whose office is stuffed with guns and flags. “I’ve only been in the office two seconds,” remarks Perkins as she is handed another pistol from his stash, “and I’m already fetishising weaponry. This is how it starts, people.” He, in turn introduces her to the ways and means of the Mexican cartels that use human trafficking to help smuggle in the drugs that make them their gargantuan profits. The parts, like this, where Perkins tries to convey and comment on the scale of suffering and the complexity of the factors behind it as she moves along the communities living hard up against both sides of the wall (“How many times do we have to put something like this up before we realise this is not the way?”) work less well than the lighter sections. Also more effective are the sections when she interviews with compassion and skill the people directly affected by the mighty forces moving around them. It remains a travelogue rather than a documentary, and the format cannot bear too much stress. Let a presenter coax out the stories, leaven the remainder with wit, and the documentary can come later.