Pressure is mounting on the UK government to take in some of the thousands of asylum seekers left without shelter following a devastating fire at Europe’s largest migrant camp on the Greek island of Lesbos. The blaze tore through the Moria registration and identification centre (RIC) overnight on Tuesday, incinerating tents that had been home to 13,000 people, including at least 4,000 children. Germany and France are to take in children hit by the fire but the UK has yet to offer any assistance. Since last October, the Greek government has been appealing for help from other countries to take in asylum-seeking children from its islands; 13 countries, including non-EU states Norway and Switzerland, have taken part but the UK has refused to help. The fire has made the situation on Lesbos even more critical. Nick Thomas-Symonds, the shadow home secretary, urged the government to act. He said: “The government should live up to our responsibilities and promises as a country and look to work with international partners so we can immediately offer sanctuary and home to some of the unaccompanied children in this terrible situation.” More than 70 civil society organisations have signed a call for action urging governments to take in people displaced by the Moria camp fire. Stephanie Pope, EU and UN policy and advocacy manager at Refugee Rights Europe, said: “While we are shocked and saddened by the horrific images of Moria burning, they come as no surprise. The devastating fires are yet another reminder of the tragic human cost of a European asylum and migration system based on containment and deterrence policies. “Thousands of individuals, including roughly 4,000 children, have been left homeless and traumatised. We urge all European governments including the UK, to uphold their commitment to human rights and show solidarity with these individuals, by relocating a number of them to safety without delay.” Ruth Tanner, the head of Oxfam’s humanitarian campaigns, said: “The ongoing humanitarian tragedy in the camp and now this devastating fire are an urgent reminder to the UK government that it should be doing its fair share for people fleeing conflict and persecution. “The UK’s resettlement operations, which were paused due to the pandemic, should be urgently restarted. The UK government needs to provide adequate safe and legal routes for refugees to reach the UK and allow more refugee families to be reunited in safety here.” In a letter to the home secretary, Lord Dubs, who was a child refugee himself, said: “The situation in Greece is an international emergency and it requires international cooperation to find a solution. As a leading nation on the world stage, I hope the UK will play its role in making sure that children are relocated from this horrendous situation as soon as possible.” In 2016, after defeats in the House of Lords, the government accepted an amendment to the immigration bill proposed byDubs requiring the Home Office to accept an unspecified number of unaccompanied child refugees from Europe for resettlement in the UK. The process was subsequently referred to as the Dubs scheme. The government capped the Dubs scheme at 480 children, although there was no legal requirement to do this. The cap has been met so the scheme has in effect ended; however, the legislation remains and the government could take more children under the scheme if it chose to do so. The tragedy underlines the importance of establishing a credible replacement for European laws – known as the Dublin regulation – which govern family reunion for unaccompanied minors who have relatives in the UK, campaigners say. When the transition period ends on 31 December, so will the UK’s obligations under the Dublin regulation. The UK also suspended its global resettlement scheme, designed to transfer recognised refugees from an another country, due to the pandemic and has yet to restart it. Refugees International advocate Daphne Panayotatos, said: “The devastation caused by the fires in Moria has only underscored what the world already knew about the indignity, unsustainability and danger of holding people in the miserable conditions in Lesbos. “The UK and other European countries have taken only minimal steps in response to Greece’s requests for assistance. By keeping resettlement operations on hold, the UK has further abdicated its responsibility to people seeking safety in Europe. With tens of thousands in Lesbos now left with nowhere to go, the UK should immediately step up to take in more vulnerable asylum seekers, resume resettlement, and facilitate family reunification.”  