It has been three years since Mo Farah last stepped on to the track but he insists he is stronger than ever and ready to defy father time by breaking the first world record of his career at the age of 37. The target in Farah’s sights in Brussels on Friday is Haile Gebrselassie’s one-hour record, set 13 years ago in Ostrava. The Ethiopian’s final distance of 21.285km, an average pace of 2:49 per kilometre, should be within Farah’s grasp, given he has run slightly quicker over 13.1 miles at the Great North Run and comes armed with the next generation shoe technology. And Farah has an extra reason to succeed: to get one over Gebrselassie, with whom he spectacularly fell out after having a watch, money and two phones taken when he was staying at the Ethiopian’s hotel last year. Gebrselassie responded by accusing Farah of “defaming” his reputation and business. “It would definitely mean a lot to me,” said Farah, who also holds the best time for two miles indoors although that is not regarded as an official world record by World Athletics. “A world record is something I’d love to have. Haile’s record has been there for a long time, he has done a lot for athletics. But it’s always nice to set history.” A lot has changed since Farah last stepped on to the track in August 2017, with his former coach Alberto Salazar being banned for four years for doping offences and talents such as the Ugandan Joshua Cheptegei pushing the sport on by breaking the world 5,000m record. However Farah believes he can still compete with the very best despite a three-year hiatus where he moved up to the marathon with decidedly mixed results. “In certain things in life we have to be honest with ourselves and tell the truth,” said Farah, who won four Olympic and seven world titles over 5,000m and 10,000m. “I wanted something to excite me so I tried the marathon. I broke the European record. It was OK but I wasn’t so excited as I was on the track. That’s the reason I’ve chosen to come back. I genuinely do miss it. It’s nice to be back.” Farah’s best days are surely long behind him now, but he insisted that even though he will be 38 by the time the Tokyo Olympics takes place next July he expects to have a live shot at a medal. “It’s a strange year for all of us. The Olympics this year isn’t going to happen but it’s probably a good thing for me. It means I can get back on the track, get racing again, and rebuild my confidence before having a crack at the Olympics.”Farah also dismissed suggestions he might have lost much of the high-end finishing speed that made him almost unbeatable on the track. “Not at all. Having the marathon under my belt has definitely made me stronger. Coach knows best but I am definitely going to push on. Tokyo is the big one.”