Guardian writers’ predicted position: 19th (NB: this is not necessarily Jacob Steinberg’s prediction but the average of our writers’ tips) Last season’s position: 4th in Championship Odds to win the league (via Oddschecker): 1,000-1 Fulham earned the dubious honour of becoming a cautionary tale after winning promotion to the Premier League two seasons ago. Instead of making improvements in a calm and focused manner, they embarked on a disastrous £100m spend, wrecked their team spirit and ended up changing managers twice. Slavisa Jokanovic was the first to go, Claudio Ranieri did not last long after alienating several key players and the damage was already done by the time Scott Parker took caretaker charge in February 2019. Parker inherited a shambles and he could not save Fulham from an embarrassing relegation. The former England midfielder was blameless, though. He could see where Fulham had gone wrong and he provided a welcome dose of reality, identifying a lack of nous and grit. A losing culture had developed. Parker set about changing Fulham’s mentality. Last season was not perfect and missing out on automatic promotion was disappointing. There were doubts over Parker’s tactics at times and a feeling Fulham did not reach their full potential. When it came to the play-offs, however, they held their nerve. Fulham were underdogs when they faced Brentford at Wembley but they shaded the contest, played with more professionalism and edged a tense, ugly contest in extra-time, with Joe Bryan claiming two unlikely goals from left-back. Fulham were back in the big time. But Parker wants a more level-headed approach. The 39-year-old is not seeking to make drastic changes. He does not want more disharmony. He has brought Tom Cairney, discarded by Ranieri, back into the fold. He has improved Bryan, who struggled in the Premier League last time. He has even revitalised Aboubakar Kamara, who looked to be on the way in 2019. There will be chances for Jean Michaël Seri and André-Frank Zambo Anguissa, two of those expensive flops from two summers ago, to prove their worth in midfield after returning from loan spells. Yet Parker cannot carry any passengers. He needs a team willing to dig in and work hard. Fulham are still capable of passing sweetly but they need to snarl as well. A focus on clean sheets is key and it will be interesting to see whether Michael Hector, who has been a rock since joining from Chelsea, can shine at the highest level. Hector’s leadership in front of the goalkeeper Marek Rodak will be vital given Denis Odoi, Tim Ream and Maxime Le Marchand did not fare well two seasons ago. There are obvious areas for Fulham to improve. They do not have to avoid spending simply because they made mistakes in the past. The trick is buying wisely, for the future. Antonee Robinson, signed for £1.9m from Wigan and intent on providing competition for Bryan at left-back, fits that template. Harrison Reed, who impressed on loan last season, will add bite in midfield after an £8m move from Southampton and Mario Lemina has joined on loan from the same club. Fulham have some decent players, with Josh Onomah keen to impress in midfield after failing to make it at Tottenham. The worry remains that they lack the quality to stay up. Cairney is a watchable No 10 but will not find as much space against better opponents. Bobby Reid scored five goals when Cardiff fell into the Championship last year, while Ivan Cavaleiro and Anthony Knockaert dropped down a division to join Fulham last summer. Knockaert, the former Brighton winger, has much to prove at this level after Fulham made his loan permanent for £10m. As ever the pressure is likely to fall on Aleksandar Mitrovic, who has rarely let Fulham down since joining from Newcastle in 2018. The Serbian forward looks more mature than in the past. Yet the 25-year-old, who scored 11 goals when Fulham were relegated, will require good service. Much depends on Mitrovic. More than anything, though, Fulham need to trust in the collective. They are not good enough to forget about the basics. They will go down if they are not willing to graft. Parker has restored their identity. Another disastrous season awaits if he is unable to keep it in place. Fulham style themselves as London’s original club and have mostly led a modest existence, although their former owner Mohamed Al Fayed did once talk about making them the Manchester United of the south. Unfortunately the Egyptian tried to do it by signing Steve Marlet for £11.5m from Lyon in 2001. Marlet turned out to be slightly inferior to United’s big signing that summer, Ruud van Nistelrooy, and managed 11 goals in 55 league appearances before joining Marseille on loan in 2003. Still, full marks for thinking big – even if the Michael Jackson statue outside Craven Cottage made a bigger impact than the goalshy Frenchman. On the touchline Although Parker is yet to throw himself into a 50-50 tackle when the ball strays towards the dugout, he does not hide his emotions. He is a natty dresser too; a man who appreciates the value of a tie clip. On Zoom Good luck trying to find anyone with a bad word to say about Parker, who on Wednesday signed a new three-year contract. He is a lovely man and although he can be guarded at times, he let it all pour out after the play-off final. Scott Parker's post-match interview the other night goes so well with The Streets Dry Your Eyes! 🎶 👏 🎥 @MarkyPickard pic.twitter.com/hAAd6aKn6y Mitrovic was was crucial again last season, scoring 26 times. However, he still has a point to prove in the Premier League. Can he produce on a regular basis in the top level? The pressure on him is huge. There have been two chaotic relegations from the Premier League since Shahid Khan, an American billionaire who owns the NFL’s Jacksonville Jaguars, purchased the club from Mohamed Al Fayed in 2013. Khan’s son Tony, the vice-chairman and director of football operations, is influential in transfers. Onomah has found it hard to fulfil his potential since breaking through at Tottenham. However the 23-year-old midfielder is a talent. He looks settled at Fulham and scored a stunning goal in the first leg of their play-off semi-final win against Cardiff. He will hope to shine in the Premier League. Robinson almost joined Milan in January, only to fail a medical. Then the left-back almost joined Sheffield United this summer, only for Fulham to swoop. The talented American will provide strong competition for Bryan. Formed as Fulham St Andrew’s Church Sunday School FC in 1879 and stayed faithful to their black and white colours when Fulham Football Club was born a decade later. The club released a commemorative shirt to celebrate their 140th anniversary last year. Craven Cottage is a small ground and it is not easy making it ready for social distancing measures. However, visiting sides are still able to use the away dressing room and have also been given the press lounge and concourse area in the Johnny Haynes Stand. The squad is not packed with internationals. Their star is Mitrovic, who will be hoping to fire Serbia through the play-offs and into the finals. Serbia face Norway in October. Victory would set up a crunch match against Scotland or Israel.