Aston Villa have signed Ollie Watkins from Brentford on a five-year contract in what is reported to be a club-record £28m deal that could potentially rise to £33m. Watkins scored 26 goals last season in a campaign during which Brentford reached the Championship play-off final, where they lost against Fulham. The move reunites the 24-year-old with Dean Smith, who was Brentford manager when Watkins arrived from Exeter City in 2017. “Ollie has developed into one of the most sought-after strikers in the country and we are looking forward to seeing him show his great qualities in an Aston Villa shirt,” said Smith. “He is a hugely determined character who has both the ability and personality to succeed at the highest level.” Villa had been looking to bolster their attack after securing Premier League survival on the final day of last season. They had been linked with Callum Wilson before his move from Bournemouth to Newcastle this week. “I am so excited to join Aston Villa and to reunite with Dean Smith as my head coach,” said Watkins. “I cannot wait to wear the famous claret and blue in the Premier League. I want to do something special here and score some goals.” Fulham have signed PSG goalkeeper Alphonse Areola on a season-long loan. The Premier League newcomers also hold an option to make the move permanent next summer. “I am very happy everything is done,” Areola told the club’s official channel. “Scott Parker called me and I had a good feeling. He said he really wanted me. “Fulham is a historic club in London and I have heard a lot about the stadium,” the 27-year-old added. “I hope this season will be a good one for us. I want to bring my energy and do everything for this team to keep us where we belong to be.” Areola has made over 100 appearances for PSG since making his debut in 2013 and was a member of France’s World Cup-winning squad in 2018. He spent last season on loan at Real Madrid. Sheffield United have completed their fourth signing of the week after securing a deal for the West Brom forward Oliver Burke, with Callum Robinson moving in the opposite direction. Burke has signed a three-year contract, following the Derby pair Jayden Bogle and Max Lowe and a loan deal for Chelsea’s Ethan Ampadu on Monday. Wolves have followed up their £37m move for striker Fábio Silva by bringing in another Porto youngster. Attacking midfielder Vitinha moves to Molineux on an initial loan deal, with a reported £18m option to make the deal permanent next season.