Shere Hite, the feminist sex researcher, who has died of corticobasal degeneration aged 77, dedicated her career to documenting the sex lives of women. She was catapulted to fame by her groundbreaking study into female sexual response, The Hite Report: A Nationwide Study of Female Sexuality, published in 1976. Based on responses from 3,500 women to questionnaires about their experiences of sex and pleasure, the book has since sold almost 50m copies worldwide. Sigmund Freud’s theory of the vaginal orgasm was thoroughly debunked following the publication of The Hite Report. Freud claimed that many women experienced orgasm through the clitoris but declared that such orgasms were sexually and psychologically immature and that women who could not orgasm through penetration were “frigid”. I conducted the last interview with Shere in 2011, during which she told me that Freud’s ignorance about female sexual pleasure was responsible for so many women faking orgasms. “Male sexology was laboratory based,” said Shere. “Mine focused on real women’s experiences as recounted by them.” Her findings were a threat to countless men because Shere had exposed the truth that women could have orgasms without them. As a result, her research was labelled The Hate Report in Playboy – for which she had once posed topless. She went on to write The Hite Report on Male Sexuality (1981), wanting to open a discussion on men’s sexual desires, responses and fantasies and how they relate to the ideas of “masculinity”. Using similar methodology to her earlier research, she compiled 7,239 responses of men, aged between 13 and 97, who had agreed to answer a lengthy and open-ended questionnaire about their sex lives. But her most radical work was Women and Love: A Cultural Revolution in Progress (1987) in which she exposed the emotional abuse women sometimes endured in supposedly loving relationships. Shere painted a bleak picture of women struggling to escape emotionally and sexually unfulfilling marriages, diving into affairs whenever they could. All-American manhood was insulted and told her as often as it could. In more than 900 pages of research, Shere found that most American women were deeply unhappy with their male partners, as insensitive lovers. Following a cover story in Time magazine in November that year, about which Shere believed that the journalist quoted unsympathetic critics who had not read the book, a number of male academics publicly questioned Shere’s methods. She had sent out 100,000 questionnaires, of which 4,500 were returned. “So few people responded, it’s not representative of any group, except the odd group who agreed to respond,” said Donald Rubin, chair of the department of statistics at Harvard University. Shere retorted: “I feel I have contributed significantly to methodology. None of the media read the long explanation in my report of how I did the research. After all, Freud only interviewed three Viennese women.” There were also unfounded allegations about Shere’s behaviour, for example that she once attacked a limousine driver because he called her “dear”, that she had stormed out of television interviews and was considered arrogant and narcissistic by some interviewers. She was born Shirley Gregory in St Joseph, Missouri, the daughter of Paul Gregory, who worked in aviation, and Shirley (nee Hurt), a teacher. To distinguish her from her mother, she was given the nickname “Shere” from an early age. Her mother was only 16 when she gave birth and Shere was raised by her grandparents, but later moved to Florida during her teens to live with an aunt. When her mother remarried, Shere adopted the surname of her stepfather, Raymond Hite. Following a degree in history at the University of Florida in 1967, Shere enrolled at the University of Columbia in New York for a PhD in social history, funding her studies by working part-time as a model. She was a self-styled “instinctive feminist”. When hired by Olivetti to be photographed caressing a keyboard beneath the advertising strapline “The typewriter that’s so smart that she doesn’t have to be”, Shere was so angry that she turned up to a feminist protest against the poster. After being recognised as the model, Shere was invited to join the New York chapter of the National Organisation for Women. At her first meeting, the issue of the female orgasm was raised. Feminists had disclosed in consciousness-raising groups that they were not sexually satisfied during heterosexual sex, with many admitting they had never achieved orgasm this way. She dropped out of her PhD, saying that Columbia University was too conservative and instead began her sexology research independently. Her first publication was Sexual Honesty: By Women for Women (1974). In 1984, aged 42, Shere met Friedrich Höricke, a German concert pianist. They married and moved to Germany in 1989. Shere became a German citizen in 1996, having renounced her US citizenship in 1995, citing sustained attacks on her work and personal criticism and threats. She and Friedrich divorced in 1999; by then she had settled permanently in the UK, where she lived in north London. In 2000 Shere released an updated account of women’s sex lives (The New Hite Report) in which she found that British women were the most sexually confident and liberated in the English-speaking world, although British men were a disappointment in bed. Her final publication was an autobiography, The Hite Report on Shere Hite, which also appeared in 2000. With her health failing, Shere undertook her last public speaking engagement in 2012, although she remained concerned about female sexuality being exploited by the porn industry. She is survived by her second husband, Paul Sullivan, whom she married in 2012. • Shere Hite, sex researcher and writer, born 2 October 1942; died 9 September 2020