Sabri Lamouchi offered a stark warning to his Nottingham Forest players after they suffered a 2-0 defeat at the hands of Cardiff. Forest have gone eight league games without a win after two goals from Kieffer Moore helped Neil Harris’s side to their first victory of the campaign. Lamouchi was furious after seeing his side concede from two set pieces, after spending hours in training working on defending them this past week. Moore took only three minutes to head in a corner, before prodding home after a long throw-in five minutes before half-time. Forest’s slide out of the play-off places last season left Lamouchi under pressure and that scrutiny is increased by two defeats in two league games this campaign. “We started the game in absolutely the wrong way. It is just unacceptable to start the game like that,” he said. “We conceded a goal from the first corner and we knew the quality of this [Cardiff] team. We had worked all week on dealing with long throw-ins, second balls and corners. Our marking was absolutely unacceptable. “We conceded the second goal the first time they launched a long throw into the box. You can work all week but if you are not focused and determined when it comes to defending, you do not have a chance. “The second half was much better. But we have to do more. Some players are still thinking about the end of last season. But this is a new season and we have new players and we have the quality to get out of this situation.” Harris was delighted to see his summer signing from Wigan score twice. The Cardiff manager said: “I’m really pleased for the big man, he was desperate to come and play. So you’re delighted when he gets off the mark with goals, his all-round performance was excellent, his athleticism too. “The team showed a great response to a little bit of criticism as we hadn’t started the season very well. I thought the focus, the mentality, on and off the pitch, it came to fruition here, especially in the first half. “In the first half, it was exactly how I want my Cardiff City team to play. We weren’t as good in the second half, but we dug in and got a clean sheet. “It has been such a short turnaround, we did not have much time to work, so we did not start great as a team, last week. Today we had quality in the final third, we kept a clean sheet and this was more like the way we want to play.”