Guardian writers’ predicted position: 1st (NB: this is not necessarily Andy Hunter’s prediction but the average of our writers’ tips) Last season’s position: 1st Odds to win the league (via Oddschecker): 9-4 The 30-year wait for the 19th league title had only just ended when Jürgen Klopp started fielding questions about creating a dynasty at Liverpool. To say they cheesed him off would be an understatement. Reasonably, he wished to savour a moment generations of Liverpool fans had dreamed of rather than demand even more from his relentless squad, but within a week of winning the Premier League he too was contemplating sustained domination. “Next season we will not defend anything … we will attack,” Klopp said, six days into his reign as champion of England, Europe and the world. “I don’t feel finally satisfied. We are just in the middle of something.” Just do it – again, as Liverpool’s new kit suppliers might say. It is not that simple, although Klopp’s team made it appear so last season. The champions demolished the opposition en route to claiming the league with 99 points, two more than when runners-up to Manchester City in 2018-19 and a tally that might have been greater but for easing up with the title won. The coveted prize was effectively sewn up before Covid-19 threw everything into disarray. In the end Klopp embraced the asterisk that rivals wanted attached to Liverpool’s undisputed achievement. It would be recognition, he argued, of triumph in a historic season, made even more so by Liverpool wrapping up the title with seven games to spare – a record – and remaining unbeaten at Anfield for a third consecutive league campaign – a club record. Liverpool’s superiority was reflected in an 18-point winning margin. That is a forbidding gap for any opponent to bridge. It may prove an impossible one, too, should Klopp’s team retain the extraordinary focus and consistency that have delivered 196 points over the past two seasons. There have been only four league defeats, two sustained after the pursuit of the title was finally over. Klopp’s conviction that this team are in the “middle of something” was backed up by his decision to sign a five-year contract extension in December. The talk of attacking next season’s title is no surprise – it is Liverpool’s way under Klopp – but it is in defence where the champions have a solid and settled advantage over City, Chelsea and Manchester United. Liverpool won the league with the tightest defence, one that is established, has another year’s experience and, as the influence of Trent Alexander-Arnold and Andy Robertson demonstrates, continues to improve. Kevin De Bruyne was the only player to produce more assists in the Premier League last season than Liverpool’s potent full-backs. The champions were mentally stronger than City, too, resilient and singleminded enough to rack up wins on below-par, difficult days. And unlike Frank Lampard or Ole Gunnar Solskjær, Liverpool’s manager does not have to concern himself with the unknowns of a team in transition. There are a few concerns all the same. Sustaining those remarkable levels for a third successive Premier League campaign is chief among them. Liverpool have strengthened their left-back cover, with Kostas Tsimikas, and although the desire for Thiago Alcântara is no secret, the commanding midfielder remains a Bayern Munich player at the time of writing. Liverpool are not in desperate need of additions, clearly, and Klopp warned from the outset the pandemic would affect his spending, as the aborted move for Timo Werner confirmed. But there is a need to freshen up and inject new competition into a squad relatively unchanged for almost three years. Tsimikas and Takumi Minamino are the only senior outfield players signed since the big-spending summer of 2018. There is a question of depth, too, with Dejan Lovren and Adam Lallana moving on, doubts surrounding the futures of Divock Origi and Xherdan Shaqiri, and a condensed, intensive season ahead. Improvement, however, can emerge from within. Naby Keïta gave several overdue reminders of his talent after the restart, Minamino has impressed in pre-season (after a challenging time alone in England during lockdown) and Harvey Elliott, Curtis Jones, Rhian Brewster and Neco Williams are among a clutch of youngsters who excite Klopp. The aim is number 20 and the incentive is also clear: to lift the Premier League trophy in front of supporters inside Anfield this time. A bronze bust of John Houlding was unveiled outside Anfield two years ago and you suspect the club’s founder would argue it was long overdue. But for the decision of the landlord of Anfield, local brewer, JP and later Lord Mayor of Liverpool to more than double Everton’s rent in 1889 his tenants might not have eventually quit, and he might not have set Liverpool Association Football Club on a storied path that has brought triumph and tragedy. It was the inspirational force of Bill Shankly that transformed Liverpool from a second division team into the global powerhouse of today.  On the touchline Ebullient would be a nice way to put it. Frenzied, incessant, capable of raging at match officials/own players/own fans in an instant would be a broader and more accurate description. And to think the 53-year-old claims he’s mellowed. On Zoom What you see is what you get with Klopp and he is no different in the current weird world of press conferences. Continues to give long, considered answers to a wide range of questions and to take the Michael when the opportunity arises. Virgil van Dijk. The defensive pillar is indispensable to Liverpool. Van Dijk played every minute of the title-winning campaign and his fitness record has been impeccable at Anfield. Given the lack of cover for that position, his availability is vital to defending the title. Liverpool wore Everton’s old blue and white shirts for their first four seasons until switching to red in 1896. It was not until 25 November 1964, when Anderlecht visited in the European Cup, that Bill Shankly introduced matching red shorts to make his team look more powerful. The all-red strip was completed with the socks in the away leg on 16 December. Fenway Sports Group, owner of the Boston Red Sox, acquired Liverpool in an acrimonious high court battle with Tom Hicks and George Gillett in 2010. Led by the principal owner, John W Henry, the chairman, Tom Werner, and the president, Mike Gordon – who is heavily involved in the day-to-day running of Liverpool – the company has transformed fortunes on and off the pitch. There is widespread interest in Rhian Brewster and understandably so after his prolific loan at Swansea. Brewster scored 11 goals in 22 appearances after his move in January and, while Klopp has yet to decide on the next step, Anfield may provide the best platform after the decision not to pursue Werner and given doubts over Origi’s future. Thiago is the target who captivates but, at the time of writing, Tsimikas is Liverpool’s only reinforcement. Klopp has wanted cover for Andy Robertson for some time and, after Norwich stood firm on their £20m valuation of Jamal Lewis, the Greece international was signed for £11.75m from Olympiakos. The club worked with fan group Spion Kop 1906 to bring a touch of familiarity to the Kop and it was covered in flags that paid tribute to, among other things, European glory and the Hillsborough victims. Another banner was later added to the upper tier of the Sir Kenny Dalglish Stand: “Liverpool FC – Champions Again.” Premier League minutes may be hard to come by for Williams but the 19-year-old right-back has done enough to impress Ryan Giggs. The teenager received his first senior Wales call-up for the Nations League fixtures against Finland and Bulgaria.