The Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny has said he is now able to breathe without any external support, in his first public statement since he was poisoned last month. Navalny, who German authorities said was poisoned with the nerve agent novichok, posted a photograph on Instagram of himself sitting up in a hospital bed surrounded by his wife and their two children. In the caption to the post, he wrote: “Hi, this is Navalny. I’m missing you. I still can hardly do anything, but yesterday I could breathe the whole day on my own. Completely on my own. No external help, not even a simple ventilator in my throat. I liked it a lot. A surprising process that is under-appreciated by many. I highly recommend.” Navalny collapsed on a flight from Tomsk in Siberia to Moscow after drinking a cup of tea at the airport. The flight made an emergency landing in Omsk, where he spent two days being treated by Russian doctors, who ruled out poisoning in public statements. However, a medical source in the city told Reuters on Monday that his treating doctors had immediately suspected poisoning. After two days he was flown on a specially-equipped medical plan to Berlin, where he is being treated at the Charité hospital. On Monday, the hospital said in a statement that he “continues to improve” and hinted that Navalny was able to talk. Born in 1976 just outside Moscow, Alexei Navalny is a lawyer-turned-campaigner whose Anti-Corruption Foundation investigates the wealth of Vladimir Putin’s inner circle. He started out as a Russian nationalist, but emerged as the main leader of Russia's democratic opposition during the wave of protests that led up to the 2012 presidential election, and has since been a thorn in the Kremlin’s side. Navalny is barred from appearing on state television, but has used social media to his advantage. A 2017 documentary accusing the prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, of corruption received more than 30m views on YouTube within two months. He has been repeatedly arrested and jailed. The European court of human rights ruled that Russia violated Navalny's rights by holding him under house arrest in 2014. Election officials barred him from running for president in 2018 due to an embezzlement conviction that he claims was politically motivated. Navalny told the commission its decision would be a vote 'not against me, but against 16,000 people who have nominated me; against 200,000 volunteers who have been canvassing for me'. There has also been a physical price to pay. In April 2017, he was attacked with green dye that nearly blinded him in one eye, and in July 2019 he was taken from jail to hospital with symptoms that one of his doctors said could indicate poisoning. In 2020, he was again hospitalised after a suspected poisoning, and taken to Germany for treatment. The German government later said toxicology results showed Navalny was poisoned with a Novichok nerve agent. Navalny’s spokeswoman, Kira Yarmysh, confirmed on Tuesday that he plans to return to Russia when he can. “I’ll confirm again to everyone: no other options were ever considered,” Yarmysh tweeted in response to questions from journalists about Navalny’s travel plans. A German security official had told the New York Times on Monday that Navalny was speaking, was aware of what had happened to him, and had expressed a desire to return to Russia. “He’s not planning to go into exile in Germany,” the official said. “He wants to go home to Russia and he wants to continue his mission.” German authorities say French and Swedish laboratories had confirmed their findings that novichok had been used to poison Navalny. The French president, Emmanual Macron, called his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, to ask for an explanation. Russian authorities have denied all involvement in the poisoning, either suggesting Navalny had fallen ill for other reasons or suggesting others had carried out a poisoning. On Tuesday, Alexei Naryshkin, the head of Russia’s foreign spy agency, told journalists there was no poison in Navalny’s body when he left Russia.