Normally the time in between seasons allows me to reset, as someone who is generally quite busy with a hectic fixture schedule between Christmas and new year, I have to save my resolutions for the summer. My aims, however, for any new campaign rarely vary too much, which might seem slightly boring but it is important to be clear and honest with yourself. My plan is a simple one: do better than the season before, both as a team and an individual. If you can achieve that then you have enjoyed a successful season. Our squad is always focused on reaching the point of safety and building from there, something we have achieved over the past four seasons. Three big clubs have been promoted and are spending money on new players, so the Premier League will be as competitive as ever and it’s important we use our experience and quality to ensure we are too. We are not the biggest club in the league and comfortably finishing 10th was a fantastic accomplishment. As a group we used the downtime well, ensuring the highest levels of fitness were maintained, a concept that served us well during a hectic run-in. We finished really short on numbers and had a lot of young boys on the bench. The club is looking at the numbers and getting new players in. We do not go spending a lot of money, we are shrewd and operate on the quiet, which is the way our club has worked for many seasons. There is still plenty of time to go in the window as it does not close until October. We did well towards the end of last season despite lacking depth but if we suffer a few injuries this season, then we’d be down to bare bones with what is currently available. At the risk of repeating everyone in the game: football without fans is not the same. I have struggled to get the same rush of adrenaline before a match and I am not alone in that. Professionalism kicked in and the childlike desire to beat whoever is in front of you gets you through 90 minutes. Everyone wants fans back and we will all appreciate being able to see one another again, having full stadiums and being able to get that buzz back. I cannot wait to walk out into a packed ground and have everyone enjoy their football. Like everything in life, any step closer to normality can only be a positive one. Additionally, the quicker the silence ends in stadiums the sooner I will not be able to hear the gaffer shouting at me from wherever I am on the pitch. You can hear him on TV, so imagine what it is like for us players. It would be fantastic, on a personal level, to have my family at a game this season. My daughter, Olive, was born 16 weeks premature during the pandemic and it has been an incredibly challenging time for us all. My wife visited her every day during Olive’s three and a half months in hospital and I was absent for only a couple of days due to matches. Olive has been a trouper and it would be a great milestone for us all if we are able to get her to Turf Moor, alongside her football-loving brother, Jaxon, who has been growing up fast during lockdown. Having all the games on TV last season was great. It was second best to being in the stands and the experience of travelling up and down the country to follow your team but it was a much-needed boost for everyone. It gave people something to look forward to and at the weekend you could watch matches all day, which was a nice distraction, as there is only so much Netflix and reading one can take, so I hope it continues to assist the fans desperate to support their teams. During the pandemic football has shown its power for good. As a collective Players Together showed the sport can make a difference and the wider impact it can have. It opened up channels of communication between the captains to make sure we can continue that hard work to make sure we can help again when it is required. It is a very powerful thing to have players and clubs coming together. I am also proud of the impact taking a knee has made to raise awareness of an important issue. Many other sports followed our example and its widespread use can only help in the long run as we fight for equality throughout society. It was truly humbling to learn that my words struck a chord with people, especially as I was speaking from the heart I received a lot of letters, texts and calls about my words after the match at Manchester City about the plane carrying a banner. It was truly humbling to learn that I struck a chord with people, especially as I was speaking from the heart. I have spent plenty of time analysing what I said to ascertain if I could have made my message clearer or articulated myself better but sometimes maybe off the cuff is the best way to do things. As a club we have moved on from that night and this season will hopefully be remembered for the all the positivity Premier League football brings to the town of Burnley, something I am incredibly proud to be a part of. The prospect of 38 matches and the excitement they will provide is something that always builds my anticipation during the summer, especially as there is still hope I could better my highest scoring season of two. It’s a privilege to captain a Premier League team for what should be another fascinating season for all involved. I just hope you enjoy it as much as I do.