Sign up for the Week in Patriarchy, a newsletter​ on feminism and sexism sent every Saturday. One dead grandmother-to-be. A downed plane. An incinerated car. Several terrifying explosions. An altercation at Applebee’s. A massive wildfire that burned 47,000 acres of Arizona forest and resulted in an estimated $8m worth of damage. All that’s just a small snapshot of the manslaughter and mayhem unleashed by gender reveal parties over the last couple of years. And that’s before you factor in the latest nightmare ignited by the terrible trend: the El Dorado fire in California. The fire, which was caused by a “smoke-generating pyrotechnic device” set off at a gender reveal party, has burned more than 13,000 acres of forest so far and prompted the evacuation of 3,000 residents. It’s worth pausing here for a moment to fully absorb the fact that, as well as resulting in a woman’s death, gender reveal parties have destroyed at least 60,000 acres of land in the last three years. (To put this in perspective, the area of Manhattan is around 14,600 acres.) We all know that the police are fond of a bit of profiling; based on these statistics alone they ought to be implementing stop-and-frisk tactics on all heterosexual couples who come within five miles of a heavily wooded area. If the woman’s got a baby bump and the man’s got a dad bod then law enforcement should search them for explosives, stat. I’m only half joking here. Can you imagine if trans people regularly set fire to forests in order to tell the world their gender? The practice would be criminalized immediately and conservatives would be clutching their pearls over the weird ritual – they’re already horrified by people announcing their pronouns. Or can you imagine if gender reveal parties were a traditional Muslim practice? America would stick anyone who promoted them on a terrorist watchlist. But because gender reveal parties reinforce entrenched power structures, they’re treated as a quirky news story when they go wrong. Incidents that result in death or destruction are framed as unfortunate anomalies rather than a reflection of the practice itself. As far as I can tell, gender reveal parties have caused more destruction than the protests about police brutality that have been happening this year. However, there seems to be a lot more hand-wringing about the latter. Property destruction is coded very differently depending on the group responsible for it. And it’s not just potential property damage that’s an issue; there’s also the psychological damage that can come with reinforcing rigid gender binaries. Not to mention, throwing a party to tell the world what kind of genitals your kid has is a deeply weird thing to do. Indeed Jenna Karvunidis, the woman responsible for popularizing gender reveal parties, recently said she regrets starting the trend. In 2008 Karvunidis announced her baby’s sex by cutting into a cake filled with pink icing; she wrote about it on her blog and it went viral. Plot twist: that baby girl now likes wearing blue suits and Karvunidis wants her kids to “grow up in a world where gender doesn’t matter”. Amen to that. What’s between your legs shouldn’t dictate your life; there should be a lot more focus on what’s between your ears. The US, Brazil and Hungary are the only countries where quality of life has declined over the last decade, as measured by an annual ranking system called the Social Progress Index. All those countries, you might have noticed, are run by strongmen. Meanwhile the top four countries on the index (Norway, Denmark, Finland, New Zealand) all have female leaders. Pauline Harmange, a French writer, recently published a short ode to misandry called Moi les hommes, je les déteste (I Hate Men). Four hundred and fifty copies were printed and she didn’t expect many people to read it. But then it caught the attention of Ralph Zurmély, a government official, who tried to ban it over its “incitement to hatred on the grounds of gender”. Now a book that nobody had heard of a week ago is headline news and sales are soaring. The Guardian has an interesting interview with Harmange here. Not going to lie, I would watch that. The pope reckons that both food and sex have fallen victim to “overzealous morality”. However, he is not a big fan of gossip, which he says is a “plague worse than Covid”. (A little dramatic!) Not sure what he thinks about gender reveal parties. That’s according to Glamour, anyway. Reproductive rights, meanwhile, look like they’ll be decimated if Trump gets another term. Last year documents leaked to the Guardian showed that TikTok’s attempts to moderate content in accordance with local laws meant a lot of pro-LGBT content (including innocuous videos of same-sex couples holding hands) got censored – even in countries where homosexuality has never been illegal. Looks like little has changed since then. A new report by the Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI) found that the platform is censoring videos with LGBTQ+ hashtags in up to nine languages, including Russian and Arabic. Because of course they are. Fraser will replace Michael Corbat as Citigroup’s chief executive in February. Wall Street is still very much a boy’s club, so this is a big deal. Fraser’s husband apparently quit his job in banking to support her career; good man. Snake sisters are doing it for themselves. And by “it” I mean having snake babies. A 62-year-old ball python in America’s St Louis Zoo just laid seven eggs despite not being with a male python for at least 15 years. So were the eggs produced asexually or was the python sneaking out of her cage for secret late-night assignations? Zookeepers are investigating.