As an evolutionary anthropologist I have spent more than a decade researching human interaction and it is not an overstatement to say that the nature of our relationships with each other is one of the most critical factors in our health, happiness and life satisfaction. People who have strong, healthy relationships show a reduction in rates of mortality from chronic illness of 50% – that’s on a par with quitting smoking and beats maintaining a healthy BMI. Having supportive friends reduces the risk of poor mental health but also contributes to recovery and a reduction in relapse among those who suffer from addiction. The most we can hope for is an inter-species relationship akin to that between human and dog Our need for each other is so critical to our survival that mechanisms in our body have been recruited to ensure we seek out relationships and strive to maintain them. This is most clearly represented by the phenomenon of bio-behavioral synchrony where, as two people interact in person, their behaviour, physiology and neurology synchronise. We all probably recognise the synchrony in behaviour that we see in the parent/child and romantic couples we know – the matching of gesture, voice tone and vocabulary – but this extends to their heart rate, blood pressure, body temperature, levels of circulating neurochemistry and brain activation patterns. As yet we do not fully understand what triggers this phenomenon but the fact that we see it in healthy interactions, and particularly where a close bond is present, suggests that it is fundamental to the ties that bind us and in all probability is key to the health benefits of social interaction. Companion robots have been trialled in care homes in the UK and Japan, but it is more generally believed by people working in the field that programming even the basic skills required to build a beneficial human relationship – empathy and attachment – are nigh on impossible and prohibitively expensive to reproduce in a robot. The most we can hope for is an inter-species relationship akin to that between human and dog. But even this is proving tricky to emulate. In a recent study 85% of those questioned believed a robot could never be as good a companion as a dog because they had no emotions, no personality and, most nebulous of all, “no soul”. Beyond this is the problem of our inbuilt ability to spot an imposter. Participants in a study led by the neuroscientist Thierry Chaminade were asked to interpret a range of emotions when displayed by a human face and a robot face. Functional MRI results comparing brain activity during the robot- and human-focused tasks showed increased neural processing during the robot task, required to interpret its expression. Another crucial area of the brain showed no activity at all when robots were the focus – the mirror neurones that fire when we perceive actions undertaken by a fellow human. The brain clearly identified it as alien. Why does this matter? Surely even if we do not build a relationship with these robots they can feed us our pills, play us some music and even teach us a language, as the trialled robots can. But caring, even in this limited context, is rarely purely carrying out practical tasks. Caring is grounded in empathy. It is about reading someone’s expression as we hand them their pills and knowing that they are having a hard day, or chatting about their birthday plans with family. It is about using our own life experience to offer them support and understanding. It is about that biobehavioural synchrony. That meeting of human minds. The wonderful flood of neurochemicals that brighten our day and shore up our immune system. In a way, this would not matter if we could be sure that, should robots be introduced into care homes, they would be used simply to supplement human care, not to replace it. Indeed, we may dream that as the robot completes practical tasks, humans are freed to spend time talking to their clients. But when adult social care is faced with a funding crisis, it is easy to see how care work could be automated rather than supplemented. After all, robots don’t get ill, they don’t take holidays, they don’t leave for a new job and they can work 24/7. If we allow robots into our care homes, we risk sleepwalking into an even larger social care crisis than we are now in. We are already beset by an epidemic of loneliness among the elderly, and we risk significantly worsening this, and their associated mental and physical health, if we withdraw the powerful medicine that is human contact. Replacing carers with robots yet again devalues what is valuable and skilled work, and abdicates the personal and social responsibility we owe to the most vulnerable in our society. Now is the time to ask ourselves: would we be happy for our grandparents, our parents, even our children to be cared for by robots? Should you hesitate to answer yes to this question, then perhaps now is the time for us to pause and decide whether to continue down this path. • Dr Anna Machin is an evolutionary anthropologist, writer and broadcaster