The father of Jacob Blake, the man shot by police in in Kenosha, Wisconsin, said on Monday that the family has received threats and that he refused to “play politics with my son’s life” amid tensions over Donald Trump’s planned visit to the city on Tuesday. Jacob Blake Sr is the father of Jacob Blake Jr, a 29-year-old Black man and father, who is in hospital in Kenosha, paralyzed from the waist down, after a white police officer fired seven shots at his back last Sunday. Blake Sr said he had to take his other son, 20, to hospital because he was depressed. Blake Sr told CNN: “I received some threats and it affected my son.” He declined to give further details. He said: “It’s sad to me how people don’t understand the kind of pressure this family is under.” And he talked of his son, Jacob Jr, as being an individual who, a few weeks ago “was running around laughing, and now that individual cannot move his legs”. Local officials have urged the president not to visit Kenosha or at least to postpone his trip. Trump has talked about violent protests in a way that implies ongoing chaos in Kenosha. In fact, daily and nightly marches and demonstrations have been entirely peaceful there since Wednesday. That followed a bout of unrest straight after the police shooting, where some businesses and public property were badly damaged and many stores are now boarded up, then a spiral into chaos last Tuesday night when armed, white agitators turned up on the streets, were given water and encouragement by police in an armed vehicle despite being out after curfew, and then ended up confronting protesters. A 17-year-old, Kyle Rittenhouse, from Antioch, Illinois, had an assault rifle and shot dead a man, then walked away as others tried to give first aid, then was chased and shot dead another man and badly wounded a third. He then walked through police lines without being apprehended and was arrested the next day in his home town in Illinois. Ben Crump, a civil rights lawyer acting for the Blake family, condemned “two justice systems in America: one for white, one for Black”. Both the police shooting of Jacob Blake Jr and parts of the incidents with Rittenhouse were caught on tape, including Rittenhouse walking through police lines after the killings, which his lawyer has argued were in self defense. Blake Sr told CNN the fact Rittenhouse was able to return home clearly illustrated the disparity. “That man went home to his house in Antioch, Illinois … he went to another state,” he said. “[While] My son is in a state of being paralyzed.” “The two justice systems were [there] in stark contrast, right there in front of your eyes, on video.” At a White House press briefing on Monday evening, Trump defended his supporters who fired paintballs and pepper spray at protesters in Portland, Oregon, on Saturday. He also defended police shootings when asked about Blake, by saying that police “choke sometimes” and make a mistake. Asked about Kyle Rittenhouse, Trump said: “That was an interesting situation.” He characterized Rittenhouse’s being chased by men after the fatal shooting as “trying to get away from them”, adding “they very violently attacked him.” He also said that Rittenhouse, who has been charged with intentional homicide and other felonies “probably would’ve been killed” if he had not been armed. Wisconsin governor Tony Evers wrote to Trump on Sunday asking him to reconsider his visit, as the city continues to grapple with the aftermath of those events. Jacob Blake’s uncle, Justin Blake, told CNN that, “President Trump is a racist who stokes racial tensions. He has been stirring racial tensions since he got in the White House. Why, as Jacob’s uncle, would I want to talk to him? Our focus is on Jacob and healing the community.” He said Jacob Blake’s father has told him he “has no interest in speaking with President Trump” and instead is focused on his son’s health and getting justice. Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden and his vice presidential pick Kamala Harris have both spoken extensively to the Blake family be telephone. Biden is reportedly considering visiting Wisconsin. On Monday evening, he issued a statement that said, in part: “Tonight, the president declined to rebuke violence. He wouldn’t even repudiate one of his supporters who is charged with murder because of his attacks on others. He is too weak, too scared of the hatred he has stirred to put an end to it.”