Football League newcomers Harrogate booked their place in the second round of the Carabao Cup with a dramatic penalty shoot-out win at Tranmere, on a day of first-round shocks. James Vaughan had given the home side the lead just after the hour, but Lloyd Kerry soon equalised and with no further goals the tie went to the lottery of a shoot-out. Harrogate came through it 8-7 winners when Josh Falkingham converted after Tranmere’s defender Emmanuel Monthe had missed. Earlier in the day fellow new boys Barrow had lost a shoot-out, beaten by Derby at Pride Park. After a goalless 90 minutes, the tie was settled after Kelle Roos saved three spot-kicks as the Championship side progressed 3-2. Luton knocked Championship promotion hopefuls Norwich out as James Collins scored a hat-trick in a fine 3-1 win at Kenilworth Road. Collins broke the deadlock with a penalty after 79 minutes, only for Kieran Dowell – signed from Everton last month – to equalise. The Hatters, however, had the final say as Collins struck again in the 83rd minute and completed his treble in stoppage time. League Two Newport beat Welsh rivals Swansea 2-0 at Rodney Parade with both goals from Tristan Abrahams, while Northampton, promoted via the play-offs back into League One, knocked out Championship side Cardiff with a comfortable 3-0 win at Sixfields Stadium. Robbie Cundy’s first-half header proved enough for Cambridge to pull off an unexpected 1-0 win at Birmingham, while Huddersfield were knocked out following a 1-0 home defeat by Rochdale to hand their new manager, Carlos Corberan, an opening loss. Plymouth marked their return to League One with a 3-2 victory over QPR at Home Park, where summer signing Frank Nouble scored a late winner. Bradford won 2-1 at Bolton, as did Lincoln at Crewe and Leyton Orient at Forest Green. Ched Evans scored twice for Fleetwood in their 3-2 home win over Wigan, while Bristol City saw off Exeter 2-0. Gillingham progressed after a 1-0 win over League Two Southend, despite having defender Ryan Jackson sent off during the second half, while Millwall dispatched Crawley 3-1 at Broadfield Stadium. Sheffield Wednesday edged past Walsall after winning a shoot-out 4-2 following a goalless 90 minutes, new Reading manager, Veljko Paunovic, saw his side beat Colchester 3-1 with a hat-trick from Portuguese forward Lucas Joao, and Barnsley beat Nottingham Forest 1-0. Freddie Sears scored twice as Ipswich saw off Bristol Rovers 3-0 at Portman Road. Coventry lost defender Declan Drysdale to a first-half red card but won 1-0 at MK Dons, who missed a penalty. Oldham were 3-0 winners over Carlisle, while Cheltenham won 1-0 at Peterborough. Theo Robinson scored deep into stoppage time as Port Vale won 2-1 at Scunthorpe, while Swindon were beaten 3-1 at home by Charlton. Morecambe won 4-3 on penalties at Grimsby after the match ended 1-1, while AFC Wimbledon were left to rue a missed spot-kick late on against Oxford, who progressed following a penalty shoot-out following a 1-1 draw after 90 minutes. Salford knocked out Rotherham 4-2 on penalties after forcing a shoot-out in the dying moments following an equaliser from substitute Matt Crooks during stoppage time, while Hull beat Sunderland 5-4 on penalties, the tie at the Stadium of Light having finished goalless.