A teenager has been arrested after a 15-year-old boy was shot on his way to school in Suffolk. The victim, a pupil at Kesgrave high school, sustained serious injuries and was airlifted to Addenbrooke’s hospital in Cambridge, Suffolk police said. A police statement said officers were called just after 8.40am on Monday to reports of a shooting in Friends Walk. A teenage boy was arrested and taken into custody for questioning. The Suffolk police assistant chief constable Rob Jones said: “Following this serious incident our priority is to keep everyone safe. We have now made an arrest as part of the investigation and are working with our partners in Suffolk and our schools to ensure that everyone feels safe when they are collecting their children from school this afternoon. “There will be more police officers on patrol and to provide reassurance in the area and I would ask for anyone with information about this incident to come forward.” Kesgrave high school said the school day would continue as normal but police would be on site. “We have been made aware by the police that there has been a serious incident involving one of our year 11 students, on their way to school,” it said in a statement. “Students in school are safe and we are managing the situation in constant close communication with the police.” According to the school’s website, Monday was the first day back for year 11 students after the summer holiday. The school said: “Students are to remain in school and will be kept safe in liaison with the police. Police will be present in the area and around the school throughout the school day. At the present time we are expecting students to be dismissed at the end of the school day, 3.20pm, as normal.” Friends Walk was completely closed off on Monday as was the neighbouring street Through Jollys, while Ropes Drive was partially open. Members of the public have been advised to avoid the area. A man who lives in Through Jollys told the East Anglian Daily Times (EADT): “I heard the sound of the gunshot, I thought someone had dropped a paving slab or something. I heard the screams so I ran outside to see if I could go help. When the ambulance and police arrived I was asked to get back so they could get on with their job. “I told my son it’s not a bad area just because something like this has happened.” The owner of an animal shelter in Kesgrave said a man had been hiding in his back garden but escaped before armed police officers arrived. The resident, who asked not to be named, told the PA news agency the man “looked like he hadn’t had a haircut for a while”. “I got woken up because my dogs were going absolutely ballistic at the back of the house,” he said. “When I went to the back window to have a look there was a gentleman who looked like he was carrying something, at first I thought it was a bat or pole or something, and he went down behind my exotic animal enclosures. He added that the man had a hooded top over his arm concealing whatever he was carrying. “I’ve got no neighbours directly and I’ve got a woodland at the side … I didn’t see where he went.” Debbie McCallum, councillor for Kesgrave, told the EADT the incident was unusual for the area. “This is definitely not the usual thing you expect to see in Kesgrave. We are a quiet, relaxed town,” she said. “My utmost sympathies go to the victim who was shot. I would urge people to stay calm – the police have this under control. “If you have any information that could help the police, I would urge you to come forward.”