Owen Farrell has always trod a fine line with his tackling technique; now it threatens what is left of Saracens’ season. A red card on the hour for a high tackle on Charlie Atkinson, Wasps’ replacement fly-half, means the England captain will almost certainly miss Saracens’ date in Dublin in a fortnight. Their European quarter-final against Leinster has long been their sole focus in this, the season the European champions were relegated from the Premiership for abuse of the salary cap. Such offences do not apply to European competition, but red cards do. Farrell’s tackle technique, sometimes low on the use of arms, has caught up with him. “He clearly got it wrong,” said Mark McCall. “He’s made huge improvements to his tackle technique. Today’s incident was a little different, because he’s chasing a kick and trying to make a difference for his team and got it slightly wrong. We hope the player he hit is OK. I think he is. But it’s a real shame.” Lee Blackett, the Wasps head coach, confirmed Atkinson was “pretty healthy”. Farrell did use his arms for this tackle. He was aiming high on the upper body, but Atkinson dipped slightly at the last split-second, and his arm connected forcefully with the head. Farrell buried his own head in his hands, even as he hit the floor. He knew what this misstep meant. The morality police might bear in mind that no player makes these mistakes on purpose, considering what is at stake for both tackler and tacklee. Nevertheless, the referee issued the card straightaway. Atkinson, who is only just out of school, left the field for an HIA. Farrell waited on the touchline to console him, but any remorse he may feel will be lost when the super-slomo gifs of the incident are circulated and the verdicts dispensed on social media. Even those on the disciplinary panel may struggle to find mitigation. All of which is to overshadow somewhat the rest of the story in Barnet, which on another day may have been headline-worthy in its own right. Wasps followed up their victory against all odds last Monday at Bath with a win against almost as many. Saracens have been building towards that quarter-final, blending their heavyweights back into the team, collecting otherwise-meaningless wins. It seemed they would do the same against a weakened Wasps. They opened smoothly, working Elliot Daly over for the first try in the third minute, looking a million dollars. But this Wasps squad are turning into their new head coach, which means they are insatiable and hard in defence. They ruffled Saracens at the breakdown and Jimmy Gopperth would kick all of the penalties that came his way, which was four in the first half, part of a 23-point haul for their captain for the day. Wasps ended up leading at the break 12-7. Again, Saracens came out of the sheds in top form. Farrell pulled back three points and a few minutes later he sent Daly streaking clear. Daly timed his pass to Sean Maitland immaculately for the game’s second try. Saracens back in front. The home team’s discipline, even before Farrell’s moment, was poor throughout. Gopperth had Wasps level again just before he took them into the lead with the penalty accruing from the red card. Despite Alex Goode landing a penalty on his 300th appearance to draw Saracens level, Tom Willis barged his way over for the try that took Wasps into a lead they would not relinquish. Their season goes from strength to strength. No matter the personnel, the performances, notwithstanding a slip at home to Sale the round before last, keep coming, high on character despite significant disruption. Even here, they lost Sione Vailanu to injury in the first half. This win keeps them nestled among the play-off contenders. Saracens now face their own exercise in regrouping, two weeks before the only match that means anything to them, before they slip away for their year in purgatory. Their reserves of character have long been established. Leinster in Dublin without Farrell will test them to the limit.