Serving ingredients cooked in several ways might be reminiscent of chi-chi noughties menus, but for the eco-aware home cook, it’s an approach that makes good sense. Seasonal veg is cheaper, tastes better and uses shorter, more carbon-friendly supply chains. What’s more, when there is an ingredient glut, it’s fun to experiment with different ways of preparing it – even more so on the same plate. In this case, aubergines are both roasted and whipped, then served with a piquant dressing and flatbreads. The rich, garlicky puree gives body to the roast aubergine, and the light dressing cuts through the richness. Prep 15 minCook 45 minServes 41kg (roughly 3-4) aubergines7 tbsp olive oilSalt and black pepper1 tsp runny honey1 garlic clove, peeled and roughly chopped2 tbsp tahiniJuice of ½ lemon400g spinachGreek yoghurt, to serveFlatbreads, to serveFor the dressing1 red chilli, deseeded and chopped10 mint leaves, roughly chopped, plus a small handful to decorate½ small red onion, finely chopped4 tbsp red-wine vinegar Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7, and line an oven tray with greaseproof paper. Top and tail the aubergines, and cut each lengthways into six to eight long wedges about 3cm wide. Put these on the tray, drizzle with the oil and toss to coat all over. Season, arrange the wedges skin side down and roast for 35-45 minutes, or until the edges are dark golden and crisp, and the flesh is tender. While the aubergines are cooking, make the dressing. Put all the ingredients into a small bowl, season with a little salt, whisk and leave the onion to soften in the vinegar. Wash the spinach, heat one tablespoon of oil in a hot pan, add the spinach and cook for four to five minutes, until wilted. Set aside. Using a food processor or stick blender, blitz the garlic, tahini, lemon juice and three tablespoons of olive oil together for a minute. Add half the cooked aubergine (use the least attractive pieces) to the tahini mix, along with one to two tablespoons of water, and blitz again to a dark, flecked puree. Season to taste. Drizzle the remaining aubergine with the honey. Spoon the warm puree on to hot plates and top with some spinach. Arrange the aubergine wedges on top and spoon over the dressing. Rip over a few mint leaves and serve with dollops of yoghurt and flatbreads to scoop with. If you have bigger appetites, pair this with some steamed maftoul (giant couscous) tossed in more chopped mint, a little olive oil, crushed garlic and seasoning. Consider making your own flatbreads – they’re very easy and delicious.