There are currently hundreds of men in their twenties and thirties wondering if they are still professional footballers. The majority of those whose contracts ended on 30 June are still without a club and are hurriedly lowering their financial expectations in the hope they can find a club to bite at the right price. The players who require the lowest wages are finding themselves in demand – and that tends to be unmarried youngsters with few overheads. A glut of players become jobless every year but this year youngsters who can price themselves competitively in the market are finding openings that may have been taken by more experienced – and expensive – players in the past. The pandemic has almost frozen the transfer market, with many clubs deciding to stick rather than twist. The Premier League resumes on Saturday yet Burnley have not spent any money on transfer fees; Brighton have only invested £900,000; and Aston Villa, who spent £150m last summer, have only paid a fee for Matty Cash. Liverpool and Manchester United have only brought one player each. The trend is the same in the Football League. Bournemouth have let 11 players leave without signing anyone. Preston still have no new faces. Reading, whose wage bill of £40m for the 2018-19 season worked out as 194% of their turnover, have boiled their squad down to the minimum. Only six of the 24 clubs in the Championship – Stoke, Nottingham Forest, Watford, Norwich, Barnsley and Rotherham – have increased their squad size, all shaping a new team knowing they need something different this season. Some of this inertia is down to the new salary caps of £2.5m in the League One and £1.5m in League Two. Last season, a middling League One wage bill was £5.6m, more than twice the new cap. So almost every club in the third tier has a huge challenge on their hands. Sunderland paid £27m in wages the season before last to finish as the 49th best team in the country. Clubs are not just dealing with a salary cap but also a massive decline in income – plus the likely impending recession. To cope they are either cutting the size of their squads or replacing expensive players with cheaper alternatives. Forest Green, Blackpool and Bristol Rovers have replaced almost their entire squads. Portsmouth have cut their squad size by eight, Accrington nine, and Tranmere and MK Dons 10. Stevenage have swapped one bloated failing squad for an almost entirely different slimmed down one, with 27 players leaving and 12 brought in. With more experienced and expensive players shown the door, youngsters have been given the chance to step up. Under-21 players do not count towards the salary cap, so promising teenagers are in demand. Most 18-year-olds on their first contracts earn around £150-£200 a week in League Two, £200-300 in League One, and £300-500 in the Championship. These are incredibly cheap for clubs. MK Dons are down to just 18 senior players, so manager Russell Martin has drafted four scholars into first-team training for pre-season. Martin gave five teenagers game time against Arsenal and Fulham last week. Teenagers Sam Beckwith and Avan Jones have impressed at Luton in pre-season and will hope to retain their places in a slimmed-down Championship squad. The only negative for the youngsters is that Covid-19 regulations stipulate that players cannot move back and forth between the youth team and first-team squads. Other clubs see the cap as a chance to clamber out of a division they don’t want to be in and are investing in experienced players instead. Bolton, who intend being in League Two for no more than nine months, have signed a whole new squad. Mansfield are also going for it and so are Salford – who have released 15 players and signed nine, including Preston captain Tom Clarke, which says everything about the Class of 92’s spending power. Although the salary cap is coming in with immediate effect, current contracts are assumed to be worth a league average salary until they expire. These clubs know they have to act quick to exploit their financial advantage before the cap levels the field. Some of Salford’s natural rivals for promotion have had to sit tight. Leyton Orient simply re-signed four of their eight out of contract players, expecting them to play major roles in a promotion push. With a wage bill roughly three times the cap, they have only made one free and one loan signing. Instead, like a lot of others, manager Ross Embleton will make do with what he’s got and hope his many young and relatively cheap squad members come in handy. While fans have been denied the annual surreal summer pleasure of watching well known stars trotting out at local non-league grounds, lower division youth teams have still enjoyed pre-season opportunities against some of the biggest clubs in the game. With European trips out of the question and UK tours impractical, big clubs have sought out fixtures with their less glamorous neighbours. Spurs have hosted Oxford, Luton, Stevenage, Orient and MK Dons at their Enfield training ground; West Ham went to Stevenage; and Crystal Palace played at Leyton Orient last week. A familiar face on the second team circuit is about to become rather better known. A regular referee in Premier League 2, Sam Allison has been promoted to the EFL, where he will be the only black referee this season. Firefighter Allison will take charge of games featuring players he refereed while both were coming through the ranks. Most will be unaware that Allison, now 38, was a decent striker himself. Having been released by Swindon Town, he was in the first England Schoolboys Under-18s team to play at Wembley in 1998, before spending a decade in senior non-league football. He will take some kidding. When a player regularly stands out as one of the best on the pitch, it usually means they are capable of moving up a level. Three years ago, Randell Williams, then 20, was catching the eye on the left wing forCrystal Palace’s Under-21s. Tall, languid and ponytailed, he looked different and played differently, too. The previous season he had been playing in the ninth tier for Tower Hamlets, having been released by Spurs. Given a third chance by Watford, he spent a year on loan at Wycombe. In January 2019, he moved to Exeter on a free and last season he supplied more goals from the right wing than any other player in League Two. Sadly for the Grecians, after illuminating the play-off semi-finals, he could not do it at Wembley against Northampton. He’ll be back. A total of 10,000 Arsenal fans descended on the Emirates in the last week of the school holidays to see two Under-21 games. In the first, 10-man Arsenal came from a goal down to beat Bolton 3-1. After 25 minutes, Gunners keeper Emiliano Martínez was sent off, having given away a penalty, which Adam Blakeman converted. But the young Gunners responded with goals from Thomas Esifeld (who has gone on to play 100 times for VFl Bochum back in Germany) and two by Irish midfielder Conor Henderson (now in his third year in Bulgaria with Pinn Blagoevgrad). Arsenal started with two 17-year-olds: Héctor Bellerín at right-back and Serge Gnabry on the left wing. Eight years on and Bellerín and Martinez’s most recent competitive game was Arsenal’s triumphant FA Cup final, while Gnabry lifted the European Cup with Bayern Munich, having scored two goals in the semi-final to get them there. Follow Gavin Willacy and Playing in the Shadows on Twitter