Being able to wave two trophies at our success-shy neighbours in the past month has made this the most optimistic pre-season mood for many a moon. There are signs Arteta is inspiring the sort of team spirit we’ll need if we’re finally going to lose that also-ran complacency that has plagued us for years. Key players None of us will sleep soundly until Auba signs da ting. The other concern is the schedule, which means squad depth will be key. Can Gabriel, Saliba and Marí shore up a consistent defence, releasing Tierney to be more effective on the flank? Youngsters to watch The focus stays on the progress of Martinelli and Saka, and whether Nketiah, Willock, Smith-Rowe and Nelson will seize their opportunities. We need to sign The Özil impasse means cash is still tight. An alternative for Xhaka, such as Thomas Partey, would be useful, but it might take a Mesut-sized shrinkage of the wage bill to fund it. Biggest character David Luiz. When fans are allowed back, will you go? I’d love to: not going feels like a void in my life, and watching matches on TV feels far more stressful than being there. But I’m in a vulnerable category – not sure I can risk it. Predictions… We will finish 3rd. Top four 1. Man City, 2. Liverpool, 3. Arsenal, 4. Chelsea. Bottom three 18. Aston Villa, 19. Fulham, 20. West Brom. First manager sacked José Mourinho. • Bernard Azulay goonersdiary.co.uk @GoonerN5 A bullish observer would say we have momentum and we’ll be more streetwise now. A realist would say we have no decent strikers, were dead lucky to survive and need at least five top‑class recruits to avoid another battle. We need players who’ll allow the manager to introduce tactics that aren’t just: “GIVE IT TO JACK.” So right now, I’m pretty worried. Key players We could have been renamed Aston Grealish last season, but his finger can’t stay in the dyke for ever. Our strikers can’t hit a cow’s arse, or a barn door – they struggle to even find the farm. That’s where our problems lie. Youngsters to watch Sadly it doesn’t look like the current kids will save us millions. We need to sign We don’t need prospects, or lads with a good sell-on profile: we need proven top-flight players. And we can’t beat the market: we have to pay the going rate. So let’s stop messing about and start with Sarr from Watford. Biggest character No contest. Daft hair, an annual moment of off-the-pitch madness and simply the most exciting, entertaining Englishman in the game. When fans are allowed back, will you go? I’ve written this season off in terms of regular attendance. It’s sad: it leaves a hole in the week and means less time with my pals and Dad. Broadcasters refusing to screen all the games just rubs salt in the wounds. Predictions … We will finish 16th (if we spend well). Top four 1. Liverpool, 2. Man City, 3. Man Utd, 4. Chelsea. Bottom three 18. West Brom, 19. Fulham, 20. Brighton. First manager sacked Steve Bruce. • Jonathan Pritchard Our fourth season in the division, and it feels we can really make our mark under Graham Potter. Alexis Mac Allister, Yves Bissouma, Leandro Trossard and others have such potential … it’s hard not to feel optimistic. Key players After all the hype about Ben White, he’s the focus. Leeds fans started a campaign to keep him beyond his loan spell (#FreeBenWhite) but he’s signed a four-year contract with us. Handing him the No 3 shirt for our friendly against Chelsea (“three Ben White”) was a nice touch. Also watch out for Tariq Lamptey and new signing Joël Veltman. Youngsters to watch Steven Alzate, just about to turn 22, had a great debut season before surgery on a groin injury. We need to sign A striker. Nicolás González has been spending time in Brighton with his friend Mac Allister and says he wants to move to England. Biggest character Neal Maupay had no qualms about berating Arsenal players after they said he “needed to learn some humility” when he accidentally injured Bernd Leno at the Amex in June. Expect more of the same given his gift for winding up defences with his skill. When fans are allowed back, will you go? Can’t wait. The trial run for the Chelsea friendly was a success. Predictions … We will finish 10th. Top four 1. Arsenal, 2. Liverpool, 3. Man City, 4. Man Utd. Bottom three 18. Palace, 19. West Brom, 20. Fulham. First manager sacked Scott Parker. • Steph Fincham Strange times: it doesn’t feel like we’re at the end of pre-season – it’s pretty difficult to raise much enthusiasm at this stage. Though that’ll probably change once we get started. Key players We’re excellent defensively, a fine unit with no obvious weak links – so the key players could again be the forwards. They did remarkably well last season and, with Ashley Barnes getting back to fitness, we could have four very good strikers ready to go. Youngsters to watch We’ve just attained category-one academy status, so that’ll help. There are a few in the system showing real potential, and, while it might still be too early for him, 17-year-old Lewis Richardson looks a good bet to break through eventually. We need to sign Replacements for those who have gone, for starters – so a new wide player and central midfielder, and a central defender to replace Ben Gibson. Biggest character It’s always Sean Dyche. He’ll lead us from the front, just as he’s done since he first walked through the door in October 2012. When fans are allowed back, will you go? No chanting, no sitting together … it won’t be football as we know it. I guess we have to start somewhere, but I have some real safety concerns. Predictions … We will finish 9th. Top four 1. Liverpool, 2. Man City, 3. Chelsea, 4. Arsenal. Bottom three 18. Leeds, 19. Brighton, 20. Fulham. First manager sacked Roy Hodgson. • Tony Scholes UpTheClarets.com @utcdotcom It’s looking good – some excellent new signings who should hit the ground running, the promise of more to follow, and the youngsters continuing to improve after last season’s introduction. Hard not to be optimistic. Key players Timo Werner, Thiago Silva and Mateo Kovacic, plus whoever we end up with in goal. Kai Havertz looks a real talent, too. Hopefully Lampard will have had the side working flat out on our frailties as a defensive unit. If he gets that right, and signs the right keeper, we should be firing on all cylinders. Youngsters to watch Billy Gilmour looks like he’ll just get better and better, and Tino Ajorin is on the fringes of the first team. If he doesn’t go out on loan he may well get a chance from the bench. We need to sign Oblak or Pope in goal. Declan Rice would be great, too. Biggest character By all accounts new signing Hakim Ziyech has the potential to be a bit of a loose cannon. Looking forward to some fireworks from him. When fans are allowed back, will you go? I’ve been in two minds, but if you can still go as a group and there isn’t over‑the-top stewarding I’ll be there. It’ll be strange at first, but we need to start slowly moving to full grounds again. Predictions … We will finish 3rd. Top four 1. Man City, 2. Liverpool, 3. Chelsea, 4. Man Utd. Bottom three 18. Palace, 19. Fulham, 20. West Brom. First manager sacked Roy Hodgson. • Paul Baker In memory of Trizia Fiorellino The run post-lockdown was abject, but the clear strategy of bringing in young talent over the summer has given us some encouragement. Signing Eze and Ferguson was a statement of intent, and with Flynn Downes and Conor Gallagher hopefully on the way too, it could be an exciting squad. Key players It’s anyone’s guess as to whether Zaha will still be here when the window shuts. Eze is the player everyone is talking about: his debut in the friendly against Charlton was exceptional: he could make a real difference. And Tyrick Mitchell is also making great progress at left-back. Youngsters to watch Malachi Boateng and John Kymani-Gordon have both had some game time during pre-season. We need to sign A forward is an absolute must, while a young centre-back such as Bochum’s Armel Bella-Kotchap wouldn’t go amiss. Ryan Fraser would be a positive addition on the wing, too. Biggest character Other than Zaha, it’s James McArthur: hugely popular with teammates and fans alike, he leads by example, on and off the pitch. When fans are allowed back, will you go? I can’t wait. I think it’ll be a great mental boost for everyone to go back, to see their friends, and enjoy the sense of togetherness and community again. Predictions … We will finish 15th. Top four 1. Man City, 2. Liverpool, 3. Man Utd, 4. Chelsea. Bottom three 18. Brighton, 19. West Brom, 20. Fulham. First manager sacked Slaven Bilic. • Chris Waters @Clapham_Grand Just when you think you’ve seen it all, Ancelotti draws on all his charm and immediately (with the recruitment of James Rodríguez, Allan and Abdoulaye Doucouré) turns dread into a sense that, actually, anything is possible … Key players Rodríguez, assuming he can adapt. Also key to our chances are Richarlison and Dominic Calvert-Lewin. Can they build on last season’s form? Youngsters to watch Jarrad Branthwaite looks well set to build on the excellent start to his career in defence, while Ellis Simms scores for fun in the U23s. It’ll be interesting too to see what Moise Kean can do in his second year in England. We need to sign A right-back, still an area of weakness, and a genuine challenger to Pickford in goal. Sergio Romero from United, perhaps? Biggest character Farhad Moshiri. Despite all the mistakes he’s made, and despite his odd media performances, he is, financially at least, totally committed to the club. If he could throw a bit of discipline and business acumen into the mix, we’d have the perfect owner. When fans are allowed back, will you go? For me it feels too soon. Perhaps we should just allow youngsters in at this stage. They’re at low risk, and it’d let them develop their love for the game. Predictions … We will finish 6th. Top four 1. Chelsea, 2. Man City, 3. Liverpool, 4. Man Utd. Bottom three 18. Palace, 19. West Brom, 20. Fulham. First manager sacked Jürgen Klopp. • The esk TheEsk.org @TheEsk So, are we feeling optimistic? Of the season starting: yes. Of the season finishing on time: less so. Of Fulham topping the division: much less so. But of “merely” staying up? A definite maybe … Key players For several seasons our defence has been suspect at best, so Marek Rodak may well be a busy bunny in goal. Up front, Mitro’s the man: give him service and he’ll score. He’s probably the only centre-forward who can still cause problems when only 5% fit. Youngsters to watch Striker Jay Stansfield and winger Sylvester Jasper made fine cameos last season. And, although he was signed with the Under-23s in mind for now, we may get a glimpse of highly-rated 17-year-old striker Kieron Bowie. We need to sign Our biggest need is a solid centre-back partnership, not successive make-do-and-mend arrangements. Left-back Antonee Robinson is an astute capture from Wigan but, with Steven Sessegnon and Alfie Mawson linked with moves, where are the lynchpins, never mind strength in depth? Kris Ajer (Celtic) or Juan Foyth (Spurs) anyone? Biggest character Mitro: moody yet magnificent, tough as granite but with a huge smile once the job’s done. He seems to love life at the Cottage. When fans are allowed back, will you go? Unlikely, for health reasons. Homely Craven Cottage isn’t best suited for social distancing. Under normal circumstances that’s one reason we love the place. Predictions … We will finish 15th (we can dream). Top four 1. Man City, 2. Liverpool, 3. Chelsea, 4. Man Utd. Bottom three 18. Aston Villa, 19. Crystal Palace, 20. West Brom. First manager sacked David Moyes. • David Lloyd toofif.co.uk @DMLTOOFIF If the short close season is helping anyone, it’s Leeds. The city is still high on the seven post-lockdown wins that took the title, and the seven solid days of partying to celebrate. £30m on Rodrigo and a few million more on Robin Koch have kept the mood high, and we’re still reminding ourselves daily that the Peacocks are managed by Marcelo Bielsa. It’s been a long time coming, but supporting Leeds is fun again. Key players Mateusz Klich and Jackie Harrison played almost every minute of the last two seasons and will need to step up: Klich setting the tempo, Harrison creating, especially with Hernández now aged 35. The defence is a worry – no settled left-back, Illan Meslier young to be first choice goalkeeper, Ben White gone, more being asked of Liam Cooper – but we were worried last season and ended up with the best defence in the Championship. Youngsters to watch Every time Jamie Shackleton plays in midfield he looks good enough to start every week. Ian Poveda made a joyful impact partying through the final games on the wing, and Pascal Struijk apparently has Bielsa thinking he doesn’t need another backup defender. We need to sign After Rodrigo and Koch, fans can’t decide whether we should step on the brakes remembering our last financial meltdown, or step on the gas because it’s such a thrill. Another keeper would be nice, specifically Arsenal’s Emiliano Martínez. And right now we’re salivating over playmaker Rodrigo De Paul, for another big outlay from Udinese. Biggest character You know about our manager, right? Meanwhile, look out for Ezgjan Alioski on those tunnel cams, inflicting mild property damage while sound engineers scramble to mute his dolphin shrieks. When fans are allowed back, will you go? Photos from the trial at Brighton made the new normal look like watching Reading at the Madejski, not something I’ve ever been keen to have in my life. I’d like to try it, though, just to get away from the couch life. Predictions … We will finish 9th. Top four 1. Liverpool, 2. Man City, 3. Arsenal, 4. Tottenham. Bottom three 18. Villa, 19. Brighton, 20. West Brom. First manager sacked Frank Lampard. • Daniel Chapman moscowhite.com @MoscowhiteTSB The mood isn’t that great. The post‑lockdown mini-season wasn’t good for us, and the shorter summer means the hangover is likely to last a bit longer. Relative inaction in the transfer market so far has done little to ease those worries. Key players Ricardo Pereira can’t return soon enough – we’re a different side when he’s involved. Wilfred Ndidi will have a big role to play too. Youngsters to watch Luke Thomas and James Justin look like they’ll get a lot of game time, given that our back line is looking wafer thin. Here’s hoping they can step up to the mark. We need to sign We could strengthen all over, but the economic slump and uncertainty seems to be making it very difficult. Someone like Ismaïla Sarr on the wing is a necessity, though, while a striker such as Odsonne Édouard from Celtic would really help an ageing Vardy. Biggest character It’s always Vardy isn’t it? James Maddison makes his fair share of headlines, too, though. When fans are allowed back, will you go? I feel duty-bound to get back to Filbert Way as soon as possible, but, truth be told, football as we know and love it is a long way from returning. Predictions … We will finish 9th. Top four 1. Man City, 2. Liverpool, 3. Chelsea, 4. Man Utd. Bottom three 18. Newcastle, 19. Fulham, 20. Aston Villa. First manager sacked Steve Bruce. • Chris Whiting clippings.me/chriswhiting @ChrisRWhiting • Part 2: Liverpool to Wolves