A new trial of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, the British-Iranian dual national detained in Iran for the past four years, has been postponed at the last minute. Her husband, Richard Ratcliffe, confirmed the news, which came as a surprise to both his wife and her London-based family. Her MP, Tulip Siddiq, said Zaghari-Ratcliffe was relieved but also frustrated, angry and stressed. The Labour MP added: “Once again she is being used as a bargaining chip.” Zaghari-Ratcliffe contacted the prosecutor’s office and her lawyer on Sunday morning after the official car due to take her to court did not arrive at her home. She was subsequently told by her lawyer the case would not be going ahead on Sunday. Her family said it had no reason to believe this was anything but a postponement in what is being described as a gruesome game of cat and mouse. Zaghari-Ratcliffe had suddenly found herself facing a second round of charges in a Tehran revolutionary court that could lead to her being imprisoned for up to a further 10 years. Her lawyer has been given less than a week to prepare her defence. Zaghari-Ratcliffe has been staying at her parents’ home in Tehran with an ankle tag that requires her to stay within 300 metres of the residence. Her six-year-old daughter is living in London with her father. It is not known if private British diplomatic representations led to the postponement, but such delays are frequent in the Iranian legal system. Her fate has always seemed linked to wider UK-Iranian relations. A Foreign Office spokesperson said:“We welcome the deferral of this groundless court hearing, and call on Iran to make Nazanin’s release permanent so that she can return to her family in the UK.” Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe is arrested at Imam Khomeini airport as she is trying to return to Britain after a holiday visiting family with her daughter, Gabriella. Her husband, Richard Radcliffe, delivers a letter to David Cameron in 10 Downing Street, demanding the government do more for her release. She is sentenced to five years in jail. Her husband says the exact charges are still being kept a secret. Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe's health deteriorates after she spends several days on hunger strike in protest at her imprisonment. Iran’s supreme court upholds her conviction. Boris Johnson, then Foreign Secretary, tells a parliamentary select committee "When we look at what [she] was doing, she was simply teaching people journalism". Four days after his comments, Zaghari-Ratcliffe is returned to court, where his statement is cited in evidence against her. Her employers, the Thomson Reuters Foundation, deny that she has ever trained journalists, and her family maintain she was in Iran on holiday. Johnson is eventually forced to apologise for the "distress and anguish" his comments cause the family. Her husband reveals that Zaghari-Ratcliffe has fears for her health after lumps had been found in her breasts that required an ultrasound scan, and that she was now “on the verge of a nervous breakdown”. New Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt meets with Richard Ratcliffe, and pledges "We will do everything we can to bring her home." She is granted a temporary three-day release from prison. Zaghari-Ratcliffe is on hunger strike again, in protest at the withdrawal of her medical care. The foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, takes the unusual step of granting her diplomatic protection – a move that raises her case from a consular matter to the level of a dispute between the two states. The UK upgrades its travel advice to British-Iranian dual nationals, for the first time advising against all travel to Iran. The advice also urges Iranian nationals living in the UK to exercise caution if they decide to travel to Iran. Richard Ratcliffe joins his wife in a new hunger strike campaign. He fasts outside the Iranian embassy in London as she begins a third hunger strike protest in prison. Zaghari-Ratcliffe ends her hunger strike by eating some breakfast. Her husband also ends his strike outside the embassy. According to her husband, Zaghari-Ratcliffe was moved from Evin prison to the mental ward of Imam Khomeini hospital, where Iran’s Revolutionary Guards have prevented relatives from contacting her. Zaghari-Ratcliffe's five year old daughter Gabriella, who has lived with her grandparents in Tehran and regularly visited her mother in jail over the last three years, returns to London in order to start school. Amid the threat of the coronavirus pandemic, she is temporarily released from prison, but will be required to wear an ankle brace and not move more than 300 metres from her parents’ home. Iranian state media reports that she will appear in court to face new and unspecified charges. She was released from Evin prison in Tehran in March after coronavirus swept through Iranian jails, and she believed she had subsequently met the criteria for full release as previously pronounced by the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s family have urged the UK Foreign Office to demand that its Tehran-based diplomats be allowed to observe proceedings in court, but Iran does not recognise dual national status and has consistently deprived her of consular support. The previous foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, elevated her status by giving her diplomatic protection in March 2019, but it is hard to see what practical difference this has had on her plight. Zaghari-Ratcliffe was due to complete her five-year prison sentence next spring and the family had always feared the Iranian regime would bring new charges. The second round of charges was first raised in October 2017, but was then apparently dropped in 2018. She said the new case against her did not appear to contain any fresh evidence to that compiled by the prosecutors previously. Relations between the FCO and Ratcliffe have been tense due to his decision to campaign in public for her release, a tactic that officials fear is unproductive. He in turn points to the comparative success of more proactive approaches taken by other countries in securing the release of their dual nationals. Speculation surrounds the reasoning behind Iran’s decision to levy the charges now and then postpone the case. Redress, the legal campaign group that is working to free Zaghari-Ratcliffe, said: “Nazanin is the only case in Iran for which a supreme leader’s order from 17 March 2020 granting clemency to her and thousands of other prisoners has not been implemented, marking her out as a unique prisoner. “She is the only known prisoner who was released on furlough in March due to the Covid-19 pandemic with an ankle tag and has had to wear it for many more months than the customary 60 days for similar cases.” The charges were levied days after the UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, wrote to the family’s lawyers confirming he believed the UK government owed a financial debt to the Iranian government arising from a 50-year-old arms contract. He said efforts were continuing to make the payment without breaching sanctions. The Iranian ministry of defence then accused the UK of making excuses for refusing to pay the sum. Both the UK and the Iranian governments say there is no link between the outstanding debt and the continued detention of Zaghari-Ratcliffe. A further UK court hearing on the debt is due on 4 November. Her case may also be intertwined with the standoff between the west and Iran over the fate of the nuclear deal signed in 2015, and the lifting of the UN embargo on conventional arms sales to Iran that is due to occur in October. The US is also claiming it has the powers to require the UN to impose its previous sanctions on Iran on the basis Iran is in breach of the 2015 deal. The UK has joined France and Germany in resisting this US interpretation, and the issue will come to a head at the UN general assembly over the next fortnight A planned trip to Europe by the Iranian foreign minister, Javad Zarif, rumoured to take place next week, has been deferred, the Iranian foreign ministry said, citing practical difficulties of such a trip in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak. Iran is already facing an international outcry over the execution on Saturday of Navid Afkari, a 27-year-old Olympic wrestler who was found guilty of killing a security guard during protests in August 2018. He said the confession had been extracted under torture, and had been seeking to raise money to offer compensation to the guard’s family.