Tom Hollander and Saskia Reeves star in this TV adaptation of One Day author David Nicholls’s 2014 bestseller. Parents Douglas (Hollander) and Connie (Reeves) are setting off on a grand tour of Europe before their son Albie (Tom Taylor) leaves home for university, but they have a rocky journey after Connie announces that she wants to end their marriage. Cue tears in the car park of the rubbish tip and Douglas’s resolve to make this trip his last shot to win his wife back. Meanwhile, flashbacks recount the pair’s burgeoning romance. Ammar Kalia More extraordinary subjects and glimpses of Theroux’s furrowed brow as this retrospective reaches part three of four. “Law and Disorder” is the theme, with Theroux reconsidering his programmes on police and prisons, and how the US justice system has treated black citizens. Hannah J Davies Episode two of a strangely flat dramatic cocktail, its stab at Wodehousian lightness undone by odd performances as every reaction shot lasts at least half a second too long. Tonight, rookie rubber merchant Matthew (Luke Treadaway) begins to understand the gravity of what he’s up against. Jack Seale A deep dive into the extraordinary events that took place at Dale Farm in Essex in 2011. Despite the land being owned by Irish Travellers, disputes raged between them and the council, which objected to developments on the site. This doc hears both sides of the story. Phil Harrison Having just announced that the final season of their long-running reality show will air in 2021, here is your chance to catch the second half of season 18, which was paused due to the coronavirus pandemic. As we rejoin the clan, they are shooting themselves on their iPhones in isolation. AK Based on the podcast Truth & Justice, where presenter Bob Ruff investigates the people he believes have been wrongfully convicted of crimes, this two-part TV special examines the 1993 murders of eight-year-old Stevie Branch, James Moore and Christopher Byers. AK Journeyman, 11.40pm, Film4 Paddy Considine directs and stars as champion boxer Matty Burton, who takes on a grudge match – but it’s only at the end of the bout that his real fight begins: after surgery on a brain injury, he begins rebuilding his life with the help of his wife, Emma (Jodie Whittaker). Their scenes carry the emotional punch. Paul Howlett Champions Cup Rugby Union: Toulouse v Ulster 12.15pm, Channel 4. The quarter-final match. Premier League Football: Chelsea v Liverpool 4pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The big-spending pretenders take on the league champions. Premier League Football: Leicester City v Burnley 6.45pm, BBC One. From King Power Stadium.