A cargo ship carrying nearly 6,000 cattle and 43 crew sank off Japan in rough weather caused by Typhoon Maysak, a survivor has said. The Filipino crew member was rescued late on Wednesday after Japanese navy P-3C surveillance aircraft spotted him wearing a life vest and waving while bobbing in the water. The man, who was in good health, told rescuers the ship capsized before sinking, said spokesman Yuichiro Higashi at the Japanese coast guard’s regional headquarters conducting the search. The Panamanian-registered vessel, called Gulf Livestock 1, sent the distress call from the East China Sea early on Wednesday, to the west of Amami Oshima Island in south-western Japan, Japanese public broadcaster NHK reported. The cause of the distress was not immediately known, but the weather was rough in the area due to Typhoon Maysak. The typhoon has since passed the area and the weather during the ongoing search is fine, Higashi said. The vessel, owned by Gulf Navigation Holding based in the United Arab Emirates, departed Napier in New Zealand on 14 August with 5,867 cattle on board, New Zealand’s foreign ministry told Reuters. A spokeswoman for the coastguard said the survivor was rescued on Wednesday night Tokyo time during the search for the ship after being spotted adrift wearing a life jacket. The vessel was en route to the Port of Jingtang in Tangshan, China, with an estimated journey of approximately 17 days, it said. The ship was believed to have 43 crew members who included 39 from the Philippines, two from New Zealand and at least one from Australia. NHK reported the coastguard had spotted an object that looked like a lifeboat while searching for the ship. But strong winds and rains from Maysak were hampering search and rescue efforts. The ship had been on its way to China from Napier in New Zealand. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) said it was in touch with the families of the two Australians on board. “The Australian government is providing consular assistance to the families of two Australian crew members on board a cargo vessel reported missing in Japanese waters,” DFAT said.