North Norfolk’s premier broadcaster is no stranger to the world of audio, but he’s really brought the boys out of the barracks in terms of funny one-liners in his latest offering. Steve Coogan’s Partridge shows the world the real, be-slippered Alan as he bravely goes Lynn-free for a week and fuels the rumour that Bryan Ferry can’t ride a bike. 18 episodes Phoebe Robinson was one half of the brilliantly funny 2 Dope Queens; now she turns the tables in this podcast that shuns ubiquitous white male interviewees. Jameela Jamil, Michelle Buteau and a pre-megastardom Lizzo are particular delights, switching effortlessly from seriousness to an eruption of knowing chuckles in their warm chats. 53 episodes MC Grindah and the People Just Do Nothing crew discuss music, fashion, relationships and more in their blundering and inimitable style. Chabuddy G’s “massive fashion interview” is a thing of beauty, just like his nipple-chafing pleather vest. Don’t miss their history of music, starting with classical (“No bass and no drums? You can’t skank to that”). Six episodes Buxton’s ramble-chats might be funny, warm, truthful or sad, but also throw up some of the finest comedy moments in podcastland. One of the best comes an hour and two minutes into episode 29, when Louis Theroux demonstrates his a cappella falsetto of Baccara’s Yes Sir, I Can Boogie. And then goes on slightly longer than is comfortable. 130 episodes The lascivious tale of Belinda Blumenthal flipping her vaginal lid in an ornamental maze is a pioneer of the laugh-out-loud-on-public-transport genre. Jamie Morton, Alice Levine and James Cooper’s dissection of distinctly unerotic dad-penned fiction spawned a world tour and an HBO special. Five seasons A fictional US megachurch lends itself very well to improvised satire in Holly Laurent and Greg Hess’s masterclass of weirdness. With a teen ministry called Climax, a Hamilton-influenced festive episode with a new take on We Three Kings, and some skilful guest stars, it’s joyously disturbing. 104 episodes The Onion’s “true-crime” podcast lampoons the hot dead white girl trope brilliantly. As is tradition in the genre, the police missed a lot of clues so it’s up to David Pascall to investigate when a teenage girl is murdered in the town of Bluff Springs. Plinky-plonk piano, 911 calls and fast-talking waitresses blend with a big dose of absurdity. Eight episodes Julia Davis and Vicki Pepperdine are Joan and Jericha, agony aunts and purveyors of the world’s funniest and filthiest podcast. Nothing is off limits, from Joan’s weekly smear tests by soft-voiced confidante Mahmood to the sound advice that geriatric mothers risk having wrinkly babies. Sex advice and bobbly boobs abound from a duo equally versed in psycho-genital counselling and sports journalism. Two seasons What started out as relentless rewatching of terrible films spiralled into a source of comfort during lockdown. New Zealand comics Guy Montgomery and Tim Batt spent a year watching Adam Sandler vehicle Grown Ups 2 every week, then Bechdel failure Sex and the City 2, before tackling horror We Are Your Friends. They’re still stuck on Home Alone 3 … 300 episodes A lot of podcasts say they’re unfiltered, but Audrey (AKA Ghana’s finest), Milena and Tolly constantly prove that The Receipts really is. From pole dancing in a fishnet bodysuit to who’s a good white queen (Pink and Reese Witherspoon make the list), it’s all here. And if you send in your question, they’ll dish out advice like the agony aunts they were born to be. 103 episodes, plus bonus: Your Receipts