The US has put new restrictions on Chinese diplomats in America, barring senior envoys from visiting universities or meeting local government officials without approval, in the latest escalation in tensions between the two countries. Announcing the latest measures, the state department said it was responding to “significant barriers” on its own diplomats based in China. “We’re simply demanding reciprocity,” US secretary of state Mike Pompeo told a news briefing. “Access for our diplomats in China should be reflective of the access that Chinese diplomats in the United States have, and today’s steps will move us substantially in that direction,” he said. China’s Washington embassy called the move “yet another unjustified restriction and barrier on Chinese diplomatic and consular personnel” that “runs counter to the self-proclaimed values of openness and freedom of the US side”. The US-China relationship has been increasingly strained over a range of issues from Huawei and trade disputes, to coronavirus, China’s crackdown in Hong Kong and human rights violations in Xinjiang. A round of tit-for-tat controls on embassies and media have already seen both countries close a major consulate, and increase restrictions on journalists, with American journalists for outlets including the New York Times, Washington Post and Wall Street Journal forced to leave China. In addition to controls on university visits and meetings with officials, US authorities will have to give approval for all cultural events with an audience of more than 50 people hosted by Chinese diplomats outside their own embassies and consulates. The state department also pledged to ensure all diplomatic social media accounts were labelled as government accounts, although it was unclear what this would mean, or how it would be implemented. Some social media outlets such as Twitter already flag up accounts run by Chinese authorities. Pompeo also said that Keith Krach, the state department’s undersecretary for economic growth, had written recently to the governing boards of US universities alerting them to threats posed by the Chinese communist party. “These threats can come in the form of illicit funding for research, intellectual property theft, intimidation of foreign students and opaque talent recruitment efforts,” Pompeo said. He said universities could ensure they had clean investments and endowment funds, “by taking a few key steps to disclose all [Chinese] companies’ investments invested in the endowment funds, especially those in emerging-market index funds”. With the US presidential election looming, the incumbent, Donald Trump, has sharpened his administration’s offensive against China – with sanctions and strong rhetoric replacing past enthusiasm for a new trade deal – while trying to paint his Democratic rival, Joe Biden, as soft on Beijing. In addition to controls on media and diplomats, Trump’s administration has brought in a range of sanctions on senior officials it alleges were involved in rights abuses in Xinjiang and the crackdown in Hong Kong. He also issued a pair of executive orders that will ban any US transactions with the Chinese companies that own social media apps TikTok and WeChat from later this month, saying the US must take “aggressive action” in the interest of national security.