Alexei Navalny, who lies critically ill in a German hospital after being poisoned in Siberia, is Russia’s unofficial leader of the opposition and the politician Vladimir Putin fears most. Relatively young, resourceful and smart, he has bravely defied many previous attempts to silence him, including imprisonment and physical attacks. Navalny is not easily dismissed as a pro-western dissident or leftwing intellectual. He is a Russian patriot, a daring, Jason Bourne-like figure who recently flew drones over the private dachas of the Kremlin elite to expose their apparently corruptly acquired wealth, then posted videos online. That the Kremlin is responsible for Navalny’s plight is not in serious doubt. Whether Putin had prior knowledge of the plot, or personally authorised it, will probably never be known. As usual, the Kremlin is hiding behind a wall of denials and absurd claims, such as that Navalny fell ill after flying on an empty stomach. But his German doctors are unequivocal. He was poisoned by a chemical nerve agent, novichok, which the Russian state secretly developed and which only Russia is known to have used. Novichok refers to a group of nerve agents developed by the Soviet Union in the 1970s and 80s to elude international restrictions on chemical weapons. Like other nerve agents, they are organophosphate compounds, but the chemicals used to make them, and their final structures, are considered classified in the UK, the US and other countries. The most potent of the novichok substances are considered to be more lethal than VX, the most deadly of the familiar nerve agents, which include sarin, tabun and soman. Novichok agents work in a similar way, by massively over-stimulating muscles and glands. Treatment for novichok exposure would be the same as for other nerve agents, namely with atropine, diazepam and potentially drugs called oximes. The chemical structures of novichok agents were made public in 2008 by Vil Mirzayanov, a former Russian scientist living in the US, but the structures have never been publicly confirmed. It is thought they can be made in different forms, including as a dust aerosol. The novichoks are known as binary agents because they only become lethal  after mixing two otherwise harmless components. According to Mirzayanov, they are 10 to 100 times more toxic than conventional nerve agents.  Why choose this particular moment to assassinate a longstanding opponent? One possible reason is widespread political unrest in Russia’s far east, which Navalny tried to tap into before he was attacked. For a worried Kremlin, the pro-democracy uprising in neighbouring Belarus sets a dangerous precedent he could exploit. Another possible reason is the negative impact of the pandemic on Russia’s economy, which is in freefall, and on Putin’s personal standing. The timing may also have been influenced by events further afield. Putin reportedly expects Donald Trump to be re-elected in November. According to US intelligence, he is doing his covert best to help him. But if Joe Biden wins, Putin’s easy ride will end. American tolerance for his anti-western subversion operations and malign meddling in places such as Ukraine, the Baltic republics, the Balkans and the Middle East will fall. The same goes for the regime’s internal repression and its egregious habit of killing or jailing critics. Who attacked Navalny is not realistically in doubt. The bigger, unanswered question is what can the western democracies do about it? As after the Salisbury novichok poisonings, there has been a chorus of condemnation from just about everyone except Trump. As in 2018, sanctions and expulsions of Russian diplomats are mooted. Russia has been sternly told it must provide an explanation for breaching international law and the prohibition on using chemical weapons. Putin reportedly expects Donald Trump to be re-elected. If Joe Biden wins, his easy ride will end Yet those making such calls, including the EU, Nato, the UN and Britain, know perfectly well that Putin will do no such thing. If punitive measures are imposed, he will ride them out, as he did over Crimea. Contemptuously flouting western liberal opinion matters far more to him than any damage that may be done to Russia and its people. But there is a way to hit him where it hurts and it’s in the hands of Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel, who has been outspoken over the Navalny affair. As urged by Germany’s Greens and many in her ruling coalition, Merkel could and should scrap the Russia-to-Germany Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, which, if completed, will greatly enrich Putin and his larcenous henchmen. Cancellation could also reduce Russian leverage in Europe, sending a powerful message Putin could not ignore. More important still, abandoning the pipeline would be an environmental boon. It’s crazy to be boosting gas capacity during a climate emergency, thereby increasing use of high-carbon fossil fuels. Merkel should perform a double U-turn: scrap Nord Stream 2 and lift her veto on nuclear power generation to assure Germany’s future energy supply. It’s asking a lot. But Merkel is nearing the end of her career and has political capital in the bank. To adapt her famous words in 2015: “Sie kann es schaffen” – she can manage it.