We have been instructed to gather at a nondescript meeting point in London (the corner of a road, opposite a park, or at the entrance of a foot tunnel, depending on our choice of location). Once there, and amid the drizzle, we download an app to our phones which becomes a soundscape to this promenade drama. As we begin to walk and listen, two people among us break out to reveal themselves as actors and begin to perform a few steps ahead. Billed as a socially distanced outdoor show, C-o-n-t-a-c-t offers an inventive solution to the continued closure of most theatres, even if it feels like a theatrical variation on a silent disco at first. Laura White plays Sarah, whose stream-of-consciousness pours into our headphones. Her inner monologue is an anxious one (“My neck hurts”… “Why did I wear this bra?”) with overlapping thoughts, a song repeating on a loop and digestive sounds inside her body. Max Gold is Raphael, who looks like a commuter in leather jacket and jeans but turns out to be Sarah’s guardian angel, arrived from another world. An immersive show of this kind risks sliding into gimmickry, but this performance gathers an almost noirish tension and emotional grip that holds us. Originally a French production written by Eric Chantelauze, it is adapted into English by Quentin Bruno and the language is occasionally rich but never cloying. Cyril Barbessol’s accompanying piano music is melancholy and the soundscape locks us into Sarah’s inner world, from the grief she feels at her father’s death to her distrust of the world now he is gone. Rather like the Donmar’s Blindness, the sound envelops us with its visceral impact and intimacy. To the confused onlookers who pass us, we are a group of people standing in silent, rapt, attention Gabriel, it becomes clear, is here to heal Sarah; at first, their dynamic has faint echoes of Wim Wenders’ film romance between a mortal and an angel, Wings of Desire, but the relationship here is a platonic one which has both darkness and light. Sarah describes her sense of isolation which chimes with the wider state of social isolation of past months during lockdown, and Gabriel offers a route out of that sadness by simply listening to her. “You need witnesses to your sorrow,” Sarah says as she talks. The drama unfolds along the streets, on benches, beside office buildings, and infuses these public spaces with a strange romance. A riverfront becomes its backdrop – the Thames swilling below and the Shard jutting above. Even the drizzle helps to set the mood and the movement of the actors is elegantly choreographed by director Samuel Sené, who conceived the original production with Gabrielle Jourdain. To the confused onlookers who pass us, we are a group of people standing in silent, rapt, attention, staring at two figures who, without headphones, appear to be miming. It creates a curious circle within a circle of watching, and being watched, but despite the self-consciousness this creates, the drama sweeps us in and is a delightful hybrid creation: a walk, a soundscape, an inspired piece of street theatre. • At locations across London until 10 October.