Erling Braut Haaland scored twice and teenager Giovanni Reyna added another as Borussia Dortmund cruised past Borussia Mönchengladbach 3-0 in their season opener on Saturday. The 20-year-old Haaland scored a 54th-minute penalty, awarded for a foul on Reyna, and bagged another with a sensationally quick counterattack and a Jadon Sancho assist as Dortmund utilised their fearsome youthful attacking weapons. Reyna opened the scoring, after combining perfectly with his fellow 17-year-old Jude Bellingham in the 35th minute. His first league goal made him the second youngest American to score in the league after Christian Pulisic. The hosts, playing in front of a crowd limited to 9,300 fans in their 80,000-capacity stadium due to Covid-19 restrictions, also hit the crossbar with a Sancho header. Hertha Berlin beat hosts Werder Bremen 4-1 to earn their first win there in 14 years. Hertha, who announced a €127m investment in June, barely had any chances until they struck twice in three minutes late in the first half. Peter Pekarik was left unmarked at the far post and tapped in for the lead in the 42nd minute. Dodi Lukebakio then stunned the hosts – and 8,500 home fans allowed to attend the match – with a second on the stroke of half-time. Matheus Cunha wrongfooted keeper Jiri Pavlenka with a low shot before newcomer Jhon Córdoba added his first goal for the club in the 90th minute. Davie Selke had earlier cut the deficit in the 68th with a close-range header against his former club. Freiburg were made to sweat against VfB Stuttgart, eventually edging past them 3-2 having gone 3-0 up only to see their opponents score twice late in the game. Andrej Kramaric scored a hat-trick to hand Hoffenheim a 3-2 win at Cologne, who had equalised twice. Bayern kicked off their season with an 8-0 demolition of Schalke on Friday. Unai Emery earned his first win as Villarreal coach after his side came from behind to beat Eibar 2-1 at home in La Liga. After being held to a disappointing draw with promoted Huesca last week, Villarreal again fell behind at home to humble opposition when Kike put Eibar ahead five minutes into the second half. Emery sprung a double substitution shortly afterwards and the changes paid dividends as Gerard Moreno levelled in the 63rd minute and then played in Paco Alcácer, who rounded the goalkeeper to tap in from a tight angle in the 71st. Fiorentina grabbed a late goal through Gaetano Castrovilli to beat visiting Torino 1-0 in the opening match of the new Serie A season. As the season kicked off without spectators due to the pandemic, Castrovilli tapped the ball home in the 78th minute at the far post to hand Torino’s new coach, Marco Giampaolo, a losing debut. Andrea Belotti had the ball in the net for Torino deep into stoppage time with an acrobatic effort but it was disallowed for offside.