Geraint Thomas has admitted that he struggled through lockdown to be ready for the 2020 Tour de France. The 2018 Tour winner and 2019 runner-up, left out of the Ineos Grenadiers team for this year’s race, said that he had found lockdown “tough going.” “I’d won the biggest bike race you can win and it felt almost like I was going through the motions a bit,” he told the Guardian. “I need to be super ‘on’ it, to get to my Grand Tour competitive shape. That takes a lot of work. It doesn’t come naturally, especially the whole weight thing. So, I was just running a little heavy and it was more a case of getting on top of that. Six weeks of racing has really helped.” The Welshman’s non-selection by team manage Dave Brailsford was a shock to many but Thomas dismissed rumours that he had refused to ride in support of teammate and 2019 Tour winner, Egan Bernal. “It’s nothing against Egan,” Thomas said in response to that suggestion. “It’s not like I’m throwing my toys out of the pram. But these last few years — I want to make the most of them.” “I could have gone and done a job, but there’s also other guys in the team that can do that job,” he added. “I feel that I’m at the stage of my career now where I want to make the most of every year. I’ve done so much for other people throughout my career. “Obviously I was disappointed because it was always the plan and what I wanted to do. But once that decision was made, I went back to Cardiff, saw my son and it was, ‘right, reset now – all guns blazing for the Giro and give it everything.’” Thomas finally seems on the right track. He is currently fourth overall and racing at what he calls the ‘pointy end,’ in Italian stage race, Tirreno-Adriatico, as build-up to the Giro d’Italia, which starts in Sicily on 3 October. “I’m feeling better than three weeks ago for sure. It’s the first time I’ve been at the pointy end this year. This race will do me the world of good for the Giro. I’ve got some confidence again.” The autumn Giro, will briefly at least, be the latest Grand Tour ever scheduled. The 2020 Vuelta a España, also delayed, runs into mid-November. Thomas, who has sometimes struggled in intense heat, admitted that the later scheduling of the Italian race might suit him. “I’ve learnt to deal with the heat, over the years, but I did grow up in Cardiff,” he said. “I think the cooler temperatures will be my terrain rather than the 30-degree days. But it will be interesting to see what the weather is like at the back end of the Giro, as we go over the Stelvio pass, so I hope that goes ahead and the weather’s not super bad.” “Obviously in the UK, where cycling is still relatively new to most people, the Tour is seen as the be all and end all, but with all its history and culture, the Giro’s still a massive race and a race I’d love to win.” In the meantime, he is keeping an eye on Bernal’s progress in the Tour. “It does niggle at me sometimes, like on a big GC day, not being there. I’ll be watching thinking, ‘I should be there,’ but having the Giro now gives me that focus.” He says that his relationship with Brailsford has not been damaged by his non-selection for the Tour. “The good thing is that I feel comfortable telling him exactly what I think and vice versa. That sounds obvious, but I can’t be as open with some people as I am with Dave. That takes time and trust. He’s backing me for the Giro and we’re getting everything in place to get in as good a shape as possible.” The Tour, he insists, has not seen the last of him. “One hundred percent I want to be back at the Tour. I could have gone but in the end of the day, the team don’t pay me to do that job. They pay me to be competitive and that’s what I want as well. The plan is to go back next year and try and be competitive then.” So without the Welshman’s guile and experience alongside him, can Bernal still win? “It’s such a strange year that you can’t tell,” Thomas said. “Roglic might be flying now, but you never know. The last few days he could fall apart. I’m not saying he will, but with what everyone has gone through this year, you never know.”