‘Diane is based around the strong women I knew when I was growing up,” says David Selley, reminiscing about his childhood in Southend-on-Sea. “You’d go to a pub and there’d be a woman at the bar smoking, with all these men hanging off every word. And she’d give you a little wink, and you’d be like, ‘You are the coolest human being who’s ever existed.’” We’re in the Glory pub in east London, where Selley’s alter ego – the 80s nightclub icon and so-called “Duchess of Canvey” Diane Chorley – first made her name almost a decade ago. Selley, 38, has never publicly stepped out from behind Chorley’s mask before. But today there’s a new album to promote – and a remarkable story to tell. The album collects the finest songs – by turns mouthy kitchen-sink vaudeville à la Ian Dury and lush Pulp-style pop – from Chorley’s early stage shows. These culminated in Down the Flick, the 2019 Edinburgh fringe smash resurrecting the celeb-studded hotspot in Canvey Island, Essex, where Chorley once reigned. Since then, Selley has been developing a musical with West End impresario Sonia Friedman that recounts the character’s chequered backstory, which includes petrochemicals, a prison stretch and brushes with Boy George. As Chorley fans will know, the appeal of her shows is as much musical as comic: Simon Ribchester, the duchess’s sidekick, moonlights as Laura Marling’s guitarist. As for the laughs, Selley says: “For me, comedy is like Victoria Wood and Michael Barrymore.” But he adds: “Maybe I have some dysphoria as to what I am.” At the moment, he/she is primarily a chat-show host, on the Hat Trick podcast Chatting with Chorley, whose guests – Duchess fans all – have included Sophie Ellis-Bextor and Russell T Davies. Selley finds chatting as himself more awkward: he keeps apologising for the self-indulgence. Even in his music career, he hid behind alter egos. As frontman of high-concept electropoppers A.Human, his songs were “always storytelling”. They were “about characters in weird, often seaside places”. Selley, an art school graduate, later worked as a cabaret singer at Ibiza super-club Manumission. But his mum worried about career drift. “I come from a working-class background and, to my family, a job like that seemed ludicrous.” At his mum’s prompting, Selley took up teaching full-time. But he kept writing stories, lyrics and poems – one of which starred a woman called the Duchess, who ran a nightclub on Canvey Island. His brother’s boyfriend suggested he flesh out the character on stage. Selley did so in his spare time – then, when comedian Stewart Lee saw Chorley perform and told the world, the hobby took off. Which would have been fine, had his employer not taken exception. “One day, the schoolkids found out about Diane, through my agent’s website. I got really bad death threats. It was horrible.” It was, he says, a strict academic school, where Selley’s job was “to enforce this ideology of structure and good behaviour. And also, I present myself in quite a masculine, heteronormative way. So when they found what they thought was a kink in my armour – kink being the appropriate word – they went crazy.” The school demanded he choose between teaching and performing. He hasn't taught since What really disappointed Selley was the school’s response. “Dreadful,” he calls it. “It was a great opportunity for them to teach these kids about gender representation – which I was exploring in media studies anyway.” Instead, the school demanded he choose between teaching and performing. And he hasn’t taught since. But the incident rankles – and fuels the force Chorley has become. “Diane has always been about inclusivity, love and respect. It seemed absolutely right that the one thing I should doggedly pursue after that experience was playing that character and making her nightclub a reality.” By doing so, says Selley, he’s not just summoning the spirit of his Essex youth, but righting society’s wrongs. “We’re trying to recreate that feeling of being in the clubhouse on Saturday night on a caravan holiday. You’re like, ‘Wow – this is amazing!’ You don’t want to be anywhere else.” He adds: “People are quick to jump on the working class as not being accepting of people from diverse worlds.” But that, he points out, doesn’t tell the whole story of the culture he grew up in – of the uncle who parroted xenophobic tabloid headlines while hymning the virtues of his Sikh mate Joe; of working men’s clubsthat are dying out now. He finds this “incredibly sad, because that is a whole ecosystem that brought a wide array of people together. The more we get to know people and speak to people, the less anxious we are – and the better the community we live in. But we’re told today to isolate ourselves and be scared of people who seem different to us.” Those kids who mocked their teacher’s queerness leap to mind. “I’m here to teach that lesson,” says Selley, or it could be Chorley. “And I’m still teaching the lesson because they didn’t stop me. And they’re never going to stop me, because this is a story I have to tell.” • Diane Chorley: Greatest Hits is out on 9 October.