Cast and crew members from one of the West End’s most boisterous musicals have stood in silence outside their still-closed theatre, pleading for a date when they can reopen to full audiences. The 15-minute silent stand by dozens of people involved in Only Fools and Horses: the Musical was, organisers said, a show of solidarity with those in theatre who have lost their jobs and income, and also an appeal for guidance and clarity. “We need a date,” said the show’s co-writer, Paul Whitehouse, who plays Grandad. “If it’s OK to go to the cinema, it must be OK to go to a show. If it’s OK to go to a crowded airport and sit on a plane for hours, it must be OK to go to a show. You can ventilate a theatre ... you can’t open a window on a plane.” The performing arts has been one of the hardest-hit sectors, with thousands of jobs already lost and politicians and unions warning of a “tsunami” to come. Large numbers of creative freelance workers are stacking supermarket shelves and sorting parcels as a means of getting by because they have fallen through the gaps in government support schemes. It is a desperate situation, said Whitehouse, who spoke to the Guardian in the royal circle of the Theatre Royal Haymarket, London. “This stand is to highlight the plight of everyone who works in the theatre industry: the front-of-house staff, box office, bar staff, cleaners, ushers, maintenance workers as well as the stage crew and cast, producers, writers, set designers, directors, lighting and sound designers, art departments, production teams, makeup and wigs, costume, carpenters, marketing, musicians and musical directors.” Whitehouse, 62, had coronavirus just before lockdown. “I felt a bit rough but I was fine after less than a week. At the time the narrative was, it’s in Italy, it’s on its way here. I’ve got heart problems, but all I felt was a bit rough.” He said he understood the wider complexities, but added: “At some point we’ve got to take a punt, otherwise we’ll be putting life on hold for ever. “If I was 80 I would be walking out in the street with a placard saying, ‘not in my name’.” The government has given the go-ahead for theatres to reopen with a socially distanced audience. The modern Bridge Theatre near Tower Bridge, London, has opened with a season of monologues while the Troubador Wembley Park is open for audiences of 400 in its 1,200-seat auditorium for a musical version of Sleepless in Seattle. For most theatres, opening to reduced audiences would only bring even bigger financial problems than they already have. For West End theatres, with their tiny bars and narrow corridors, it is virtually impossible. The government has indicated that a decision on if or when to allow full audiences will not be taken before November.