Steve Bruce believes Mike Ashley remains committed to helping Newcastle succeed despite the owner’s ongoing attempts to sell the club. The manager has revealed the retail tycoon personally “flexed his muscles” to secure the recent signings of Callum Wilson, Ryan Fraser and Jamal Lewis. While Newcastle’s proposed Saudi Arabian takeover has – for the moment at least – foundered, Bruce insists the recent near £40m spend on the trio suggests the future can still be bright under Ashley’s slightly reluctant ownership. Although he admits he would almost have certainly lost his job had the Saudis moved in – “a new brush always sweeps clean,” Bruce said – he had mixed feelings about the buy-out’s collapse. “It was a unique situation. It could have lifted Newcastle straight into the realms of a Manchester City. That’s what the owner’s disappointed in. It would have been great to see this great club compete at the top with City and Liverpool which is what it needs – and everyone wants to see.” Even so, Bruce was pleased to see Wilson and Fraser – acquired from Bournemouth’s attack – succumb to a combination of Newcastle’s enduring pulling power and Ashley’s financial clout. “For us to beat off other clubs, especially Aston Villa, for Callum Wilson we needed Mike to flex his muscles which he did to make sure it happened,” he said. “Ryan Fraser, too, had six or seven options so we must not underestimate that. But to play for Newcastle is a big thing for a lot of players. We’ve got a marvellous club.” Several Newcastle managers have endured difficult relationships with Ashley but, although Bruce has only met the owner “three or four times” there have been no problems. “He’s been open and transparent,” he said. “With what’s happened to the world with this Covid thing then to go and do what we’ve done in the transfer market has been terrific. It’s lifted everybody. We’ve given everybody a bit of excitement.” On Wednesday Ashley and his helicopter made a rare appearance at Newcastle’s training ground before taking Bruce, his staff and the squad out to dinner that evening. “I get on with Mike fine and that’s vitally important,” said Bruce. “I value it that he takes us out to dinner.” Ashley has also sanctioned the new long-term deals signed by the midfielder Isaac Hayden and reserve goalkeeper Karl Darlow yesterday. “We’re delighted to have tied Isaac and Karl up,” said Bruce, who has sent his central defender Florian Lejeune on loan to Deportivo. “Playing for Newcastle is still a big draw. It’s a big club players get excited about playing for. When the real world resumes and the supporters come back the new signings will realise what they’ve signed for. It’s a great, great club with unique support.”