Guardian writers’ predicted position: 7th (NB: this is not necessarily Paul Doyle’s prediction but the average of our writers’ tips) Last season’s position: 5th Odds to win the league (via Oddschecker): 150-1 How Leicester do over the next eight months will be determined to an important extent by how they do over the next four weeks. They need to recruit well and start the season strongly. Leicester have a splendid team that can get even better. But, with others improving, they could go backwards if they do not adequately address shortcomings that led to last season’s weird anticlimax, when a better-than-predicted fifth-place finish was greeted like the output of a tawdry government’s algorithm. The sagging in the second half of the season – when they won four of their last 17 league matches and slunk out of both domestic cups – was down to a variety of factors, including a lack of depth and a lack of mettle when it mattered most. If the first of those problems is not solved by transfers then the second risks becoming worse. When Leicester are at their best, they are brilliant – not just glorious entertainers but infernal opponents (they won more tackles than any other team in the league last season) but when their confidence goes pop, they lose their snap and crackle. They should sign reinforcements to strengthen their ability to cope with the kind of injuries that sabotaged them, especially if they want to go far in the Europa League, a challenge they did not face last season. Overall, Brendan Rodgers used his squad well but when injuries and losses of form hit, he did not have as many options as he would have wanted, which is why the only managers to make fewer substitutions were Sean Dyche and Nuno Espírito Santo. No club can pre-empt every eventuality but here is a Leicester wish list, from the urgent to the desirable: a right winger, a centre-back, a striker, a creative midfielder. Last season’s major signing, Ayoze Pérez, had a mediocre campaign and seldom convinced on the right wing, especially after the injury to the wonderful full-back Ricardo Pereira, who is essential to Leicester’s defensive solidity and attacking potency. Demarai Gray has yet to find consistency; he may develop it but, at 24, he has yet to progress beyond the role of impact sub. An upgrade would be welcome. When everyone is in form, Leicester’s defence is excellent, and their goalkeeper among the best in the league. That should remain the case despite the sale of Ben Chilwell to Chelsea, especially now Timothy Castagne has joined from Atalanta and if Luke Thomas builds on the impressive potential he showed when filling in at the end of last season. James Justin also did well when called upon, without reaching Pereira’s heights. The middle of the defence is where an addition is needed most even though Harry Maguire was barely missed because Caglar Soyuncu stepped in superbly, at least until July’s ludicrous defeat at Bournemouth. Jonny Evans marred an otherwise pristine season with a sending-off on the final day and is suspended for the first three matches. Rodgers will probably have to improvise in defence for the opening games. That could mean action for Filip Benkovic, back after a loan at Bristol City. Even if Leicester get through the start without suffering further blows to their confidence, the purchase of at least one powerful centre-back would improve their chances of sustaining tightness and morale, especially if Rodgers decides to use the back-three formation that was practically forced on him towards the end of last season. Leicester’s attack will again be led by Jamie Vardy even though Rodgers’ predecessor, Claude Puel, suggested their evolution required developing other lines of attack. He was right but Rodgers pulled it off while also finding a way to help Vardy preserve his firepower and earn the Golden Boot and a new contract. Kelechi Iheanacho, who seemed next to useless a year ago, also improved and now represents a valuable attacking option. But Leicester would still benefit from buying a centre-forward, ideally one powerful in the air as well as dextrous on the ground. The strikers will be served – and the scoring duties shared – by a cast of wonderful creators, especially when James Maddison recovers from his hip injury. Harvey Barnes and Youri Tielemans cause damage in different ways, the former thrillingly explosive, the latter elegantly cutting. They, and Dennis Praet, will be expected to be more consistent, especially with the immaculate Wilfred Ndidi giving them a secure platform on which to perform. Originally known as Leicester Fosse until someone decided in 1919 that City sounded grander than a fortified ditch, they have been an entertaining yo-yo club for most of their existence: no one has claimed more second-tier titles and no club has reached the FA Cup final more often without lifting the trophy. In 2002-03, they gained promotion to the Premier League despite entering administration and having to be rescued by a consortium featuring Gary Lineker and Emile Heskey. In 2016 they pulled off another feat that was not supposed to happen, defying more monied clubs to become champions of England for the first time. On the touchline Rodgers tends to stand as close as possible to the action, often penning notes in his jotter or miming instructions to players. Known to commend fine play with a curious rapid handclap action that brings to mind a toy robot playing a mini-accordion. On Zoom Rodgers is among the league’s most engaging managers, usually happy to explain his decisions and elaborate on points of interest whether concerning his team or football in general. His takes on tactics or players’ attributes are almost always interesting. Absolutely no one is saying Vardy is the new Jack Southworth – who was 37 when he finished No 1 in the top flight’s scoring charts in 1894 – but, at 33, last season’s Golden Boot winner remains as precious as ever to Leicester, who gave him a new three-year contract in August. Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha initially got involved as a shirt sponsor but in 2011 the Thai businessman took over the club, leading it first to promotion and then to its greatest victory. Following Vichai’s tragic death in a helicopter crash at the stadium in 2018, his son Aiyawatt has worked hard to perpetuate the legacy and make the club’s success sustainable. The sale of Chilwell could mean more opportunities for the 19-year-old Thomas, an academy graduate who made his debut in July. He was so composed and authoritative in that, and his two subsequent appearances, that he was awarded a new contract in August. Castagne played chiefly on the right for Atalanta but the Belgian international also excels on the left, either as full-back or wing-back. His versatility will give Rodgers welcome options and his speed and intensity make him ideal for the dynamic attacking style the manager wants. Leicester changed colours often in their early years as they sought an identity distinct from their city’s rugby club. Their imagination did not take them far, as they alighted on white shorts and “Cambridge blue”. Those have been their home colours for a century, except for 1972-73, when an executive brainwave spawned an all-white kit modelled on Real Madrid. In normal times the King Power is one of the league’s more animated grounds, not just thanks to the fans but also the bands and entertainment outside. There is none of that now, and the absence weighs. England are not exactly struggling for explosive wide players but if Barnes, a fast and thrilling 22-year-old, develops more consistency he could make an irresistible case for inclusion in Gareth Southgate’s squad.