Rapper Tory Lanez has denied shooting chart-topping rapper Megan Thee Stallion in a July incident in Los Angeles. On his new album Daystar released today, Lanez raps “I ain’t do it” and alleges: “Megan[’s] people trying to frame me for a shooting.” Megan has not responded to the allegation. In an Instagram Live stream in August, she said: “Tory shot me. You shot me, and you got your publicist and your people going to these blogs, lying and shit. Stop lying.” Lanez was arrested in July following the incident, charged with carrying a concealed weapon and released on bail. In August, the LA County district attorney’s office said it was reviewing the case over a possible assault charge, and asked LA police to investigate it further. Reports in the immediate aftermath of the incident stated that Megan Thee Stallion, whose real name is Megan Jovon Ruth Pete, had cut her foot on broken glass but she made a statement three days later saying: “I suffered gunshot wounds as a result of a crime that was committed against me and done with the intention to physically harm me.” She also posted and later deleted a graphic image of her foot during surgery, writing: “I got hit at the back of my feet … why would I lie abt getting shot?” On his new album, Lanez questions her account, rapping on Money Over Fallouts: “How the fuck you get shot in your foot, don’t hit no bones or tendons?” Medical records stated that shrapnel was removed from her left heel. In her Instagram statement in August, she detailed further claims about the incident. She suggested there had been an argument in a car between her, Lanez, her friend and his security guard. “I get out the car, I’m done arguing … I’m walking away. [Lanez], from out the back seat of the car, starts shooting me. You shot me.” She said she initially blamed the injury on broken glass because she was scared of the police following high-profile incidents of brutality against black people. “The police come, I’m scared. Police was literally killing black people for no reason. The police is really aggressive. You think I’m about to tell the police that us black people got a gun in the car?” On the track Queen and Slim, Lanez raps: “I wasn’t the wrong one that night, you was just too drunk to even see it … I’ve never even had an argument with ya.” On the track In the Air he raps “I’ve never hit no woman”, and says the situation is a test from God: “He’s using Megan as a vessel and a test of faith.” The rappers are both major stars in the US. Megan is currently No 1 in the US and UK singles charts with her collaboration with Cardi B, WAP. It is her second US chart-topper of the year after the remix to her track Savage, featuring Beyoncé. Toronto rapper Lanez has released five full-length projects, all of which reached the US top five, most recently in April with The New Toronto 3, which was also a top-five hit in the UK.