Jordan Pickford Trusted with the No 1 shirt but spent the entire 90 minutes as a relatively bored spectator and his involvement was watching a penalty fly well over his head. 6/10 Kyle Walker Picked up his first booking after trying to make up ground having been caught out of position and fully deserved his second for a needlessly rash challenge in the opposition half. 5/10 Joe Gomez The Liverpool defender always seemed one step ahead of the Iceland attack as he brought comfort at the back until switching off late on to gift Iceland a spot kick. Will be a relieved man. 7/10 Eric Dier Proved himself capable of playing in his desired position of centre-back. The Tottenham defender’s excellent distribution helped his cause, often moving the ball forward at pace. 7/10 Kieran Trippier Adapted to playing on a different flank as he soon learned that cutting in to cross with his right foot could be a dangerous weapon. Caused problems on a couple of occasions. 6/10 James Ward-Prowse Needed to be smarter to find space to receive possession as the hosts congested the middle of the pitch but did show his worth in the side with some dangerous corners. 6/10 Declan Rice Worked hard to provide a shield for the back four and was England’s main scrapper in the scrappiest of midfield battles. Will be annoyed he fluffed his lines with a first-half chance. 7/10 Phil Foden The midfielder quickly settled into international football on his debut with some smart early touches to instigate attacks but Iceland offered little space for him to play in as the game went on. 7/10 Jadon Sancho Confident in possession and keen to attack Iceland at every opportunity. He tried to change the dynamic in the final third when things slowed down but without the desired effect. 7/10 Harry Kane Showed clever movement to tap home early on, only to see the flag raised. The captain tired and did not see much of the ball after his early burst thanks to some impressive man-marking. 6/10 Raheem Sterling Spent most of the game on the periphery but maintained his cool to score a nerveless penalty, which he had helped win, in the final moments of the match. 7/10 Danny Ings (Foden 68) Came on to liven up the attack but with England going down to 10 soon after his introduction, the striker was left isolated 6; Trent Alexander-Arnold (Sancho 73) A necessary change to add solidity at the back after Walker’s dismissal and carried out his duties with great purpose 6; Mason Greenwood (Kane 78) Not the most memorable debut for the prodigious forward but showed a glimpse of his capabilities 6