Now free to air, Sky’s flagship arts and culture channel has a slate of new programming to come throughout the autumn, beginning tonight at 9pm with a documentary charting the meeting of the AC/DC singer Brian Johnson and Foo Fighters’ Dave Grohl. Afterwards, this series of monthly late-night arts panel shows, fronted by the art historian Tim Marlow, begins. The opener focuses on the effects of coronavirus on the arts; Marlow is joined by the British singer-songwriter and poet Arlo Parks. Ammar Kalia A new series follows Royal National Lifeboat Institution volunteers as they make quick decisions to save lives. Matt and Gavin are brothers whose dad also volunteered; they spring into action in Swanage, Dorset, when a pair of paddleboarders stray into dangerous territory: shipping lanes. Hannah Verdier The Scottish countryside magazine show returns for a new series, exploring how coronavirus has affected rural life. We open in the Beinn Eighe national nature reserve in Wester Ross, where the presenter Dougie Vipond visits a tree nursery to see how the unique Scots pines are being preserved. AK More human stories from tenants and council workers in the London borough of Southwark, as this six-part docuseries continues. While fly-tipping proves a major issue for housing officer Janet, pest controller Andy has an even bigger load of rubbish to deal with – 40 tonnes of the stuff, to be precise. Hannah J Davies TV decorators, assemble! The cream of the early 00s crop – Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen, Linda Barker and Craig Phillips – get together for this listicle-based show on increasing the sale value of your house, from DIY renovations to major overhauls such as converting your garage. AK Julian McMahon (Nip/Tuck) leads a lively cast in an otherwise rote police procedural. The first fugitive of the week is a doctor who has been recorded killing his wife: as an elite team investigates, crime fans will easily identify the key minor character, based on when they enter the narrative. Jack Searle Performance (Donald Cammell and Nicolas Roeg, 1970), 1.20am, TCM MoviesA brilliant, kaleidoscopic mix of Krays villainy and acid-infused rock dreams from the directors Cammell and Roeg. James Fox’s gangster, Chas, hides out in the home of a rock recluse, Turner (Mick Jagger), who is living in a potty, sexy ménage with Anita Pallenberg and Michelle Breton; identities start to shift and merge in a baleful, disturbing portrait of hedonistic 60s London. Paul Howlett Diamond athletics: Naples 5.45pm, BBC Two. Seventh meeting of the campaign.US Open golf 12.30noon, Sky Sports Main Event. Opening day’s play from Mamaroneck, New York.International football Marseille v Saint-Etienne 8pm, BT Sport 1. French top-flight clash.