Brighton have tied down Ben White to a new four-year contract after fending off interest from Leeds, who had three bids rejected for the defender, the last of about £25m. The 22-year-old played every minute as Leeds were promoted to the Premier League but Brighton stood firm with the centre-back an integral part of their long-term plans.Leeds eventually gave up in their pursuit of White and have since signed the Freiburg defender Robin Koch. White has been tracked by Liverpool, Manchester City and Manchester United but is primed to be a key part of Graham Potter’s squad after seamlessly stepping up to the challenge of playing in the Championship after previously excelling on loan in League One and League Two with Peterborough and Newport respectively. “He had a brilliant season helping Leeds to the title last season, and now he has the opportunity to show his qualities in the Premier League,” Potter said. White, who also operated as a defensive midfielder last season, joined Brighton after being released by Southampton as a 16-year-old. He had two years plus a third-year option remaining on his previous contract and rejected three offers before signing a deal until 2024. White is yet to play a league match for Brighton but is set for a key role this season. He played alongside Adam Webster and the captain Lewis Dunk, who recently signed a new five-year contract, in a three-man defence in a friendly against Chelsea on Saturday.Dan Ashworth, Brighton’s technical director, said the club always had a “strong belief” White could play in the top flight. “His next challenge is to show his capabilities at the highest level of the domestic game,” he said. Brighton’s Glenn Murray is closing on a season’s loan to Watford after undergoing a medical on Tuesday, casting further doubt over the future of Troy Deeney, who is of interest to West Bromwich Albion. Murray, who turns 37 this month, scored two goals in 24 appearances last season. The striker scored 23 goals to help Brighton into the top flight in 2016-17. Deeney, 32, is one of Watford’s highest earners.