As fears rise over the spread of coronavirus in Britain, it is remarkable how little ministers are talking about the millions of people who are most at risk. Boris Johnson addressed the nation yesterday about the fear of a second wave but made no substantive mention of people with underlying health conditions who are particularly vulnerable to the virus. Instead, there was a vague reference to avoiding “simply lock[ing] up the elderly and vulnerable”, with nothing on the extra protective measures they might take. Apparently, there was time to talk about when you can get a pint in a pub, but not how to keep disabled people safe. Around 14 million people in the UK are now under some level of local restriction, and yet there has been no word on what this means for people who were told to shield earlier in the year, other than a quick line in the House of Commons that shielding is “not necessary” for those living outside local lockdown areas. This is despite there now being more estimated current coronavirus cases than when the shielding programme was paused in August. Now there are new restrictions for the general public, should I start shielding again if I’m high risk? Does it depend on where I live in the country? Ministers say I should now work at home “if I can”, but what if I can’t? Coronavirus cases in England have almost doubled in the space of a week, and yet people with severe asthma or low immunity are still being expected to risk their lives and go into work if working from home is not possible. At the same time, there is still no reassurance for parents, who are seemingly still expected to send children with underlying health conditions into classrooms. The narrative that “no healthy child has died from coronavirus in the UK”, though accurate, is telling in its dismissal of children at high risk. This government has failed to support people with underlying health conditions from the start of the pandemic. At first it recommended months of staying at home, because it was too dangerous to leave the house, before suddenly declaring it safe to use public transport and sit in busy classrooms or offices, without any credible explanation of its shift in advice. With a lack of guidance from the government, people at high risk have been left alone to figure out what to do. That ministers have not provided a functional testing programme, or track and trace, only makes decision-making more difficult. Many “extremely vulnerable” people are still shielding long after the official programme finished in August, and haven’t seen family or friends in six months and counting. Others who can’t – say, a mother with muscular dystrophy who has to do the school run – have no choice but to risk their safety. We are entering a difficult halfway house for people with underlying health conditions. The risk is rising daily, but disabled employees have next to no protection if they don’t feel safe at work. The Equality and Human Rights Commission says employers have a legal duty to make reasonable adjustments for disabled people if it is less safe for them to go to work than their non-disabled colleagues, but disabled workers and carers report that in practice, they are being put at risk and even threatened with the sack. Children with disabilities are told to go back to school, but at least 20,000 in specialist schools are not allowed to go back because of safety concerns. There is no word on what will happen to the education of disabled children who are missing school, just as there is little reassurance for disabled workers. Polling by the charity Scope shows that a quarter of disabled people fear losing their job as a result of the pandemic. If the challenge for society in the coming months is to figure out how best to live with coronavirus, this is all the greater for people with underlying health conditions. The everyday parts of life – work, school, family, healthcare – will not simply go away if ignored, but rather need to be adapted in the safest way possible. Labour is urging the government to publish a long-term plan for disabled people who may have to shield, and it’s these sort of practical steps we need, from an extension of the furlough scheme for high-risk workers to adequate testing, especially for schools with vulnerable children (and parents and teachers). None of this is easy, and it requires flexibility and compromise. But the minimum high-risk families can expect is a competent government that is seen to think seriously about their lives. If the test of a civilised society is how it treats the most vulnerable, the test of a government during a pandemic is how it protects the clinically vulnerable. As the winter approaches, Boris Johnson is failing fast. • Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnist and author of Crippled: Austerity and the Demonisation of Disabled People – now out on audiobook