Guardian writers’ predicted position: 14th (NB: this is not necessarily Jacob Steinberg’s prediction but the average of our writers’ tips) Last season’s position: 16th Odds to win the league (via Oddschecker): 500-1 When Mark Noble used Twitter to voice anger at the controversial sale of Grady Diangana to West Bromwich Albion, the midfielder laid bare the discontent eating away at West Ham’s soul and sent them lurching into crisis mode before a ball has been kicked. Although it is legitimate to question whether West Ham’s captain stepped out of line and undermined David Moyes by going public less than half an hour after Diangana’s departure, the other side is that the midfielder is in tune with an increasingly furious fanbase. Noble bleeds claret and blue. He knows why supporters are livid after seeing one of their academy graduates join a rival and if civil war is about to break out again in east London, it will be a problem for Karren Brady, David Sullivan and David Gold if Noble is not on their side. The 33-year-old’s voice matters and although he knew that his post would create problems for the unpopular trio in the boardroom at West Ham, he still clicked send. His was not an isolated view. Diangana, who did not want to leave after impressing on loan at West Brom last season, was popular in the dressing room and the 22-year-old winger’s transfer came as a shock to his teammates. It was not long before Declan Rice, West Ham’s most important player, had liked Noble’s post and there was further embarrassment when Jack Wilshere told Diangana on Instagram to “Go and do your thing in a club that respects you”. For all the anger, though, this is a complicated story. West Ham’s owners were unimpressed with Noble and it must be bitter to see Wilshere questioning their wisdom. Indeed it is because of signings such as Wilshere – six league starts since joining on a three-year deal in 2018 – that West Ham felt compelled to sell Diangana. West Ham, who have made no signings and need to sell to buy, are paying the price for poor decisions in the transfer market. Wilshere was handed that contract on the request of Manuel Pellegrini, who was hired on a deal worth £7m a year in 2018. In their eagerness to back Pellegrini, West Ham created problems down the line. They gave the Chilean a big budget and allowed him to pick his own director of football, Mario Husillos. Now, however, the clean-up operation is underway. Pellegrini and Husillos were sacked last December and West Ham, who spent last season fighting to stay up, are struggling to shift the duo’s expensive misfits. Finding buyers for Albian Ajeti, Jordan Hugill and Roberto Jímenez was the easy part. But Moyes, who is desperate to strengthen his defence and bring balance and depth to a lopsided squad, has found it harder to move Felipe Anderson, Pablo Fornals and Manuel Lanzini. Short of other options, West Ham felt they had to accept when the offer came for Diangana. Sullivan, the most powerful figure at the club, was warned that it would be a PR disaster. On the other hand one source points out that Moyes has accepted the need for pragmatism. Even though Diangana was looking good in pre-season, West Ham do not lack wingers. Where they are weak is in defence. Their full-backs are frail and, with Issa Diop struggling alongside Angelo Ogbonna in the centre, Moyes hopes to beef up his back four by signing the commanding Burnley centre-back James Tarkowski. Tarkowski would improve a defence that conceded 62 goals last season. In the wider sense, though, there is little sign of a coherent strategy. Dysfunction breeds discontent and the mood became even more toxic when West Ham conceded five goals in a friendly defeat by Bournemouth last Saturday. Not that it is all doom and gloom. West Ham finished last season well and Moyes has some talented players. Rice and Tomas Soucek have a strong partnership in midfield, Jarrod Bowen is sharp on the right and Michail Antonio has flourished as a striker. All the same it is hard not to think back to Moyes talking about wanting to sign “young, hungry players” in January. That sounds a lot like Diangana and if the sale of one academy product is followed by Chelsea snatching Rice before the window shuts, Noble’s tweets may not make for pretty reading. Don’t tell Sam Allardyce that West Ham play on the floor. Allardyce despised all the Academy of Football talk when he was in charge. Yet it is part of the club’s identity. Supporters crave attractive football, even though West Ham often lack substance to go with the style and haven’t won anything other than the Intertoto Cup since lifting the FA Cup in 1980. Underachievement comes with the territory and nothing has changed since the move to the London Stadium in 2016. West Ham haven’t been happy since leaving Upton Park, even though a very fetching claret carpet covers the running track. On the touchline Moyes barks orders from the touchline and is often contained, although he did receive a red card and a one-match ban after swearing at the fourth official when his Sunderland team lost to Southampton in the League Cup in 2016. On Zoom Moyes was fined £30,000 by the Football Association after telling BBC reporter Vicki Sparks that she “might get a slap” after an interview in 2017. He apologised for the remark, however, and tends to give honest answers during press conferences. The first thing West Ham need from Rice is to forget about joining Chelsea. Rice was excellent in defensive midfield last season and Moyes, who sees the 21-year-old as a future West Ham captain, has warned Chelsea they will need “Bank of England” money to buy the England international. Sullivan and Gold have not been popular with supporters since buying the club in 2010. They faced furious protests during a home game against Burnley in 2018 and there was more unrest earlier this year. Supporters believe that West Ham lost their identity after moving to Stratford and also feel that Sullivan and Gold have not invested enough. Diangana was the youngster to watch before his controversial exit. Instead supporters will hope that Moyes continues to give opportunities to Ben Johnson. The 20-year-old defender is comfortable on both flanks and impressed after breaking into the team at the end of last season. Soucek made a huge impact after joining on loan from Slavia Prague in January, scoring three goals from midfield, and West Ham were delighted to land the 25-year-old on a permanent deal at the end of last season. The Czech Republic international has a solid partnership with Rice. The club wore blue in their original incarnation as Thames Ironworks and the story goes that they switched to claret and blue after winning a bet against Aston Villa. Whether the tale is true, though, is disputed by club historians. Still, it sounds good. The teams still walk out to I’m Forever Blowing Bubbles, West Ham’s famous anthem, and the bubbles machines are still in operation. The stadium is also adorned with mosaics and flags to give it a West Ham feel. Andriy Yarmolenko has struggled since an achilles injury in October 2018 and has barely featured under Moyes. The experienced Ukraine winger will be hoping to play more regularly before his country’s opening game against the Netherlands next summer.