The Hong Kong media tycoon Jimmy Lai has been cleared of criminal intimidation charges dating from 2017, bringing to a close one of several cases against him. On Thursday Lai, who has been arrested multiple times this year mostly in relation to pro-democracy activities, was acquitted of intimidating a reporter from the pro-Beijing Oriental Daily, a rival newspaper to his pro-democracy tabloid Apple Daily, during a 2017 vigil to mark the 4 June 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre. During the trial, at West Kowloon court, prosecutors alleged Lai’s foul language towards the reporter during a confrontation, which was caught on video, amounted to intimidation. Lai, who was charged over the incident only in February this year, pleaded not guilty. According to the Hong Kong broadcaster RTHK, the magistrate, May Chung, said the prosecution had not proven its case that Lai had threatened the Oriental Daily reporter with personal injury. RTHK reported Chung as saying she found the reporter, who was granted anonymity by the court, was neither an honest nor reliable witness, and had been part of a special team assigned to follow public figures, including Lai, which led to animosity. Lai seemed to have temporarily lost his temper rather than made a calculated attempt to instil fear, the magistrate said. Lai has been arrested at least three times since mass pro-democracy protests last year, usually over accusations of organising or inciting people to protest illegally. He was also among 25 people charged over attending a Tiananmen vigil this year, banned for the first time since 1989 purportedly because of social distancing requirements. Last month Lai was arrested over accusations of foreign collusion under the national security laws imposed on Hong Kong by Beijing, and hundreds of police raided the Apple Daily newsroom. Lai is the most high-profile of the 25 people arrested so far under the national security laws, only one of whom has been charged. Accusations against Lai of foreign collusion, by Beijing and Hong Kong authorities, have at least partly stemmed from his visit to the US last year, where he met the vice-president, Mike Pence, and the secretary of state, Mike Pompeo.