The BBC’s baking queen is back for a new series of simple, heartwarming recipes. Filmed before lockdown, this opening episode finds Berry in the home of haute cuisine: Paris. Dispensing with the starched tablecloths, she seeks out more basic fare, beginning with buying oozing cheeses to make a croque-monsieur before taking on crepes and buttery croissants. To finish, there is a centrepiece of a slow-roasted leg of lamb. Ammar Kalia Paired in the schedules with her Bake Off judge and mentor Mary Berry, Nadiya Hussain also returns with a new foodie series, taking us back to her first love: baking. As always, Hussain reworks familiar recipes, with her blueberry scone pizza and an Asian-spiced toad in the hole. AK This film shadows three families as they interact with the Children’s Cancer Unit at London’s Royal Marsden hospital, where traditional treatments can be augmented with experimental drugs. The stories are heartbreaking, while the empathy of the staff shines through. Graeme Virtue The frenetic comedy starring Maisie Williams continues. As Kim’s world intersects with that of the gangsters, she finally faces her father’s killer. In the process, she discovers the truth about the end of the world. Can her relationship with Nicky survive? Yet it turns out Nicky has problems of his own. Phil Harrison Drills at the ready: designer Sarah Moore and “small spaces expert” Max McMurdo aim to Airbnb the unused parts of people’s homes in this series. We open in the Cotswolds, where farming couple Eloise and Austin want to build two shepherd’s huts (complete with hot tubs) in a disused field. AK Rapper Action Bronson and his pair of gourmands, Meyhem Lauren and Alchemist, end this season’s culinary tour with a visit to Bronson’s family in Kosovo. There, the trio meet Bronson’s aunt and uncle and soon indulge in family-favourite recipes such as paçe stew, stuffed savoury pastries and layered flija pancake. AK Bridge of Spies (Steven Spielberg, 2015), 9pm, More4In the depths of the cold war in 1962, Tom Hanks’s US lawyer James Donovan is persuaded to fly to freezing Berlin to negotiate the exchange of Russian spy Rudolf Abel (Mark Rylance) for a captured US pilot. Steven Spielberg, working with a playful Coen brothers script, crafts a terrifically tense drama. Paul Howlett International football: Brisbane Lions v Gold Coast Suns 10am, BT Sport 1. AFL clash from Brisbane Cricket Ground. Tour de France 12.20noon, Eurosport 1. Stage 11 coverage. Rugby Union: Bath v Worcester Warriors 7.30pm, BT Sport 1. Gallagher Premiership head to head. 