What were you hoping for?A fun evening, with good company and/or to find the love of my life. First impressions?He looks lovely. What did you talk about?Family, jobs, how amazing the food was, his acting career, university, how I’m not telepathic with my twin sister. Any awkward moments?When I thought he said he was a band manager and asked him what band he manages. He actually said he was a bar manager... Good table manners?Yes. He let me try every dish first and was very kind to our lovely waiter. Best thing about Josh?He’s easy to get along with and a very caring, engaging guy. Would you introduce him to your friends?I would – they’d like him. Describe Josh in three words?Kind, smiley, genuine. What do you think he made of you?Talkative, loves her food (he was full by the time the main course arrived and I pretended I was, too, as I thought it was good date etiquette) and a very fast drinker. Did you go on somewhere?To a pub across the road for a pint. A very different vibe to the fancy restaurant. If it weren’t for social distancing, would you have kissed?I’m not sure we would have. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?A mask-free waiter so I could understand him a bit better. I misunderstood what he said and accidentally agreed he could pick our dishes. Oysters as a first course was a bit of a surprise. Josh had never had them before but handled the situation very well and seemed to enjoy them. Either that or he’s a really great actor. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?Maybe I’ll see him at one of his band’s gigs one day... What were you hoping for?A blonde lass who has good chat and likes a drink. First impressions?Well, she was blonde, so that box was ticked. I thought she was a pretty lass and was looking forward to getting to know her. What did you talk about?Work, lockdown life, family. She was into football, which is always good. We had lots in common. Any awkward moments?When the oysters came out. I had never had them before, so it was interesting to try them for the first time with a stranger. Good table manners?Very good, and she was always appreciative towards the waiters. Best thing about Ella? She was chatty and understanding. We are from very different backgrounds but there was never any judgment. Would you introduce her to your friends?Probably not. Describe Ella in three words?Kind, understanding, driven. What do you think she made of you?I think she liked me as a person – not too sure about sexual attraction though. Did you go on somewhere?Yes, to a great little pub over the road. If it weren’t for social distancing, would you have kissed?I would say no. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I wouldn’t change anything. The food, service and wine were all amazing, and it was nice to experience it with a stranger who is a great person. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?Although she was lovely, and great company, I don’t think so. There wasn’t any sexual chemistry. • Josh and Ella ate at Arros QD, London W1. They were photographed separately for this image. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com