A multicoloured eyeshadow palette sends waves of terror down many a spine. What to do with all those colours? The answer? Focus on a single shade. I consider blue, particularly the darker variants, a modern neutral. It holds less complexity than a yellow or orange. Bold sorts can paint on a winged eye as per the Miu Miu AW20 show. The more reticent can stick to an eyeliner. Less harsh than black, with iterations to suit all skin tones (indigo is universal), it’s an easy way to add colour without going all out – which is just as well as we’re not doing much of that. 1. Clarins Ombre 4-Colour Eyeshadow Palette £34, clarins.com 2. Laura Mercier Caviar Eye Stick in Intense Indigo £25, spacenk.com3. Byredo The Colour Stick £30, byredo.com 4. Dior 5 Couleurs Eyeshadow Palette in Denim £48, dior.com 5. Stila Suede Shade Liquid Eyeshadow £24, stila.co.uk Light the way Frustrated adventurers can tap into this seven-strong eco-friendly candle range. It uses personalities, scents (think incense, tuberose, cedarwood) and destinations to reimagine travel right where you are. Nomad Noe candle, £55, selfridges.com Skin deep Developed by a facialist, this vegan-friendly skincare line is fragrance free and results driven. The serum, a smoothing and brightening vitamin A, C and E complex, is excellent. Skin Ingredients Skin Protein Serum, £39, skingredients.com Heads you win This luxe range combines hyaluronic acid (hydrating), vitamin E (protects from environmental damage) and abyssine (volume boosting) to restore youthfulness to hair. Kerastase Chronologist Masque, £39, kerastase.co.uk We are a nation obsessed with lashes. The rapid growth of the false lash market – be it those bought over the counter with the glue that rarely works or the applied extensions that last six weeks but don’t allow you to wash your face properly – is testament to this. For those who find faux lashes a faff, there’s mascara. But mascaras can no longer get away with being the poor relative. They need to deliver faux lash results – not necessarily tarantula style but certainly an elevated version of yours. Otherwise what’s the point? They should also nourish and condition. Those that stiffen and crumble? Unacceptable. As is smudging. We also expect volume, curl and length because no one can be arsed with two different mascaras every morning. Lash curlers, I hear you cry. The risk of poking my eyeballs with a metal implement holds no allure for me. The demand for a high-achieving hyphenated mascara has never been greater. This from Charlotte Tilbury stretches, volumises and lengthens in one fell swoop. The wand – a mini paddle brush with diamond-shaped bristles – paints every lash from root to tip. The smudge- and humidity-proof formulation is super light, so conversation-starting lashes actually feel naked. If you want understated lashes (who are you, anyway?) then bypass this. But for epic, notice-me lashes, you’re in the right place. Charlotte Tilbury Pillow Talk Push Up Lashes, £12, cultbeauty.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto