Adam Yates took over the leader’s yellow jersey in the Tour de France after Julian Alaphilippe of France was penalised 20 seconds for taking an illegal feed in the final 20km of the fifth stage from Gap to Privas. The French rider was shown on TV images taking a drinks bottle from a Deceuninck - Quick-Step team helper 17km from the finish, which is against UCI rules and subject to a time penalty. Yates, who had been in second place overall for Team Mitchelton-Scott, four seconds behind Alaphilippe, now leads overall by three seconds from Primoz Roglic. While the race lead changed hands, the dominance of the Jumbo-Visma team in the Tour continued with Wout van Aert, taking stage victory, just 24 hours after his team leader, Roglic, had won a ski-station finish at Orcieres-Merlette. “It was a heavy finish,” said the 25-year-old, who also won this year’s Milan-San Remo classic, “but it was maybe the most easy stage I ever did in a bike race because there was no breakaway, not a high pace at all.” The Belgian outsprinted the Dutchman Cees Bol in an uphill finish to the Ardèche town of Privas, as a gusting Mistral blew across the Rhone valley and livened up a pedestrian 183km stage that was ridden, for much of the distance, at cycle touring pace. “The last hour was really hectic, with a lot of wind, as all the GC teams wanted to be in front. The last kilometre was slightly uphill, so I knew that this was a stage that suited me, and I was just to happy that I got the opportunity from the team to go for it.” Sam Bennett’s third place on the stage was enough for him to take the leadership in the points classification and become the first Irishman in more than 30 years to pull on the Tour’s green jersey. The steadily descending route, leaving the Alps behind as the peloton pedalled steadily into the Drôme, failed to inspire any action at all, until, with 40km remaining, the pace increased and a series of incidents heightened the tension, with Sepp Kuss, one of Roglic’s key helpers, one of those to take a tumble and the 2019 Giro d’Italia winner, Richard Carapaz, briefly delayed by a puncture. For the first time since the peloton left Nice, Egan Bernal and his Ineos Grenadiers were prominent, shielding the defending champion in the run-in to Privas, as a combination of twists, turns and crosswinds frayed nerves. But as the sprinters’ teams warmed to their task, it was the Jumbo-Visma team that once again took centre stage.