Abdoulaye Doucouré has become Everton’s third major midfield signing in four days after completing his move from Watford for about £20m. The 27-year-old has signed a three-year contract, with Everton having the option on a fourth season. The Frenchman has been a target for Everton since last summer, when Marco Silva was manager, but Watford were prepared to sell only after their relegation. Doucouré made 129 Premier League appearances in four years at Vicarage Road and joins Allan and James Rodríguez in Carlo Ancelotti’s new-look midfield. “I have been waiting a long time to come here and now it has happened so I am very happy,” Doucouré said. “I had some interest from other clubs but from the beginning when Everton showed an interest in me I told my agent to focus on Everton. It was the only club I wanted to join. Everton has a big history in English football and it is a good club for me to have a step up in my career.” Everton have spent in the region of £60m revamping their midfield this summer, and have also held talks with Chelsea over a loan move for centre-back Fiyako Tomori. Newcastle United have continued their expansive spending in this window with the acquisition of Norwich’s Jamal Lewis for around £15m. The left-back, who was linked with a move to Liverpool earlier in the summer, has signed a a five-year contract at St James’ Park. “Jamal is a very exciting prospect,” said the Newcastle manager, Steve Bruce. “I watched him flourish in the Championship two years ago and he made a real fist of it in the Premier League last season. He is only 22 years old and has a wonderful future ahead of him, so I hope he is a Newcastle United full-back for years to come.” Lewis told the club’s official website: “It was a little bit unexpected but it was something that I was obviously looking forward to when I heard that there was serious interest, so I’m delighted to be here now. Newcastle’s such a great club with such history and I knew it was an opportunity I would love to take with both hands.” Bayer Leverkusen have invested some of the £72m fee for new Chelsea signing Kai Havertz, signing Czech striker Patrik Schick from Roma for £24m. The 24-year-old spent last season on loan at RB Leipzig, scoring 10 Bundesliga goals in 22 appearances. Roma have also sold former Manchester City left-back Aleksandar Kolarov, who joins Internazionale in a cut-price deal. In Spain, Atlético Madrid have secured the permanent return of Belgian winger Yannick Carrasco for an undisclosed fee. Carrasco left for Chinese side Dalian Yifang in 2018, before returning to Atlético on loan in January 2020. Guardian sport