It’s a prequel. Sort of. While Endeavour stars Shaun Evans as then-DC Morse in late 60s Oxford and the new Perry Mason origin series revels in its depiction of a seedy-glamorous 30s Los Angeles, Young Wallander’s fresh-faced lead is a different kind of detective. While he has the same basic biography as Henning Mankell’s creation – played previously by Rolf Lassgård, Krister Henriksson and Kenneth Branagh – his youth takes place in the present day. But present-day Sweden isn’t quite present-day Sweden, either. Fans of the Branagh version may disagree, but cultural specificity has always been crucial to the appeal of Scandinavian crime drama exports. Still, Mankell apparently gave his blessing before he died, and this Netflix series is produced by Yellow Bird UK, part of the company that kicked off the whole Nordic noir TV boom in the early 00s, so we are duty-bound to push past the weirdness of a London copper cautioning a geordie perp about drug offences in his minimalist Malmö home. There is also a logic to it, however. The Stockholm-born Adam Pålsson (Before We Die, The Bridge), playing a Swedish-accented, English-speaking Kurt Wallander works as a combined forebear to all three previous screen incarnations. And since this character has already been reborn several times via different actors and mediums, he has long existed on multiple timelines. This setting also allows Young Wallander to side-step the usual prequel pitfall: a lack of narrative tension. In Mankell’s final Wallander novel, The Troubled Man, the detective ultimately succumbs to the fog of Alzheimer’s, but maybe, just maybe, this time around it will be different. Maybe he will make other decisions and escape his fate. We, unlike our morose hero, live in eternal hope. The other clear rationale for a contemporary setting is the means to address modern-day issues more directly. Wallander’s first big case unfolds after he is witness to a bizarre, apparently racially motivated murder of a young white teenager (his face was painted with the blue and yellow flag, for extra clarity), against the backdrop of nationwide anti-immigration protests. Yet the related issues of integration, racism and free speech are touched on only in the most glancing way. At Malmö’s notably diverse police station, Wallander’s boss is a black woman (Clare Perkins). The script has her sticking up for the rights of racist protesters, which might have been an interesting and human contradiction, were the character more fully developed. There is no acknowledgment of institutional police racism, either, when Wallander’s partner and best friend, Reza Al-Rahman (Yasen Atour), is unceremoniously demoted from the major crimes unit so Wallander can take his place. The only murmur of dissent comes from detective Frida Rask (Leanne Best), who weakly remarks: “I don’t think that would look very good,” and is ignored. If all this is intended as a subtle foreshadowing of middle-aged Wallander’s progressive, anti-establishment stance, it doesn’t work within the ambiguous timeline. What exactly are the outmoded societal attitudes that he will one day rail against? When exactly did they become outmoded? In any case, by the second episode, all the black people and women have been relegated to the sidelines, while Wallander and his gruff mentor, Det Supt Hemberg (Richard Dillane) get on with the heroic work of crime investigation. “You like opera, Wallander?” Hemberg asks, as the two men cruise in their Volvo through the starkly beautiful Swedish landscape. (Lithuanian, actually: the show was shot in and around Vilnius.) Young Wallander ticks off its lead’s familiar attributes in checklist fashion, rarely pausing to offer more developed hints at psychological cause and correlation. Our man likes to listen to Verdi while driving? Check. He has a budding romantic interest in a woman called Mona (Ellise Chappell)? Check. Unresolved trauma leading to depressive tendencies and an increasing reliance on alcohol? Check, check and check. In the end, Young Wallander remains as haunted by what might have been as the most hard-bitten policing veteran. Just imagine if the show had researched and recreated 70s Malmö, where the Henriksson-timeline Wallander would have been a rookie? Imagine exploring how that very specific time and place – the era of plane hijacking, radical politics and Abba’s Eurovision win – shaped Wallander’s character? Now that would have been a case worth digging into.