As Donald Trump toured parts of the Wisconsin city of Kenosha on Tuesday – against the wishes of local government officials – the family of Jacob Blake, the young Black father now paralyzed after being shot by city police, had a message for the visiting US president. Justin Blake, Jacob’s uncle, kicked off a community party on the same Kenosha block where his nephew was shot multiple times in the back by a police officer. The shooting triggered yet another harsh examination of US police practices and led to the gun deaths of two protesters, killed by a white militia supporter last week. “We’re not going to let anyone smudge my nephew’s name,” said Justin Blake, as Trump held court elsewhere with local law enforcement and criticized the protesters who had taken to streets after the shooting. “We don’t have any words for the orange man in the White House,” Blake added. Trump’s visit came to a town at the center of US politics following Blake’s shooting, the nights of protest and vandalism that it triggered, and finally the deaths of two protesters allegedly at the hands of Kyle Rittenhouse, who now stands charged with murder. Trump had billed his trip to Kenosha as a unifying move, but Blake’s family declined to meet with him and his schedule was dominated by meetings with local police officials and business leaders. He toured damaged property and paid far more attention to the destruction than to the police shooting that preceded it. To many residents, especially Black citizens, Trump’s visit was roundly unwelcome, echoing the local mayor, John Antaramian, and Wisconsin governor, Tony Evers, who had asked the president not to come. At the local courthouse, about 100 Trump supporters and a similar number of Black Lives Matter supporters traded chants back and forth. About 50 yards away, members of the national guard sat laughing and joking behind the courthouse wall. Jacob Ansari, a 42-year-old IT security adviser, wore a shirt depicting the Republican party being thrown into the trash. He said: “The president has no business being here and inflaming tension. He’s riling up his supporters and bringing in all these people who aren’t wearing masks and who have the potential to incite more violence.” He added: “People frame everything around broken windows and property, and not the actual human lives that are being hurt by bad cops and white supremacists. I think we all need to come out and stand up in this moment and say that none of this is OK. It’s not OK for the president to come out and whip up his potentially violent supporters.” Others agreed, saying that Trump’s visit was hardly likely to calm the situation in town, especially as it brought many Trump supporters out into the streets and came after widespread support for the shooter among Republicans and conservatives. “Trump coming here is counter-productive, because he essentially endorsed the armed assassin who came in here. That’s patently racist,” said Mike Edwards, who lives in nearby New Glarus. “Rioting gives the movement a black eye, but I hope that people can see the frustrations behind it. I hope Kenosha motivates people to come out to the polls and vote him out.” Trump’s motorcade had passed a mix of supporters on the drive into town, many of whom were holding American flags, and also protesters, some carrying signs that read Black Lives Matter. As a massive police presence, complete with several armored vehicles, secured the area, barricades were set up along several of the city’s major thoroughfares to keep onlookers some distance from the passing presidential vehicles. Among those waiting for Trump were two elderly women, Joyce and Kathy, who declined to give their last names. They said they had lived in Kenosha for 60 years and had sat outside the local courthouse since 9.30am in support of the president and wearing Maga hats and Trump T-shirts. “We love Trump coming in here! The ones who are against him, there’s nothing to do to satisfy them. But those of us who love him, he’s coming in here to help us and support us. He’s going to make it better for all of us,” said Joyce. Kathy added: “People have a right to protest. It’s not all bad, but it’s stirring up more trouble and promoting more violence. I wish they would just listen to what Trump’s trying to do. He has done so much good for our country.” Meanwhile, back at the block party, Blake’s uncle Justin had one parting comment for Trump from a family and a community still grieving over the horrific injuries to one of their own. “Keep your disrespect and foul language away from our family,” he said.