Large, fast-moving fires raged on across the American west on Wednesday, destroying hundreds of homes in the Pacific north-west and sending a dense plume of smoke that turned skies amber across parts of the region. More than 85 significant wildfires are burning across the west. In California, high, dry winds stoked dozens of out-of-control blazes that have forced helicopter rescues and evacuations. In Washington, more acres burned in a single day than firefighters usually see all year, and the fires scorched farming town of Malden. Fires also forced people to flee in Oregon and Idaho. “The geographic scale and intensity of what is transpiring is truly jarring,” wrote Daniel Swain, a climate scientist at the University of California, Los Angeles. “What’s remarkable is that there’s so many fires,” said Chris Field, who directs the Stanford Woods Institute for the Environment. “Even as someone whose job is to understand what’s happening, it’s really hard to keep up.” In California, the Bear fire, which began in a remote northern region not far from the town of Paradise, expanded by about a quarter-million acres over a 24-hour period. The blaze threatened the town of Oroville, where residents are under evacuation warnings just three years after they were evacuated when heavy rains damaged the huge Oroville dam. A vast cloud of smoke covered much of California on Wednesday, dimming the sun to an eerie orange glow in swathes of the region. “Smoke particles scatter blue light and only allow yellow-orange-red light to reach the surface, causing skies to look orange,” the Bay Area Air District said on Twitter. In Oregon, wildfires covering some 375,000 acres were distributed in complexes throughout the entire length of Cascade Mountains, with many moving quickly towards its most populous cities. Blazes also sprung up in other forested areas in the state’s western third. Although no deaths had been confirmed by emergency services by Wednesday afternoon, in a press conference, Governor Kate Brown told Oregonians to prepare for what could be “the greatest loss of life and structures due to wildfire in state history”. By Wednesday afternoon, parts of at least seven counties were subject to evacuation orders, in communities scattered across the length of the state, from the southern border to the Portland suburbs. These evacuations included much of the southern city of Medford (population 82,000), half of Clackamas county, which comprises the south-eastern part of the Portland metropolitan area, and parts of Washington county, on the city’s west. The wholly uncontained Santiam fire, meanwhile, had burned over 159,000 acres by Wednesday, had forced evacuations in several small mountain communities, and sent thick smoke over the state capital, Salem, turning skies in the city blood red. As stretched fire crews struggled to contain the flames, three prisons in Oregon were evacuated on Tuesday night. Throughout the region, firefighters have been racing to contain an onslaught of fire. The El Dorado fire in California’s San Bernardino national forest had spread across 11,259 acres and was 19% contained on Wednesday. The day before, 14 firefighters were trapped, suffering burns. Three were critically injured, and are being treated at a hospital in Fresno, the US Forest Service said. The Creek fire, in the Sierra national forest, remained out of control, growing to nearly 153,000 acres and spurring the evacuation of more than 30,000 people in Madera and Fresno counties. The fire left dozens of campers and hikers stranded at the Vermilion Valley Resort, after the only road, snaking along a steep cliff, was closed on Sunday. The Bobcat fire in Angeles national forest, which erupted shortly after noon Sunday, had already torn through more than 10,000 acres as of Wednesday morning. Authorities estimated it was burning at a rate of 1,000 acres every half hour and doubled in size from Tuesday to Wednesday. That area of brush had not seen a wildfire in six decades. A dramatic temperature plunge, caused by an intrusion of polar air, helped slow wildfires in Colorado and Montana. Temperatures in Denver fell from over 100F (37.8C) on Saturday to 33F (0.6C) on Tuesday. Searing temperatures and orange, fire-tinged skies gave way to snow overnight, prompting Scott Dennings, a climate scientist at Colorado State University, to caption before and after photos with a Robert Frost poem: “Some say the world will end in fire, / Some say in ice.” Some say the world will end in fire,Some say in ice.From what I’ve tasted of desireI hold with those who favor fire.But if it had to perish twice,I think I know enough of hateTo say that for destruction iceIs also greatAnd would suffice. pic.twitter.com/ui8JtjJ2Wo Although landscapes in California and much of the west are adapted to fire, global heating is driving more frequent and extreme fires. The massive flames across the region are alarming, and unprecedented, “What we’ve been experiencing, we’ve been expecting,” Field said. Climate change has given rise to fires that behave differently, burn more intensely and explosively and “are just harder for firefighters to fight”. Decades of fire suppression – wherein the US government put out wildfires that were beneficial to the landscape – have also driven larger blazes. The government also criminalized the Indigenous practice of setting small intentional burns to clear out brush and prevent more damaging, destructive burns. “The way we are interacting with the ecosystems across the west is dramatically different now,” Field said. The wildfires this week came as the region suffers its second historic heatwave since August and widespread drought has dried out vegetation. California registered its first large fires this summer in mid-August, weeks ahead of peak fire season in the state, which comes in the autumn, when powerful offshore winds have stoked some of the state’s biggest, most dangerous blazes. The mid-August blazes were triggered by heat and a highly unusual bout of dry lightning. “The word ‘historic’ is a term we use often in the state of California, but these numbers bear fruit,” Gavin Newsom, the state’s governor, said on Tuesday, calling the challenge ahead “extraordinary”. “I have no patience for climate change deniers,” Newsom said. “That view is completely inconsistent with the reality on the ground, and the facts of our experiences. You may not believe it, but our own experiences tell a different story here in the state of California.”