Ryan ten Doeschate is 40 years old and isn’t blasting the volume of runs he once did. But his experience is a handy insurance policy for a team that seldom needs one. Having shot out Middlesex for 138, Essex’s batsmen looked like they had squandered the good work of their bowlers at 44-4, but the old man of the side had other ideas. He did not leave the crease for over two hours, during which the late middle order transformed a deficit of 94 runs into a lead of 89, Adam Wheater and Simon Harmer getting in at the other end. Cue Sam Cook and Aaron Beard to elbow their way past the old firm of Jamie Porter and Harmer to bag a combined 7-49 and yet another victory was chalked up. Essex are through to the Bob final and it would be a brave man – or an overly confident weather-seer – who would bet against them. The only other county to have won four of their five matches, Somerset, will be Essex’s opponents in the final at HQ, but were made to work for their day in the slanting autumnal sun by Worcestershire. The difference between the sides was the opener, Tom Lammonby who, at 20, has made centuries in consecutive matches and also has a “carried his bat” against his name, a rare distinction that many players spend the length of his lifetime trying to achieve. But another statistic is more revealing of a talent that is probably the find of the tournament. Under pressure to win, Lammonby’s 107* in an innings of 193 represented 55% of his team’s runs and, just to underline how tricky scoring was, no Worcestershire batsman beat Ben Cox’s 32 when the hosts pursued their target. That was no cheap century and Lammonby is a name to watch. After last year’s Champo showdown, Somerset and Essex will go again later this month. Though Nottinghamshire failed to register their first win of the Bob in their match against Durham, they finished 10 points ahead of Leicestershire (who do have a victory) in the North Group. Given the state of red-ball cricket at Trent Bridge recently, that constitutes progress. If Notts are to be competitive in the championship next year, much will surely depend on their two centurions in this match, Joe Clarke and Ben Duckett. Despite both men being under 26, they have racked up a scarcely believable 175 first-class matches between them, so should be entering the prime of their careers. Nearly four years have passed since Duckett played the last of his four Tests, in which he looked painfully raw but not without talent. He has quietly constructed a very decent 2020 season and might now have the platform from which to explore the potential that won him that call-up. While the future of English batting was making a century at better than a run a ball, a man twice his age was earning himself another year’s contract with the Barnesian match figures of 49-23-72-9 in Kent’s win over Hampshire. Darren Stevens isn’t quite old enough to have played with the man whose longevity and effectiveness surpasses even his own, but he was wobbling it a bit this way and a bit that way long before Zak Crawley was born. He has Michelles in three of the five Bob matches and finishes the group stage as the highest wicket taker (betting without Simon Harmer of course). Us becoming used to it doesn’t make it any less remarkable. I’m not given to sentimentality (yes, I know, Scouser and all) but who didn’t feel a tear in the eye and a swelling of pride in our game when Glamorgan lined up to salute Ian Bell’s last innings in first-class cricket and later, alongside Warwickshire, repeated the gesture to mark Jeff Evans’ last match as an umpire? Some old-school courtesies were always honoured as much in the breach as in their observation – walking the most obvious example – and, even today, the moral high ground is contested over running out players backing up yards down the pitch. But fans and fellow players recognise the game’s great servants and pay tribute with a quick and dignified guard of honour, before attempting to stick one up the batsman’s nose first ball. Exactly how it should be. The Bob has been a success. The players have given their all, with some new names and some old faces for fans to enjoy. An old truism has been proven again – there’s not much wrong with cricket that a bit of sunshine can’t cure. Partly because it would be foolish not to learn lessons from a format foisted upon the game and partly because administrators like nothing more than to tinker with the first-class structure, the Bob’s backwash will have some impact on four-day cricket in 2021, Covid-19 dominated or not. I’d make three quick suggestions for any review: (i) Simplify any points system, reduce the impact of bonus points and make tiebreak rules crystal clear at the start; (ii) Consult county members and, if possible, the wider cricket community in any review; (iii) Create a narrative that a casual (or semi-casual) cricket fan can follow: straightforward league tables and a system which ensures that a single sentence can summarise what is at stake in any fixture. • This article appeared first on The 99.94 Cricket Blog• Gary Naylor is the host of the new podcast, The 80s and 90s Cricket Show • Follow Gary Naylor on Twitter