I was hooked on one of your British productions, Marcella. I’ve got a little iPad set up with my treadmill and there were some days that I was so gripped that I must have done about 16km to try to get to the end of the next episode – that’s how great I thought it was. I like a gritty show, and doing a police drama well is really hard. They didn’t go too over the top with the blood and the gore; it was more about the psychological aspects of the characters and, of course, her journey. What a role for a woman – Anna Friel was terrific. I’m a big fan of Ninja Warrior, which I suspect might fall into the category of a guilty pleasure. I stand on the sofa and shout at the television to encourage them to do things that I couldn’t even do when I was young and fit. These people can fly, they have superpowers, they’re extraordinary. I grew up in the era of Bewitched and Gilligan’s Island – classic TV shows that you would sit down to watch as a family and look forward to every week. These were studio shows with canned laughter and over-the-top characters. One of my all-time favourite ones was The Patty Duke Show. Duke played teenage twins – Patty was the cool one and Cathy was the nerdy one. The only difference that she made to her appearance was she had a hairstyle that flicked up at the bottom when she was Patty and one that curled under when she was Cathy. We all wanted to be Patty, so much so that I convinced my mum to try to cut my hair like hers. It was not successful. I’d love to be a baddie in season four of Marcella – that would be great fun. I absolutely loved Schitt’s Creek. It was a beautifully thought-out show – the characters were great, the concept was clever and funny and it had a sweetness to it that was very endearing. We loved all the characters and we cared about them. I was very sorry to see that finish – I get that the timing was probably right, but I could have watched so much more and I miss it. You know what, if a show’s still going, it’s still got an audience and it should continue. I may not like it, but clearly lots of people do. We all like different things – so if it’s still on air, it’s still being watched and good luck to them. I haven’t really turned down that many roles. I did Prisoner for a year in 1985 – I was asked to stay on for another year and I declined the offer because I was young and keen to get out and do something else. The show ended about eight or nine months into that second year, so, with the benefit of hindsight, I wish I had stayed on to see it out. Neighbours is on weekdays on Channel 5 at 1.45pm and 5.30pm