Bayern have got another crush on a Chelsea youth academy graduate. Last year the German giants tried and failed to get Callum Hudson-Odoi on board. This year, the target is very much Tariq Lamptey, now of Brighton, who bought the right-back for a measly £3m back in January, and now value him at around £23m after a string of very impressive displays this season. The thing is, Bayern only want to part with around £14m, so expect there to be a classic bit of jostling on that one before the window shuts. Perhaps Bayern should be more concerned with throwing some of that Lamptey loot towards David Alaba, with the Austrian reportedly unhappy with the terms currently being offered for a contract extension. His deal expires next summer, with Manchester United reportedly ready to make a bid on the cheap if their own offer for Porto’s Alex Telles falls flat. Oh! Luke Shaw! What did you do?! There is no significant update to the most tortuous transfer saga of the year. Borussia Dortmund still want €120m for Jadon Sancho, with Manchester United still convinced that around €90m is enough. It’s not, guys! The Mail say that Bayer Leverkusen have made a £9m offer to Arsenal for Sead Kolasinac, which seems entirely reasonable, given the Gunners have got Kieran Tierney, Bukayo Saka and Ainsley Maitland-Niles capable of playing left back, and need some notes for long-term targets Thomas Partey and Houssem Aouar. Why Milan Skriniar, one of the continent’s most sought-after defenders, would leave Scudetto-chasing Inter for a Fulham defence that is less well organised than a US presidential debate is anyone’s guess. You could be the new Alfie Mawson, Milan! Fulham’s chairman, Tony Khan, spoke openly on Monday about splashing out on a new defender after the latest dismal defeat to Aston Villa. Tottenham are also in the hunt for Skriniar, in their attempts to fill a Jan Verthonghen-sized hole at the back. Josh King to Torino has a nice ring to it. The striker is desperate to leave Bournemouth following their relegation to the Championship, and could tread the well-worn path from England to Turin, following in the footsteps of the great Joe Hart Denis Law. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/09/28-55395-gnl.fw.20200928.ic.handball.mp3 Wolves are battling Sevilla and Napoli for £15m-rated AZ Alkmaar winger Oussama Idrissi, who scored 17 goals and ten assists in 42 appearances last season, while West Ham are in for Fiorentina centre back Nikola Milenkovic after being beaten by Leicester in their attempts to sign Wesley Fofana from Saint-Étienne. Despite signing Rúben Dias for £62m yesterday to take Pep Guardiola’s total spending at City on defenders to over £400m, somebody at Manchester City posted on the club’s official website that you can “win a signed Kalidou Koulibaly shirt”. Gaffe of the day, or does the City admin know something we don’t?