The new director general of the BBC, Tim Davie, has quickly set a fresh tone. Before making a first speech last week, in the mere act of clearing his throat he had both given Britannia back her stirring voice in time for the Last Night of the Proms and indicated he wants an even balance of political views in the comedy on his channels and radio stations. Word went out that a “radical overhaul” of topical humour is planned, although his actual speech, when it did come, was less direct. Being free from bias, Davie said, should be about pursuing the “truth, and not a particular agenda”. In response this weekend, one anonymous veteran of what was once called “light entertainment” predicted Davie’s impartiality edict would be met with a “fiesta of eye-rolling” inside the corporation’s corridors of fun. But it has certainly served as a statement of intent to the outside world. Davie’s diet of equal rightwing and leftwing japery will be impossible to deliver, even if he is serious about trying. His sentiment will, though, placate those who have it in for “right on” state-sponsored comedy. Some responses from comedians and producers this weekend have come out so pat that it’s clear they have been in the ring on this issue once or twice before. And even a relative newcomer, such as the politically-engaged star Rufus Jones – familiar from the BBC satire W1A and the creator of the popular Channel 4 sitcom Home, about attitudes to immigration – said he heard echoes from the past. “It reminded me of previous moments when the BBC were told to balance themselves politically. It certainly isn’t the first time,” he told the Observer. But I feel Davie has sent up a flare, rather than delivered a bomb.” Other performers have been swift to argue that Davie’s plan is a signal example of not understanding the comic impulse. Jokes may sound subversive, but they are not necessarily politically motivated. As the debate took off online, the comic writer and novelist David Quantick posted the simple line: “Comedy is not leftwing. There you go.” Developing his theme, he reminded his followers playfully how Morecambe and Wise, Les Dawson and Bob Monkhouse once “stood side by side with the steelworkers of Havana”. (They didn’t.) For one anonymous topical writer, Davie’s battle on bias in entertainment is just a symptom of the blurring between broadcast comment and humour. “This is a pre-emptive move, I think, and comedy is just a low-hanging fruit,” he said. “It now seems to be expected to follow the same rules as news, and that never used to be the case. The confusion is partly the BBC’s own fault for putting comedians on political discussion shows such as Question Time in order to boost their appeal.” The writer added that these shows put performers into a polarised, partisan world they don’t normally inhabit. A standup might well vote Labour, but her usual live set in a comedy club would scarcely touch upon those views. If we put out-and-out Tory comics on screen, they would actually break the law within the first few minutes Those few BBC satirists who do regularly tackle current affairs on air may justifiably feel they have faced all this before, but no row is ever repeated exactly. In 2020, the context has changed. For a start, this time Davie’s inexplicit promises have also been welcomed by alienated socialists – those who believe the BBC helped scupper Jeremy Corbyn’s boat. And some of a very different cohort – those who are tired of what they regard as an oppressive wave of “woke” censorship – may now also line up alongside Davie. John Cleese, that curmudgeonly comedy god, told the Radio 4 audience last week that he felt comedians could not operate within the strictures of growing sensitivities. “If you have to keep thinking which words you can use and which you can’t, then that will stifle creativity,” he said, challenging listeners to come up with a funny “woke joke”. Inside Broadcasting House, programme-makers also recognise what potentially treacherous territory this now is to navigate. The BBC is newly vulnerable under the rule of an antagonistic government that, of course, does not like being parodied, but also ideologically objects to a nationalised information and entertainment service that skews the commercial broadcasting market. What’s more, as one BBC comedy scriptwriter said this weekend, Tory politicians truly have been goaded by an influx of younger, more strident comedians that now appear on television, a side-effect of the effort to attract younger viewers. Topical shows such as Nish Kumar’s The Mash Report are closer to the niche American satirical output that goes out to pre-converted audiences on liberal networks. These are platforms where a neat political jibe against the government can be met with more applause than a joke. All the same, several of those performers assessing the political weather this weekend say they do not feel directly under threat. There is a strong suspicion that it is straight news coverage on the Today programme on Radio 4 and Newsnight on BBC2 that really annoys politicians, and that any incipient war on comedy will just be a side skirmish. After all, much of the BBC’s comedy output has nothing to do with current affairs. “To me, this feels like a panel-show aimed conversation,” said Jones. “Because if you look at entertainment more generally on the BBC, it is not really political at all. People like Michael McIntyre, or Rob Beckett, who seems to have become Mr Saturday Night for good reason, are more likely to be talking about spice racks than politics.” If reform is needed, he added, the more “urgent and fundamental work” is to balance the representation of women and non-white contributors on panel shows. Another veteran performer argued that not only is it hard to find avowedly rightwing comedians, Simon Evans and Geoff Norcott being busy exceptions, but putting some of them on television would cause big new problems: “When people airily ask why we don’t see rightwing comedy on the telly, I always feel like pointing out that if we put some of the most out-and-out Tory comics on screen, they would be pretty foul-mouthed and would actually break the law within the first few minutes in about three different ways. A lot of what comics like that say is incredibly harsh.” The acclaimed topical impressionist Rory Bremner took the heat out of the debate with a tweet that reworked an old joke about how little satire impacts on the real world. “Just think,” he wrote facetiously, “if it weren’t for all these leftwing comedians and presenters on the BBC telling us what to think, we’d have won the Brexit vote, be leaving Europe, and have a proper Conservative government. Instead of the mess we’re in now.” If political quips, and even journalistic scrutiny, actually have little influence, as Bremner suggests, perhaps campaigning drama is more powerful? Certainly, a play or series that highlights inequality or suffering can sometimes alter views, just as a policy invention by a high-profile footballer can cause a U-turn. Jones, whose drama Home makes a clear attempt to personalise the immigration debate, says he will continue writing undaunted. “Speaking personally, I won’t let it affect me at all. I always write from my gut anyway. And in fact, with my own drama, one of the times I was most lambasted by the public was for an episode where I gave a character a pro-Brexit speech,” he said. “In the end, it is really for producers to decide how far they will let a channel controller influence a show’s content. I certainly don’t feel betrayed by the BBC. I still feel it is a noble institution, and one I owe everything to.” If Conservative politicians are customarily suspicious of entertainers and comics, it might actually come down to a question of temperament. Such people are breeds apart, according to one long-serving scriptwriter. There are, he argues, no secret agendas. “It’s not really to do with party politics. It is to do with what motivates you. You don’t go into programme-making or entertainment to make big money. Even successful performers lead a precarious life. “And if someone is really politically motivated, they go into politics, not comedy.” • This article was amended on 7 September 2020. An earlier version incorrectly described Home as a BBC sitcom, when it should have said the programme is on Channel 4.