Eddie Large, best known as one half of the comedy duo Little and Large, has died aged 78 after contracting coronavirus. The Glasgow-born, Manchester-raised comedian who had been in hospital with heart failure, found huge fame alongside Syd Little in the 1970s and 80s. Millions of TV viewers watched the pair. Large’s son, Ryan McGinnis, broke the news in a Facebook post, explaining that his father caught Covid-19 while in hospital. He wrote: “It is with great sadness that Mum and I need to announce that my dad passed away in the early hours of this morning. He had been suffering with heart failure and unfortunately, whilst in hospital, contracted the coronavirus, which his heart was sadly not strong enough to fight. Dad had fought bravely for so long. Due to this horrible disease we had been unable to visit him at the hospital but all of the family and close friends spoke to him every day. “We will miss him terribly and we are so proud of everything he achieved in his career with Syd and know that he was much loved by the millions that watched them each week.” Large’s agent, Peter Mansfield, also confirmed the death of the comedian, whose real name was Edward McGinnis. “Straight man” Little, real name Cyril Mead, and Large began performing together in 1962, initially performing in pubs and clubs in the north-west of England. The pair broke into the mainstream after appearing on the ITV talent show Opportunity Knocks, later landing their own ITV series, The Little and Large Tellyshow, in 1976. After moving to the BBC in 1978, The Little and Large Show aired over 13 years to huge audiences. The duo continued to appear in pantomimes throughout the 90s, but eventually retired from the circuit in 2001 owing to Large’s heart problems, which he had suffered with since 1991; he underwent a heart transplant in 2002. Tributes have poured in from fellow comedians. Sir Lenny Henry tweeted about watching the duo in Great Yarmouth in 1978, describing them as “rude, raucous and rollicking” and praising Large’s “energy and electricity”. Eddie Large died. Midnight Matinee Great Yarmouth 1978. They finished part one. I’d never heard laughter like it. Rude, raucous and rollicking.Dunno how they did it, but Eddies energy and electricity and impressions and props and improv were hugely impressive. R.I.P. Jason Manford tweeted: “So sorry to hear about Eddie Large passing away. Came to every comedy and musical show I did whenever I hit Bristol and was always around for a chat about comedy and Man City afterwards. Such a gentle, funny man. RIP Eddie.” Little Britain’s Matt Lucas also paid tribute, adding: “Eddie Large (along with his supersonic friend Syd) was really lovely and kind and encouraging to me when I was a nipper on Shooting Stars. So sad to hear of his passing.” Paul Chuckle remembered Large as a “funny and lovely man”. Large is survived by his wife, Patsy, and three children.