This cheesecake is made with tofu, which gives it a nice and creamy texture. It’s a great option if you have silken tofu in your cupboard, but are short on fresh ingredients such as cream. It tastes different to a standard cheesecake as it is less “cheesy”, but I enjoy both. You can always substitute some of the silken tofu for vegan or dairy cream cheese. I enjoy the simplicity of this version, which lets the lemon and rosewater flavours shine. The edible petal decorations are an optional extra and can be arranged however you like. Serves six to eight For the biscuit base180g digestive biscuits (or use any sweet, plain biscuit)80g melted dairy or vegan butter (or 70g melted coconut oil – if you use coconut oil it won’t look liquid enough to set firm in the fridge, but it will set firmer than the butter option after a couple of hours) Alternative biscuit base (vegan and gluten-free)125g dates125g blanched almonds (you can substitute other nuts and adjust quantities for desired sweetness)Pinch of salt15g melted coconut oil (or melted vegan butter) For the cheesecake675g silken tofu (or you can use cream cheese – vegan or dairy)190g caster or granulated sugar1½ tbsp cornflour¼ tsp rosewater (optional)1½ tbsp coconut oil (or use melted butter – vegan or dairy)Grated rind of two lemons (or any citrus fruit) For the petal decorations (optional)White edible wafer paperFood dyes: brown, pink, yellow Heat the oven to 180C/160C (fan)/350F. Place the biscuits in a sandwich bag and use a rolling pin to crush them into fine crumbs. Place in a bowl and pour over the melted butter/coconut oil. Stir together until the crumbs look evenly coated, and then press into the base of a 9in round ovenproof dish. Alternatively, you can make the vegan and gluten-free version. Place the dates in a food processor and blitz until they are sticky and form a ball. Add the blanched almonds, a pinch of salt and coconut oil, and blitz again until combined. Press this mixture into your dish. For the cheesecake, use a food processor to blend the tofu until smooth (or use cream cheese). Remove a couple of tablespoons and whisk this together with the cornflour in a separate bowl. Add back to the main mixture, along with the caster sugar, rosewater (optional), melted coconut oil and grated lemon rind. Mix together again until smooth and combined. Pour over the biscuit base, and then bake for 20 to 25 minutes, until slightly coloured at the edges and there is still a slight wobble in the centre. Cover with clingfilm and place in the fridge to finish cooling. Meanwhile, make the edible decorations. Cut simple petal shapes from the wafer paper, then use a paintbrush to very lightly wet these. Paint using food dye mixed with a little water. When the wafer paper is wet, you will be able to shape it so that it looks more realistic. For the stem make a long stem shape painted brown. When you’re happy with your petals and stem, leave to dry for a few hours. They will go hard and be easy to pick up. Decorate the fully chilled cheesecake with the petal decorations, then serve and enjoy.