As footballers we are privileged to do what we do in this country, and we never forget that. The money we earn is well-documented, but the majority of professionals are from working-class backgrounds and, whatever successes we enjoy, we are still anchored by the social conscience formed by our surroundings. We are using the means we are lucky to have to help those who really need it, the people who are fighting this terrible virus on the frontline of the NHS. Jordan Henderson might be the captain of the European champions but he is also a working-class lad from Sunderland who deserves full credit for bringing us all together, showing what makes a true leader. As a group we just wanted to do something positive, and we feel we have taken a step towards achieving it. From the moment Jordan called me, the Premier League captains have worked tirelessly to ensure we could get #PlayersTogether in place in such a short time. There has been great collective urgency to help in any way possible, while at the same time ensuring our funds are directed to the places that are most needed. Naturally such a complex matter needs time to sort, but our frank discussions always had the same purpose: to help in any way we can. The aim is to raise as much as possible and to get the money, as soon as humanly possible, to NHS charities. The funding will be used to assist NHS staff and volunteers, providing them with food, overnight essentials and furniture for rest rooms. Because of the wicked nature of the virus, many of the staff are left isolated, not able to see those closest to them, and that will undoubtedly have an impact on mental health. So we feel it is important that these people get access to technology that allows them to talk with friends and family. The impact of this crisis will be felt for years, so it is important our grants are released in stages when they are needed. A percentage will be used to provide respite, rehabilitation and mental health care to NHS staff and their families. As with football, support does not stop once the match is over, and we will continue to back the frontline whenever it is needed. Football is a global game and the Premier League reflects this with its diversity in every team, as players travel from all over the globe to be part of the best competition in the world. Every player has a story of how coronavirus has impacted upon their country, and many are sending money back to their own nations, which is the right thing to do. However, all the #PlayersTogether donations will be anonymous. There is no pressure on individuals to put money to this cause, as there are many fantastic charitable opportunities globally that can help. The criticism of footballers from those in the media and government has been unhelpful, to say the least. Bad press comes with the territory of being in a high-profile profession – these things make for easier headlines than the constant community and charitable work we do all over the globe. But as we have worked hard to do our part, those headlines have created a distraction, needlessly trying to make villains out of footballers, rather than focusing on praising the great work of those key workers who are putting themselves at risk to help others. They are the ones grafting to keep this country on its feet when it needs it most. We are just doing our part to support them. Our message is a positive one, and if using our profile helps other wealthy people to review their social conscience and donate, then the more the merrier. But money is not the only way to help in this situation. We can all do our bit, whether it is staying at home or assisting an elderly relative or neighbour. We are all in this together. All the British players know the importance of the NHS. We have all used it; the majority of us were not born with a silver spoon in our mouths. More specifically, we were born in NHS hospitals. And all the players, regardless of where they are from, understand the urgency of the matter: a lot of people are putting themselves at risk to help us out, to look after us. We know how important that is. My wife is pregnant with our second child and we will be relying on the NHS to provide us with fantastic care, as they did when our son was born. Throughout our lives we have used this fantastic service to keep us healthy, and I am really grateful that we can now give something back. Currently we all have much more time to reflect on what we should be grateful for, and I am doing so every day. I have always been thankful for what football has given to me, and for the freedoms it has offered me in my life. We all have the same worries at the moment; we are working hard to keep our families and loved ones safe. Nothing else really matters. When we come out the other side of this, my hope is we will become a closer-knit society, one with more understanding of others, regardless of occupation, background or even what team we might support.