“Well I hope you enjoy it!” So said Jeremy Paxman to the teams from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge and Imperial College, London just before reading them their first starter question of the final of the 2019-20 series of University Challenge. A more jovial opening than viewers expect, perhaps. But despite his reputation – take it from someone who’s been there – Paxman loves nothing more than to see two teams of very bright young students show off what they know. And, like us, he probably suspected he was in for a cracker. It was always going to be a special final for one very simple reason: it was between two teams that, thus far, had gone undefeated. This is far less frequent than you might expect, and made for an exciting match. The forgiving nature of the show’s current format, allowing for highest-scoring losers to return and holding best-of-three quarterfinals, means that it is actually quite rare to see two teams sail through. Of the 10 finals since the current format was introduced, only two have seen a face-off between undefeated teams. In fact, the same number of finals has seen both teams with a loss on their record, and rematches are as likely to end in upsets as not. This time round, both teams had practically the same record. When they each faced Durham, Corpus Christi won 185 to 130 while Imperial had 185 to 115. Against Trinity, Cambridge, Corpus Christi scored 245 to 80 while Imperial racked up 235 to 80. You could not ask for two more evenly matched opponents. Imperial set off to an early lead in the contest with Brooks, McMeel and Brandon (appearing under his first name, not his surname, Blackwell) taking starters on tea, asteroids and Pirandello, among others. Aside from showing off the teamwork that got them to the final in the first place, it brought their score to a round 100 before Corpus Christi were even off the mark. Corpus captain Wang then got his team away with a buzz on Matisse and Picasso. With a lot of ground to catch up they did exactly the right thing and rattled off the answers to the pop music bonuses as quickly as possible, dispensing with their usual style of enthusiastic equivocating. This start to the match set the tone for the rest of the contest. The Cambridge quartet of Russel, Stewart, Wang and Gunasekera were not the team we have come to know in previous matches. They wasted no time chatting between answers. Questions on world cinema, 17th-century science and classical music were dispatched with uncharacteristic speed, but familiar competence, bringing them to just over triple figures by the end of the match, with 105. This was enough to let us know how well they might have done if only the buzzes had fallen their way. Imperial, on the other hand, were on unstoppable form, and would not concede an inch. They conferred well on the bonuses, with their star player Brandon – the highest individual scorer of the series – dropping some of his usual gems (“This is African American post-colonial theory. And I’m about to get it wrong. On TV”). Meanwhile, their dominance on the buzzer continued after the music round, with captain Caleb Rich coming into his own with six stunning starters in the second half that brought his team to an astonishing 275 points at the gong. To put that into perspective, that is more than the combined score of both teams in some finals. And that, ultimately, is what made this final so special. With Imperial surging ahead confidently and Corpus Christi doing everything they could to catch up, their combined score of 380 was more than we have seen in a final for 10 years, and is unlikely to be matched any time soon. For the second time in recent memory, the trophy presentation was not held in studio. Instead the finalists were whisked away to Oxford to meet the Abel prize-winning mathematician Andrew Wiles, famous for solving Fermat’s Last Theorem and a classic University Challenge answer in his own right (always a good quality in a trophy presenter). Thus ended another excellent series of University Challenge. Hats off to both teams for a stellar match to cap it off, and congratulations to Imperial on their well-deserved win – I know how good that feels! • This article’s subheading was amended on 21 April 2020 to correct a wrack/rack homophone.