In tough times, people with money show their true colors. For Rihanna, that meant donating $2.1m to domestic violence charities in a crisis that has threatened to keep victims trapped inside with abusive partners. Cardi B’s donations came in the form of a giveaway: she promised to donate $1,000 every hour for the next 42 days, a total of about $1m, to people badly affected by the pandemic. She came up with the idea after getting messaged by fans in need, but, she warned: “I’m going to make sure you really do need it, so don’t be lying so you can lend your fucking boyfriend some money!” Taylor Swift has similarly, although more quietly, been donating $3,000 packages to fans in need. Thank you guys for supporting me and @FashionNova, I teamed up with them to help those that have been impacted by the Coronavirus pandemic. Many of you are struggling to pay bills, feed your families, and take care of your overall essential needs. #FashionNovaCARES & I are giving away $1,000 EVERY HOUR until we’ve given away $1 MILLION DOLLARS to those directly affected by this crisis. Tell us how the $1,000 can help you during these times. We’ll be reading your submissions and selecting stories everyday so enter now by visiting www.FashionNova.com/Cares Also PLEASE make sure that your Instagram is public, because I will also personally be looking thru these submitted pages. Starting NOW! A post shared by  Cardi B (@iamcardib) on Apr 8, 2020 at 12:29pm PDT As thousands across the US struggle to sign up for unemployment cheques, it is no wonder that celebrities feel obligated to step up. But they are also standing in for a country failing to provide adequate care. When Rihanna donated personal protective equipment to healthcare providers in New York (as well as a $5m donation to global organizations protecting healthcare workers and marginalized communities), she was giving what authorities should have been providing. Nonetheless, the New York governor, Andrew Cuomo, showed his gratitude by tweeting: “We’re so appreciative of your help and that of so many others who have stepped up.” Less powerful individuals are also taking on officials to demand better. While Trump was busy pointing the finger at healthcare workers, accusing them of having stolen masks, vigilante groups of ravers were handing them out to people in New York. In Chicago this week, after human rights campaigners fought for it, prisoners won the right to be provided basic hygiene supplies such as soap and sanitizer during the pandemic. To appreciate the work of individuals does not contradict the desire for the state to do better. It is lovely to see this show of solidarity, especially when it is our favorite celebrities doing it. But when it is the Mark Zuckerbergs, Bill Gateses and Jeff Bezoses of the world giving out millions in donations, it gets a bit more worrying. Why? Because it underlines a transfer of responsibility from the state to individuals. Do we really want to live in a world where tech billionaires have as much power as the government?