“Everything bad in life is eventually a blessing.” I’m not sure where I read this – it may well have been in this wonderful novel by Taffy Brodesser-Akner. Like all the best epigrams, it is deeply wise, even if it overgeneralises. I can’t think of many instances from my own life where it isn’t true. A breakdown, a miscarriage, a job lost – they all led to better things. The phrase reminds me of something Winston Churchill supposedly said on losing the 1945 election. His wife apparently told him that defeat may well have been a blessing in disguise. “Madame, if this is a blessing, it is indeed well disguised,” he replied. And yet a blessing it was. Britain got Attlee, the welfare state, the NHS. Churchill got a rest, and then his swansong six years later. The rest is history. And so to the present. Though our current blessings may also be well disguised, we must count them. I have just listened to a fine podcast on this, an interview with Mo Gawdat, who has expressed some of the most sensible, positive, beautiful sentiments about the crisis that I have yet heard. If you click on one link this week, let is be this: an hour of your life that will make you feel better. There were other Upside blessings this week, including: • Food heroes reaching out to the vulnerable. Two-minute read • Drive-by Strauss: concerts aired from cars. One-minute blast • The pandas finally securing enough privacy to mate. About 10 minutes • Two penpals: one is five, the other 93. Two minutes • How universities are doing their bit. 90 seconds • The billionaires piling into the coronavirus relief effort. Two minutes • The politicians returning to medical careers to help in the Covid effort. Two minutes • What the virus teaches us about hope. Five-minute read And, just as importantly, in non-virus news: • The antidote: your favourite articles that have nothing to do with coronavirus. Extended browse • The colour of spring, in all its glory. Two-minute balm • Breathing new life into the Great Barrier Reef. One-minute, nice pics • The rise and rise of the microloan. Three-minute loan, low rate of interest • The enzymes that eat plastic. One minute Back on Covid-19, there are tentative signs of infection curves flattening. Do watch for this tendency – not the rising death rates – as an early harbinger of the turning point. Also, this is an interesting attempt to map how Americans have responded to lockdown. Meanwhile, this was rather hopeful: almost three-quarters of new electricity generation capacity built in 2019 involved renewable energy. We admire the Atlantic, and are very much looking forward to its new column How to Build a Life by Arthur C Brooks. It certainly got off to a good start. We also respected the way the UK health secretary, Matt Hancock, congratulated his opposite number on being reappointed to the shadow cabinet. Congratulations @JonAshworth reappointed as Shadow Health Secretary - thoroughly decent man & has been exemplary in his measured, constructive approach to holding Govt to account throughout the Coronavirus pandemic Elsewhere, this is striking: a ferry – powered by waves, courtesy of Mongabay. Upside readers, yo are amazing – resilient, imaginative, supportive and creative. We love receiving your messages about how you are coping in lockdown. Keep them coming. Karen Ranney wrote in from Kingston, New York. My mother, Lorraine Ranney (11 Oct 1919 – 17 Sep 2019), lived her 100 years always seeking to serve and help others. In her memory and honor, I granted some thousands of dollars of the inheritance I recently came into towards the transition to face mask production at foundmyanimal.com. Bethany Obrecht and I have never had a conversation less than 15 feet from each other, but we are friends for life. Just last week, her workshop at foundmyanimal.com assembled more than 2,000 masks. I have always said my parents were the Great Generation, and now it is our turn to attempt to fill their shoes. Lorna Robson wants to get us all into bridge. We were forced to shut our bridge business (Andrew Robson Bridge Club) three weeks ago when social distancing started, as all of our bridge teaching and bridge playing was face to face. Last week we started a new little venture online called Andrew Robson BridgeCasts, a sort of cross between a podcast and a video. We started it thinking we’d be lucky to get 100 subscribers, but a week later, we have 2,600. The first few days are free, then it is paid for, but just under £10 a month (about 30p a day). We are amazed at the feedback we have been getting and how people are joining our online bridge community. Finally, Bhavika got in touch from west London. I wanted to share a clip from my block of flats in Sudbury Hill, west London. One of the residents, Chrissy, a zumba teacher, led a zumba class for everyone. It was fantastic! It really helped lift people’s spirits and it showed how important community is. Everyone was joining in, from toddlers to old people! In a charity poster that my super talented colleague Chris Clarke has created for NHS charities. Get yours here.