The federal government will have the final say on the resumption of the NRL when it outlines a national plan for the return of sport on Friday. The crucial cabinet meeting looks set to be the final hurdle for the league, which continues to surge towards its intended re-launch of its season on 28 May. ARL Commission chairman Peter V’landys is hopeful of finalising the restructure of its competition as he continues talks with broadcasters early this week. How much revenue the league can re-negotiate in its sensitive discussions with The Nine Network and Fox Sports will be key. The NRL’s innovative committee is scheduled for Wednesday, but it could be pushed back should V’landys be unable to nut out a broadcasting arrangement. NRL clubs and the Rugby League Players Association are also expected to give feedback on the league’s stringent biosecurity measures on Monday. The governing body on Sunday passed on a 48-page document outlining protocols to ensure the healthy and safety of its players and club staff. The same document will be put in front of the federal government’s health detection committee later this week before a national cabinet meeting on Friday. It is anticipated that meeting will forecast the immediate future of not just elite sporting codes like the NRL, but grassroots competitions as well. “These will be matters taken up by the national cabinet because we know it doesn’t affect just one code,” NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian said on Monday. “It affects a number of codes, it affects community sport. And the prime minister and all the state leaders felt it was appropriate to have a national response to these matters.” The outcome could result in a pivotal exemption from the Australian Border Force for the Warriors to fly into the country from New Zealand as late as Sunday. All 16 clubs have been told to begin preparations to resume squad training on Monday, giving teams three weeks before the season returns in late May. The league is also exploring whether other non-NSW clubs can train in their home states or be forced to indefinitely relocate in Sydney. “We also appreciate the various codes of putting their pandemic plans, which some health officials are going through,” Berejiklian said. “But I would suggest that what national cabinet determines will guide a lot of the sporting organisations into what expectations they can manage moving forward.” Berejiklian’s counterpart in Queensland, Annastacia Palaszczuk, is also open to top-level rugby league returning to the state if the NRL can show it will provide a safe workplace for players and the community. Just weeks after being one of the harshest critics of the game’s efforts to resume late next month, Palaszczuk confirmed she had received the NRL’s safety plan. That has now been passed onto the state’s chief health officer Dr Jeannette Young, who will assess the sport’s bid. At this stage, Queensland clubs face being forced to go into camp in NSW for the competition’s planned resumption on 28 May due to the Sunshine State’s border closure. However, Queensland has been one of the first states to relax some of its major coronavirus restrictions, offering some hope to the more than 150 players and staff members. “Everyone wants to see sport come back in some shape or form,” Palaszczuk told ABC on Monday. “It needs to be safe for the players and the teams, and it needs to be safe for the community. As long as those sporting codes can tick that off, we’ve also had a submission from another sporting code as well. And we’re assessing that as well.”