Three days before the UK went into lockdown and the world changed beyond all recognition, I had to catch a train from London to Edinburgh with my six-year-old autistic son, two-year-old daughter and partner. We were travelling back to Scotland a week later than planned after a harrowing visit with my parents. My mother, who has metastatic breast cancer, had ended up in intensive care just as the first UK deaths from coronavirus were being announced. She was still in hospital when we left. Now, somehow, I needed to make the magical transformation from daughter to mother, get my head in gear and get my children home before the journey I had been routinely making for 20 years became, at worst, impossible or, at best, freighted with risk. Two days earlier, my partner had tried to take him home to give me a little more time with my mum, but at King’s Cross he had a meltdown and refused to get on the train. It is perhaps one of the great understatements of my life to say that my nerves were jangling. The usual questions replayed on a loop composed by anxiety. Would he get in the taxi or run away? (He would get in the taxi.) Would he be able to cope with the sensory overload of the platforms at King’s Cross? (Yes.) Would there be time to grab a coffee and sandwich? (Of course not.) Now, suddenly, there was a new strain of questions. Would the train be too busy for us to keep our distance from other passengers? Would there be handwash in the toilets, and would we be able to get our son to use it? And when we got home, would we be able to get the handful of foods he eats or would the Birds Eye Chicken Dippers have been emptied from Tesco? We families of autistic children are a resilient bunch. We have learned the high art of appearing calm as we work our arses off to make this noisy, intolerant and unpredictable world habitable for our children. We are like the people who paint the rooms before the Queen enters them, forever one step ahead of our little rulers, trying to make their passage through life smoother, better, happier. We are fighters. And it turns out these skills are extremely handy in a global pandemic. Self-isolation is, for many families, an overdramatic descriptor of daily life. Physical distancing often comes with the territory. My son used to have a habit of screaming, “SAY GOODBYE!” to any friend I ran in to on the street until I had no choice but to carry out his orders. Don’t get me wrong. He loves people, but he needs to know when they’re coming. His passions before the pandemic were school, a special-needs family swimming session every Saturday, watching the trains from a nearby McDonald’s car park with a McFlurry and chips, the play park, the local ice-cream shop and going to visit “Ajji and Tata” (my parents) in London. None of this is possible now. And like many autistic people, my son struggles with change and chronology. So according to neurotypical reasoning, life under lockdown would be especially hard for him. This is why it’s a relief that the UK coronavirus rules have been relaxed for people with autism and learning disabilities, which means families like ours can leave our homes for exercise more than once a day and travel beyond our local area if necessary. And sometimes, for us, it is. My son might be pro-physical distancing as a rule of thumb, but he doesn’t know how to keep two metres apart from anyone. He has a deep sensory love of running his body and hands along railings and walls. The world is now a minefield. Yet he is coping brilliantly. New routines have been laid down, quickly and organically. Every day he scoots three circuits of our local park with his “babuga” (our son’s name for his other mother: its etymological root is “bike”… don’t ask). He doesn’t notice people wearing masks, perhaps because he struggles with facial recognition, perhaps because this simply isn’t the way his brain identifies humans. In the morning, we act out The Tiger Who Came to Tea in his bedroom (his sister is daddy, I’m the tiger, my son, naturally, is EVERYONE). In the afternoon he jumps up and down on our coal box, and we shout at him ineffectually. He says hello to Ajji and Tata on the phone: my mother is back at home thanks to the everyday miracle of NHS social care we are only now beginning to acknowledge. There is screen time, the building of train tracks and ceaseless reciting of the alphabet. His autistic logic results in a Zen-like acceptance of our new reality that no mindfulness course could teach I wouldn’t call any of it home-schooling exactly, unless doing a roly-poly on to a cherry tomato is on the curriculum, but his progress continues at its own idiosyncratic and spellbinding pace. And witnessing the flowering of my son’s relationship with his sister has been one of the happiest experiences of my life. As well as being deeply challenging, lockdown is a tender lesson in what really matters not just to my son but to all small children. Home. The family unit. A cup of popcorn on the sofa in front of Paddington 2. The little things. We never did big birthday parties or trips to the museum so this collective simplifying of our days is already familiar to us. What’s amazing is not how much is lost, but how much is gained when restrictions are imposed upon us. “I’ll go back to school on … Monday? Tuesday?” This is what my son says every day, though it’s unclear if he is genuinely asking or just likes the repetition of the days of the week. The point is he’s fine with it. School is closed. It would be impossible for him to go until it’s open again. And that’s that. His autistic logic results in a Zen-like acceptance of our new reality that no mindfulness course could teach. Meanwhile, my neurotypical two-year-old is asking why people are wearing masks. Fear of the world beyond our front gate is creeping in. The other day, she breathed a sigh of relief when we turned on to an empty street and said softly from her buggy: “It’s nice and quiet here.” One of the paradoxes of lockdown in a city is the horizons that have broadened overnight. Our street now has the requisite WhatsApp group filled with everyday gallantry and pledges to hold a street party once this is all over. I told this group my son is autistic and favours a particular brand of margherita pizza if anyone spotted one. A neighbour, whom I probably still wouldn’t recognise if I saw her, promptly delivered two large pizzas to our doorstep and refused payment, saying her nephew was autistic and had a similarly restricted diet. The following week another pizza appeared from “No 18”. I don’t think any of them knew our son was autistic before this crisis. They probably saw him careering down our street barefoot or loudly reciting the numbers on their front door in his phase when he had to “do my numbers” before coming home. Perhaps they drew their own conclusions. Now they know they are responding not just with kindness but pizzas. And disclosures of their own. Meanwhile, my son continues to meet the precariousness of life with courage, humour and idiosyncrasy. In my admittedly limited and neurotypical experience, lockdown is both harder and easier for him than I might have expected. Not that I have many expectations. Another skill acquired from parenting my son – and no one on this ravaged planet has taught me more than this particular six-year-old boy – is to expect nothing beyond having every single one of your assumptions challenged. There may be no going back to how things were, but there is no going forward either. According to my son’s watertight logic, now is the only place to be.