Tributes from all over the football world have been paid to the former Leeds and England defender Norman Hunter, who has died at the age of 76 after testing positive for coronavirus. Hunter had been admitted to hospital on 10 April and although famed for his strength and determination in his playing days close friends were aware he had underlying health problems in retirement and might be at risk. A statement from the club confirming his death read: “Leeds United are devastated to learn of the passing of club legend Norman Hunter at the age of 76. He leaves a huge hole in the Leeds United family. His legacy will never be forgotten and our thoughts are with Norman’s family and friends at this difficult time.” With more than 700 appearance in a 15-year first-team career at Elland Road, Hunter was synonymous with the success Leeds enjoyed in the late 1960s and early 1970s under Don Revie, a manager whose personal relationship with the centre-half was so strong that other members of the squad would jokingly refer to him as “Norman’s dad”. Only three players have made more appearances for Leeds, Jack Charlton, Billy Bremner and Paul Reaney, all teammates of Hunter’s at a time when the club were the most powerful force in English football. Hunter helped win the league title in 1969 and 1974, the FA Cup in 1972, and in 1974 became the first recipient of the Professional Footballers’ Association’s player of the year award. Former teammate Eddie Gray told TalkSport: “Norman was a truly great football player. A lot of great players have walked through the gates of Elland Road and Norman was right up there with the best of them. It’s a sad day for everybody connected with the club. He was a great reader of the game, great left foot, great passer, so influential in our team.” Gary McAllister, a former Leeds captain and manager, said: “In the truest sense of the word he is a legend and he set the levels at Leeds. Howard [Wilkinson] won a league and other managers have done well but the Revie era and the team he played in were the best. Whenever you see that group together you can see how close they are.“When you discuss players in different eras you talk about the physicality of Norman but top players adapt, he would have been a top player today.” Peter Reid, a former Leeds manager, described Hunter as a giant of a man and speaking a day before the death was announced, Johnny Giles said the hard-man image was slightly misleading. “Norman was one of the best professionals I ever played with or against,” Giles said. “A top-class individual and one of the most humble people you could ever meet. He was always grateful for what football had given him.” The World Cup winner Sir Geoff Hurst – Hunter was a non-playing member of the 1966 squad and had to wait 41 years to receive a medal – said: “Norman was a huge part of the England squad back in the day. He will be very sadly missed.” Hunter won 28 England caps between 1965 and 1974 and his sole appearance in the World Cup finals was as a substitute in England’s 3-2 quarter-final defeat by West Germany in 1970. Another member of that side, the goalkeeper Peter Bonetti, died on Sunday. Peter Shilton, the former England goalkeeper, described Hunter as “a wonderful man” whose company he had always enjoyed. “I played with him for England and continued to meet him at various football events over the years,” he said. “It was always great to catch up. My condolences to the family on such a terrible loss.” Gary Lineker, the presenter of Match of the Day and another former England international, posted: “Grew up watching the great LUFC side of which Norman Hunter was a part. This awful virus was one crunching tackle too far.”