‘It started with a tweet. On 4 March 2018, reacting to the news that barrier-busting miler Roger Bannister had died, Mike Selvey posted the following: “The great John Walker ran a sub-four-minute mile on a track laid out on the outfield of the MCG during the Centenary Test in March 1977.” Hold up. He did what?’ ‘He did not elaborate on who the complainant may have been used by. But he spoke of corruption in the Vatican, and also made allegations of corruption in Victoria. Pell said he was unpopular among some Vatican officials for his efforts to get the institution’s finances in order. Asked by Bolt “how high up the corruption goes”, Pell responded: “Who knows.”’ ‘The term was coined to reflect a perception that you are cosmetically enhancing your appearance through makeup and hairstyles to appear as if you have black heritage. “It’s about picking and choosing common black traits and characteristics for one’s benefit while we continue to face discrimination on a day to day basis.”’ ‘It’s still early days, but if anything was going to return MasterChef Australia to the rare air it enjoyed in its glory days, this would be it. Social media lit up with old MasterChef fans brought back from the wilderness, many confessing this was the first time they’d tuned back in for years.’ ‘Twenty years later, American Psycho hasn’t left the culture, because the culture hasn’t left American Psycho. The only difference is that Bateman seems more electable now than he might have been then.’ 6. Prince Harry may quit hunting over Meghan’s dislike of sport, says conservationist friend ‘The British primatologist Dame Jane Goodall believes the Duke of Sussex will give up hunting because of his wife’s dislike for the sport, and thinks he has been finding life “a bit challenging” since the couple moved to North America.’ 7. Trump can’t cancel the election – but he will try to stop people voting ‘While you imagine Trump would love to unilaterally crown himself king of the US, he doesn’t have the power to postpone an election, as Clinton noted. Since 1845, federal law has mandated that presidential elections be held on “the Tuesday next after the first Monday in the month of November”. Only Congress can change that’ 8. Prue Leith: Journey with my Daughter review – a fraught search for family secrets ‘Leith hasn’t yet been taken into the nation’s hearts in quite the same way as her Bake Off predecessor, Mary Berry. That’s our loss, as this documentary made clear. Perhaps Prue’s a spikier character, but her story is a fascinating one.’ 9. Man believed to be Brazil’s biggest cocaine supplier arrested in Mozambique ‘One of Brazil’s most wanted people, an alleged drug baron accused of running international cocaine operations for the country’s biggest gang, has been arrested in Mozambique.’ 10. My favourite game: Sunderland v Chelsea, 1992 FA Cup replay ‘What stands out still is the silences. After every line of every chant, the silence was complete. We’d heard the stories, of course. We knew about the Roker Roar. We thought we’d heard it – but we hadn’t, not till then, not till the night Sunderland beat Chelsea to reach the 1992 FA Cup semi-final.’