Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak on Tuesday include: The International Monetary Fund slashes its forecasts for global growth and warns of a slump in output this year unparalleled since the Great Depression of the 30s. In its half-yearly forecasts, the IMF says the “Great Lockdown” is likely to cause a dramatic drop in activity that will be far more painful than the recession that followed the banking meltdown of the late 00s. A further 778 deaths are recorded in hospitals in the UK, taking the total to at least 12,107, the country’s Department of Health and Social Care says. The true extent is likely to be greater because the data do not include deaths in other settings and many National Health Service trusts are still collating figures from over the bank holiday period. New York’s hospitalisations fell slightly on Monday, the state’s governor, Andrew Cuomo, announces. “We think we are at the apex,” Cuomo says, adding that 1,600 new people came in to New York hospitals. The decrease is attributed to people recovering and being discharged. Italy, Spain and Austria allow partial returns to work as countries across Europe report further falls in new cases and begin taking the first cautious steps out of lockdown to revive their battered economies. According to researchers at Johns Hopkins University, at least 1,945,055 people have been infected and 121,897 have died since the outbreak began. The institution collects its data from official releases and media reports. Britain’s economy could shrink by 35% and unemployment rise by more than 2 million people due to the crisis, an official economics forecaster warns. In a stark assessment of the economic fallout, the Office for Budget Responsibility says gross domestic product (GDP) could plunge by more than a third in the second quarter of the year and 13% for 2020 as a whole. Mary Lou McDonald, the leader of Ireland’s Sinn Féin party, tests positive for Covid-19. She says she is no longer deemed to be infected or infectious and hopes to return to work next week. She was tested on 28 March and received the result on Monday, a two-week wait reflecting delays and glitches that have plagued testing in Ireland. China reported 89 new cases on 13 April, down from 108 the previous day. The state broadcaster had reported earlier that 79 of the day’s imported cases were in the north-eastern province of Heilongjiang, which shares a border with Russia. Hubei province reported zero new deaths and cases. As Moscow tightens its lockdown measures, Russia reports its highest daily infection figures yet. In a video conference with officials on Monday, the president, Vladimir Putin, said the next weeks would be “decisive” for Russia’s fight against the virus as the situation “is changing practically every day, and unfortunately not for the better”.