Among the many events cancelled this spring because of the coronavirus pandemic, one in particular stands out. The 75th anniversary of the end of the second world war, which takes place this May, was due to be a genuinely international occasion. In Berlin, 8 May was declared a public holiday and a major commemoration was planned. In London, there were to have been three days of celebrations, including a procession of war veterans down the Mall. Across the continent, thousands of street parties, concerts, festivals and commemorative church services were planned. Almost all of these events have now been called off – though today we learned that in the UK the Queen will address the nation and there will be some form of Vera Lynn singalong. For many veterans and survivors of the war, this would have been their last chance to take part in a major celebration of this kind. Sad though this is, perhaps it will give us time to rethink the way we remember the second world war. Commemorations in recent years have become toxic, divisive affairs. At the D-Day 75th-anniversary commemorations in Portsmouth last year, a steel wall had to be erected around the festival site: organisers were worried about demonstrations against Donald Trump, who was attending. Vladimir Putin was not even invited, and Russian officials responded to the snub by saying that D-Day was not worth commemorating anyway, because by that point in the war Russian heroes had already won all the truly important battles. Similar tensions have marred commemorations across Europe. This January, the Polish president, Andrzej Duda, pulled out of attending a Holocaust remembrance ceremony in Jerusalem. He was angry that Putin would be delivering a speech there. Putin replied by boycotting a similar ceremony in Poland for the Auschwitz liberation anniversary. In Croatia, Serbs, Jews and Roma have for years refused to attend Holocaust commemorations, in protest against the rise of the Croatian far right. Jewish groups in Hungary and Austria did the same in 2014 and 2018, claiming that populists were hijacking the commemorations for their own purposes. The European parliament has become so concerned that last September it passed an extraordinary resolution condemning the growing trend across Europe to glorify fascists, communists and their many wartime collaborators. In such an atmosphere, taking a break this May might not be a bad thing. While we are confined to our homes on VE Day, perhaps we should use the time to take stock of what exactly it is we are remembering – and, just as importantly, what we are forgetting. In Britain we have come to view the war as a simplistic battle between absolute good and absolute evil. We have lost all appreciation of the hard moral choices we had to make along the way – particularly when it comes to the bombing war, or our abandonment of eastern Europe in 1945. Not all of our war veterans were saints and heroes, as they themselves were often the first to admit. During the commemorations of D-Day last year, the British war veteran Harry Billinge told a BBC interviewer that much of what is spoken today is “bullshit”. “Don’t thank me, and don’t say I’m a hero,” he insisted. “All the heroes are dead.” The American veteran Leonard Creo agreed. When I interviewed him before his death last Christmas, he told me that he wasn’t interested in commemorations, because he found the cult of second world war heroism absurd. “We’re seeing more and more adulation every day that passes, because we’re getting fewer and fewer,” he said. “Pretty soon they’ll see who’s the last one. And then they’ll put it all on one little guy, who could have been a cook or a clerk or something.” In mainland Europe there is a corresponding cult of the martyr. At least 35 million people died there, and memories of the carnage still provoke strong feelings. But once again, not all of the victims were themselves entirely pure. Greece suffered terribly under German occupation. Yet as many people died at the hands of their own countrymen in the savage civil war that followed. In France, 1944-45 was not only a period of liberation – it was also months of head-shaving and vengeance on collaborators. One of the nations to suffer most in the war was Ukraine, where partisans waged a heroic war of resistance against both the Nazis and the Soviets – but they also conducted a murderous campaign against Polish and Jewish minorities. Are these people heroes, martyrs or monsters? Those who actually lived through 1945 remember how morally complicated life was at this time. Their generation understood that war was not something glorious, but something terrible from which no nation emerged with its morals intact. It is for this reason that our grandparents put aside their differences and set up a whole host of global institutions after 1945, including the United Nations, the European Union and the World Health Organization. Our national leaders are already comparing the current coronavirus crisis to the last war. Perhaps it is time they followed our grandparents’ example and learned to work together once again, to tackle Covid-19. If we can emerge with dignity and cooperation – and, crucially, without resurrecting old resentments – then perhaps we too will have something worth telling our own grandchildren about. Keith Lowe is the author of Savage Continent: Europe in the Aftermath of World War II. His new book, Prisoners of History, is published this July.