Our regular ranked lists are always popular and deeply read, but even in that context, this is a standout. From Drew Barrymore to David Niven, our film critic Peter Bradshaw helpfully provides a huge stack of “inspiring, indiscreet and occasionally gasp-worthy” reading when we most need it. “Large, an intelligent and articulate man who always had finely tuned comic instincts, found the spectacle of the diffident and awkward Little irresistibly funny, and started to heckle him. They met for a drink after the show and discussed developing an act based around Little’s efforts to entertain the public despite constant interruptions from his portly partner.” “Detractors might say that the literalness of their stage names was often matched by the obviousness of their comedy involving foreign accents or underdressed women. It is only fair to note, though, that they attracted 15 million viewers a week at their peak, and were known on the pier and panto circuit for their ability to draw loud and raucous laughter, especially from older audiences.” In the wake of Grant’s recent renaissance, Jenny Valentish picks out three eminently streamable early works, from a salacious reimagining of the life of Norman Lindsay to serpent cults and sadistic melodramas. “As the hour wears on, however, moments of humour and interest arise. The most fascinating, at least to those of us with memories that are still just about managing to function is the sight of what we might almost call the real, or at least the original screen version of, Gordon Ramsay.” 6. How do you stop politicians from rigging the ballot? This woman knows She ended gerrymandering in Michigan against all odds. Now Katie Fahey is hoping the momentum is replicated in other states. 7. Discovery of letters shines light on Thomas Hardy’s second marriage The author’s second wife, Florence Dugdale, tells of celebrity pressures, and joy at living with “one of the kindest men in the world”. 8. From Aldous Huxley to the Beatles: how LSD has inspired art As scientist David Nutt campaigns for drug rules to change in the UK, we look at artists who said yes to psychedelic culture. 9. I’ve never seen … any James Bond film Continuing our series in which writers rectify gaps in their film education, Hadley Freeman finally pops her 007 cherry with the “Bondiest Bond” – The Spy Who Loved Me. 10. How the LA Rams’ new logo managed to anger an entire fanbase With the rest of the sports world on hold, the Los Angeles Rams had a news cycle all to themselves last week. Unfortunately, it had nothing to do with football.