The dramatic monologue is emerging as a convenient form for online theatre as the industry adapts to the limitations of the coronavirus lockdown. There have been recent offerings from the Bunker Theatre and High Tide that are at once theatrical and eminently suited to film. Now comes The Beast Will Rise, a series of 14 monologues by Philip Ridley, a writer with a rich history of monologue plays that pack a punch, including Angry and Killer. The works that make up the serieswill be streamed on a weekly basis, in lieu of The Beast of Blue Yonder, Ridley’s fantastical black comedy which was due to be staged at the Southwark Playhouse this month. They enlist the same director, Wiebke Green, and are performed by members of the cast of The Beast of Blue Yonder. The first two works are simple in form: a female character sits speaking to a static camera, with little else in the frame. Both characters are marooned in a predatory world and exude a queasy mix of fear and loneliness, as well as a compulsive need to explain themselves. The plays capture our contemporary state of isolation and desperation – though with no mention of a virus. Gators is 19 minutes long and based in a postdiluvian, dystopian world with fantastical edges. A woman (Rachel Bright) describes it to us from her living room, and it becomes clear that there has been a climate catastrophe. Since the flood, a generation have grown up with giant swamps in their neighbourhoods and 9ft alligators in their back gardens. The ’gators, the woman says, have become “sweet” on human beings, creeping out of the swamps to woo them. But their sinister stalking has turned into vengeful killing, and society lives in fear of being savaged. “The world’s gone crazy and I haven’t got an Uzi,” the woman says tremulously as she swigs beer from a can and answers the questions of a voiceless interviewer behind the camera. The play has a tacit message about environmental abuse, but the presence of the ’gators has a seductive side, too. In 2005, Ridley described his controversial production Mercury Fur, which involved extreme fantasies of sex and death, as “a play about love. About what we do for love and what happens if there is a lack of love.” As outlandish and otherworldly as its scenario seems, Gators deals with the same underlying desire. However macabre a love the ’gators represent to Bright’s character, she has a need to be loved, and merely existing in her solitary, albeit safe, state, is not enough, it seems. The world in Zarabooshka is more recognisable, and all the more discomforting for it. The sole character (Grace Hogg-Robinson) is of indeterminate age but looks like a girl. She sits on a stripped mattress and, although child sex abuse is not mentioned, there are heavy hints about human trafficking, captivity and the men who pay for girls’ services and leave them bloodied afterwards. The girl’s reality only comes to us in interludes, between a fantasy world of picket fences and log fires that she is intent on retreating into. Imagination and make-believe, it is suggested, are her only solace in this brutal existence (“We’re stuck where we’re stuck and no one’s going to unstick us,” she says). The girl whispers to camera, her nose almost pressed to the lens, as if there is danger even in speaking aloud. However distressing her state is, there is a broad-brush generality to the story, which, at 11 minutes long, only ever reaches a certain emotional depth. But the girl’s vulnerability is exquisitely rendered by Hogg-Robinson. In fact, both she and Bright lift these dramas with the intensity of their performances, and it is this, ultimately, that leaves our hairs on end. • Gators and Zarabooshka are available online at wearetramp.com