Alex Garland, the writer-director of eerie sci-fi thrillers Ex Machina and Annihilation, brings a typically ineffable new series to the small screen, starring Nick Offerman. Set in the confines of a shadowy San Francisco tech startup, Amaya, we open as programmer Sergei is offered a position in the company’s secretive development department by founder Forest (Offerman). When Sergei goes missing, his girlfriend Lily sets out to discover what caused his sudden disappearance. Enigmatic and filled with striking visuals. Ammar Kalia More precious objects and even more precious memories restored by Jay Blades and his team. Tonight’s highlights include a mechanical birdcage whose song marks the last link between a daughter and her departed trapeze-artist mother. A lesson in the surprising eccentricity behind apparently ordinary lives. Phil Harrison After an extended recap of the disastrous fire that toppled Notre Dame’s famous spire on 15 April last year, this film embeds with efforts to restore the gothic masterpiece. While 21st-century tech plays a part, it mostly involves the work of patient craftsmen. Graeme Virtue Merritt Wever and Domhnall Gleeson star as an ex-couple reunited for a trip across America in this charming new comedy produced by Phoebe Waller-Bridge. Picking up on a pact they made in college – that if each texted the other “run”, they would leave their existing lives to go off together – we open with their awkward reunion. AK Mike Judge, the Beavis and Butthead and King of the Hill creator, brings his inimitable animation style to a second season of his rock’n’roll anecdotes show. We open with one of the kings of hedonism, George Clinton, who recalls his LSD trips and creation of cosmic funk. AK Mae is feeling insecure about sharing a standup bill with George’s teenage crush (Barry Ward), a 00s heart-throb staging his comedy comeback. Meanwhile, George seems to be having trouble giving up on her heteronormative happily-ever-after. Or is that all just in Mae’s mind? Ellen E Jones Brassed Off (Mark Herman, 1996), 9pm, Film4Like The Full Monty, it’s a story of northern folk facing industrial ruin; but while Monty is a feelgood movie, Mark Herman’s tale of social injustice is bitterly angry. The pits are on the verge of closure and a community is fragmenting, while Pete Postlethwaite’s colliery band plays on. Paul Howlett 