Last year, just six of 50 kids’ shows had a BAME lead. It’s not a great state of affairs in a country that has long prided itself on having a diverse population. JoJo and & Gran Gran has added to those numbers. It arrived last month on CBeebies, with black British Gran Gran, who hails from Saint Lucia, teaching her four-year-old granddaughter JoJo about their Caribbean heritage during their days out. But that’s not the only thing this show does differently. There was a conscious effort on the creator’s behalf to do away with the Catherine Tate-esque stereotype of grandparents. Tom Cousins, the series’ producer, told PA that showcasing “grandparents who are really active” was vital. As such, Gran Gran is neither frail nor doddery, but refreshingly energetic and capable. The series is based on the books by Laura Henry-Allain, with Gran Gran inspired by Henry-Allain’s own grandmother Marie Helena, who lived to 101. A 2019 UK study by Hopster found that gender stereotypes were prevalent in children’s TV. It said that “female characters were seen to be objectified and, in some cases, undermined by male characters”. Grace’s Amazing Machines from CBBC flips those stereotypes on their head by having Grace Webb present it. She is neither a cartoon princess nor a well-mannered mum, but a real-life professional motorbike rider who introduces young viewers to a range of “amazing machines”. From Fireman Sam to all the recent Top Gear lineups, TV shows in this mould are almost always male dominated, so it is refreshing to see it shaken up – even more so when it is being presented to the next generation of petrolheads. Without a stunt double in sight, Grace tests vehicles from fire trucks and supercars through to “useful” machines, teaching children about ambulances, buses and houseboats. It’s unique, daring and appeals to girls and boys. Inspired by the experiences of children who are on the autistic spectrum, Pablo launched in late 2017 to much-deserved praise. Not only does it make considerable strides in the representation of disability in children’s television, it does so in a positive, enlightening way. Five-year-old Pablo is played by Jake Williamson, who is himself autistic, and was aged just 10 when the first series was created. With the help of magic crayons, Pablo draws imaginary animal friends who come to life to encourage him through challenging situations. Each animal portrays a characteristic of autism, from a llama who often repeats things to a dinosaur who doesn’t like to talk much. The animals are all played by actors who themselves are on the autistic spectrum, some of whom also contribute to the scripts. It results in an authentic view of the condition, which isn’t bound by singular perspectives or stereotypes. Sumita Majumdar, a contributing writer who plays Wren, a bird with an excess of energy, says: “It allowed me to fully embrace and accept all elements of the way in which autism affects me, recognising the difficulties and acknowledging the positives.” As you might expect from the title, the show makes space for a variety of families and children alike to share their homes and lives. There is a fair dash of diverse Britain as a variety of families share their homes and lives with viewers. Two of the eight families have interracial parents, and there has been an Eid special. Meanwhile, Alexa and Archie live with just their dad, and giggly seven-year-old Lenny has spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita, a form of dwarfism. There are some working-class families, too, a demographic often ignored by kids’ TV. The Hopster study also found that “working-class families were severely underrepresented, appearing in just 9% of episodes, while making up 50% of the actual population”. However, no families live in high-rise flats, nor does the series include any same-sex parents; omissions that the BBC will hopefully put right in future series. Narrated by Ainsley Harriet, My World Kitchen sees children make dishes from their ancestral homeland. From Tanzanian banana curry with Talib to Filipino cassava cake with Reese, the diversity is thrilling and never feels forced. Despite the 11-minute running time, there is more to this show than merely cooking. After the child host welcomes us into their home, we discover where their family or ancestors are from. Next, we find the country on a map, and learn more about it, from major landmarks to common animals found there. But it’s the small, specific cultural details that really make the show. In series three, episode 14 – Pippa’s Zimbabwean Nyama – Pippa and her friends learn about washing their hands over a small brown bowl at the dinner table before eating their meal with their hands. • All shows are available on CBeebies or CBBC, and streamed on BBC iPlayer