Despite minimal face time with the world at large, I still put my face on. Not because I am a beauty editor but because consistency in an unpredictable climate is my coping mechanism. If you can’t be bothered to go the whole hog, consider a minimalist look that is one step beyond the no-makeup mantra. A shot of colour around one eye (as at Jamie Wei Huang SS20) is fun, audacious and, yes, a little edgy but, fundamentally, takes no effort at all. Perhaps in the weeks to come, you’ll find the drive to colour the other one in. 1. Chanel Le Liner De Chanel £28, chanel.com 2. Mac Eyeshadow in Steamy £15, maccosmetics.co.uk 3. Stila Stay All Day Liquid Eyeliner £17.60, lookfantastic.com 4. Laura Mercier Caviar Stick Eye Colour £25, spacenk.com 5. Marc Jacobs Liquid Gel Highliner £24, harveynichols.com You may have noticed that a product you’ve loved and used for years no longer performs in the same way. Often it’s because it has been reformulated. Sometimes the brand will tell you. Sometimes it won’t. Many do it to save money. This is shortsighted, particularly when the result is a product that no longer delivers – and disgruntled customers. Others do it to keep their formulations technologically advanced – when it works, it is brilliant. But often it doesn’t. So it didn’t fill me with glee when I discovered one of my favourite products, Becca’s Shimmering Skin Perfector, was to be upgraded and renamed. When I recommend mixing a liquid highlighter into foundation for a stupendous glow, this is one I always suggest. When I meet a fellow lover of it, it becomes a love-in. When I consider desert-island products, this makes the cut. So how does the new iteration compare? Thankfully, it is as superb. Like its predecessor, it is a pearlised gel formula – still in six shades for all skin tones – but lighter, more hydrating, more intense (so you won’t need as much), and you can use it all over your body. Some elements will be polarising, namely the new fruity scent - pineapple, coconut and orange flower – and the new-agey name changes (Topaz is now Strength, Champagne Pop is now Creativity). Formulation-wise, however, you won’t be disappointed. Becca Ignite Liquified Light Highlighter, £32, boots.com The white stuff Lip masks sound ridiculous, but they are great for combating flaky and dehydrated lips. Try this antioxidant-filled variant to sooth, smooth and hydrate overnight. Milk Makeup Melatonin Lip Mask, £17, cultbeauty.co.uk Plump it up Guerlain’s luxe bestseller has been tweaked to give you plumper, more luminous and intensely hydrated skin in just 15 minutes. Guerlain Super Aqua Sheet Mask, £84 (set of 6), guerlain.com All-round star This skincare line is not only cruelty free, vegan and eco-conscious, it is also straightforward, effective and brilliantly priced. And it’s all made in Norfolk. Q&A Activated Charcoal Face Mask, £6.50, qandaskin.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto