Margaret Atwood will show how she has gone from handmaids’ tales to handmade tales when she unveils her latest project: a puppet show version of Edgar Allen Poe’s The Masque of the Red Death. The novelist is to be a guest on Mary Beard’s BBC Two arts show Front Row Late, hosted in lockdown from the study in Beard’s house. Atwood’s contribution is what Beard calls a “very surprising” version of Poe’s horror story: a puppet show choreographed by the author and her sister Ruth, with all the characters made from household objects. “An empty bottle and some hand sanitiser take starring roles,” Beard writes in a blogpost. Poe’s story, first published in 1842, tells the tale of a prince attempting to avoid a plague by hiding in his abbey. Atwood’s version was as funny and engaging as it sounded, said Beard. “But, in our discussion, Atwood also raises some pressing questions about the role of horror stories in our cultural imagination, asking what pleasure we can take in tales of plague, and what we can learn from Poe’s gothic fiction – as well as casting her sharp eye to life after pandemic.” Beard said the point of the arts was not just to soothe, but also to help us think harder. “That is why they are so essential at times like this, when we need all the intellectual resources we can possibly muster to make sense of the crisis we are in, and to frame the very different world that is bound to follow.” Like other broadcasters presenting from home, Beard said she was expecting comments about her decor, ornaments and book choices. “I’m bracing myself for a good few queries about the very prominent copy of the speeches of the ancient Athenian orator Lysias, standing out on my own shelves.” Beard’s show will include poetry, with Emma Thompson reading John Donne and the Game of Thrones actor Emilia Clarke reading Rudyard Kipling. There will also be a look at what was meant to be one of the must-see, never-to-be-repeated art exhibitions of 2020, Titian: Love, Desire, Death. It opened to the public on 16 March and closed on 19 March. Front Row Late is on BBC Two at 11.30pm Thursday, part of BBC Arts’ Culture in Quarantine series.