Barack Obama has endorsed Joe Biden for president, casting his former vice-president as the experienced statesman and unifying leader that will be needed to confront the public health and economic crisis caused by the coronavirus pandemic that will probably be the defining issue of the presidential election. Obama’s endorsement, a 12-minute video published on Tuesday, came just one day after Biden’s one-time rival Bernie Sanders threw his weight behind him and appealed to progressives to unify against Donald Trump. In his remarks, the former president appealed to Democrats to unify behind the presumptive nominee ahead of what will almost certainly be a historically divisive general election campaign. “Choosing Joe to be my vice-president was one of the best decisions I ever made, and he became a close friend,” Obama said in a 12-minute video released on Tuesday. “And I believe Joe has all the qualities we need in a president right now.” I’m proud to endorse my friend @JoeBiden for President of the United States. Let's go: https://t.co/maHVGRozkX In a tweet, Biden said Obama’s support “means the world” to him and his wife, Jill, and that “there’s no one I’d rather have standing by my side”. Obama praised Biden’s opponents for the nomination, who he said comprised “one of the most impressive Democratic fields ever”. Obama said Sanders was an “American original” who would be critical to defeating Trump in November. “Pandemics have a way of cutting through a lot of noise and spin to remind us of what is real, and what is important,” Obama said. “This crisis has reminded us that government matters. It’s reminded us that good government matters.” Obama declined to play a public role in the primary, which Sanders’ departure from the race last week in effect ended, making Biden the presumptive nominee. The former president remains incredibly popular among Democrats. But emphasizing America’s deep divide, Obama last year only tied with Trump as the man Americans admired most. When Sanders exited the race, Trump tried to sow discord by questioning why Obama had not yet endorsed Biden. “It does amaze me that President Obama hasn’t supported Sleepy Joe,” the president said during a coronavirus briefing, speculating that his predecessor “knows something that you don’t know, that I think I know, that you don’t know.” In a statement on Tuesday, the Trump campaign suggested Obama was somehow reluctant to support his former vice-president, with whom he shared an uncommon friendship and whom he awarded the presidential medal of freedom. “Obama has no other choice but to support him,” said Brad Parscale, Trump’s 2020 campaign manager. “Even Bernie Sanders beat him to it.” In 2008, Obama assembled a coalition of African Americans, suburban women, white working-class voters and, crucially, young people in what many Democrats remember as one of the most inspirational campaigns in modern history. Biden has drawn support from similar constituencies but is missing a key part of that coalition: young people, who remain deeply skeptical of his candidacy. To the dismay of some Democrats, Obama has mostly continued the tradition of former presidents by not criticizing his successor, even as Trump has dismantled his legacy on everything from healthcare to climate change. In the midst of a pandemic, Trump has sought to deflect criticism by blaming his predecessor. On Tuesday Obama did not mention his successor by name, instead assailing the party Trump leads and implicitly criticizing him with praise of Biden. “One thing everybody has learned by now is that the Republicans occupying the White House and running the US Senate are not interested in progress,” Obama said. “They’re interested in power.” Biden’s campaign has tied him closely to Obama. But many of the young and progressive voters to whom Biden must appeal were too young to vote for Obama and are occasionally critical of his accomplishments. Still, Biden’s association with Obama helped propel him ahead of younger rivals. His eight years as Obama’s No 2 contributed greatly to his support among African American voters, particularly in South Carolina, the foundation of a remarkable campaign turnaround. His time as vice-president was also central to his argument that he is a capable, experienced leader best positioned to beat Trump in November. Obama made a similar case in his endorsement video, praising Biden’s leadership in the wake of the economic crash of 2008, as well as his management of the H1N1 and Ebola crises. Healthcare proved to be a particular flashpoint during the primary, with candidates divided between expanding the Affordable Care Act, Obama’s signature achievement, or seeking universal coverage. Biden has resisted Sanders’ Medicare for All plan and advocated for building on the ACA, commonly known as Obamacare. In his video, Obama said it was time to “go further” and ensure that all Americans have access to healthcare, calling on Democrats to push for a public option, expand Medicare and “finish the job so that healthcare isn’t just a right, but a reality for everybody”. Biden has insisted that he did not seek Obama’s endorsement – maintaining that the nominee must win the primary “on their own merits” – but he did consult Obama on several occasions, including recently about choosing a running mate. Biden told donors on a fundraising call Obama advised him to choose someone not afraid to disagree with him and who will “always tell me the truth”. “And so I’m going to need a woman vice-president who has the capacity, has strengths where I have weaknesses,” Biden said at the virtual fundraiser this month. In his closing remarks, Obama, teasing his own return to the campaign trail, urged all Americans dismayed by the current state of affairs to join forces against Trump. “Right now, we need Americans of goodwill to unite in a great awakening against a politics that too often has been characterized by corruption, carelessness, self-dealing, disinformation, ignorance, and just plain meanness,” he said. “And to change that, we need Americans of all political stripes to get involved in our politics and our public life like never before.”