The spring holidays have ended, but children are not going back to school. For at least three more weeks, the vast majority of the 10 million British children aged between four and 18 will be spending their days at home. There are powerful reasons to wish that this was not the case. The economic argument for trying to reopen schools, associated with a faction in the government including the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, is that the damage caused by a nationwide shutdown of more than a few weeks could be so severe as to effectively cancel out the benefits of the lockdown. But there are also social reasons to push for a return to normal. Children miss their friends, teachers, routines. Their education is suffering. While schools remain open to families where parents are key workers, or children have special educational needs or social workers, it is generally accepted that the impact of closures is uneven and hitting those who are already disadvantaged hardest. If schools were to remain closed until September, children would then have been away from their classrooms and peers for almost six months. Politicians and others rightly regard this as a scenario to be avoided. But while moves towards reopening schools in Germany and Denmark have understandably led parents, as well as the education secretary, Gavin Williamson, to hope for similar steps in England (and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland), much work remains to make this a realistic prospect. For now, the more urgent questions than when schools will reopen are why and how. That is, not why people want children to return to school (which is clear enough), but why schools in May, June or September will be any safer – for pupils, their families and teachers – than they are now. The feasibility of physical distancing measures is already the subject of debate, with experts tending towards the view that they won’t work for the youngest children. How to make it possible for teachers and older children to keep their distance – and to what extent it is worthwhile spacing out desks, given the narrowness of corridors and other factors – is under discussion. Other countries plan to shrink class sizes by teaching part-time. Confidence is key. Whenever schools reopen, their leaders will need clearly presented information to share with staff and parents. The five tests set by ministers include sufficient testing capacity and supplies of personal protective equipment. Given difficulties in the health and care sectors, it is reasonable to assume that adequate resources for schools, colleges and nurseries are some way off. The voucher system for free school meals is not working smoothly. Whatever is agreed in outline, there will be sticking points: older and vulnerable teachers; pupils living with grandparents or other ill relatives; challenges around discipline in relation to distancing; parents who may be reluctant to send children back; how to make up for all the lost lessons, particularly for GCSE students and younger primary children who have missed chunks of literacy and numeracy learning. Mr Williamson’s apology to children, in Sunday’s press conference, was well judged. Though he did not spell this out, better decision-making by politicians at the start of the year could have spared them – and their teachers – this disruption. Next, he should postpone the new baseline tests for four-year-olds which were due to start in September. They are an unnecessary distraction at a time when what is needed is for Mr Williamson to go beyond the letter of his role as cabinet minister for education, and advocate vigorously for teachers, parents and children.