Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The first coronavirus case has been recorded at a refugee camp in Lebanon. The outbreak of the virus at crowded and often unhygienic refugee camps has been feared since the start of the crisis. Spain announced it plans to phase out its lockdown in the second half of May. Prime minister Pedro Sánchez also asked lawmakers to extend the country’s state of emergency until 9 May. Germany approved its first human trials for a Covid-19 vaccine. Some 200 healthy people between 18 and 55 will receive several variants of the vaccine candidate. Pope Francis called for unity among EU member states on the eve of European Council summit to discuss a huge but divisive economic stimulus package to respond to the coronavirus crisis. EU states have clashed repeatedly over financial responses to the epidemic. At least 34 crew members have tested positive for coronavirus on a cruise ship docked in Japan for maintenance. The outbreak onboard the Italian-operated Costa Atlantica adds to concerns about testing and hospital capacity in Nagasaki, where only 102 beds are available. Half of France’s working population has signed up to the country’s temporary unemployment scheme, according to the minister of labour, Muriel Pénicaud. Some 10.2 million private sector workers have applied for support, or one employee out of two and six companies out of 10, she said. Coronavirus-related deaths in the UK may be as high as 41,000, according to a Financial Times analysis of the latest data from the Office for National Statistics (ONS). Their findings include deaths that occurred outside hospitals updated to reflect recent mortality trends. The European commission has said the UK was well aware of its coronavirus procurement initiative when it decided not to participate. Its account contradicts the UK government claim that a “misunderstanding” was to blame for the UK not getting involved. Officials in Beijing dismissed the US state of Missouri’s move to sue the Chinese government over its handling of the coronavirus outbreak as “nothing short of absurdity” and lacking any factual or legal basis.