Prep 10 minCook 15 minServes 2 adults + 2 children (makes 6 pizzas) 10 tbsp gram flour240–300ml cold waterOlive oil12 cherry tomatoes, diced1 courgette, grated1 large handful grated cheddar1 tsp dried oregano Sift the flour into a mixing bowl, ideally one with a pouring lip. Add the water gradually and whisk, stopping when you have a pourable batter. Heat a generous splash of olive oil in a frying pan. Once hot, poura 10cm circle of batter into the pan. Fry for 60 seconds or so then flip, cooking the pizza base until it’s golden on both sides, then transfer to a baking tray. Repeat using the rest of the batter. Scatter all the bases with the tomato, courgette and cheese. Load them as generously as you like. Add a pinch of dried oregano and a squiggle of olive oil to the top, then slide the baking tray under a hot grill for a couple of minutes, until the toppings are golden, but be careful not to let pizza’s edges burn. Slice and serve immediately. Prep 2 minCook 8 minServes 2 adults + 2 children 8 tbsp porridge oats1 x 400ml tin coconut milk12 raspberries (fresh or frozen), squished Put the porridge oats and coconut milk into a small pan. Put the pan on a gentle heat and stir continuously as the milk warms. After seven or eight minutes, the oats will be soft and creamy. Just before serving, add the raspberries and stir. Pink porridge! Prep 20 minCook 20 minServes 2 adults + 2 children 1 tsp coconut oil1 butternut squash, diced1 × 400g tin chickpeas, rinsed½ x tin coconut milk (200ml)1 mugful of cold water1 tsp salt-free vegetable stock For the curry paste2–3cm fresh ginger, peeled1 garlic clove, peeled½ red onion, roughly dicedHandful of coriander (stalks and leaves)1 tsp low/no-salt Thai fish sauce4 tbsp water Put all the curry paste ingredients into a blender and whiz until smooth. Warm the coconut oil in a medium saucepan and add the paste. Heat gently for two minutes, then add the butternut squash and chickpeas. Stir, coating everything in curry paste, then add the coconut milk, water and stock. Bring to a simmer and cook for 12–14 minutes, lid on. Using a potato masher, softly mash the mixture to break down the squash and chickpeas, achieving a creamy-textured curry that you won’t need to put through the blender. Serve family-style over rice. Grownups can top theirs with sliced fresh chilli, lime juice and soy sauce. Prep 5 minsFreeze 2 hoursServes 2 adults + 2 children 2 mugs Greek yoghurt½ banana1 large handful chopped soft fruit ( strawberries, raspberries, blueberries, blackberries) Put the yoghurt and banana into a blender and whiz until smooth. Spread into a shallow dish – I use a deep rectangular baking tray to achieve 1cm thickness – that you’ve lined with clingfilm. Scatter the berries evenly over the top, pressing some in and leaving others on the surface. Freeze for two hours, then use the clingfilm to lift the bark from the dish and break it up into shards as big or small as you like. Spare pieces will keep in the freezer for a month. If you’re concerned about the berry pieces, whiz them into the yoghurt-banana mix to create smooth bark with the same nutritional goodness. Recipes extracted from Young Gums: Baby Food With Attitude by Beth Bentley (Ebury, £14.99). Young Gums is Beth Bentley’s blog about nutritionist-checked food for infants from six months old, containing no refined sugars, grains or processed ingredients.