England pace bowler Jofra Archer revealed he has “gone mad” searching for his Cricket World Cup winner’s medal after losing it during a recent house move. Archer rose from relative obscurity to become a household name at last year’s tournament, finishing as England’s leading wicket-taker with 20 at an average of 23.05. Archer was chosen to bowl the super over in the Lord’s final against New Zealand last July, holding his nerve in the most dramatic of situations to spirit England to a remarkable triumph. But when asked about his souvenir from the day, he told BBC Radio 5 Live: “I had it hanging off a portrait someone did for me and sent to me, I had my medal hanging on that. I moved flat and the picture is on the new wall but there’s no medal. I turned the house upside down for about a week but I still haven’t managed to find it. “I know it should be in the house so I will keep eyes out for it but I’ve gone mad looking for it already.” Archer admitted he has spent much of his time during the coronavirus-enforced lockdown, having returned to the United Kingdom from Barbados last month, looking for his medal. And the 25-year-old said the search will continue, adding: “There’s nothing else to do in isolation. It’s all hands on deck.” England prevailed in the final on boundary countback alone after they matched New Zealand’s total in the regulation 50 overs while the Kiwis equalled the hosts’ score in a nerve-shredding super over. While Archer would have seemed the logical choice to bowl England’s super over after his supreme success in the preceding weeks, the fast bowler was reluctant to put his hand up because of his status as a newcomer to the team. Asked when he realised he would be tasked with the super over, Archer replied: “Pretty late. I wasn’t sure until I had to go down there and warm up. That doesn’t mean I didn’t want it, I just didn’t think I was in a position to volunteer, I was just coming into the team, I’d played the least amount of games in the squad. I didn’t think it was my time to volunteer. “It was the only super over of the whole tournament, I never actually thought about it or planned for the situation, it just happened.”