Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The global death toll has reached 164,938, according to the Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center. The total number of infections worldwide is at 2,394,291. Turkey’s death toll has passed 2,000, with the announcement of 127 new deaths bringing the official death toll to 2,017. There have been 3,977 new cases of Covid-19 infection in the country in the past 24 hours, bringing the total number of reported infections to 86,306. Poland recorded its biggest spike in coronavirus cases on Sunday with 545 new infections registered, a day before the country planned to ease some of its restrictions. Poland now has 9,287 confirmed cases and 360 deaths. Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and Donald Trump have agreed in a phone call to “continue their close cooperation” in protecting their healthcare systems and economies from the worst impacts of the coronavirus pandemic. France has doubled its production of face masks from 4m to 8m a week and there are now enough for essential healthcare and frontline staff. The French prime minister, Édouard Philippe, said there were still not enough for all citizens and asked people to be patient. The British government will charter flights to repatriate the most vulnerable Britons stranded in New Zealand this week. People most at risk from coronavirus will be prioritised for the flights, which will bring back over 1,500 people in total. Peru has reported over 15,000 cases of coronavirus, the second highest tally in Latin America after Brazil. The country registered a total of 15,628 cases and 400 deaths, according to its health ministry. US governors have accused Donald Trump of making “delusional” and “dangerous” statements amid mounting tensions between the president and state leaders over coronavirus testing and pressure to roll back stay-at-home measures. Tunisia is extending its lockdown to 4 May, but hopes to ease restrictions gradually on some economic activities after that date, the prime minister, Elyes Fakhfakh, has said. Thousands of Israelis demonstrated against prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu while maintaining social distancing measures, calling on Gantz’s Blue and White party not to join a coalition led by a premier charged with corruption.