This is an elaborate way to serve a majestic cauliflower, and makes a great, plant-based alternative to the more traditional Easter roast lamb. The whole plant – including the leaves – is roasted whole and intact, seasoned with an aromatic, Moroccan-style spice mix, then dressed with a satisfying layer of glorious tahini sauce and sweet molasses. Ideally, use a cauli that has plenty of leaves, because they go crisp, umami-rich and flavoursome when roasted. This makes use of a spice mix that’s traditionally used on lamb. The cauliflower is best served whole and carved at the table to share. To save energy, fill the oven with other ingredients while you’re cooking this – roast veg and meat will keep in the fridge for up to five days, and are handy to have around for making quick meals throughout the week. Serves 4-61 head cauliflower, with leaves1 glug extra-virgin olive oil1 tsp ground cumin1 tsp ground coriander½ tsp ground caraway (optional)½ tsp freshly ground black pepper½ tsp cayenne pepper (optional)2 tsp sea saltPeel of ½ unwaxed lemon, finely sliced1 drizzle blackstrap or date molasses2 tsp black and/or white sesame seeds, toasted in a dry frying pan For the tahini sauce60g dark tahini¼ unwaxed lemon, zested and juiced½ small garlic clove, peeled¼ tsp sea salt Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/gas 4. Put the cauliflower on a large sheet of greaseproof paper, big enough to wrap around it. Drizzle the cauliflower generously with olive oil. In a small bowl, mix all the spices and the salt, rub all over the cauliflower, and sprinkle with the lemon peel. Wrap up the cauliflower in the greaseproof paper, put it on a baking tray, and roast for an hour, until tender when pierced with the tip of a sharp knife. Open out the paper and fold it back, then return the cauliflower to the oven at 190C (170C fan)/375F/gas 5 for a further 20 minutes, or until the outside begins to blacken slightly. Put all the ingredients for the tahini sauce in a blender with four tablespoons of water and blend smooth – add a touch more water, if need be, to achieve the consistency of double cream. Transfer the cauliflower to a platter, and drizzle first with the tahini sauce and then with the molasses, before finishing with a sprinkle of sesame seeds. Tom Hunt’s Eating for Pleasure, People & Planet is published by Kyle Books at £26. To order a copy, go to guardianbookshop.com.