Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The director general of the World Health Organization says there is still “a long way to go” in tackling the pandemic. Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus says that, while most national epidemics in western Europe appear to have stabilised or are declining, outbreaks appeared to be growing in Africa, Central and South America, and eastern Europe. At least 179,778 people are known to have died since the outbreak began and at least 2.5 million have been infected, according to Johns Hopkins University. The US has recorded four times more cases than the next worst-hit country, Italy. Donald Trump’s botched handling of the epidemic has left the US looking like a third world country and on course for a second Great Depression, the Nobel prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz says. In an interview with the Guardian, Stiglitz said millions of Americans were turning to food banks, having to work due to a lack of sick pay and dying because of health inequalities. The country’s Department for Health and Social Care publishes the latest daily figures, showing that there have been 759 new deaths, taking the total to 18,100. Yesterday’s daily rise was 823. However, according to an analysis of ONS data by the Financial Times, coronavirus-related deaths in the UK may be as high as 41,000. The findings include deaths that occurred outside hospitals, updated to reflect recent mortality trends. A Chinese citizen journalist reappears, having gone missing for almost two months after posting videos from Wuhan during the outbreak. Li Zehua claims he was detained by police and forcibly quarantined. He was one of three Chinese journalists reporting in Wuhan during some of the worst weeks of the epidemic. He was last seen on 26 February after posting a video in which he was chased by a white SUV and an hours-long livestream that ended when several agents entered his apartment. The number of confirmed cases in Singapore passes 10,000, despite concerted and strenuous attempts to contain the spread of the infection in the city state. The milestone comes after Singapore’s ministry of health reported 1,016 new cases on Wednesday, the third day in a row that the city’s daily tally has exceeded 1,000, bringing the overall total in the city to 10,141. Downing Street rejects suggestions that Sir Simon McDonald, the head of the Foreign Office, was pressurised into withdrawing his statement to a select committee saying the government took a political decision not to participate in the EU’s ventilator procurement scheme. The European commission has said the UK was well aware of its procurement initiative when it decided not to participate, backing up McDonald’s original assertion and contradicting the UK government’s claim – backed by McDonald in his later statement – that a “misunderstanding” was to blame. The first case is recorded at a refugee camp in Lebanon. The outbreak of the virus at crowded and often unhygienic refugee camps has been feared since the start of the crisis. Spain announces plans to phase out its lockdown in the second half of May. The prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, also asks lawmakers to extend the country’s state of emergency until 9 May. Germany approves its first human trials for a vaccine. Some 200 healthy people between 18 and 55 will receive several variants of the vaccine candidate.