The Czech Republic has opened its borders for outbound foreign travel in a sudden U-turn after official figures showed a decline in the rate of Covid-19 infections. The move, announced by the health minister, Adam Vojtěch, represented a surprise change of course for the country, which had been among the first in Europe to close its borders on 16 March. Officials had insisted until recent days that travel restrictions would remain for the foreseeable future, with the country’s president, Miloš Zeman, suggesting last weekend that frontiers should stay closed for the next year. Vojtěch announced the reversal in a press conference on Thursday night but indicated the onus would be on travellers to prove they were uninfected on their return. “Upon return, travellers will either have to present confirmation of a negative test for coronavirus, or be forced to spend 14 days in quarantine,” he said. Commuters would also be able to cross the border daily if they presented a negative test for coronavirus every 14 days, Vojtěch said, a move that will affect a relatively small number of people who live in the Czech Republic but work in a neighbouring country, or vice versa. In a further development, the deputy health minister, Roman Prymula, announced that the mandatory wearing of face masks, credited by officials with containing the virus’s spread, would stay in place until at least the end of June. Restrictions are also being lifted on movement within the country, with groups of up to 10 people permitted to gather. Previous rules limited outdoor gatherings to two. There had been growing public pressure for an easing of emergency measures. But there was criticism that the announcement sowed confusion, with no immediate information on when foreign visitors would be allowed to re-enter, which would help Prague’s beleaguered tourism industry. “Has the government opened the borders only for Czech citizens or for foreigners who would like to come to the Czech Republic?” tweeted Jiří Pehe, a political analyst and director of New York University in Prague. The announcement came hours after the government had accelerated its timetable for reopening the economy following pressure from Czech trading lobbies. Restaurants and pubs will be allowed to fully reopen on 25 May, two weeks earlier than initially planned in a five-phase restart plan announced last week. Zoos will be allowed to reopen from Monday, a full month earlier than planned. The relaxations came after Prague’s municipal court ruled the government’s restrictions unlawful on Thursday. Officials have hailed better-than-expected results from the coronavirus clampdown. The health ministry confirmed the number of infections at 7,188 on Friday, with 55 new Covid-19 positive tests recorded the previous day, the lowest number since 14 March. There have been 213 deaths.