Originally released in 1980, this funky track from solo artist Cristina Camargo is pure “80s vibes”, Peterson says. “I’ve been loving this boogie tune, produced by Lincoln Olivetti and Robson Jorge, of late. It lifts the mood every time.” Olivetti and Jorge crafted Rio’s early-80s boogie sound, and produced classic albums by Brazilian disco legends in the mid-70s. “It reminds me of line dancing in Rio, particularly on a Sunday afternoon in Lapa, where sound systems play a mixture of this and classic British 80s cuts by the likes of Lisa Stansfield and Soul II Soul – very obscure!” “This track has a raw north-eastern Brazil vibe. Rosa is actually from São Paulo but broke out in France, a country that has always had a strong relationship with Brazilian artists. In fact, Seu Jorge (who also features in this list) broke out of his residency at Favela Chic in Paris.” This track by Rosa, who is often accompanied by seven-string guitars and percussion typical of the north-eastern state of Pernambuco, has been a popular choice for live sets, Peterson says. “It even had Thom Yorke running over to the decks when I played it at a party last year”. “I found this on Outro Tempo, a brilliant compilation album of electronic and contemporary music made between 1978 and 1992, selected by John Gomez. It is a super fringe but healthy world of music missed by the collectors until now.” Maria Rita Stumpf, born in the mountains of Aparados da Serra in Brazil’s southernmost state of Rio Grande do Sul, is widely regarded as a pioneer of Brazilian music, and a truly forward-thinking artist, Peterson says. He recommends checking out her newest project, working with indigenous Brazilians. “This came out last year and is another great example of the new generation celebrating the music of outsider writers such as Arthur Verocai and Tom Zé.” Peterson recommends it now, as Brazilian groups such as Boogarins, O Terno and Bixiga 70 are seeing a surge in popularity across the UK and US: “My most-listened-to BBC session of last year was with Boogarins at Maida Vale.” For those who like this track, he also suggests Zé Manel’s Volta pra Casa, produced by Kassin, whom he worked with on the Sonzeira project. “This sublime track is by two old friends playing samba together in the most intimate space. It was taken from an awesome album recorded straight to disc for Night Dreamer Records at Artone Studios in Amsterdam.” Known for his part in the renaissance of Brazilian samba and his roles in films including last year’s Brotherhood, a Brazilian crime drama set in mid-90s São Paulo, Seu Jorje is an “A-list star”, so “it’s rare to hear him in such a delicate setting”. Vhoor, also known Victor Hugo, is a producer from Belo Horizonte, Brazil’s sixth-largest city, in the south-east of the country. “He is part of the latest generation of beat makers digging into the vast reserves of samples hidden in the country’s music archives. He’s becoming a hugely in-demand producer for anyone searching for Brazilian-inflected trap, Afro-Latin and footwork.” The track sampled by Vhoor is Oba, La Vem Ela by the great Jorge Ben; Peterson says he loves dropping them back to back. Bossa nova pianist João Donato, described by Peterson as “one of the most important living musicians in Brazilian music”, worked on this “infectious tune” with singer-songwriter Tulipa Ruiz from São Paulo. “He has worked and arranged for the best, and is known for turning down Miles Davis in the 1970s because he wanted to focus on his own music. He’s still active and on fire, and came on my BBC 6 Music show last year, delivering a memorable live performance.” “I recommend the whole of this album from an iconic musician. It’s widely regarded as the most important work in Brazilian jazz – like the Brazilian Kind of Blue [by Miles Davis].” The late composer and multi-instrumentalist was born in Flores do Pajeú, a rural town in the north-east, spent time hitchhiking around the states of Pernambuco, Ceará and Bahia, and made his name in Rio de Janeiro, where he recorded Coisas (meaning “Things”) in 1965. “If you find an original, you’re in Holy Grail territory – they are currently going for over £6,000. But I’m happy with my reissue!” • The Spotify playlist above features a later recording of the track Coisas No 5, after it was renamed Nana and given lyrics by Mario Telles. The full Coisas album is available on YouTube. “Whoooah” is Peterson’s simple description of this next track. He was introduced to it by a friend while at the Ricci Festival in Sicily (organised by Peterson). “It’s by a producer from Rio called Carrot Green, who makes slowed-down house. I love it. It builds and builds and hasn’t left my box since.” The original track is by gospel choir Coral Filhos de Oxossi, and was picked up by Green and remixed for his Brazilian Shakedown record.• The Spotify playlist above features the original track Gira Gira by Coral Filhos de Oxossi. “This was Ana Frango Elétrico’s second album and one of the best Brazilian albums from last year. Her first Mormaço Queima has also just been released digitally. She’s another great new talent.” Peterson’s favourite track on the album is Promessas e Previsões, meaning “Promises and Predictions”. For fans of the Rio songstress and her short-but-sweet 29-minute album, he recommends listening to the great Gal Costa’s 2011 album Gal, which inspired Elétrico, and is “proof that she’s still pushing the boundaries”. Gilles Peterson presents The 20 on Worldwide FM on Thursdays at 9am. This week’s show focuses on Brazilian jazz