To a certain way of thinking, never has an independent Scotland looked more desirable; to another way of thinking, never has it looked more unviable. Some people – since 2016, I’ve sometimes been one of them – manage to hold both opinions: “It would be a good idea, if only …” But John Lloyd, a fine journalist with a long career at the Financial Times, has never been among the vacillators. In this book, he argues that Scotland’s secession from the United Kingdom would certainly be damaging for what was left of it – England, Wales and Northern Ireland, supposing the last still existed – but nothing less than a disaster for Scotland itself. Economically, socially and culturally, secession would do it more harm than Brexit. The likely economic consequences are hard to deny. Scotland would be launched as a new nation using, as Lloyd says, “a currency (sterling) of a state it has left and over which it has no control, and an application to join a European Union whose rules insist on its adoption of a currency (the euro) the SNP leaders do not wish to join”. Scotland would be separated from its largest export market, which is the rest of the UK, by a hard customs border; there would be no equivalent of the Belfast agreement, an enforceable international treaty, to soften it. The Barnett formula by which the Treasury allots a higher rate of per capita public expenditure in Scotland would go, and with it, by Lloyd’s reckoning, an annual subsidy of between £8bn and £10bn that helps sustain Scotland’s idea of itself as the last British redoubt of the welfare state: free university education, free medical prescriptions and free home care. Oil revenues aren’t what they were, and they never will be again. Most forecasts, including those of the Scottish National Party, predict the need for cuts amounting to as much as a fifth in public spending unless taxes are raised significantly. In the short to medium term, an independent Scotland would inevitably face turbulence and economic decline. Lloyd writes in a memorable sentence that for the SNP’s leaders “the prospect, for all their public confidence, must be, in reflective moments, terrifying.” And so it must – as terrifying, in fact, as the economic prospect that should have terrified Boris Johnson, Michael Gove and other members of the Tory groupuscule that has led the UK out of Europe. Just like Brexiters in the European referendum campaign, the most zealous Scottish nationalists write off these dire forecasts as “project fear”. Forgetting that the original project fear contained warnings that proved well founded (don’t trust in the constancy of oil revenues, for example), they march through Scottish cities turning their streets into a sea of white and blue, demanding a second referendum on independence – now! The author cuts them no slack. In his view, Scottish nationalism as a popular cause rests on fanciful assumptions of difference and moral superiority. “A confident statement of long-term, deeply embedded difference between the English and the Scots in character, habits, and outlook is rarely possible, though the nationalists attempt to encourage it,” he writes, citing the SNP leadership’s stress on the openness of Scottish society to immigration, compared with the “grudging, even hostile attitudes” that Scottish nationalists imply are those of the English, when England is the far more multicultural and diverse country. Likewise, the belief that Scotland is inherently more social democratic is hard to justify; the furthest that surveys of social attitudes will go is only that Scotland is “somewhat” more so. As for a greater attachment to European identity, similar surveys show that historically the EU hasn’t excited the Scots any more than the English (more than a third of Scottish votes were for Brexit, after all), though that has changed since 2016. In other words, as the commentator Alex Massie recently wrote, “Scotland has more in common with the rest of the United Kingdom, even after Brexit, than it does with anywhere else on Earth.” The SNP’s two most successful leaders, Alex Salmond and Nicola Sturgeon, always recognised this fact and took care to build the secessionist case on different grounds from cultural and social oppression, as summarised in the cry of “Freedom!” that rings out from the Mel Gibson/William Wallace character in Braveheart. Leery – and lacking the inspirational grievances – of “heroic” nationalism, they chose better governance and greater prosperity as their objectives, with Scotland imagined in Salmond’s phrase as “the Saudia Arabia of renewable energy”. Lloyd doubts that this reasoned, civic nationalism is what fuels the popular movement, which now “relies heavily on a distrust, a dislike [of England], most strongly expressed by some of Scotland’s most prominent writers, furthered by the nationalist leadership through a relentless depiction of the British political and governing class as chronically out of touch, London-centred and determined to impoverish Scotland with policies of austerity”. The writers he has in mind include Tom Nairn, James Kelman, the late Alasdair Gray, and the long-dead Hugh MacDiarmid. Some prize quotations are summoned. Gray divided English people who came to live in Scotland into two categories: “settlers”, who have the same status as “the Italians who brought us fish and chips”, and “colonists”, who can “look forward to a future back in England through promotion or by retirement”. Kelman refused, and refuses, to read English (as opposed to any other country’s) literature on the evidence-free grounds that: “Why would you want to read things that were treating you as an animal?” Scottish attitudes towards England more generally are difficult to gauge, but if hostility towards it exists as a significant factor in Scottish politics then the tone and personnel of the present Westminster government seem unlikely to bring about any decrease. Which brings us to a paradox. A book that is severely critical of Scottish nationalism becomes kindness itself when it turns to English nationalism. The author berates the SNP on many fronts: that it has never properly engaged with the difficulties that independence will bring; that its social and economic policies post-independence are either vague or absent; that it perpetuates Scotland’s proud but naive idea of itself as a nation of “confident globalists, well able to fend for themselves in the world’s market place, requiring to be protected from no peoples other than the English”. This is the author as a sceptical, scolding father figure. When he moves south a maternal side emerges, anxious to understand and forgive. The obvious similarities between nationalists north of the border and Brexiters south of it – their delusions as “confident globalists”, their need for enemies (London, Brussels), and their economic recklessness – are never invoked. English nationalism, Lloyd writes, has been characterised as a rightwing endeavour with its psychological origins in English/British exceptionalism and the empire. All wrong. In fact, he says, the blame must go to “the Englishman’s burden of the three Celtic statelets”, which were never grateful enough to England for their subsidies. While Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland got their devolved assemblies, England continued to be powerless and “enforcibly enfolded” inside Britain and the Union flag. It felt ignored and resentful. By this logic, Scottish nationalism and not the Bruges Group forged the first link in Brexit’s causal chain. He takes on the imperial argument with unusual literalness. Jacob Rees-Mogg is described as “in some ways the opposite of an imperialist” because he believes in the free market – as though this division in 19th-century Britain was anywhere near as clear-cut. Every Rees-Mogg mannerism suggests the word “empire”: his drawling superiority; his idolisation of martial figures such as generals Gordon and Napier (who thought the best way to “quieten” a conquered country was “a good thrashing first and great kindness afterwards”). Lloyd quotes a speech by Rees-Mogg in praise of free trade, but even here the MP for North East Somerset can’t help but sound imperial: “Britain has been called on to be a shaper not only of our destiny but that of the whole world.” And Brexit critics such as Fintan O’Toole (to whom Lloyd takes especial exception) are, after all, not suggesting that Rees-Mogg and his colleagues want to march into Matabeleland with rifle, flag and drum, only that an emotional residue from Britain’s era as the supreme power bloats their view of England’s capability and destiny. Lloyd himself often reaches back to his upbringing in East Fife, in a fishing town that in the 1950s and 60s was far more “Scottish” than it is now, though that identity, like most others, has never been a simple thing. His grandfather repaired fishing boats; his mother was a hairdresser; he never knew his English father; his Polish stepfather worked in the mines. He evokes life there more than half-a-century ago with a lively eye for the particular, to show how a distinctive local identity could flourish within a political culture that was unionist and led from London. His book is never better than when it attacks Scottish ideas of English oppression. Where it fails is its refusal to recognise that England has changed – from a stable and predictable neighbour into a volatile, abrasive and rather friendless country going who-knows-where. Lloyd suggests some form of federalism will hold the UK together, and wants future referendums to stipulate a majority of at least 60% before the status quo can be changed. Good ideas, probably: we know how divisive narrow majorities can be. But where are the federalists? And where is the SNP politician saintly enough to accept this higher bar when the Brexiters now in power were delighted to accept a much lower one? Forces great and small, the pandemic on the one hand and Salmond’s trial on the other, have made the Union’s future anyone’s guess. • Should Auld Acquaintance Be Forgot: The Great Mistake of Scottish Independence is published by Polity (£20).