The Way Out, part of the BBC’s Performance Live strand, is set within the bricks-and-mortar reality of Battersea Arts Centre, with a camera capturing the drama in one unbroken shot. This might have given the 40-minute film a gritty, documentary feel but the story quickly slips into less solid space and drops down a rabbit hole. Our latter-day Alice (Bláithín Mac Gabhann), named only as the Outsider, enters the building at night to find it alive with entertainment. The white rabbit figure is played by Omid Djalili, a Guide dressed in the red coat and hat of an impresario, and Wonderland is what Mac Gabhann finds along the labyrinthine corridors and halls of the arts venue. Djalili quotes Lewis Carroll to drive the point home as he and a silent Mac Gabhann stumble across seemingly impromptu live acts. There is song, dance, spoken word, cabaret, hula-hooping and acrobatics, all strung together in a structure that imitates an immersive theatre show, with snatches of dialogue between the acts. It is a curious adventure indeed, and might easily have become clumsy in its central endeavour to showcase the talents of the performers who appear around the next corner. But it works, wondrously, and if the idea of capturing the magic of live performance though the static medium of film sounds like a contradiction in terms, Suri Krishnamma’s production pulls it off and builds to some bewitching moments. The uninterrupted “single-take” filming helps to give it a seamlessness and fluidity that conjures the sense of an organic, moving show, without becoming giddy or breathless. Djalili is a co-writer, along with Krishnamma and Nicholas Mark Harding, and his character talks in endless – and initially infuriating – oxymorons (“we need to go up to go down”, “the longest way round is the shortest way home” and so on). But he wins us over with comic vulnerability: “I look in the mirror and see a wizened, short, fat kebab-shop owner’s son … but inside me there’s a thin, high cheek-boned, flamboyant luvvie.” There is one showstopper after another within the performances: Botis Seva emerges as a misshapen shadow along a corridor and his hip-hop infused choreography in Quicksand grows into a mesmerising series of staggers, flails and falls. Le Gateau Chocolat sits in a cavernous room, a melancholic figure in folds of fabric, and sings a stunning solo, Liminal. Sanah Ahsan’s fierce performance poetry, Come As You Are, is set to Sam Peña’s improvised piano music and is an exhilarating declaration of love and an invocation to bare the soul. The Grade II-listed building in which it is set – damaged by fire in 2015 – adds to the romance. Its frescoes are shown alongside its pockmarks, exposed pipes and crumbling plaster, and there is glory in the unvarnished beauty. As a show, it is unapologetically sentimental in its message about the transformative power of performance. It’s not the destination but the journey that counts, say Djalili in another of his paradoxes. But it reminds us of the journey that performance takes us on, imaginatively, and it leaves us with yearning. Available to watch on BBC iPlayer.