Mitch Cronin, the Queensland Cup’s grand final captain, has died in what has been described as a training accident after family members reportedly found him in his Brisbane backyard pool on Friday. He had reportedly just completed a weights session before deciding to cool down in his pool. An autopsy will be completed, with Cronin suffering a suspected heart attack. The 27-year-old spent time with both Brisbane and Canberra without making his NRL debut before piloting Wynnum Manly to the Queensland Cup final last year. The Seagulls hooker, who also worked as a teacher’s aide, was one of the Queensland Cup’s standouts and had not given up on his NRL dream. Cronin’s manager, Paul Hogan, confirmed his death to NewsCorp and said it was a “tragic loss of life”. “This has left Wynnum club, their players and myself totally shocked,” he said. “He was an outstanding young man and my thoughts are with his family. We are all shattered.” Current and former teammates posted tributes on social media. Former Raiders teammate Jordan Rapana wrote: “Man I still don’t want to believe it! You got me through some of the toughest times of my life! I love you my brother, fly high you absolute legend, love you forever brother! Okioki teina... QUEENSLANDER!!!!” The QRL competitions manager, Dave Maiden, said Cronin was an outstanding person and leader who inspired those around him. “He was a quality human being who will be mourned by many and missed by all,” he said. “The people who came across him will be in state of disbelief ... He’s one of the good ones.” The Seagulls’ chief executive, Hanan Laban, described Cronin as a quiet achiever who was fearless on the field, yet humble and modest. “We are devastated … and we send out love to Chris, Andrea, Ben, Amy and the Cronin family,” said Laban. “Mitch was an exceptional young man who was loved and respected by his teammates, his coaching staff, our supporters and the wider rugby league community. “From the moment he arrived at Wynnum he embodied the values of the Seagulls through his positive attitude, strong work ethic, and deep care for his teammates and his club.”