Plants, like most things, go in and out of fashion. There is a tradition of English cottage gardening in my neighbourhood, where orchards grew a century ago. But with the climate arching towards the sub-tropical, rather than the temperate, the dainty English roses drooped from the heat. Then, local gardeners realised the value of hardier native species. May Gibbs, the famous illustrator and author, lived in the neighbouring suburb. The popularity of her illustrations – though her subjects were native to Western Australia, not Sydney – ignited the imagination of children and gardeners. Australiana took hold and began showing up in the works of modernists artist like Margaret Preston, who also lived nearby. Sweet daphne and forget-me-not bushes grew in the understory of gorgeous hakea laurina, with their bold, dusty pink pinwheel flowers, alongside grevillea christened with varietal names like Iced Vovos. Realising that the bulbs had a short-lived season, people started planting more perennials too – chrysanthemums; a multitude of scented geranium varieties; nasturtiums in a riot of colours and variegations; stiff, garish-hued paper daisies; golden wattles; banksias and bottle brushes. These days, they’re nary seen on verges. But these plants served a purpose, besides throwing cheer into the air for all passersby to enjoy. They attract the honey eaters, pollinators and many of them served as natural pest control, warding off predators with their polyphenols. When colourful flowers bordering lawn fell out of favour, they were replaced by uniform hydrangeas and hedges of complacent, white hybrid roses that have neither scent nor charm, but do look very lovely cut in a vase or jam jar. Now, we’re swinging back to more useful gardens. With seed shortages, it may not be easy to buy the most fashionable plants – edibles. However, you can still enjoy a time-honoured gardening tradition and make excellent use of companion plants. Think of companion planting like a neighbourly friendship – struck by trading gardening advice over a low fence. Like good neighbours, companion planting will help the rest of your garden out. If you’re just starting, here are some plants to consider as companions, borders and soul lifters, that serve multiple purposes. Comfrey: I plant comfrey everywhere, but especially under citrus trees. It is a permaculture 101 plant with so many uses. It has a mighty, deep taproot and pulls nitrogen out of the soil to the surface to enrich its neighbours that might otherwise struggle to access nitrogen due to their shallower roots. The leaves can be cut and dropped to make a readily available fertiliser and mulch all at the same time. Voila! Comfrey is also known as knitbone due its use for wound healing, and calming of irritated skin – the roots and leaves are used to makes salves. Lastly, the clustered bell-shaped flowers are pleasing and are a great pollinator attractant. Lavender: One of the calmest scents, that also has anti-bacterial and anti-fungal properties. It is great for keeping mosquitoes at bay. Grow it, and you will find yourself making little dried out lavender potpourri pillows, as I am doing, to stash in cupboards to repel moths – something my aunt taught me. Chamomile: There are two predominant varieties that are easily sourced in Australia, Roman and German chamomile. They have a distinctive smell, and are a cousin of the pineappleweed otherwise known as wild chamomile, which I absolutely adore, much to the disgust of my Scandinavian farmer friends who see them just as weeds. They make wonderful borders, and the flowers can be dried for a delicious calming tea. Houttuynia cordata aka fish mint: With its heart-shaped leaves, this is one of the most unassuming ground covers. It grows easily and often pops up unexpectedly in gardens in Australia. Fish mint has long been used for food and medicine in South East Asia to treat pneumonia, hypertension, constipation, fevers and for liver detoxification. You can guess what it tastes like. All the mints: For their beautiful fragrance as well as their lovely nature. Mints creep along to act as a wonderful living mulch. I have mine covering the bases of our fig trees. Round mint in particular is easy to cultivate and an excellent addition to our home cooking. They are also excellent pest deterrents – repelling ants, spiders and mosquitoes. Anything that contains citronella Catnip: Which also contains nepetalactone (the part that cats love) and is a deterrent for flea beetles, mosquitos and cockroaches. Artemisia aka wormwood or mugwort: Japanese mugwort is used for cooking, both fresh and dried in mochi rice dumpling, as well as medicinally as a tool alongside acupuncture where they are made into moxa for moxibustion. Lemon myrtle: Probably containing the highest amount of pure citral oil of any plant. If I had my way, the list would continue for days, because I’m a kitchen sink kind of person. Go big or go home. Since we are all at home, we may as well go big and plant not only edibles but all their friends too. While it may not be visible to the naked eye, under the ground all these plants will form a network association to support each other. Even if they are just in pots next to each other, you will certainly find that they’re talking.