Photographer Lucien Lung had been trying to unique find a way to cover the coronavirus pandemic despite being unable to leave his home. Using webcams, he captured the planet in lockdown at a specific time on a symbolic date: 4 April, the day Covid-19 cases exceeded 1m across the globe. “We’ve seen many pictures of empty places – deserted symbolic landmarks were a must have for photographers,” Lung says. “But how do you go further and tell it in a way that brings something more? “The public space and the way it’s occupied (or not) has become part of the story now. And webcams give this opportunity of accessing many different places, ‘freezing’ the world at a given time and looking at it.” Lung chose 4 April for its symbolism as the day of the Qingming festival in China. “[It’s] the day we usually go to the cemetery to sweep the tombstones, celebrate and remember our ancestors. With the crisis this year, that certainly didn’t happen,” he says. “I looked at the evolution of the crisis, calculated the progression, and took a bet that a new threshold would be crossed that Saturday, and it was: for the first time, the number of coronavirus cases in the world went over 1m, half of mankind was under lockdown measures, the situation in Italy was stabilising, and the centre of the crisis moved from Europe to the United States.” Lung chose images captured at noon for two reasons: for the light, and because this was a time of day when the streets are supposed to be bustling with life. “There are actually a lot of webcam choices online,” he says. “There are companies broadcasting the view from their buildings, tourist hot spots, surveillance cameras. “The idea was to get a general overview of the world. To do that, landmarks are the easiest, of course, both to find and for viewers who are able to quickly identify the places and connect with them.” Equally, locations that can appear mundane have been particularly revealing during the coronavirus outbreak – as tollbooths, airports, beaches and shopping malls have all been silenced and are still. “A large part of the work was preparation: identifying the webcams, how to get to them, if they were trustworthy, what time I would need to be in front of my computer. And hoping they would still be connected on the right day,” he says. Tracking down a great view of Karbala in Iraq came to nothing when the camera wasn’t working on the day. “There was really no alternative to being in front of the computer repeatedly at the right time, keeping in mind that when it’s noon in Christchurch (New Zealand) it’s 1am in Paris. That made for a long day,” he says. “I like the idea that most webcams film continuously and don’t keep their recordings. You have to be there at that moment and get it. Like photography, there’s no going back and shooting again if the moment has passed.” The limitations of the project – in which areas in such as Africa and China, for example, are under-represented – also illustrate modern globalisation, says Lung. “Africa has far fewer cameras than other continents. Economic development and connectivity to the global internet come to mind as factors of explanation. “In China, cameras do exist in public areas all across the country. The facial recognition and surveillance system being implemented means that 600 million cameras are set to be installed by the end of 2020, but there’s no accessing them, and the links I did manage to find would rapidly be offline. “When I talk about a state of the world, I’m well aware it’s the state of a connected world,” he says. “It seems antinomic at first for a photographer to work with webcams and images produced by machines that you don’t control. That was certainly a first for me. But with lockdown measures enforced and everyone asked to make an effort to stay home, you have to work with what you have.” His view is that the pictures are powerful for their truthfulness. “You can’t lie, you don’t get to choose what you take a picture of. There’s no waiting for a square to empty before taking the pictures, you’re stuck with shooting at noon and the situation you have in your screen. “But that gives the images a sort of strong objective value.”