The UK’s competition watchdog will next week set out measures to tackle concerns about refunds and cancellations in the travel industry after a surge in complaints. On Friday, the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) said four in five of 21,000 complaints received by its coronavirus taskforce related to refunds and cancellations. The government-backed body said it was “particularly concerned” about firms refusing refunds, charging high administration or cancellation fees and pressuring consumers into accepting vouchers instead of cash refunds. My flight to Europe is cancelled. All I’m being offered is an alternative flight or vouchers. Is this legal? No. But that hasn’t stopped a number of airlines doing exactly that. All flights on EU carriers within, or into the EU, and all flights leaving from an EU airport, are protected by the EU’s “denied boarding” rules, which require a full refund in seven days when flights are cancelled. The problem for consumers is that enforcing these rights is proving very difficult. After initially promising to refund passengers within 20 working days, Ryanair has now said passengers should accept vouchers valid for 12 months, or wait until the Covid-19 pandemic is over for a refund. Refunds at British Airways are only being processed by customer services which, of course, is impossible to contact. easyJet, initially only offered refunds through customer services but now has a web portal to request refunds. Note: the EU cancellation rules do not apply to non-EU carriers where the flight started outside the EU – for example, a Korean Air flight from Seoul to London. In the face of a no-refund policy, what should I do? Taking the offer of replacement vouchers in the current climate is highly risky given the airline may not be around in six months. While some will be happy to accept vouchers, many will not. Coby Benson of the specialist flight compensation lawyers, Bott and Co, advises passengers to submit their refund request in writing, using the following text: I understand that my flight [fight number] on [flight date] has been cancelled and I therefore request a full refund pursuant to articles 5(1)(a) and 8(1)(a) of EC Regulation No.261/2004. You are reminded that the refund must be made within seven days. For the avoidance of doubt, I do not accept a travel voucher. If the airline does not respond or does not agree then the passenger can either issue court proceedings or use Alternative Dispute Resolution. If your flight cost more than £100 and was booked using a credit card, you can hold the card provider jointly liable. When things calm down we suspect many passengers will be forced down this route. My flight operated as scheduled but I was unable to go on it. What then? The fact that the government advised against all but essential travel means travel insurance policies should pay foreign trip cancellation claims provided you bought your policy before the pandemic was declared on 11 March. Miles Brignall “The taskforce is looking closely at these practices – with a focus on sectors and individual businesses that have been the subject of a high volume of complaints – and next steps will be announced next week,” the CMA said. “The CMA will not hesitate to take enforcement action if there is evidence that businesses have breached competition or consumer protection law.” The proposed action comes after the consumer group Which? claimed that 20 of the UK’s largest airline operators were illegally withholding refunds that should be paid within 14 days. Which? also found that 10 of the UK’s biggest travel companies, including Love Holidays and Tui, were not offering full refunds within the legal time limit. The CMA taskforce has received 21,000 complaints about coronavirus-related issues since its launch last month. It has sent advisory or warning letters to 187 firms after receiving 2,500 complaints about large price rises on food and personal hygiene products, such as hand sanitiser. The largest price increases complained about related to hand sanitiser, with a reported median rise of 367%. The average increase across all complaints about price hikes – which related to rice, eggs flour, toilet paper and paracetamol – was 130%. The CMA said it had written to trade bodies representing convenience stores and the online trading sites Amazon and eBay in its attempt to tackle price rises. It said it was “continuing to engage” with eBay and Amazon to ensure listings that charge unjustifiable prices for essential goods were removed quickly.