I wasn’t much of a reader as a kid. Books and words required far too much attention; I was much happier laid out dribbling mindlessly on the sofa watching cartoons, gameshows and endlessly flicking channels. As much as my concerned family and frustrated teachers tried to press me into reading, nothing seemed to stick. Thankfully, though, my friends and I became obsessed with one particular series of books: The Edge Chronicles by Paul Stewart and Chris Riddell. First published in 1998, the illustrated fantasy saga of sky pirates and floating citadels is still being published, currently totalling 18 volumes. I was drawn in by Riddell’s incredibly detailed drawings of bulbous, grotesque goblins and lithe, shifty men, all inhabiting this radical sky-bound universe, then hooked on Stewart’s fast-moving prose and action-packed narratives. Going back to the books for the first time in almost 20 years, I was sceptical. The intervening decades have seen me keep up my love of TV – namely in my role at the Guardian – but also move forward in my taste for books, which became an equally enduring passion. After university courses stacked with postmodernism, postcolonialism, structuralism and all the other “isms”, I had been sucked into the allure of the weighty, “difficult” tome; books you read not just for pleasure but to say that you’ve read. Surely a children’s book now would be too easy and too boring? Picking up the first book, the 439-page Curse of the Gloamglozer, the drawings were just as vivid as I remembered, beginning with the Hieronymus Bosch-levels of detail in the levitating city of Sanctaphrax. And then I got stuck. There are so many characters with obscure names to remember: Quint, Wind Jackal, Ice Fox, Linius Pallitax, Ramrock, Queep, in the opening pages alone. How did I keep track of all these as a 10-year-old? I had skimmed over the introduction which explains why these sky pirates exist (I was too distracted by the drawings) so now I had no idea why one ship was fighting another and why there were goblin slaves onboard. Aren’t slaves a bit intense for a kids’ book? Turns out years of reading nonsensical “literary” syntax may have taken away my capacity to follow a story meant for children. Yet I persevered, and things began to fall into place. I soon remembered that first buzz of getting hooked on a story that was coloured purely by my imagination. TV fills in all gaps, but books give the mind ample space to roam. I was hooked, too, on the young apprentice Quint’s quest to find out what had been plaguing his master Linius, and his developing relationship with the young Maris. I read all 439 pages in a day, desperate to know the ending. We are understandably all looking for means of escape in these panic-fuelled times. Reading this volume of The Edge Chronicles, I remembered what reading purely for pleasure felt like. What it was to lose yourself in a text, not for its stylistic intricacies or knowing commentary on the world, but for its imaginative capacity to be pure entertainment. It was the feeling of reading purely for yourself. It’s something I’ll be looking out for in my next read – perhaps the next 17 volumes of the Chronicles?