Ian Macdonald is right to point out the downside of attributing sainthood to NHS staff (If we care about NHS staff, we should stop calling them saints, 25 April). A flipside of sainthood is martyrism. I work with many healthcare staff who buy into the signals that they should always be self-sacrificing, saying yes when they really want to say no and be willing to “go the extra mile”. Faced with impossible demands, both internally and externally, they cannot hold to healthy boundaries for themselves and for others; the end results are the extremes of stress, exhaustion and burnout, and monumentally high levels of sickness, absenteeism and attrition. While being clapped every Thursday is an acknowledgement of their emotional and physical labours beyond the call of duty, and a temporary morale-booster, it would be far better to honour them by recognising their ordinary humanity with practical, long-term measures. First, give them all a pay rise that acknowledges the losses they have all endured after 10 years of austerity, and then some. Second, make it a legal requirement for the NHS to use evidence-based tools, which are nowadays available, to ensure workloads are always matched by staffing levels. Third, now that the dependency on immigrant carers is plain for all to see, bypass the still hostile values and byzantine rules of the Home Office and reward all those foreign workers who have given so much with British citizenship.Rev Prof Stephen WrightUniversity of Cumbria • At 8pm on the third Thursday of asking, I eventually appeared on my doorstep, clapping my thank you to care workers and clinicians. No more prevarication. Not doing so in previous weeks might mean I did not support them: me an NHS man whose daughter and wife work at the hospital frontline. But Ian Macdonald has articulated my dilemma. As I stand there declaring support, I am ashamed of sending colleagues into mortal risk on my behalf, disgusted that we charge many of them for that privilege, appalled by the unplayable hand dealt to the NHS by the UK government, and amazed that (if we are being led by the science) we have the least scientific scientists in Europe, if not the world. I will be back on the step on Thursday showing my support. But like most binary choices, it is not that simple.Dr Alan WillsonSwansea • It was interesting to read Ian Macdonald’s column suggesting NHS workers are human, not saints. As an NHS nurse for over 40 years I completely agree. One of the most powerful acts has been the Thursday banging and clapping in appreciation. The humanness in all NHS workers cannot fail to be moved by this national event but it comes after years of abuse. Most would settle not for a weekly clap but for this kindness and plain civility to be sustained on a daily basis in work when coronavirus has been and gone. The most significant change is that people are being kind rather than shouting at us. I pray for that.Elaine TomlinsConsultant nurse, Southampton • For any of your readers who would like to put in their window, alongside the rainbow and the “I love the NHS” signs, a more political message, the following, which I received recently, might do the trick: “Tory Voters. At the next election. Stay Home. Protect the NHS. Save lives.”Mike CantorLondon