Picasso and PaperTake a video trip through the dizzying abundance of Picasso’s creativity and see how many surprising uses a genius can find for a piece of paper.• Royal Academy, London. Johanna Unzueta: Tools for LifePolitical and social commentary from this Chilean-American artist is made immediate by a mini-documentary and virtual exhibition.• Modern Art Oxford. National Gallery walk throughTake a virtual stroll around the National Gallery with Google Street View, seeing masterpieces by Leonardo, Botticelli and Van Gogh.• National Gallery, London. Jim DineThe latest show by this radical and endlessly creative American visionary can be enjoyed in a film without sound.• Cristea Roberts Gallery, London. This CorrosionA video tour of a group show that stars Tasha Amini, Lisa Brice, Allison Katz and more.• Modern Art, London. A mural by street artist Lionel Stanhope on a bridge wall in Ladywell, south-east London. All round the world, the coronavirus outbreak is the subject of topical, colourful and attention-grabbing street art. See more. How to support artists struggling in lockdown, from home David Hockney urged us to escape lockdown through drawing A lockdown twist on the portrait opened doors Axel Scheffler and Julia Donaldson charmed with their coronavirus cartoons A couple donated 100 artworks collected on their trips across Britain to Hepworth Wakefield Gallery Cosmic visions of conquering space laid behind the iron curtain Who shot a man in Reno? A culture quiz tested your knowledge from Warhol’s portraits to catherdral spires Rene Burri’s shadowy figures made for a memorable shot of São Paulo Trolls on tour and Raphael’s search for beauty were among the week’s best culture, indoors A Boston exhibition on John Singer Sargent and race in the US was conquered by coronavirus, but its catalogue is required reading The great British art quiz continued with impressionism and pop art at Pallant House Gallery in Chichester … … followed by a test of your Newlyn School knowledge with Penlee House Gallery and Museum, Cornwall … … the collection of Derby Museum and Art Gallery … … 17 and 18th-century treasures at Bath’s Holburne Museum … … and the Ulster Museum’s collection in Belfast Tracey Emin’s lockdown diary is a heady mix of black paint and hot cross buns in the bath Creating a masterpiece at home could be as simple as making a tuna sandwich … … while the coronavirus art challenge proved that tinfoil, headphones and a pan are all you need to become the art You can take a virtual tour around the Tate Modern’s Andy Warhol exhibition The Arts Society is launching a free online arts programme aimed at the over-70s Why tiny figures have the power to bring photojournalists’ images to life An online art sale, including works by Henry Moore and Bill Brandt, is raising money for the NHS Pivotal moments captured by Magnum photographers went on sale to aid Covid-19 relief This ‘healing’ Louise Bourgeois exhibition can be experienced online A New York journal combats isolation by sending out artworks in the post How to build a hospital in nine days – the emergency architecture of the coronavirus pandemic The artist with the remote-controlled robotic body talked making a career ‘out of being a failure’ Sheila Rock caught the faces of punk just as it all went haywire Art offers vital comfort in times of crisis How a new era of virtual culture is dawning in the face of crisis The British Museum looks to crack an egg mystery A photographer hits the boardwalk to capture the eccentric life of Atlantic City Christ Crucified (1475) by Antonello da Messina The art of this Sicilian visionary is beautifully pure, intense and passionate. Antonello was one of the first Italian artists to explore the subtlety of oil paints, which he learned about from Flemish paintings that made their way to the court of Naples. Here he uses that refined skill to paint a very human, vulnerable Christ whose agony on the cross is all the more touching for being realistic, without the gore and horror of medieval art. Antonello anticipates Michelangelo in making us feel an almost sensual compassion for Jesus. This is an eloquent pared back Easter egg of powerful feeling.• National Gallery, London. To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here.