On a recent Sunday afternoon, I broke my foot. Naturally, I have been wondering what I did to deserve it. Or what lessons I am now meant to learn. I’ve had weird luck lately – or “blessings in disguise”, a phrase that more and more I can’t hear without thinking of someone or something wearing a trenchcoat and dark glasses. In the film Moonstruck, Ronny Cammareri loses his hand in a bread-slicer while talking to his brother. Ronny’s fiancé leaves him, and for five years he blames his brother. Then he meets Loretta Castorini, who has a theory. Ronny is a wolf, she says, who chewed off his own paw to escape the trap of marrying the wrong woman. The most Moonstruckian reason I might have for dropping the heavy frame of a disassembled Ikea bed on my right foot would be to convince my husband to return to Australia. This is not only stupid, but impossible: he is locked down in Lebanon. I am in Sydney, having started a new job at the Guardian, liveblogging coronavirus for eight hours a day, last month. I moved home from Beirut just over a week before the World Health Organization declared a pandemic. My husband and I hadn’t planned to be apart for long, but within 10 days of my leaving, Lebanon closed its airport. So here I was: gainfully employed in a city that has never looked more beautiful, separated from the person I love most. I looked for the meaning: what exactly was under the trenchcoat? I thought about how, cosmically, I had found myself here as I literally hopped out of an Uber and into the emergency room, and stopped thinking about it a moment later, when the young man at the patient check-in counter saw me and burst into kind laughter. Aside from a woman waiting for her husband, I was the only person in the ER. The doctor arrived, also full of good humour. “I’ll push and you steer,” he said. “Deal?” I was given a wheelchair, which I was hopeless at using and the man laughed again. He stopped chuckling only when he asked if I had a partner and, pathetically, I fought back tears. This was not the coronavirus section of the hospital. It was reserved for the kinds of emergencies that strike when there isn’t a pandemic. Many of these happen when people leave their houses. The quiet, the nurses would tell me, was also because people were afraid to go anywhere near a hospital. The doctor arrived, also full of good humour. “I’ll push and you steer,” he said. “Deal?” He was delighted that I happened to be wearing boots when the accident happened. He was dismayed at the general – unpolished, scuffed – state of those boots. He asked how much alcohol I consumed in a typical week, and laughed and laughed when I said “a normal amount.” By now, a nurse had arrived to take me for X-rays. Then a second nurse came to fetch me – with little for anyone to do, I was hot property. I was wheeled past a group of nurses watching TV. On it, people in Bondi were being fined for failing to maintain social distancing. I hopped back out of the hospital, too, (with the help of crutches), and without – thank you Australian universal healthcare – paying a thing. I felt giddy when I got home. Drunk, almost. And then I realised that it was all the human contact. Laughter. Kindness. Touch. The doctor, with too much time on his hands, had included the brand of my boots and my stupid alcohol answer in the notes he gave me, as a joke. I’ve since gone from hopping to hobbling. Soup, Anzac biscuits, Badedas and ice-cream arrived from friends and family. My mom, in South Africa, placed her phone on her bedroom pillow, and recorded a video – as though I was in bed, watching her leave the room and return with a cup of tea. I’m no Loretta Castorini, but if there’s one thing I’ve learned from breaking my foot it is this: I’m fine. Many of us are. Bored, worried, sure, but generally OK. The question, when all of this is over, is what those of us who weren’t knocked around by it – who didn’t lose our jobs or have loved ones die, who weren’t essential staff – will do about being the luckiest people in the world. As the pandemic appeared in country after country, the healthy were urged to worry not about how the virus might harm us if we caught it – but how, if we then passed it on, it might harm others. It’s a pretty good philosophy when it comes to other choices we make – politics, consumption, climate change – too. • Helen Sullivan is a world news liveblogger and reporter for Guardian Australia, based in Sydney