Lynn Faulds Wood, who has died of a stroke aged 72, was a journalist whose warm personality and relentless campaigning made her popular on screen as a consumer champion over three decades in breakfast television and as a presenter of Watchdog. By the time she appeared on TV in the 1980s, she was a seasoned campaigner in battling to right public grievances through her work in newspapers and magazines. While writing her Lynn’s Action Line column for the Sun, she drummed up support from 100,000 readers for the closure of Club Row, a live animal market in the East End of London that faced increasing opposition from the RSPCA and animal rights protesters. She showed her “pen and sword” commitment by leading thousands of readers on a march to Margaret Thatcher in Downing Street. The passing of a private member’s bill closing the market in 1983 was a direct result of Faulds Wood’s commitment to a cause. In the same year, she went into TV and, during her time on Watchdog, stepped out of the studio to confront those whom viewers felt needed to answer for their actions. Sometimes, she endured their wrath, suffering attacks with an axe and a dog chain, as well as almost being killed by the owner of a fleet of illegal lorries. When an investigation into counterfeiters put two fraudsters in prison, police told her she should wear a stab vest if she planned to continue such fearless campaigning. The nature of her activism changed when in 1991 she was diagnosed with advanced bowel cancer. Five years after surgery, she was given the all-clear; at the time when only a third of sufferers with her grade three cancer survived. “It was like the Dark Ages,” she said later. “The quality of colonoscopy was often poor and some of the surgery shameful. While we had some of the best surgeons, we also had some of the worst.” Faulds Wood threw her celebrity status, the knowledge she had quickly accumulated and her fierce determination into campaigning for better diagnosis and treatment of bowel cancer. She founded the charity Beating Bowel Cancer in 1997, then Lynn’s Bowel Cancer Campaign in 2003, and helped to set up the European Cancer Patient Coalition and MEPs Against Cancer to get the disease on governments’ agendas. She was later treated for skin cancer, and in 2009, she chaired Action Against Cancer, discussing a new European plan to combat all cancers, in Brussels. On TV, she spent a decade making programmes on the disease. For her 1993 World in Action documentary Doctor Knows Best?, she found research funding for a surgeon whose wife, a GP, died of bowel cancer. The results showed that the symptoms were different from those taught in medical schools – leading to the British government eventually publishing new guidance. Three years later, her World in Action programme Bobby Moore and Me, in which Faulds Wood interviewed Moore’s wife, Stephanie, revealed that the England footballer had been misdiagnosed and treated for irritable bowel syndrome for four years before he died aged 51 of bowel cancer – what Stephanie called an “unnecessary death”. Faulds Wood spent months answering the mailbag of almost 30,000 letters that followed the broadcast. Her 1995 series The Lady Killers, about women being threatened by diseases such as cervical cancer, led to the British Medical Association naming her medical broadcaster of the year. Lynn was born in Glasgow and grew up in Auchendennan, on the western shore of Loch Lomond. After attending the Vale of Leven academy, she gained an MA in languages from Glasgow University. During two years as a French teacher at Holland Park school, in London, she earned extra money by working behind the bar at a pub in Richmond upon Thames where she met John Stapleton, then a TV journalist on Nationwide, whom she married in 1977. She joined the programme as a researcher in 1976 before writing about consumer matters in Woman magazine’s Actionwoman column, then for the Daily Mail (1979-80) and the Sun (1980-83). She was also a consumer reporter on Cosmopolitan magazine and the daytime television show A Plus before joining the newly launched TV-am’s programme Good Morning Britain, on ITV, in 1983. A year later, she switched to the BBC’s rival, Breakfast Time (until 1986). In 1985, she teamed up with Nick Ross to present Watchdog, which had begun as a strand of the daily news magazine Nationwide five years earlier. She suggested Stapleton as a replacement in 1986 following Ross’s departure and the pair continued on the show until 1993. Product safety, particularly faulty electrical goods, was a growing concern and Faulds Wood’s description of “potential death traps” on Watchdog became common parlance as the programme influenced changes in laws and safety standards. She and Stapleton extended the brand with the school half-term series Junior Watchdog (1985 and 1987) and, on her own, Faulds Wood passed on warnings to younger viewers about dangerous toys, bicycle safety, fireworks and other hazards in the 1989 and 1990 runs of the Saturday morning show Going Live! Returning to ITV’s breakfast programme from 2003 to 2009, she presented the Lyn’ll Fix It consumer slot and, in 2006, she and Esther Rantzen – whose show That’s Life! had championed consumer issues – presented the investigative series Old Dogs, New Tricks. In 2014, she joined Sophie Raworth for the first series of Watchdog Test House. Later, she and Stapleton appeared on the BBC News channel’s newspaper review. She turned down an MBE in the 2017 New Year honours list on the grounds that the system was “tainted” and needed to be “cleaned up”. Faulds Wood is survived by Stapleton and their son, Nick, a documentary producer. • Lynn Faulds Wood, journalist and TV presenter, born 25 March 1948; died 24 April 2020