Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The number of fatalities from coronavirus in Italy rose by 566 on Monday, 135 more than on Sunday, bringing the total death toll to over 20,000. Almost half of the deaths (280) were registered in Lombardy, the northern region worst affected by the virus. The civil protection authority said the number of people who were currently infected had risen by 1,363 (1.3%) to 103,616, a further sign that the curve there is flattening. At least 1.8 million people have been infected and 116,098 have died worldwide, according to researchers at Johns Hopkins University, who have been tracking official and media reports. The tallies are likely to be underestimates due to different testing regimes and suspected underreporting of figures. A total of 11,329 patients have died in UK hospitals after testing positive, the UK’s Department of Health said, up by 717 from 10,612 in 24 hours. Belgian health authorities reported 303 more deaths in 24 hours, bringing the country’s total death toll from the outbreak to 3,903. Its death toll is lower than those in other European countries and the US due to its smaller population, but proportionally, the outbreak is now more deadly than in Italy. Health authorities in Singapore confirmed 386 more cases, the city-state’s biggest daily jump since the outbreak began there. That takes its total to 2,918 cases. A large number of the new cases are linked to outbreaks in migrant workers’ dormitories. As time runs out on emergency measures to limit the outbreak in Germany, the country’s National Academy of Sciences Leopoldina recommended a gradual relaxing of restrictions, as long as new infections stabilise and personal hygiene measures are maintained. The head of the World Health Organization (WHO), Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, urged caution over moves to lift some lockdown conditions. He said much was still unknown about the behaviour of the virus and emphasised that case finding, testing and isolating were still crucial to controlling the outbreak. Robert Redfield, director of the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), told NBC’s Today programme: “We are nearing the peak right now … You’ll know when you’re at the peak when the next day is actually less than the day before. We are stabilising right now.” The foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, said it was “still far too early” to change the advice, adding that the UK would be getting ahead of itself if ministers relaxed restrictions before medical experts advised them to. “There will come a time in the future where we can talk about relaxation or transition, but we are not there now,” he said. Spain’s overnight death toll fell by 102 to 517 in 24 hours, bringing the total to 17,489, the country’s health ministry said, adding that it was the smallest proportional daily increase since tracking began. The country’s death toll rose to 4,585, with 111 deaths overnight, a health ministry official said, adding that the total number of infected cases had reached 73,303 in the most affected Middle Eastern country.