Sir John Tooley, who has died aged 95, ran the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, for 18 years from 1970, as general administrator and then general director. During that time the organisation developed in many constructive ways: in succession to Georg Solti, Colin Davis was music director (1971-86) for most of Tooley’s tenure and the ROH continued to evolve as an internationally recognised house while retaining a nucleus of a native company, something that was subsequently lost. Both men believed strongly in bringing on British artists, who were to work alongside international performers of the highest distinction. The choice of opera directors was also expanded, and many innovative productions, not all of them, of course, successful, were staged. Tooley also played an important part in forging links with administrators in other countries, partly to stabilise artists’ fees, something that was never quite achieved, and partly to investigate the possibility of exchanging productions. That led to two memorable visits by overseas companies to Covent Garden, by the Bavarian State Opera in 1972 and La Scala, Milan, in 1976. Tooley also ensured the continued growth of the Royal Ballet into a company of world status, in collaboration with successive ballet directors, Kenneth MacMillan, Norman Morrice and Anthony Dowell, all encouraging the company’s work abroad, a tradition that continues. MacMillan’s Manon (1974) was followed by Mayerling (1978). In 1970 the Royal Ballet’s touring company returned to Sadler’s Wells theatre in north London, and seven years later it took the name of Sadler’s Wells Royal Ballet, with Peter Wright as director. Tooley looked for a new base for it outside London, and shortly before his retirement came the welcome invitation to a new home, realised in 1990 when it became Birmingham Royal Ballet. One of the early triumphs in opera of the new regime was the co-operation between Davis and the director Peter Hall. When that combination fell apart, Davis found a new stage partner in the East German director Götz Friedrich. The pair – under the general director’s benevolent control – created a new and exciting production of Wagner’s Ring cycle in the mid-1970s. There was also the sensible encouragement of Elijah Moshinsky as a director, which bore fruit in several notable stagings, most tellingly with Britten’s Peter Grimes (1975), Saint-Saëns’ Samson et Dalila (1981) and Verdi’s Otello with Plácido Domingo (1987). The magnetic conductor Carlos Kleiber gave a series of electrifying interpretations, and Domingo became a regular visitor, along with many other major singers. Among the British-trained talent, the careers of Kiri Te Kanawa and Thomas Allen, among others, were carefully nurtured. Tooley ensured that Bernard Haitink succeeded, in 1987, Davis’s long tenure as music director and he also instigated series of highly popular performances, sponsored by the Midland Bank, with ballet in a tent in Battersea Park, and space for promenaders in the stalls area of the opera house for opera and ballet. Live relays to a screen in the Covent Garden piazza were also initiated. Not all his innovations were successful, but he was determined to make the house accessible to a wider public. In all this he worked well with two chairmen of the board, first Lord Drogheda, then from 1974 Sir Claus Moser. Not everything flourished. Sometimes cast and/or directors were brought in merely because they were established “names”, rather than with any clear view of artistic merit, and too many productions seemed haphazardly cast. But Tooley was, on the whole, successful in his personal relationships with artists, always hastening backstage after a first night and, as far as possible in difficult circumstances, maintaining good relations with stage staff. He was also reasonably successful in managing the vexed question of finance, ever Covent Garden’s achilles heel. Born in Rochester, Kent, John was the son of Harry Tooley, a civil servant working in the Admiralty, and his wife, Rachael (nee Craske). From Repton school, Derbyshire, he went to Magdalene College, Cambridge, to study classics and history. Originally he intended to be a singer, but soon turned to music management. He was secretary of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama (1952-55) before being invited to join the staff of the Royal Opera House as assistant to David Webster, then its general administrator, in 1960 being made assistant general administrator. During the following decade, when Webster gradually faded from the scene mainly due to ill-health, Tooley’s role naturally gained in importance. So when he took over from Webster in 1970, he was fully conversant with the needs of the top job and able to carry on the work of the house without any abrupt change. He was knighted in 1979, and the following year his job title changed to general director. On retiring from the Royal Opera, he served on the boards or trusts of numerous arts organisations, including the Walton Trust, the Britten Pears Foundation, the Sidney Nolan Trust, Welsh National Opera and the Rudolf Nureyev Foundation. He was urbanity personified and very good company. His hail-fellow-well-met front, and apparent sang-froid in face of the inevitable crises inherent in his job, did not completely mask the iron hand behind it. Only a tough carapace would have ensured his lengthy period as head of a many-faceted and often rebellious organisation. He served both his staff and his public well. His autobiography, In House: Covent Garden, 50 Years of Opera and Ballet (1999), offered a frank assessment of his own achievements, trenchant criticism of his successors and a blueprint of what was needed for the future. In 1951 he married Judith Craig Morris, with whom he had three daughters, Sarah, Fiona and Rachel; they divorced in 1965. Three years later he married Patricia Bagshawe, with whom he had a son, Ben; they divorced in 1990. In 1995 he married Jennifer-Anne Shannon; they divorced in 2003. He is survived by his partner, Penny Souster, his four children, seven grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. • Sir John Tooley, opera administrator, born 1 June 1924; died 18 March 2020 • Alan Blyth died in 2007