New rules have come into force legally requiring most people in Germany to wear face masks on public transport, long-distance trains and in shops. The so-called Maskenpflicht (mask duty) was introduced in 15 of the country’s 16 states on Monday morning. The northern state of Schleswig-Holstein will on Wednesday be the last state to implement the legislation. Fines of between €25 and €10,000 can be imposed on those who fail to wear a mask, with rates differing widely across the country, and some states, such as Berlin and Brandenburg, insisting they would not levy fines at all, but would rely instead on people showing each other mutual respect by wearing them. Other states said they would allow a few days of grace for people to get used to the new rule. The heftiest fines will apply to shopkeepers whose staff are caught not wearing masks, and there are incremental fine systems in some states for repeat offenders. Authorities have been quick to insist the masks do not have to be medically approved. Scarfs or cloths over the nose or mouth are adequate. Tailors across the country, as well as bands of hobby sewers have been busy making masks to meet high demand, while there are reports of elastic shortages. Some states, such as Saxony and Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, have said they will provide masks to their citizens. But the decision has drawn scorn from some medical experts, who say non-medical masks will have little effect in stemming the spread of the virus, and could even encourage it, if masks are worn incorrectly. “Politicians have known for three months that we have this problem, and have not managed to have FFP2 masks (which filter the air and can keep viruses out) produced in Germany or to import them. That is not a problem that it can offload on to the people,” Frank Ulrich Montgomery, the chairman of the World Medical Association, told broadcaster Deutschlandfunk. He said the proper wearing of a mask was complicated. “People are in danger of contaminating themselves if they wear a mask incorrectly,” he said, adding that masks can lead to a false sense of security. Decision-makers have stressed the psychological importance of wearing a face covering, saying it sends out a signal to people who might come too near. They have repeatedly insisted the wearing of masks is altruistic, with the masks protecting less the wearer than those who they are in close proximity to, by limiting the dispersion of drops if a person coughs, sneezes or spits. As Deutsche Bahn, the national rail provider, announced the restrictions on its trains, it said there was a need for European countries to reach out and agree on rules for trains travelling across the borders with Belgium and the Netherlands, which unlike other borders have not closed. But as Germans sought to understand the rules – which could radically alter social interactions by hiding facial expressions – in a confusing twist car drivers were warned not to wear coverings that completely disguised their faces or risk a €60 fine. This is largely so they can still be recognised by speed cameras and police surveillance. Since October 2017 it has been illegal for people to cover their face while driving, with veils, burqas and niqabs specifically singled out. Passengers are not affected. In most states the mask duty applies to those aged six or seven and over. People with disabilities for whom wearing a mask would be inappropriate, such as those with breathing difficulties, are exempt. Amid calls for unified rules governing the Maskenpflicht, Angela Merkel, the German chancellor – who has offered tips on keeping masks hygienic such as ironing them – has said a meeting with all the state heads on Thursday will seek to at the very least come up with a nationwide fine system. A poll by the Kantar market research institute found that acceptance for mask wearing was extremely high, with 97% of those asked saying they supported the rule and recognised the importance of keeping it to help tackle coronavirus. 