On a cold, bright day a couple of weeks ago, a hearse drew up at a crematorium in Leicestershire for the funeral of an elderly woman who had died of natural causes. Six pallbearers hoisted the coffin, decorated with spring flowers, on to their shoulders and carried it to the catafalque as Vaughan Williams’ The Lark Ascending played. During a short ceremony, Sally-Ann Best, a civil celebrant, introduced music chosen by the family and read two poems. Between her, at the front of the crematorium chapel, and the funeral director standing respectfully at the back, there were rows of chairs. Every single one was empty. It was a funeral with no mourners – and not for a lack of relatives and friends. The woman’s family, most of whom lived 100 miles away, were unable to attend because of coronavirus restrictions. They were among increasing numbers of grieving people who are being denied the opportunity to say a final goodbye to their loved ones, leaving celebrants, priests and funeral directors to stand in as “proxy mourners”. Best, a member of the Institute of Civil Funerals, said she felt “very protective of the lady who had died” in the absence of family. “The words I was speaking seemed to be even more important; it was a massive mark of respect to go ahead with the ceremony even though I was the only person there.” The family told her “it brought them some comfort to know that their mum was still having a dignified and respectful funeral service”. Government guidelines, drawn up in conjunction with ethicists and faith leaders in recent weeks, permit close family members to attend funerals while observing physical distancing. The Church of England has banned church funeral services, saying immediate family only may attend at gravesides, and that burials can be live streamed to other relatives and friends. And a number of local authorities have banned funeral ceremonies in crematoria and cemeteries. Instead they are offering only “direct cremations”, in which there is no ceremony and mourners are not present, and burial services at gravesides, with a maximum of 10 mourners observing physical distancing guidelines. People in the UK will only be allowed to leave their home for the following purposes: Police will have the powers to enforce the rules, including through fines and dispersing gatherings. To ensure compliance with the instruction to stay at home, the government will: Parks will remain open for exercise, but gatherings will be dispersed. Some celebrants and funeral directors have called for an outright ban on ceremonies or clearer guidance, saying it is unfair to grieving families to have different rules applying in different parts of the country. Maggie Kinloch, a registered celebrant and chair of the Humanist Society Scotland, said the impact on grieving relatives of being unable to attend funerals would be profound and last a long time. “What we’re seeing at the moment is a generalised sense of grief across the world – not just for those we’ve loved and lost, but for our own ability to get on with our lives. This veneer of grief is massively compounded when a family lose someone they love. It’s grief upon grief. If you are unable to attend their funeral, it’s yet another layer of grief. “Families want to give their relatives the best possible celebration of their life, surrounded by people who knew them. The comfort of hugs and handshakes is hugely important. “These life rituals are shared acts of community. We want and need people with us to mark these significant moments in our lives.” Michael Cooper from Durham was unable to attend his mother’s funeral after she died aged 87 last month. The ceremony was livestreamed to him and other close family, but he said he was left with feelings of guilt and shame. “You should be there at the end, and I wasn’t. I felt ashamed in case other people were judging me. This is what was in my head – guilt and shame,” he said. “The ceremony was impeccable, except there was no one there who should have been there. I felt my mother was alone.” The funeral of Ismail Mohamed Abdulwahab, a 13-year-old boy from Brixton, south London, who died of Covid-19, took place earlier this month without any immediate family present after his mother and six siblings went into isolation. Mark Stephenson, a friend of the family who delivered a short speech on behalf of the family, said the child’s relatives were devastated they could not attend. Cruse, the bereavement charity, said it had already been contacted by people in distress over being unable to attend funerals, and it expected many more to calls its helpline in the coming weeks. “The rituals of saying goodbye to people we love are really important. The added complication for those in grief at the moment is the backdrop of countless other unattended funerals, the constant noise of news coverage, worries about their own health, income loss, children needing home-schooling,” said Andy Langford, clinical director of the charity. “Some people are saying they feel so numb they can’t express any feeling. Others find it comforting to know other people are going through a similar experience. Grief is individual.”