Music has its seasons. So much, in centuries past, was written for the church year. As the days lengthen, still cool but bright, trees turning green, I realise how much I associate this time with JS Bach. Thanks to his two magnificent choral works, the St Matthew Passion and its shorter sibling, the St John Passion, Bach has captured the musical calendar for spring and the period leading up to Easter. Part meditation, part drama, both works – composed when Bach was cantor of St Thomas church, Leipzig – relate the gospel story of Jesus’s crucifixion. For thousands of choral singers, instrumental musicians and audiences up and down the land and beyond, the annual experience of participating in these works is an act of ritual. Whatever vestige of Bach’s original Lutheran faith survives in today’s mostly secular performances, these works speak to heart and mind. They stop us in our tracks. They force us to pause, to enter another mental space, as music uniquely can. This year all performances have been cancelled. Our lives have already been stopped by Covid-19. Churches and concert halls are shut. Choirs, large or small, professional or amateur, are silent. Battered vocal scores, marked up with “stand”, “sit” and other vital instructions, remain on shelves until next year. Musicians’ livelihoods have been shattered. The Passions are guaranteed dates in the diary, but I’ve never heard a musician speak of this music as mere work. Bach is in our souls and psyches. This will be my first year without one of these Bach performances since I was at school. That’s a lot of decades of devoted attendance. I first sang in the St Matthew Passion, as part of the additional soprano chorus (called the ripieno, literally meaning stuffing) when I was a teenager. For two years, thanks to a school music teacher, I was part of the annual performances at the Royal Festival Hall, when the Bach Choir sang its heart out for its celebrated and cherubic conductor David Willcocks. He was quite a celebrity from his TV appearances as music director of the choir of King’s College, Cambridge, responsible for the annual Christmas eve service of “Nine Lessons and Carols”. The mezzo-soprano Janet Baker was a regular soloist. To share a platform, in however minor a way, with one of the most magnificent singers in modern times, meant something even to a recalcitrant adolescent more interested in the Top 40. These performances were all-day events, on a Sunday before Easter or on Good Friday. Part One was sung in the morning. Then performers and audience ate lunch, scattered around the Festival Hall’s open spaces and stairwells, thermoses and Tupperware to hand, before Part 2. More than two and a half centuries after their composition (the St John in 1724, the St Matthew in 1727), a communal tradition, different from Bach’s but every bit as intense, was alive and perpetually renewing itself. Since then, Bach has been central to my life. I sang and played in these works as a student and returned often to the Festival Hall to hear the Bach Choir. I listened, in turn, to my 11-year-old daughter singing in the ripieno with her school choir at a local church. Her conversion to Bach, without parental coercion, was as real as mine. (I’m still agonised by the memory of her little sister, who couldn’t be left at home, snoring audibly through the quietest moments of the crucifixion drama. I should note that, a little later, her Bach moment came too.) For the past few years my Bach fix has been provided by the small choir of Polyphony, with the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment at St John’s Smith Square, just metres from the Houses of Parliament. In 2017 their performance took place days after the Westminster terror attack. The sound of intermittent police sirens added to the mood of solace and mutuality. This week I had planned to hear the choir of King’s College, Cambridge, sing the St John Passion in the college’s famous chapel, under their new choral director, Daniel Hyde – his first Easter in the job – a successor at two removes to David Willcocks. Listening to one of the tens of available recordings only goes so far in replicating the experience of being there. These are works of collaboration and community. For a few hours – in every year but this – we can sit side by side with a friend or stranger, responding to the sung narrative of the Easter story, in whatever way we choose: a story of violence, prejudice, sacrifice, redemption. We make our own journeys, alone and together, through the mysteries and joys of Bach’s music. Next spring, the singers and players will be back. Support them. They need you, but you may also find you need them. If you don’t know this music, start with the alto aria Erbarme dich from the St Matthew Passion, a cry for mercy, “for the sake of my tears”. A solo violin weaves its sobbing melody around the voice. It’s a lament. Yet as ever with Bach’s music, joyous in its unfolding beauty, it is also a dance, which moves at the pulse of the human heart. Radio 3’s broadcasts of Bach’s St John Passion and St Matthew Passion are available on BBC Sounds St Matthew PassionBach Collegium Japan, conductor Masaaki Suzuki. A towering performance by a leading Bach authority (BIS). The Choir of King’s College, Cambridge, with the Academy of Ancient Music, conductor Stephen Cleobury. A new recording, fresh and committed (KGS). St John PassionCollegium Vocale Gent, conductor Philippe Herreweghe. Always thoughtful and dramatic (OutHere Music). Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment & Polyphony, conductor Stephen Layton. Top choir, top orchestra, top soloists (Hyperion). Easter OratorioMonteverdi Choir, English Baroque Soloists, conductor John Eliot Gardiner. This less familiar work paired with the superb cantata Actus tragicus. St John Passion from IsolationA YouTube premiere by Oxford Bach Soloists, each musician performing in isolation, in aid of Help Musicians UK. 