Key developments in the coronavirus pandemic on Sunday include: The country registered 525 new coronavirus deaths on Sunday, the lowest daily rate in the last two weeks. For the first time, the total number of people hospitalised fell in a day, from 29,010 to 28,949. Ethiopia has announced the first death of a patient with coronavirus. The health ministry said the patient was a 60-year-old Ethiopian woman who had spent six days in intensive care. Barbados reported the death of an 81-year-old man who had an underlying medical condition and who had travelled to the UK. Scotland’s chief medical officer is withdrawing from daily media briefings during the pandemic after it was revealed she had twice visited her family’s second home. Catherine Calderwood will remain in the post and continue advising the Scottish government but will step back from public roles. Pakistan has quarantined 20,000 worshippers and is looking for tens of thousands of others who attended a religious event in Lahore in March despite the pandemic. Authorities said they want to test or quarantine 100,000 people who were at the event held by the Tablighi Jamaat, an Islamic missionary movement, between 10 and 12 March. Lebanon has begun repatriating nationals in its first flights in weeks since it closed its international airport in response to the pandemic. Authorities said more than 20,000 people had signed up to be repatriated this week or at the end of the month. Pope Francis has celebrated Palm Sunday mass without the public because of the pandemic, which he said should focus people’s attention on what’s most important. Normally, tens of thousands would have gathered for an outdoor mass, but this year the pontiff celebrated without the crowds and inside St Peter’s Basilica. The number of new cases rose by 270 from the previous morning, while the number of recoveries increased by 491, according to the health ministry. Authorities said the daily rate of new infections has fallen significantly in recent days. The government is drawing up legislation to allow it to take “extraordinary steps” to tackle Covid-19, following concern that its relatively soft approach may be resulting in a higher death rate than in other Nordic countries. On Sunday Sweden reported a total of 401 deaths – an 8% increase from Saturday. Sweden’s toll per million inhabitants is 37, compared with 28 in Denmark, 12 in Norway and 4.5 in Finland. The outbreak in the country is appearing to be reaching its peak, according to reports, after the number of intensive care hospitalisations rose from 1,245 to 1,261. The county reported 120 new cases of the virus on Sunday, compared with 75 on Saturday. It was the most infections confirmed in a day for the city state, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to 1,309.