The financial regulator has said car finance companies must offer a three-month payment freeze and should not repossess vehicles if customers are facing financial difficulties because of the coronavirus. The Financial Conduct Authority also said payday loan firms must give customers a one-month interest payment holiday, as part of emergency measures to help households hit by the coronavirus outbreak. In addition, consumers with other credit products – such as buy-now-pay-later, rent-to-own and pawnbroking agreements – will also be allowed three-month payment freezes if they face temporary financial difficulties. The measures, which would usually require a lengthy consultation, are expected to come into force as soon as 24 April. Direct cash grants for self-employed people, worth 80% of average profits, up to £2,500 a month. There are similar wage subsidies for employees. Government to back £330bn of loans to support businesses through a Bank of England scheme for big firms. There are loans of up to £5m with no interest for six months for smaller companies. Taxes levied on commercial premises will be abolished this year for all retailers, leisure outlets and hospitality sector firms. Britain’s smallest 700,000 businesses eligible for cash grants of £10,000. Small retailers, leisure and hospitality firms can get bigger grants of £25,000. Government to increase value of universal credit and tax credits by £1,000 a year, as well as widening eligibility for these benefits. Statutory sick pay to be made available from day one, rather than day four, of absence from work, although ministers have been criticised for not increasing the level of sick pay above £94.25 a week. Small firms can claim for state refunds on sick pay bills. Local authorities to get a £500m hardship fund to provide people with council tax payment relief. Mortgage and rental holidays available for up to three months. “We are very aware of the continued struggle people are facing as a result of the pandemic,” said Christopher Woolard, the interim chief executive at the FCA. “If a payment freeze isn’t in the customer’s interests, firms should offer an alternative solution, potentially including the waiving of interest and charges or rescheduling the term of the loan. These measures will provide much needed relief to consumers during these difficult times.” The FCA said motor finance firms should not take steps to end agreements, repossess vehicles or change contracts “in a way that is unfair”. Examples include using the temporary drop in car prices caused by the virus lockdown to recalculate “balloon payments” at the end of a contract. There are growing concerns that some consumers in the UK’s £75bn car loan market will not be able to cover their monthly vehicle repayments. The UK’s car loan market includes 6.5m vehicles financed through leasing deals. The most common car purchase method is a personal contract plan, known as a PCP, where a buyer pays a deposit and then rents the vehicle for two to three years at a monthly cost, typically about £250. The measures around payday loans will stop lenders accruing additional interest on loans during the one-month freeze period. “After the end of the freeze period, the firm should allow consumers to pay the deferred payment in an affordable way,” the FCA said. “Whether, for example, by one single payment or by a number of smaller instalments.” Earlier this month, the FCA confirmed proposals for a freeze on loan and credit card payments for up to three months as part of emergency measures for consumers hit by the coronavirus outbreak.