When I first started this column, I found “midlife crisis” a possible misnomer, because I saw myself as just a cool guy in his 40s, someone younger guys look at and go, “You know what? When I get to his age I hope that I’m as much of a legend as he is.” However, this week I have run towards the midlife crisis with my arms open wide, ready to embrace it, move in with it, and resent it as the early magic of the relationship wanes. This week, I bought DJ equipment. I am not saying that I am too old to DJ. I am friends with DJ Yoda, who is about my age and is one of the best DJs in the world. Every time I see him release a mix or play a club, I am filled with envy. In fact, it is highly possible that I am jeopardising our relationship by getting this equipment. I am hoping that he is not going to see this and take it to mean that I think I can be a DJ. I remember doing a standup gig a while ago and a schoolfriend I hadn’t seen for ages came to watch. At the end of the gig, he came up to me and said, “I actually think I’m going to become a comedian” and I wanted to smash his face in. My ego translated that to: “If a dickhead like you can do it, then surely I can.” So why the hell have I spent a shedload of cash on the equipment? Admittedly, I used to DJ. My dad ran a pub and needed somebody to get the party started. My brother and I bought CD decks and we started “playing out” at the Prince of Wales. I remember getting carried away and actually doing mic work to get the crowd on the dancefloor. One of the things I am most proud of is that my wife was at many of those nights, saw me behaving as if I was Calvin Harris to a lager-soaked room of 20 people, and still decided to have children with me. The coronavirus lockdown has seen people increasingly turn to DJs. Gok Wan has been doing regular sets on Instagram, as have lots of regular club spinners. D-Nice – the old-school rapper turned DJ – recently did a set on Instagram that got over 100,000 people enjoying it in their individual homes. I should be clear: my ambition is not to join them. In order for me to arrive at the standard required, the lockdown would have to continue for about 10 to 15 years. I see it as equivalent to buying a guitar or piano, which I suppose would be equally worrying for my family. I did tell my wife I was planning on buying the equipment, and she said she couldn’t wait to see it. When it arrived, it became clear that she had thought I was joking. Now I have to learn in the garage. Hip-hop has positioned the DJ at the forefront of the culture, perhaps less so now than previously. But I have grown up watching DJs manipulate old music and create new music in ways that seem impossible. Listen to anything by Jaguar Skills and be prepared to be blown away. My own goal, though, is just to dick about until I get to a good enough standard that my wife lets me back into the house. I can’t deny, however, that I haven’t thought about the slim possibility that Kendrick Lamar happens to be driving through Crawley, hears some absolute fire coming from a garage, and demands to hire that DJ immediately.