I’m really antisocial, so just sitting on the sofa and having a cup of tea is my idea of heaven. I’m trying to politely decline all the Zoom offers that are being thrown my way and I’ve been watching lots of TV instead. In terms of total escapism, something I’ve been going back to is my favourite sitcom: The Royle Family. I watched it when it was first shown, but I didn’t appreciate just how clever it was. It was always on in the background because my family loved it, but I was a bit more passive. I sat down a couple of weeks ago and went through it all again and realised how the cast are the most brilliant actors. It’s one of the only series that makes me properly laugh. It’s quite nostalgic for me, too, because their house looks like the house we grew up in and it feels very familiar – it’s like sitting in the living room with your own family. One of my favourite episodes is when they go to Prestatyn. They rarely leave the house, so it’s a big deal for them to be off on their holidays. Then they get to the caravan and Jim’s got the hump because there’s no chip pan and the telly isn’t that good. It really tickles me. I love Ricky Tomlinson as an actor and he’s such a sweetheart in real life; he’s a really charitable man and very generous with his time. My partner, Kev, and I sat down on the sofa and got through five or six episodes in one go. It’s a running joke that Antony’s always sent to get the tea in the show – he’s the dogsbody – and that’s like Kev and I, taking it in turns to delegate and winding each other up. The other show I’ve got into is Tiger King. I do this all the time when people are talking about a show – for some reason, I only watch it later, mainly because I’m not in on the jokes and all the memes that are going around. Eventually, I gave in with Tiger King and it’s just so captivating – the characters are so charismatic and, even if I fundamentally disagree with most of what they stand for, I’m still so drawn to them. You’d believe it if it was fiction, but as real life it almost makes no sense. As a film-maker myself, it’s also amazing to see the access the team got for Tiger King and to be able to dedicate that amount of time to one story. That’s a luxury that few of us have now. It got me thinking about a documentary I made on big game hunters a few years ago in South Africa. I remember there was a debate around conservation there and it was less black and white to me, because they donated a lot of their hunted meat to the orphanages in the surrounding areas and they were assuring us that they didn’t shoot anything that was endangered. It’s hilarious that everybody is slightly on Joe Exotic’s side, though, and that they’ve taken to hate Carole [Baskin] – when you look at the pair of them on paper, the way they behave, what they stand for and what they do, they’re just as bad as each other. It just shows you that you never know how the public is going to react to some of the people that you film, no matter how objective you try to be. Stacey Dooley: Locked Up With the Lifers is on BBC Two on 19 April and Stacey Dooley: Costa Del Narcos is on BBC Two on 26 April at 9pm