Phil Neville’s future as Team GB manager hangs in the balance as the Football Association confirmed his departure in 2021. The Guardian understands that players were unaware of the exit plan until Neville’s departure was leaked in the press during the week and are disappointed with how the situation has been handled. The FA released a statement on Friday morning confirming that the former Manchester United player was “committed to honouring the full term of his contract with the FA, which will see him leave the role in July 2021”. The problem is that the Olympics is set to start on 23 July 2021 and finish on 8 August. Neville had been due to take charge of Team GB in Tokyo this summer, however the FA remained vague on whether he would remain in post for the postponed competition, likely wishing to keep the option on the table when discussing the post with potential successors. The FA’s director of women’s football, Sue Campbell said: “In light of the impact of current global events on the sporting calendar and in the best interests of the England Women’s team, both parties were in agreement that our shared priority was to ensure the Lionesses have continuity of coaching going into the home Euros and looking towards the 2023 World Cup. “Once football returns after this difficult period, Phil will continue his work with the Lionesses on the further development of his squad. I will support him fully with that important task whilst moving forward with the crucial succession planning process. “We will now discuss next steps with the British Olympic Association and the home nations with regard to Team GB Football and we are not in a position to make any further comment at this time.” With Uefa having confirmed the postponement of the Euros until 2022, Neville now misses out on leading the Lionesses at a second major tournament – the Euros initially fell within his contract term. Neville said: “As a result of the changes to the proposed tournament scheduling we will now be working to plan for a revised match calendar once it is safe and appropriate to do so. I am looking forward to getting back to work with the team as soon as possible. We have a fantastic squad of players and there is plenty to work on as we look to progress as a team going into 2021.”