A Derbyshire women’s clothing manufacturer is to make 12,500 surgical gowns for local hospitals after they worked together to develop a reusable version of the vital protective equipment. David Nieper, whose 250 expert sewers usually specialise in luxury fashions for the over-50s at its factory in Alfreton, developed the gowns in partnership with the University Hospitals of Derby and Burton NHS foundation trust, which has ordered 6,000. Two other trusts, including Buckinghamshire Healthcare trust, are set to take the rest. The gowns, which are made from a locally supplied clinical barrier fabric, meet the European standards for the prevention of transmission of infective agents, even after 100 washes at 73C (163F). David Nieper said it had only been able to source enough fabric for 12,500, given global shortages, but its design reduced the need for disposable kit. Kevin Downs, the executive director of finance and performance at the Derby and Burton trust, said: “At UHDB, we have a steady supply of PPE [from the national supply chain], but we are continuing to work with suppliers who may be able to supply and manufacture PPE locally so should we need to add to our levels of supplies to support the wider local health economy we can do so.” Christopher Nieper, the manufacturer’s chief executive, said: “We have enough fabric to make 12,500 gowns. If these are washed 100 times they could potentially save the NHS buying 1.25m disposable gowns. “We offered our suggestion of a reusable gown in this exact fabric four weeks ago. It’s a great pity the Deloitte team, responsible for procurement of gowns [across the NHS] didn’t grasp the potential of reusable equipment and has shown no interest in our British manufacturing capacity.” There is a shortage of protective equipment for NHS workers, and particularly protective gowns of this kind. British textile firms have said they are desperate to contribute by making protective gear for the NHS, but central government has been slow to take up their offers. John Lewis’s Herbert Parkinson factory in Lancashire stepped in to help this week. David Nieper said its “parachute design” helped wearers to safely disrobe and avoid contamination after their shift. Traditional surgical gowns are fastened at the back, which require reaching over the face and head to loosen ties. David Nieper’s gown has been designed with ties at the front of the shoulder which can easily be unfastened without assistance. The gown can also be removed inside out so that germs are trapped inside before being washed.