The US recorded more than 2,000 coronavirus deaths, the first country to see such a high number in a single day. Figures from Johns Hopkins University show 2,108 people died in the past 24 hours, with more than half a million confirmed infections. America could soon surpass Italy as the country with the most coronavirus deaths worldwide. The news came as White House experts said the spread of the virus was starting to level off. Dr Deborah Birx said there were good signs the outbreak was stabilising but cautioned: “As encouraging as they are, we have not reached the peak.” Britain has not yet reached the Covid-19 peak, which would allow for an easing of lockdown restrictions, said the health secretary, Matt Hancock. The death toll in British hospitals has reached almost 9,000, with 980 more deaths reported on Friday. The figure exceeded the deadliest day so far in Italy, the country worst hit by the virus. Hancock said the Easter weekend would be a “test of the nation’s resolve”. He issued another warning to the public to stay at home amid the coronavirus crisis. Spain’s daily coronavirus death toll fell for the third consecutive day on Saturday after 510 fatalities were reported in the past 24 hours, the health ministry said in a statement. It marked the smallest overnight increase since 23 March. Total fatalities from the virus rose to 16,353, from 15,843 on Friday, the ministry said, while the number of confirmed cases climbed to 161,852 from 157,022. South Korea has announced plans to strap tracking wristbands on people who ignore quarantine orders. Officials said stricter controls were required to enforce self-isolation rules.Some of the 57,000 people who are under orders to stay home have apparently slipped out by leaving behind their smartphones, which are used to monitor movement. The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, has decided to extend a nationwide lockdown to tackle the spread of the coronavirus, the Delhi chief minister said on Saturday. He did not say how long the extension would be. Earlier in the day, Modi held a video conference call with several state ministers. The Delhi chief minister, Arvind Kejriwal, said Modi had “taken a correct decision to extend the lockdown”, without sharing further details. Iran’s total death toll from the coronavirus outbreak rose to 4,357 on Saturday, with 125 people having lost their lives in the past 24 hours, the health ministry said. The total number of people diagnosed with the disease rose by 1,837 in the past 24 hours to a total of 70,029, ministry spokesman Kianoush Jahanpur said, with 3,987 of those infected in critical condition. Iran is the country most affected by the pandemic in the Middle East.