The highlights of the career of the comedian Tim Brooke-Taylor were a hit TV series that mysteriously became very hard to see and a successful radio show that offered a remarkably enduring opportunity to be heard. From 1970-82, he co-starred, with Dr Graeme Garden and Bill Oddie – who he had met at Cambridge University– in the TV series The Goodies. A distinctive combination of slapstick and satire, it has struggled to achieve a repeat afterllife, to the regret and occasional suspicion of its creators. However, Brooke-Taylor had better luck with the BBC as a regular on the Radio 4 panel show, I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue, on which he had appeared since 1972. The 73rd series is due to run from May, although the scheduling of a show recorded in front of live audiences around the country was already complicated by the social distancing restrictions imposed to counter the Covid-19 pandemic. Brooke-Taylor had recently been diagnosed with the virus, becoming the second senior British comedy figure to die with it, following Eddie Large. The Goodies featured the conceit of a trio of eccentric friends who operated as trouble-shooters, racing on their signature “trandem”, a three-seater bike, to deal with emergencies – most famously, Kitten Kong, a massive baby cat that terrorised London. The monstrous moggy scaled the Post Office Tower in homage to massive gorilla King Kong’s treatment of New York’s Empire State Building as a plaything in a famous movie. Cinematic parody was a frequent Goodies device, other send-ups including “2001 and a Bit” and “a Cornish western called Bunfight at the OK Tea Rooms”. But, although The Goodies achieved high ratings and won awards (including the Silver Rose of Montreux, a high European TV honour, for “Kitten Kong”), it was less popular with BBC bosses, who kept the trio loosely contracted, and did not seem heart-broken to lose them to ITV’s London Weekend Television in 1980. A recurrent problem was categorisation. Despite having first been screened at 10.30pm, a slot associated with experimental comedy (where Monty Python’s Flying Circus had been scheduled), it came, especially when later moved to early evening slots, to be regarded as a children’s show. Certainly, the humour could be juvenile, with Christmas pantomimes including “The Goodies and the Beanstalk” openly courting lower age-groups. But, although no TV historian has ever quite found the smoking memo or interview, it seems likely that the BBC’s worry was not that the jokes in The Goodies were too young but that they had become too old – in the sense that they reflected attitudes no longer considered appropriate. This might especially relate to the episodes “Women’s Lib” (1971), “South Africa (1975)” and “Alternative Roots” (1977), which satirise respectively feminism, apartheid, and a famous TV drama about African slavery. Without doubt, there are jokes that would now be considered sexist, and, while the episodes dealing with black history are not racist in language or intent, the spectacle of three white male Cambridge graduates taking on these subjects might itself be enough to explain the BBC’s refusal to reunite or repeat The Goodies (although the shows are available on various DVDs). An irony of the timing and cause of Brooke-Taylor’s death is that an edition that wasn’t controversial – “Clown Virus”, in which a leaked chemical weapon creates a pandemic that makes people into circus comedians – has suddenly become un-screenable. The character delineation in The Goodies had Garden as the brains man, Oddie the hippy guy, and Brooke-Taylor the posh chap, his three-piece suits often waistcoated in the colours of the Union Flag. These portraits all drew on some truth, with Brooke-Taylor’s upper-class credentials going beyond the easy target of his double-barrelled name to a childhood as the son of a solicitor in Derbyshire, where Tim was born in 1940, and secondary education at Winchester public school. Although this was a privileged institution, teachers did not always consider it their good fortune to be in charge of TBT, as he became known in a nickname that endured. One master wrote to his parents: “Tim might get a job as an actor, if he fails his A levels. Or, as he’d probably prefer, he may find work as a musical comedian.” Unusually among those who become successful performers, TBT had shown no interest in acting or singing at school, so his tutor’s prophetic remark seems to have drawn on the nature of the mucking about in class that made his academic prospects dicey. The specificity of the “musical comedian” prophecy is spooky, as Brooke-Taylor had two Top Ten pop singles with The Goodies – “The Inbetweenies” and “Funky Gibbon” – and a highlight of I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue was a round in which the panellists were required to sing “one song to the tune of another” – such as the lyrics of Bohemian Rhapsody to the music of “We’ll Meet Again”, or the other way round. Despite his failure to shine academically, Brooke-Taylor, after a period of teaching, arrived at Pembroke College, Cambridge, becoming involved in the Cambridge Footlights comedy club, of which he was President in 1963. Apart from Garden and Oddie, his generation included John Cleese, Graham Chapman, and Eric Idle. When that gang began to work in broadcasting – an almost guaranteed root for sketch comedians at the oldest universities in those days – Brooke-Taylor worked with Cleese and Chapman on ITV’s At Last The 1948 Show (1967). On BBC2’s Broaden Your Mind (1968-69), Brooke-Taylor, Cleese and Garden were joined by Garden, Oddie, and Idle, plus new recruits, Michael Palin and Terry Jones, who had been at Oxford when they were at Cambridge. Many of these also worked on the Radio 4 series I’m Sorry I’ll Read That Again (1964-73), before they separated into the Pythons and the Goodies. This division may have seeded some of the later problems of the Brooke-Taylor team, encouraging the tendency of some broadcasting executives disapprovingly to contrast the “silly” humour of The Goodies with the “surrealism” of Python’s gags about existentialism and art. In truth, the separation was more complex. Brooke-Taylor, on both The Goodies and I’m Sorry I’ll Read That Again, could be as intelligent, daring and even surreal as Cambridge friends who went the other way. A Goodies episode in which Brooke-Taylor, in drag, played a more right-wing successor to Margaret Thatcher, takes the form on an elaborate musical parody of Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd-Webber’s Evita. The punchline may be a cheesy pun – the politician has assistants called Marge and Tina, purely so she can plead with them in song not to cry for her – but the episode as a whole is weird and original in a way that The Goodies at their best were. Deservingly remembered for his perennial radio show, Tim Brooke-Taylor also merited a greater level of remembrance for his TV work.