Easter: hard to get your head around it in these strange times. Normally, it’s second only to Christmas in terms of family get-togethers, but this year, small groups of us will be sitting it out at home, some even on our own, though hopefully not without good food on the table. And wine – yes, for heaven’s sake, WINE. Even though food and wine matching is my thing, I’m not going to suggest any clever-clever food pairings at this time. Drink whatever wine you enjoy and that makes you feel good. That said, Easter is relatively late this year, so we are firmly into spring, which, to my mind at least, means lighter wines, possibly even rosé if you’ve got an outdoor space in which to enjoy it. Personally, I like the exotically lush Pedro Luis Monastrell Rosé 2019 (£5.99 Aldi, 12.5%), Spain’s version of mourvèdre, which tastes oddly but deliciously like ripe nectarines. There’s a lot to be said for the comfortingly familiar at such times: grape varieties such as chardonnay and merlot that were popular for a reason but simply fell out of fashion, say; and classic wines such as rioja and red bordeaux, which are both good with lamb. There’s a role for well-known names at these moments, just as the word Heinz on a can of soup or beans offers comforting reassurance. You pay a bit more, but it’s a faithful old friend. Supermarkets, of course, have special offers to tempt you (Waitrose is selling the very decent Terre di Vita Organic Pinot Grigio for £5.99 at the moment), and has taken on new stocks after that dead period between January and March, the wine world’s equivalent of the hungry gap. In addition to the rosé above, I was particularly impressed by Aldi’s range at the last tasting I went to before full lockdown. There’s another in my recommendations below. Please also try to support your local shops, producers and small online independent businesses who are finding life desperately hard. If you can buy wine from a local winery (or beer from a local brewery), do it. At the time of writing, some restaurants and wine bars that are unable to trade and have an off-licence are selling direct, while most local wine shops will deliver even if they’ve had to close their doors – though the situation is constantly changing. If they’re not already offering a delivery service, just ask. Aldi Exquisite Collection Padthaway Chardonnay 2018 £5.99 , 13.5%.Lush, creamy, comforting: will rub along seductively with anything from roast chicken to fish pie. Fitz sparkling wine £22 or £120 for a case of six, 12%. Really appealing. Made by the same method as, but less sweet than, prosecco: light, fresh, appley. Cool label, too. Comtesse Saint Hilaire Montagne Saint-Emilion 2018 £10 Co-op, 13.5%.Saint-Emilion is often a disappointment, but this from the next-door appellation is really good value: smooth, ripe and plummy. Cune Viña Real Rioja Crianza 2016 £8.95 Cheers, Swansea 13%. Posh-looking, smart-tasting but surprisingly reasonably priced rioja from a region that’s been badly hit by Covid-19. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.