In March, the Treasury had a whip-round and cobbled together £3.2m for British councils to spend on rough sleeping. The government promised to instantly eradicate street homelessness during the pandemic, with homeless people housed, for their safety and the safety of the general public. There was only one problem. Based on recent council data that showed 25,000 people slept rough on our streets in 2019, the £3.2m works out at a measly £128 per head; more an act of contempt than compassion. Yet again the government appeared to be prioritising saving money over saving lives. And now the facts are beginning to bear that out. According to the Observer, at least six people linked to homeless hostels in London have died from coronavirus since March. While most rough sleepers have been moved into hotels, B&Bs and other temporary accommodation, up to 35,000 people may still be crammed together in crowded hostels where physical distancing is simply an impossibility. The government claims to have temporarily sheltered 90% of Britain’s rough sleepers but many are still slipping through the net – often highly vulnerable people, most of them with long-term mental health and dependency issues. Getting them into a hotel is the easy thing. Keeping them there, looking after them, making sure their needs are met, is another. Last month Boris Johnson also pledged to provide all necessary accommodation and support for destitute migrants with no recourse to public funds, but this promise does not seem to have been kept. A range of organisations including Crisis, Public Interest Law Centre, Migrants Rights Network and Project 17 say destitute migrants continue to sleep on the streets, either because councils have turned them away or because they do not know how to go about getting support. Many also choose to stay hidden for fear of deportation. The homelessness charity St Mungo’s, which last year apologised for sharing information about migrant rough sleepers with the Home Office, recently suggested that the pandemic could lead to a significant reduction in rough sleeper numbers when the lockdown ends. “It’s a silver lining in a very grey sky,” said CEO Howard Sinclair. The premise is that while they are isolating, their addictions and mental health problems can be addressed. One project in Edinburgh is offering heroin users the opportunity to switch to methadone immediately, and is ensuring that medication is delivered to hotels, with GPs present to provide support. But such initiatives seem to be the exception rather than the rule. In London, some local councils are re-introducing local connection rules (whereby only homeless people who live/work/have close family in the area qualify for support), which are in direct conflict with the government’s pledge to house all rough sleepers. Shockingly, a week after the government pledged the £3.2m to house the homeless, two Britannia hotels in Manchester evicted 100 single homeless people, despite its agreement with the council to house them. And on Monday, the Guardian revealed that around a quarter of the homeless people put up in Manchester hotels for lockdown (47 out of approximately 200) have left – some were evicted, some chose to leave. Meanwhile, we have also heard about homeless people in Manchester being thrown out of hotels for smoking cannabis. Many rough sleepers abuse class A drugs, and here they are being evicted over a spliff. Are we really expecting their problems to go away just because they’re isolated in a hotel room? According to one outreach worker, who wants to remain anonymous, the city centre has come to resemble “God’s waiting room”. He estimates there are still dozens of rough sleepers living on the streets, strung out on drugs or paralytic on cheap booze, unable to wash and change clothes. In Birmingham a similarly bleak situation is unfolding. Outreach worker pastor Colin Rankine continues to hand out food parcels to rough sleepers in the city centre. Rankine and his volunteers, clad in hazmat suits and face masks, are also filming some of the rough sleepers they encounter for their Facebook page. A homeless woman called Faye, huddled in her sleeping bag, tells Rankine that she’s not been offered any emergency accommodation. Another, wearing no shoes, claims she was told she’d receive a fine for being in the city centre. Rough sleepers with dependency issues often rely on begging and shoplifting to fund their addictions. Both of those avenues are now closed to them. Now could indeed be a golden opportunity to help these people, but only if the political will, money and support staff are there. For homeless addicts forced to detox because they can’t access their regular supplies, they need far more support than ever. This support would normally come from the charities and third-sector organisations now facing collapse – it has been estimated that charities will miss out on at least £4.3bn of income over a 12-week period because of a shortfall in fundraising and the closure of their shops. This is of course terrible, but perhaps the pandemic will force us to accept that charities are not the solution to chronic social problems. However well intentioned homelessness charities are, they are compromised from the start – without homelessness, they won’t exist. You could make the same argument about hospitals and sick people of course, but only if you think homelessness is as inescapable as illness. The obvious alternative is to have all these services under one public umbrella so that their clients’ needs – housing, substance abuse, mental health and employment – can be addressed simultaneously. Although the causes of homelessness are varied and wildly complex, the solutions are relatively simple. What homeless people need are homes – homes for life that are secure, affordable and safe. When in their homes they also need support that is tailored specifically to their needs. St Mungo’s is right when it says a real opportunity now exists to eradicate the problem – but in order to do so, we need a change of mindset. The government’s approach to the homelessness crisis – during the pandemic and long before – has been like dressing a shotgun wound with gaffer tape. And that simply won’t do. We have to be more radical, or more homeless people will continue to needlessly lose their lives. • Daniel Lavelle writes on mental health, homelessness and social care. Simon Hattenstone is a features writer for the Guardian