Born in Essex, David Gandy, 40, studied at the University of Gloucestershire before winning a modelling competition on ITV’s This Morning in 2001. He went on to forge a partnership with Dolce & Gabbana and become the world’s highest-paid male model. He designed his own menswear line for Marks & Spencer and has collaborated with Aspinal of London. He lives in London with his partner and their daughter. When were you happiest?This morning, when I found a £20 note in a coat I hadn’t worn for a while. Which living person do you most admire, and why?David Attenborough. Not only has he taught us so much, but he’s also brought so much happiness to so many people. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Indecisiveness, or maybe impatience, or maybe second-guessing myself… I can’t decide. What was your most embarrassing moment?At an exclusive event, I went to sit where there wasn’t a chair. Mid-fall, I threw my drink over a very important person, who luckily saw the funny side and now we’re friends. What makes you unhappy?Cruelty and the neglect of animals and children. What do you most dislike about your appearance?If my nose and ears continue to grow, I’m in real trouble. What is your most unappealing habit?I fart a lot on planes. What is your favourite word?Bumfuzzle. What did you want to be when you were growing up?One of the Ghostbusters. To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why?I pulled a chair away from a girl who was just about to sit down on our second day of primary school. She farted when she hit the floor and everyone laughed. What was the best kiss of your life?Every day, when my daughter kisses and hugs me when I get home. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party?Paul Newman, JFK, Billy Connolly, Michael Caine and the Queen. What is the worst job you’ve done?I worked for a company that stripped an office, including the furniture, over one weekend – so I worked for 48 hours straight. What has been your biggest disappointment?Realising I was never going to achieve the grades to become a vet. When did you last cry, and why?Yesterday: my daughter accidentally hit me in the balls. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?Closing down social media or having more dogs. What song would you like played at your funeral?She’s Gone by Hall and Oates, but with the words changed to He’s Gone. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?Don’t argue with stupid people. They will bring you down to their level. Where would you most like to be right now?Sitting watching the sunset on the African plains with my family and a gin and tonic.