Channel 4 had grand plans for The Steph Show. Scheduled to launch in mid-spring, it was set to be the keystone of the channel’s daytime schedules – a bright, buzzy magazine show fronted by rising star Steph McGovern, newly freed from the clutches of the BBC. Shot live from a prime slab of Leeds waterside real estate before a lively studio audience, The Steph Show was gearing up to breathe life into the channel’s fusty daytime output. And then the coronavirus happened. “I’m just at Asda,” McGovern tells me over Zoom. “I had to queue for 45 minutes to get in.” She finished recording her ninth episode three hours ago, and has come straight from the studio to buy baby milk for her five-month-old daughter. And when she’s finished, she will head straight back to the studio to feed her. Because things have changed, and now she hosts The Steph Show from her house. In what sounds like an incredibly frantic few days last month, Channel 4 scrapped its original plans for The Steph Show, brought the launch date forward by three weeks and decided to film it in McGovern’s ground floor. An engineer visited her house for a feasibility assessment. Cameras were hooked up on fixed rigs around her house. Satellite trucks positioned themselves on her lawn. She filmed a trailer, holding up placards Bob Dylan-style from behind a window. They rehearsed on Sunday. The next day, the first show aired. “It was incredibly fast, but everyone wanted to get it on air. It was one of those things where we’re all in it together,” McGovern says. “I mean, the lawn is going to be wrecked,” she adds ruefully. Incredibly, the show works. McGovern wanders around her house (more of which later), chatting to celebrity guests over Skype, checking in on families who are attempting to adjust to the new situation and finding experts to discuss the practicalities of life under lockdown. Last week, she attempted a cookery segment, with the Cold Feet star Fay Ripley bravely attempting to instruct her remotely on how to make mac and cheese. McGovern botched it, but kept returning to the dish to grab a mouthful over the course of the next few minutes, the same way you or I might. For anyone stuck by themselves at the moment, it must feel like dropping in on an old friend. “That’s exactly how we wanted it to feel”, says Channel 4’s head of daytime, Jo Street, whose decision it was to bring the series forward. “Steph does feel like an everywoman. She’s the girl you want to have a beer with, or go for a coffee with, or be mates with. For a massive part of our audience, that is the job that she’s doing every lunchtime.” Indeed, it’s hard to see how this would work had anyone else been in the driving seat. If a big name had presented a daytime show from their imposingly large house, viewers would have been instantly alienated. But McGovern’s house, although beautifully designed – her integrated kitchen banquette has already become something of a national talking point – is basically a normal-sized family house. The living room, dining room and kitchen are all essentially the same thing, and you could probably walk from one end to the other in less than 10 seconds. Her partner and baby have to hide in a bedroom during the broadcast. McGovern says that her daughter “tends to sleep through the show. That’s how much she cares about it.” The main thing, she’s finding, is locating the balance between family home and television studio. “Keeping it tidy is the big thing,” McGovern says. “A lot of viewers have said to me: ‘How come your house is so clean?’ I’m like: ‘Because it’s on telly.’ I’ve got a bit of a routine of an evening. We have our dinner and then, once everyone goes to bed, I just whizz around and try and sort it out. We have a deal. My partner does the cooking and I do all the tidying.” And yet, despite all this, there’s more to McGovern than her everywoman persona would suggest. Before being poached by Channel 4, she had been BBC Breakfast’s lead business presenter for a decade. Before that she was a producer, in charge of the business news for the BBC’s one, six and 10 o’clock bulletins. At the age of 19, during an apprenticeship with Black & Decker, she devised a new production technique that saved the company £150,000 a year. When Have I Got News For You decided to continue filming remotely without an audience, she was the first choice to host. In short, she knows her stuff. And this extends to her plans for the direction of The Steph Show. “I’ve learned that I want real people to be the focus of it, and that’s what I want to keep driving through,” she says. “Yes, it’s lovely to have some celebrities on, but, for me, what’s better are people like the blood biker volunteers we had on yesterday. Or the 14-year-old girl who lost her hands when she was a baby and can now play piano because she learned it in lockdown. I know it sounds cheesy, but that’s what I think is going to make this show good.” “Public service broadcasting is not just news and current affairs,” adds Street. “It’s about connecting to an audience when they need you. Steph was really passionate about that.” It all sounds lovely, but these are uncertain times. Without wanting to get any darker than necessary, I have to ask McGovern about contingencies. Her show is called The Steph Show. It’s filmed from her house. Hopefully it won’t, but what would happen if she finds herself becoming ill? “We’ll have to see if Stephanie Cole is available,” she shrugs. “Do you know what? Nobody has an answer to that. I have not got a clue what we would do. If I wasn’t too ill, then I would like to think I would try to carry on in some capacity. If I got really ill, someone else could do it. I’m not precious about it. Johnny Vegas seems to be appearing a lot. I might ask him if he could.” So successful is The Steph Show in this new form, in fact, that I wonder whether this is perhaps how it should always be. Broadcasting from her home gives the show such a ramshackle and intimate quality that it already feels as if the show’s voice has been found. Has anyone considered abandoning the studio and carrying on like this after the lockdown lifts? “Yes. Sure,” scolds Jo Street, sarcastically. “Because this is such an easy way to make a television programme.” McGovern also admits that continuing like this for ever is her “biggest fear”, but then adds that the current set-up is bound to inform the show when it is broadcast as intended. “Or maybe I could just recreate my entire house inside the studio,” she ponders. “I might just go full-on Alan Partridge.” • The Steph Show, weekdays, 12pm, Channel 4