Roaring out of the radical 1790s, The Rime of the Ancient Mariner is a founding fable for our time. A fable must by definition revolve around an animal, and in Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s nightmare the slain albatross hangs around the fated sailor’s neck like a broken cross, an emblem of his sin against nature. It is all too relevant today, as a statement of isolation and despair: “Alone, alone, all, all alone, / Alone on a wide, wide sea!” Yet in that forlorn expression is great power; the power of art to change us. When published in 1798, Coleridge’s poem was seen as the work of “a mad German poet”. His friend Charles Lamb called him “a cracked archangel”, while his fellow drug addict Thomas De Quincey would defend his poetic experimentalism. “Where is the man who shall be equal to these things?” he said. “Is, indeed, Leviathan so tamed? In that case, the quarantine of the opium-eater might be finished.” It is not despite but because of its narcotic wildness that The Rime became one of the most referenced works of poetry ever. From Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein and Herman Melville’s Moby-Dick, to Fleetwood Mac, Iron Maiden and Public Image Ltd’s “Albatross” – a screech of post-punk angst sung by John Lydon – it is the one poem that almost everyone can quote. Lines including “All creatures great and small” and “Water, water, everywhere” have become part of the lexicon. Time to resurrect it for a new poetry-hungry audience then, with a free-to-access digital project, the Ancient Mariner Big Read curated by myself and artists Angela Cockayne and Sarah Chapman, and hosted by the University of Plymouth’s Art Institute. Following on from our Moby-Dick Big Read of 2012, we split the 150 verses of The Rime into 40 sections, to be read by performers, writers, poets and even Samuel Taylor Coleridge himself – a sixth generation nephew of the poet, whom we recorded in the Devon church where the first Sam was baptised by his minister father. Over the three years that it has taken to create the Ancient Mariner Big Read, the project has gained personal significance for its contributors. If you’ve been listening so far you will have heard Jeremy Irons, Jeanette Winterson, Hilary Mantel. There are more surprises to come. Iggy Pop, for instance,in a reading that sounds like an encore from one of his outrageous performances, yet hints at his surprising credentials (Pop’s essay on Edward Gibbon’s The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire appeared in an academic journal, Classic Ireland). In contrast, Tilda Swinton quietly went to a studio in the Scottish Highlands, near the beach where she walks her dogs, and delivered the most famous lines from the poem – “Water, water, everywhere / Nor any drop to drink” – with a crystalline calm that pulls at the poem’s despair. It’s hard not to think, as you listen, of migrants set adrift on other seas, undertaking on their own desperate voyages. Marianne Faithfull told me it was at school that she first read The Rime. “It is a true horror poem; the rhyming and the alliteration make your blood run cold,” she said. “You can never forget it. I heard it the first time when I was 14 years old in my English class at St Joseph convent school, a very strange place to be introduced to this poem, but our English teacher, Mrs Simpson, was a Protestant, and all the nuns in the world weren’t going to stop her!” Ms Faithfull has since contracted coronavirus; happily, she was discharged from hospital this week, and we send her our best wishes. Our youngest contributor, Cyrus Larcombe-Moore, 21, from Tavistock, Devon, is a winner of the Foyle young poets award. Another poet, Lemn Sissay, who has written evocatively of his lonely childhood, barely needed to look at the text when he read for us in Folkestone. “It is the poem that says everything to me,” he said, “about life, conflict, inner turmoil and outer peace.” Meanwhile, on the other side of the Atlantic, Willem Dafoe delivered a sinister reading of the scene in which the albatross is shot; Dafoe’s recent film with Robert Pattinson, The Lighthouse, directly draws on The Rime’s watery horror and its “thousand thousand slimy things”. As important to the Ancient Mariner Big Read are the contemporary art works that accompany each reading, from Marina Abramović, William Kentridge, Cornelia Parker, George Shaw, Yinka Shonibare and Glenn Brown among others. Linder, the punk feminist artist, slices out a collage of an eerie shell/dancer chimera; Ellen Gallagher and her collaborator, Edgar Cleijne, whose work deals subtly with race and transition, send a cyanotype boat drifting into a swampy blue unknown. Their works speak to the visceral images of the poem. As Robert Macfarlane, another of our readers, notes, Coleridge’s mythic work predicts the Anthropocene and the fatal disconnection between human and nature. Deeply influenced by Shakespeare, the poem shivers with the storm first stirred by Prospero in The Tempest. The magician, distrusting his own science, says he’ll drown his books. That same sentiment led Extinction Rebellion activists to a meeting of plastics manufacturers last October, wearing emblems of “the albatrosses round our necks”. And it’s why a teenage girl crouched behind the sofa when the wild-eyed Coleridge came to her parents’ house to recite The Rime in person. The terror Mary Shelley felt that night would be reborn in Frankenstein’s misbegotten Creature, another offence against nature; her novel begins and ends in the polar wastes, just as the Mariner’s deed was done within the bounds of Antarctica, soon to be sighted by Europeans for the first time. So the story spins on, from Edgar Allan Poe’s imaginary Antarctic in The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket (1838) whose humans have needle teeth and red eyes, to Moby-Dick, inspired by a copy of Frankenstein Melville was given in London in 1849, and which he combined with The Rime to create a new fable of abuse, incarnate in the great white whale. Like Moby-Dick, The Rime resounds with human oppression. Coleridge’s scenes of suffering were inspired by the Anglican priest John Newton and his 1750 account of his time as a slave trader. Newton went on, in Mariner-like reparation, to write the hymn “Amazing Grace”, which became a famous spiritual; Coleridge’s modern biographer, Richard Holmes calls The Rime an 18th-century rap. The lyricism of the poem is its battery power. It endures, like the Mariner, telling its story over and over again: in the fated mission of Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey and its astronaut’s plunge into infinity; and in Nicolas Roeg’s film The Man Who Fell to Earth, in which David Bowie plays an alien who comes as the herald of our own disaster, only to be imprisoned by the CIA. We always shoot the messenger. The 21st-century Mariner looms out of a downtown doorway, suffering ecocidal PTSD. Danger in The Rime arrives in the shape of “Life-in-Death” and off-screen echoes of slavery and plague ships. Plague masks become bird beaks and now face masks. Albatrosses ingest plastic; humans and marsupials flee the burning bush; migrants are set adrift, and the Mariner’s albatross becomes a pangolin or a bat. Yet at the heart of The Rime is the saving notion that we might yet heed the signs. Albatrosses are the longest-living wild birds, soaring on wingspans up to three metres wide. One female, named Wisdom, nesting on the Midway Atoll, is still producing fertile eggs at the age of 70. The words avian and augury have the same Latin root. Coleridge left us an extraordinary circle in the air. Our past, wheeling back from the future. The Ancient Mariner Big Read is available here, and is updated daily.