Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: Medical experts have widely condemned Donald Trump’s musings at the latest White House briefing about whether disinfectant and UV rays could be used on people to fight the virus. Russia on Friday reported 5,849 new confirmed coronavirus cases of the novel coronavirus. It is a sharp increase that appears to dash hopes that the country has reached a plateau in its battle against the virus. The near-record jump in cases brought the total to 68,622, with nearly half of those in Moscow. Sixty people with the virus died overnight, pushing the death toll to 615, Russia’s official crisis response centre said. Donald Trump has said Boris Johnson sounded “incredible” on a phone call with him after he was discharged from hospital, prompting speculation that the prime minister will return to work soon. The US president revealed details of their conversation at one of his regular press conferences in which he claimed Johnson, who was in intensive care with coronavirus earlier this month, sounded “ready to go”. The Muslim holy month of Ramadan begins on Friday, with some countries easing restrictions and others tightening them. Egypt is to ease its coronavirus lockdown by allowing more businesses to reopen and shortening a nighttime curfew. The United Arab Emirates has cut a nationwide coronavirus curfew by two hours to now run daily from 10pm-6am, instead of from 8pm. Trump also said he may extend federal social distancing guidelines to the summer. It came as Congress approved a $484bn coronavirus relief package, taking to nearly $3tn the money pledged so far. Also in the US, the Democratic senator Elizabeth Warren revealed her older brother had died after contracting Covid-19. The number of coronavirus deaths in Spain has fallen to its lowest level in more than a month, with 367 new deaths reported on Friday, Reuters has reported. The latest update took the total number of deaths to 22,524 from 22,157 the day before, the health ministry said. The overall number of coronavirus cases rose to 219,764 from 213,024 the day before. South Korea reported just six more cases of Covid-19 in the 24 hours before midnight on Friday, raising the total number of infections to 10,708. There were no deaths in the last 24 hours for the first time since 16 March – 39 days. The death toll is now 240, or 2.24%. China has published its daily coronavirus figures, reporting just six new cases and no new deaths. The French president said the government aimed to release its detailed end of lockdown plan “probably on Tuesday”. Speaking to a group of mayors by video-conference on Friday, Emmanuel Macron said managing the return to normal life was a “logistical and organisational challenge”.