Glaswegian comedians haven’t always been complimentary about their home city. “The great thing about Glasgow is that if there’s a nuclear attack it’ll look exactly the same afterwards,” said Billy Connolly. According to Frankie Boyle: “Swearing is different in Scotland. In Glasgow the word ‘fucking’ is just a warning that a noun is on its way.” Like Connolly and Boyle, many world-class comedians started out here and found the city rich in material, from Susan Calman, Kevin Bridges and Limmy to, more recently, Amna Saleem and Larry Dean. Janey Godley, who carried the infamous “Trump is a cunt” sign in a 2016 protest at Turnberry golf course, has been performing standup in Glasgow for more than 25 years. Glaswegians are, she says, “observational storytellers”. Godley has often used humour to tackle tough subjects – the murder of her mother, sexual abuse, her ties with gangsters – and her new show covers online run-ins with the far right. “We tend to be gritty, tell-it-like-it-is comics,” she says. “We laugh at dark things.” Growing up in Glasgow in the 60s and 70s, standup Lubna Kerr witnessed this inclination for people to face issues such as sectarianism with humour. “It’s important to be able to laugh about things like that … it lessens it,” she says. Kerr talks about sectarianism on stage and also tackles racism. A question she’s been asked too many times – “Where are you really from?” – became the title for her last show. Born in Pakistan, Kerr came to standup in her 50s and initially performed character comedy, exploring stereotypes of Asian women. Now she performs as herself and, like Godley, embraces storytelling: “Every Glaswegian tells stories in such a wonderful, descriptive manner.” There’s always been an array of comedy nights to nurture Glaswegian talent, including a couple run by Godley, although her favourite spots to play nowadays are the Stand (which opened in 2000) and a new arrival, the Glee Club. “It’s a very open city for comedy,” she says. “Every time you put a gig on people were like, ‘Comedy, yes!’” Yet there’s more to Glasgow’s comedy scene than standup. Chunks, a monthly alternative night, grew out of a “weird” open mic at the now-shuttered Halt Bar. Since 2014, Chunks has challenged comics to experiment within three-minute slots. Standup is banned. “It’s high-energy, very quick, very silly,” says co-founder Eamonn Jones, who performs as Donny Vostok. The audience has been treated to Chris Thorburn’s imagined theme tune for There Will Be Blood and Richard Brown as a robot programmed to spout standup cliches. Jones has appeared as “North Korea’s favourite observational comedian”, with quips such as: “Hey guys, have you ever noticed how everything’s fine?” In that routine: “We played the whole North Korean national anthem and made everybody stand.” Chunks’ experiments are often the starting point for something bigger. Amelia Bayler regularly tries out comedy songs there that she later weaves into shows. Since 2016, the collective has run Chunkstival, a curated lineup of these alternative shows during the Glasgow international comedy festival, culminating in a “spoof awards show”. There’s a touch of Glaswegian darkness woven through the silliness of Chunks. None of their comedy is “floaty”, says Jones; Brown’s latest standup, Horror Show, riffs on the similarities between jump-scares and laughs. That grittiness disguises warmth. “The alternative scene in Glasgow is open to everyone,” says Brown. “We’ve got a lot of young working-class people – it’s not at all exclusive.” Other local nights such as Light Bulb, Vision Board, Diversity Quota and the Salon also cater to alternative comedy fans. “The Glasgow scene is so tight-knit,” says Brown, “but it’s not in competition with itself. We’re all in this together.” If there's no party you want to go to, you have to throw one yourself Emily Benita and Rachel Anne Clarke have run the Salon since 2018, after experiencing aggressive atmospheres on the circuit. “My priority was a comedy night I was comfortable bringing people to,” says Clarke. “We wanted something that felt fun.” They present musical comedy, improv and cabaret. The duo also perform sketches as Ambush, with writing partner Dorothy Jane Stewart. “That’s what people really responded to – we realised there was not a lot of live sketch comedy,” says Benita. “If there’s no party you want to go to, you have to throw one yourself.” Kerr had a similar thought when she formed Funny Lassies with Shona Lawson and Natalie Sweeney in 2017, and the Women of Colour Comedy Collective last year. She encouraged Pakistani women to come and watch comedy, some of them for the first time. Scottish comics Zara Janjua and Kavita Bhardwaj and American Arri Smith performed, while the audience enjoyed afternoon tea. Kerr delivered some jokes in Urdu. Both gigs were part of the Glasgow international comedy festival. Although its neighbour Edinburgh might have a rather larger festival, since March 2003, Glasgow has kicked off comedy season with three weeks of new shows and tour highlights. Coronavirus cut this year’s festivities short, but many have taken their comedy online. Godley has upped her output of social media videos, dubbing over footage of politicians in a Scots dialect. Highlights include a reimagining of Nigel Farage’s appearance, in shorts, to talk about coronavirus on Facebook Live (“Dry your fannies, girls,” says Godley, “cos here’s the crotch shot!”). The pandemic has highlighted the strength of Glasgow’s comedy communities. “A lot of people are struggling and everyone’s coming together,” says Brown. “Even though most of the time we’re just being idiots, we’ve created this group of people who care for each other.”