Ant Middleton dusts off his camo cargo pants for another dose of schadenfreude-fuelled physical endurance tests for his 12 new celebrity recruits. Joining Ant and his staff on the remote Scottish island of Raasay are the reality stars Katie Price and Joey Essex, presenter Helen Skelton, ex-footballer John Fashanu and former boxer Tony Bellew, among others. In this first episode, the celebs are faced with a 50-metre cliff freefall and a boxing challenge, which Bellew launches into. Ammar Kalia Hapless home bakers will be interested in Patrick’s stoneware steamer, designed to create the perfect crusty loaf. It’s ovenproof, but it is idiot-proof? This episode also includes a cycling safety gadget and a hi-tech makeup remover, but which will impress the customer panel? Ellen E Jones The doyenne of crafting, Kirstie Allsopp, returns with this new series made for idle hands during lockdown. In this opening episode, Allsopp crafts 3D flowers for those who can’t get outside and enjoy spring, as well as a paper garland to brighten up your home. AK Following a recent US study which found that diners order 20% fewer calories when they know how much exercise it would take to burn them off, Fred Sirieix puts the theory to the test in this special, inviting 20 diners to eat to their heart’s content and then face his secret gym. AK New series offering a step-by-step guide to constructing some of the world’s most fabulous vehicles, from sports cars to luxury motors, kicking off with a Bentley. Here’s how a £170k Continental GT gets from the drawing board to the factory floor and beyond. Ali Catterall A new series based on the same book as the 1999 movie The Bone Collector. Russell Hornsby takes the Denzel Washington role as a tetraplegic ex-detective, remotely directing cops (Arielle Kebbel and Michael Imperioli) using his vast knowledge of serial killers. It’s slick, but standard, fare. Jack Seale T2 Trainspotting, 11.10pm, Film4 Danny Boyle’s tardy sequel catches up with Edinburgh’s four favourite junkies 21 years later – and finds them grappling with the calamity that is middle age. Ewan McGregor’s Renton wants to make amends for betraying his old muckers – Jonny Lee Miller’s Sick Boy, Ewen Bremner’s poor Spud and Robert Carlyle’s reliably terrifying Begbie. They still radiate that defiant comic energy. Paul Howlett