Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The head of Germany’s Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases calls on people to stay at home as much as possible as new figures show the country’s infection rate has increased. Lothar Wieler says the virus reproduction rate, dubbed “R”, is now at 1.0 in Germany, which means one person with the virus infects one other on average. Earlier this month, the rate was at 0.7. Vladimir Putin extends a non-working period in Russia until 11 May, as he warns the rate of infection in the country has not yet peaked. The Russian president made the announcement during a televised meeting with senior government officials and regional heads. The French prime minister, Édouard Philippe, begins outlining the schedule for the end of the lockdown. Addressing the national assembly, Philippe says the situation is unique. “Who could have envisaged a France where schools, universities, cafes, restaurants, the majority of businesses, libraries … beaches, stadiums … would be closed?” Philippe announces an ambition to increase testing to 700,000 a week, including everyone who has been in contact with someone with the virus, whether they are symptomatic or not. “Isolation is not a punishment or sanction, it is a measure of collective protection,” he says, appealing to the “civic behaviour” of everyone to isolate for 14 days if they test positive for the virus. The number of confirmed cases in the kingdom passes the 20,000 mark as its health authorities report 1,266 new infections. Saudi Arabia also reports eight deaths, bringing its total death toll to 152. The health secretary, Matt Hancock, says the UK government will begin including deaths in care homes in its daily reports as official figures show they account for almost a quarter of the total death toll in England and Wales, with yet more occurring in private homes, hospices or elsewhere. Hancock wrongly claimed at a briefing that care home deaths represent just a sixth of the total. Deaths that occur in the community will also be included from now on. Hancock says asymptomatic NHS and care staff, over-65s and those who travel to work will now qualify for testing. He says the government can potentially carry out 73,400 coronavirus tests per day. He has previously promised the UK would be undertaking 100,000 tests per day by the end of April. According to researchers at Johns Hopkins University, 3,063,814 people are known to have been infected, while 212,345 are confirmed to have died. These figures are likely to represent significant underestimates due to suspected underreporting around the world.