Last week we began with a paradox. This week we have another for you which we have shamelessly borrowed from our fellow travellers at Christian Science Monitor: It’s one of the paradoxes of the coronavirus crisis: Local papers are going under even as both readership and public need for solid information soar. With advertisers pulling out, can other financial models offer hope? We feel the paradox keenly at the Guardian as well. So I will do you a deal: if you will consider putting something in the tipbox this week that roughly equates to what you feel this newsletter is worth, we will give you more Upside news than we’ve ever given you before. Here goes: • The people who recovered from Covid-19. Two-minute read. • Businesses move into ventilator overdrive. 90-second read. • The African migrants helping to feed Italy. Two-minute snack. • The great hope for our oceans. About 30 years. • How to be isolated: a guide to surviving lockdown, by the people who are good at being alone. Three-minute read. • How the crisis is reviving our utopian hopes of connection and community 90-second OpEd piece. • How to manage Covid-19 anxiety. Two minutes. • A new mini-series: hope in a time of crisis. Daily fix. And in non-coronavirus Upside news: • The best schools in Brazil Three-minute read. • How to stop flooding Three-minute read. • Our best long reads ever. An hour or two. • The antidote – most read non-Covid tales. Quick browse. • New blood test can detect 50 types of cancer. One-minute read. Finally, two of the funniest stories of the week. The first involves a man, some magnets and a pair of very sore nostrils. The second is pure internet gold. Defence budgets are likely to be a secondary victim of the Covid-19 pandemic. Jane’s, a defence thinktank, reckons spending could be reduced by tens of billions of pounds around the world as a result of the virus. Andrew MacDonald, a Jane’s analyst said: “Defence spending plans in a series of the world’s largest defence markets are on course to be derailed in the near-term by the economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic.” This piece in the Conversation asked whether the virus might kill off the global wildlife trade. We were humbled by the sports stars who realised there is another kind of heroism, people like Jos Buttler, Marcus Rashford and the Barcelona football team. This piece in the Atlantic is beautiful: the chance to regain a less hurried life. We admired the Boston Globe’s new initiative to connect people in need with people who are able to help. And the LA Times piece on the festival hands now building Covid triage units. Given that we cannot travel at the moment and are restless for new vistas, we also liked this attempt to digitally recreate ruined castles of Europe by NeoMam Studios. And finally there were bouncy rubber pavements, which we thought might have been an early April fool, until it emerged that April Fool’s Day was largely cancelled this year. With so many of us restricted in our movements, the life-in-lockdown stories have been pouring in. Keep them coming. Lesley Freedman wrote in from lockdown in Sydney We celebrated our 30th wedding anniversary last week in Sydney. It was a covid news-free day! My partner and I rediscovered our wedding photos and watched the video for the first time right through. In the evening we dressed up and connected with four of our special guests online. We wore silly hats, popped champagne on cue and offered each other olives and cheese. For the first time in days we were happy. Adam Mileusnic has also been indoors, but that hasn’t stopped him from doing miles on his bike I’m a British guy living in Madrid and have been quarantined in my flat for 15 days now. I livestreamed an eight-hour cycling challenge on my exercise bike for a group of 36 children’s charities affected by the Covid crisis (collectively called Family for Every Child) and raised over £1,000. I came up with the idea after being trapped for so long with only one way to keep moving! You too could emulate Adam’s heroics. Check out connectandride.org. On balconies everywhere, which are finding a new purpose in life. These are extraordinary times, dear reader – let us know how it is for you. And if you are able, please support our journalism – Upside and Downside – with some pocket change. It’s very easy to do.