West Ham are hopeful their players will accept a proposal to defer their wages after Southampton’s squad agreed to go without 10% of their pay for the next three months to ensure non-playing staff receive their salaries in full. Southampton became the first Premier League club to reach an agreement over reduced pay with their players, who came to the consensus that wage deferrals were the fairest solution after holding talks with the board about the financial disruption caused by the coronavirus pandemic. The club said their manager, Ralph Hasenhüttl, senior coaching staff and board of directors would also defer some of their pay for the next three months. It is understood that Southampton’s chief executive, Martin Semmens, played a leading role in the talks, coordinating a plan between the players and the club’s owners, the Gao family and Katharine Liebherr. The economic consequences of the suspension of English football were laid bare to the players and the agreement, believed to have the backing of the Professional Footballers’ Association, enables Southampton to commit to not furloughing staff until the end of June. It represents a significant breakthrough in the pay dispute between top-flight players and owners since the postponement of the season. Although Premier League clubs could lose £1.137bn if the season is cancelled, they have found it difficult to convince players to lower their pay. Attempts to reach an agreement over potential 30% reductions across the league reached a dead end last weekend, forcing clubs to go it alone. The PFA has stood in the way of sweeping cuts, arguing they would cause a £200m tax deficit and hurt the NHS. However players are keen to contribute to society – it was announced on Wednesday that Premier League captains had launched a charitable fund, #PlayersTogether, to help people involved in tackling the pandemic – and they have also wanted clubs to make clear why wage drops are necessary. West Ham have explained their financial situation to the players, who are discussing whether to defer pay. It is believed that the club are looking for a bigger deferral than 10%. West Ham’s manager, David Moyes, has taken a 30% pay cut and the club intend to raise at least £30m through a rights issue next month. The vice-chair, Karren Brady, has also taken a 30% pay cut to ensure that full-time and casual staff continue to be paid in full. There are issues to resolve elsewhere. Bournemouth, Newcastle, Norwich and Tottenham have placed non-playing staff on furlough, and Crystal Palace are struggling to come to an agreement with their players about wage deferrals. Wolves players and coaching staff have teamed up to make a six-figure donation to the Royal Wolverhampton NHS Trust. The players have donated separately to #PlayersTogether. Wolves and their owner, Fosun, have already donated 6,300 pieces of protective equipment to the city’s NHS and council.