Dragon’s Den’s Duncan Bannatyne, the kids’ TV presenter Paul Chuckle and the fashion designer Zandra Rhodes are among the new group of eight retiree celebs travelling to the coastal Indian city of Puducherry to live out a retirement home fantasy inspired by the 2011 film. Much like yesterday’s Absolutely India, it is an initial serving of culture shock for our seniors as they negotiate the city’s traffic and cuisine, before Duncan finds Zen in a spot of yoga and some of the women explore the region’s farming. A bumbling dose of escapism. Ammar Kalia Jimmy Doherty gives us a window into spring through our TV screens with the start of this new series, beamed from his Suffolk farm. It is typical spring fare tonight as Jimmy welcomes lambs and baby reindeer, as well as building nesting boxes for his wildlife. AK Now we are having to be more flexible than ever with our shopping habits, this latest episode of the consumer advice show focuses on “use by”, “best before” and “display until” dates. What do they really mean? And should we be worried about using certain items past their expiry? Hannah J Davies As it nears its end – the final two instalments are next week – Alex Garland’s miniseries about technology and free will has become tipsy on its own mythology: this instalment is 10 minutes of dialogue in an opaque 60-minute container. But the atmosphere is strong, and what is discussed cuts to the core of the show. Jack Seale The First Dates spin-off set in a rustic Italian resort returns, with veteran matchmaker Fred Sirieix and his staff attending to nervy guests. Likable pensioners Alexandria and Geoff seem like a good pairing, while 26-year-old estate agent Georgia is winning admirers by the pool before her date even starts. Graeme Virtue The absurdly violent thriller continues with all hell breaking loose after the death of Sean’s father, the head of an all-powerful crime family. Kurdish gang leader Lale decides to get in on the action and steal a shipment of heroin amid the chaos, while new information sends Sean on a bloody retaliation. AK Lincoln (Steven Spielberg, 2012), 9pm, Film4Steven Spielberg’s monumental portrait of Abraham Lincoln focuses on a few crucial weeks in early 1865, and his struggle to abolish slavery. Anchoring this weighty but compelling drama is the performance of Daniel Day-Lewis, who embodies the great man from twinkling teller of anecdotes to the greatest of statesmen. Paul Howlett 