Sally Rooney’s 2018 bestseller gets an eagerly awaited 12-part adaptation. It tells the story of lovers Connell and Marianne, as their lives intertwine and disentangle throughout school and university in Dublin. In this opening double bill, wealthy loner Marianne sparks a tentative friendship with Connell, whose mother cleans at her house. As their relationship grows in secret, so do their lies. It is a softly paced and tender coming-of-age tale played with subtlety by Paul Mescal as Connell and Daisy Edgar-Jones as Marianne. Ammar Kalia A new series of the US cook-off that is basically MasterChef: The Professionals with much more shouting. The early stages are a noisy, adrenaline-fuelled free-for-all with preparation speed tests, tag team tasks and all manner of other gimmicks. Once it calms down, a fairly generic cooking competition emerges. Phil Harrison A fast-turnaround series takes us to the exhibitions we might, ordinarily, have been visiting this year. The first eerily empty venue is Tate Modern, where Alastair Sooke – previously the author of a BBC guide to pop art – enjoys a curation of the work of Andy Warhol. Jack Seale Turner prize-winning sculptor and artist Grayson Perry is on a mission to get the country’s creative juices flowing while self-isolating with this weekly show direct from his own studio. He will be talking us through a work of art as he creates it, as well as encouraging viewers to make their own pieces. AK A second season of the moody drama about family secrets in rural Ireland. The terrific Adrian Dunbar is back as the disgraced GP Jim Hogan, cleared of murder, but still struggling to reconnect with his kids after a prolonged absence. After tonight’s tense opener, the rest of the episodes will screen throughout the week. Graeme Virtue This fascinating documentary follows some of the biggest names in the contemporary art world – from Jeff Koons to Gerhard Richter – and their dealers to expose the often contradictory commercialism of the art market, a system that can put price above all else. AK Blithe Spirit (David Lean, 1945), 3pm, Talking Pictures TVDavid Lean’s British take on American fantasy-screwball comedies retains all the wit and style of Noël Coward’s original play. Rex Harrison plays a widowed novelist embarking on his second marriage while haunted by his first wife (Kay Hammond), with Margaret Rutherford as his medium. Paul Howlett