Who isn’t fascinated with infection rate graphs right now? My own loose theory is that you could use them to track much more than just the spread of coronavirus: change the label on the x axis and every one of them could easily represent data on how many people in the UK are currently getting too into jigsaws, for example, or growing very weak moustaches, or grappling with a sourdough. (The frighteningly steep lines depicting the out-of-control spread of new cases also neatly illustrate the world’s horniness pandemic – with everyone locked inside and the rising sap of spring, this is arguably the most sexually desperate moment in all of human history. Look at the graphs. The planet has never been hornier.) The graphs are also neatly tracking two other viral trends right now: “being extremely furious at your neighbours” and “burning down a 5G tower because Facebook told you to”. Both have really skyrocketed this week – we are outperforming even Italy in burning down our 5G towers! – but also have yet to reach a pinnacle, let alone a long curve down. We’ll take each one in turn. First, Neighbourhood Watch has now gone nuclear. Britain has always had a fine tradition of curtain-twitching – does any other culture have such reverence for net curtains, to comment on people’s parking, how big their weekly shop is, how often their grownup daughter does or does not visit with the kids? In lockdown, the government has given us all a gift by issuing behavioural guidelines but not actually making them sovereign – so we all get the pleasure of helping to enforce the rules. What that should mean in theory is we come together as a great neighbourly morass, pooling resources and scheduling our trips to help the infirm and the quarantined, one great big blitz spirit effort to get through this, together. What it actually means is once a week we all get furious at each other about going to the park. Even I have fallen into this trap, and I’m normal. More than once this week I’ve been out on my still-permitted daily walk and thought: “Wow, a lot of people in this park. Go home, idiots.” I have thought that thought, while in a park, presumably while other people in the park have looked at me and thought: “Wow, look at that guy in the park. Go home, idiot.” There is a divide down the nation, now. First, the Virtuous Saints, who read the government guidelines like a Bible and live by them, and get really arsey with you when you walk slightly too close to them on the pavement even if the pavement is quite narrow and they are right in the damn middle of it – and who have this sort of divine blind spot to their own presence outside, in the forbidden and unholy places. Then we have the Sinners, people without gardens who go and lie down in a park on weekends when it’s sunny or think a bike ride (which the government still deems “acceptable”) is acceptable. We all want to do our bit, I understand that. We all have a weird kink for the Keep Calm and Carry On spirit of the NHS in crisis. But I do think we’re about a week away from riots breaking out between Good Outside People and Bad Outside People. Then A&E departments are going to have to mop all that up, and the whole fracas will unflatten the curve and keep us all inside for an extra six weeks. Piers Morgan is going to do a really pink-in-the-face  Good Morning Britain bit calling them all “traitors” – and I’m going to have to grit my teeth and watch as that goes righteously viral. Our other new national sport is apparently burning down 5G towers – inspired by what even fact fans must admit is a world-class conspiracy theory, which elegantly blends our fear of disease with our fear of China and our fear of new technology nobody really understands to begin with. As the BBC reports, there have been at least three mast fires in the past week – in Birmingham, Liverpool and Melling – but the graphs tell us there are surely more on the way. Last week broadcasters were told by Ofcom that they’d face sanctions if they spread baseless 5G theories, after the community radio station Uckfield FM gave airtime to a woman who introduced herself as a “registered nurse” (who you might expect to be in a hospital rather than typing out long Facebook posts about how 5G infected bats in Wuhan with corona), who explained that 5G is somehow sucking the air out of our lungs, along with other stuff that has gained a weird traction on WhatsApp and made people harass fibre-optics engineers in the street. As a precautionary measure I went out to get some tinfoil to wrap around my head but all the shelves had been raided. There has been speculation that 5G disinformation has connections to Russia, like all the finest disinformation – as the Verge pointed out in a new report on Britain’s world-beating cellular arson industry, the New York Times warned last year that Moscow’s propaganda channels were pushing stories that 5G led to brain cancer, infertility, Alzheimer’s, autism and heart tumours. But even if the stories come from Russia, it still takes British people to believe them before a cell tower gets burned down in Merseyside. For some reason, destroying forward-thinking technology – which is also particularly useful for, say, staying in touch with people without leaving the house, which in my opinion is a vaguely useful service right now – because you’re worried about it impacting on your health, all while an unseen and real threat actually does impact on people’s health, seems to me a particularly British unreaction to this whole mess. We’re living through history, and we’re living through it abominably. Kids will be learning about this in schools, one day. Think about that next time you politicise sun exposure and set fire to a big lamppost. • Joel Golby is a writer for the Guardian and Vice, and the author of Brilliant, Brilliant, Brilliant Brilliant Brilliant  