Livestreaming from the homes of bands and DJs around the UK, DIY magazine is hosting a virtual festival from Friday to Sunday (2pm-10pm BST). It follows on from popular streaming project, DIYsolation (which continues Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays), and has been organised in aid of the Help Musicians charity, with a call for donations to support acts affected by the numerous live events being postponed and cancelled. Live sets and activities will come from over 20 artists performing from their homes, including Pale Waves, Marika Hackman, Metronomy’s Anna Prior, Sports Team, and there’s a pub quiz with Peace. Other highlights include the sassy Self Esteem (AKA Rebecca Lucy Taylor, formerly of Slow Club), 90s Club Kid vibes from Lynks Afrikka, and punk rockers Creeper reading spooky bedtime stories. Tinnies and glitter optional. The third virtual festival for Defected Records takes place on Friday night, after two hugely popular events last month – one streamed from Ministry of Sound in London, the other from the homes of DJs. The bill for this Good Friday edition includes headliner Calvin Harris playing as his house and techno alias Love Regenerator, Roger Sanchez, Black Motion, Sam Divine and The Mambo Brothers with an Ibiza sunset-inspired set. The event calls on the audience to donate to the World Health Organisation’s COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund, and will stream across Defected’s Facebook, Youtube, and Twitter from 2pm-10pm BST. Bringing a taste of DGTL to all our visitors worldwide, we are proud to present 'DIGITAL DGTL' - a two day live streaming festival, bringing 28 world-class acts of electronic music into your home. Tune in on digital.dgtl.nl this weekend! 🚨 #KeepDistanceStayDGTL A post shared by  DGTL (@dgtlfestival) on Apr 7, 2020 at 4:33am PDT Originally planned as an Easter weekend bash at the Amsterdam shipyard-turned-nightclub, NDSM Docklands, the DGTL electronic music festival will now be livestreamed this Saturday and Sunday. There will be 28 acts playing from around the world across multiple virtual stages, including Nicolas Lutz, Adriatique, Jeans, KiNK, JP Enfant, Tom Trago, Julianna and Mary Lake, with more special guests to be announced. For anyone throwing a solo living room rave, connect via social media using #KeepDistanceStayDGTL, and check out the blog post guide from DGTL, which includes NDSM backgrounds to add to Zoom calls. The Warehouse Project’s (WHP) virtual music event series is bringing a major party to front rooms this bank holiday weekend. On Friday (from 6pm BST), WHP will stream Aphex Twin playing techno, acid and ambient beats from the huge Depot Mayfield venue, also known as WHP19, an abandoned train station near Manchester Piccadilly. Reach for the lasers and the crazy visuals by Weirdcore, via livestreams on Facebook and YouTube. Family-friendly Camp Bestival is throwing a weekend-long event, with a debut set for mini ravers by 10-year-old Nelly Cook – with a little help from her dad, Fatboy Slim. There’s fun for all ages across the bill, including storytime with Kate Winslet; model-making with Aardman Studios; a Q&A with Fred Sirieix from Channel 4’s First Dates; a workout with Mr Motivator; and comedy duo the Scummy Mummies. The event is in aid of the Ellen MacArthur Cancer Trust and the Trussell Trust, and will stream across Facebook, Instagram and YouTube on Saturday and Sunday, from 9am to 9pm BST.