Cyclone Harold has levelled buildings and caused dangerous flooding across Fiji’s largest island of Viti Levu, after pummelling Vanuatu as a category-five storm on Monday. The tropical cyclone was downgraded to category four before reaching Fijian waters. Fijian authorities ordered people to stay indoors and closed all roads on the island of Viti Levu, which is home to the country’s capital of Suva and the bulk of the Pacific nation’s population. Frank Bainimarama, the country’s prime minister warned earlier on Wednesday that “the worst of TC Harold will strike Fiji through this afternoon … Flying debris and floodwaters can be deadly. All Fijians should stay indoors unless directed to evacuate.” Images emerged of flooded streets on the west coast of Viti Levu, and buildings demolished. Not too long ago around our cafe in Ba @MaiLifeMagazine #TCHarold #fiji pic.twitter.com/4b97XTvz2U Harold was expected to hit Tonga in the next 48 hours. The Matangi Tonga website reported that Harold’s arrival in the country would coincide with a king tide and a supermoon early on Thursday morning. An extreme high tide warning was in force for Tonga for Thursday and Friday. Fijian authorities have had days to prepare for the storm, which formed near the Solomon Islands before cutting a destructive path through Vanuatu. The storm has already wreaked a path of destruction through the Pacific. Twenty-seven people are missing and feared dead after being swept off a ferry in rough seas caused by the cyclone in Solomon Islands. The storm hit Vanuatu on Monday and two days later, it is still unclear how badly the country was hit. Communication lines to Vanuatu’s hardest hit islands - Espiritu Santo, Malo and Pentecost among others - were severed by the storm and it’s expected that calmer weather today to bring devastating news of the cyclone’s full devastation. As #Fiji braces for the impact of #TCHarold your #Kiwi vuvale is getting ready to provide any needed emergency humanitarian & disaster relief for @FijianGovt @FijiNDMO through @MFATNZ & @NZDefenceForce. There is a lot going on but we face this together. Kia kaha #Fiji pic.twitter.com/92S6G2oD21 There have been no reports of loss of life, but some pictures of destroyed buildings and flooding have already emerged. Rebuilding efforts will be complicated by the spread of Covid-19, with relief agencies desperately worried how to maintain social distancing measures while carrying out their work. There are currently no confirmed cases of the disease in Vanuatu but the government has placed a ban on inbound flights to help containment efforts. New Zealand’s High Commission in Vanuatu is working on options to get stranded citizens back to New Zealand. A Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade spokesperson said damage to the northern and central part of Vanuatu was “serious” and New Zealand “stands ready to support the Government of Vanuatu’s response”. AAP contributed to this report