1) Augusta is on our minds but there it’ll stay with the real thing postponed until later in the year… hopefully. We could cheer you up with glorious Masters moments of years gone by: Sandy Lyle’s stunning bunker shot from 1988 or Tiger’s “in your life” chip-in at 16 from 2005. But let’s also reflect the theme of crashing disappointment. So, here’s Larry Mize chipping in to break Greg Norman’s heart and win the 1987 Masters in a playoff and how about handy linksman Alan Hansen talking you through Norman’s infamous 1996 collapse against Nick Faldo. Then there’s the Masters’ excruciating equivalent of meeting the in-laws for the first time: here’s a Butler Cabin special from 2012 with Bubba Watson botching his handshake with Augusta National chairman Billy Payne. And a sliding doors moment. It could have been oh so different for Tiger last year had this security guard connected properly. Block or charge? pic.twitter.com/XpjgkFWcpQ 2) It was 15 years ago last weekend that Lee Bowyer and Kieron Dyer put their dukes up against each while playing for the same Newcastle United team. Here’s Dyer’s take on the issue nine years later. That brought back memories of David Batty and Graeme Le Saux’s fisticuffs in Blackburn shirts at Spartak Moscow in 1995. 3) Also due to start this week, the county cricket season, for which the weather would have been just fine, but instead there’s time to look back on Essex’s victory in last year’s County Championship. Essex were also victorious in the Vitality Blast Twenty20 finals. For those needing a cricket fix, how about John Arlott’s Vintage Cricket, a collection of some of the legendary commentator’s favourite moments, and featuring that much-missed Hampshire burr. Here’s Arlott’s commentary on Geoffrey Boycott’s maiden Test century, against Australia at The Oval in 1964. 4) Zinedine Zidane had quite the first touch. In fact, apologies – that probably shouldn’t be in the past tense. Trevor Francis wasn’t exactly indelicate either. O ZiZu era f*da no domínio da pelota hein pic.twitter.com/CYP3vJpCqH 5) More from when sport and video games collide … Shaq Fu! And here he is in Ready 2 Rumble Boxing too (which also features Michael Jackson and – eh? – both Bill and Hillary Clinton) … and UFC Undisputed 2010. But Shaquille O’Neal is arguably not the weirdest cross-pollination of the beat ’em up genre: here’s Fighters Megamix, where one of the unlockable characters is an anthropomorphised stock car from Daytona USA. Bill Clinton, of course, also found his way into NBA Jam. 1) Adriano Solano of Venezuela, possibly the world’s worst competitive cross-county skier. 2) Speedball 2, an absolute classic, futuristic kick-ass Rollerball-style ruck on the Amiga, was a surprising nomination for a second-tier sport-related video game. Two from the BBC Micro are surer bets: Dare Devil Denis and the superbly primitive Graham Gooch’s Test Cricket, a game that could be played entirely with the space bar. The latter was perhaps outclassed by Brian Lara Cricket on the Mega-Drive. 3) Leeds Rhino Adrian Morley gets KO-ed by Wigan Warriors’ Mick Cassidy in 1998, not that Morley couldn’t dish it out himself. Spotters’ badges: stuartgoodwin, whobroughtoranges, pabloelbrujo, bambam75, germit, ValuedCustomer. Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.