You don’t have to earn your food. I didn’t think that in the middle of a global crisis I would have to write this, but I do – and you need to hear it. You don’t have to earn your food. On Monday night, the BBC aired a Horizon show called The Restaurant That Burns Off Calories. The premise was, simply put, that out the back of the restaurant was a gym where a group of people would show how long a person might have to exercise in order to “burn off” the calories contained in the restaurant’s dishes. There was some chat about genetics and the calories that a body burns simply by existing, but at its core was a focus on calories in, calories out. The premise was simple: earn the food you eat, and you’ll be OK. For many of us, this way of thinking is more harmful now than ever. Helen West is a registered dietician and author who works extensively with people with eating disorders. “I think it’s fair to say that most of us are struggling in one way or another with the stress and uncertainty caused by COVID-19 and lockdown,” she shares. “There are many people who haven’t been formally diagnosed with an eating disorder, but struggle daily with food and exercise obsession.” Access to food is uncertain, with trips to the shops anxiety-inducing for even the most mentally “well” among us. Normal foods might be off-limits. Your cupboards might be disconcertingly bare or unusually full. You might be restlessly pacing or barely moving from your bed. Perhaps your days are stretching unnervingly long ahead of you, and food has become a source of precious comfort. Maybe your stomach is tied in knots with the stress of it all. Others will find themselves busier than ever – sometimes too hungry, other times too full, seldom able to fall into step with the rhythms of their own hunger. For those with eating disorders, the situation is even more difficult. The services many rely on might have been stripped back or stopped altogether. In the face of endless talk of health and personal responsibility, some might find their food guilt has gone into overdrive. Maybe, like me, you become stressed if you feel like your future food supply is uncertain, and you fall into disordered behaviours to quell the rising panic. When the Horizon show aired, the UK’s leading eating disorder charity, Beat, kept its support services open after hours to provide a lifeline for those affected. “Our services have sadly been in high demand tonight,” they tweeted, along with an appeal for donations. Despite the very clear guidelines issued by charities such as Beat, these dangerous messages proliferate. I should not have to explain that directly equating food eaten with an exercise “equivalent” can serve as a bulimia “how-to”. I should not have to go against the moral of a show commissioned and aired by our national broadcaster when I say that positioning health as an individual “choice” could be harmful, even lethal, for those with eating disorders. I shouldn’t have to point out that positing food as something to be “earned” will only compound the guilt and self-blame of those who struggle with binge eating. It shouldn’t be on me – a person who struggled with disordered eating for many years, and continues to live with its echo – to insist that programming doesn’t entrench precisely the kind of obsessive, unhappy, self-castigating mindsets that eating disorder therapists, clinics and patients work for years to overcome. There is the question of fatness, too: the fear of which is woven deep into the fabric of the Horizon show, from fearmongering about the “obesity epidemic” to using bigger bodies as cautionary tales. There is vibrant and plentiful literature on why fatness and fat people are wrongfully demonised, on the institutional medical bias against fat people and on the massive traumas that fat people face as a result of society’s attitudes. I advise everyone to seek out those voices and to learn from them, but for now I will say this: fatness and thinness are not moral triumphs or failures. There is no inherent virtue in thinness, nor in health (however it is conceived), and those who try to convince you otherwise do so at enormous cost to fat people, to those living with disabilities, to those with eating disorders and to the great many people who inhabit more than one of those identities. When we champion the idea of the perfect, responsible “good” body – especially in the midst of a pandemic – what are we saying about the worth, the specialness, of people whose bodies (or minds) don’t conform? We need to reach beyond ourselves – if we are well enough to do so – and have a shot at reconfiguring some of the bigger problems that give rise to such widespread food anxiety and fatphobia. We need to untangle ourselves from the idea that there is one true measure of health and instead turn our focus towards a more nebulous kind of wellbeing: one which digs not into the particulars of your diet, but which foregrounds justice, connectedness, solidarity and care. You’re worthy of care because you exist. Your value can’t be measured in calories. A calorie is no measure of the world. It doesn’t capture the crunch of a breadcrumb coating around milky pale rings of calamari or the garlic kick of aioli. The calories in a bowl of tomato soup with bread and butter speak to something abstract and cold – the amount energy it might release under laboratory conditions – and say nothing of the comfort you feel or the pleasure you take. A calorie doesn’t know about your contented bloat or the salty sharp miracle of an olive in a mouthful of pasta – it is just the energy needed to raise the temperature of one gram of water by 1°C. Nothing more, nothing less. • This article is an edited version of one originally published on Medium, Ruby has donated the fee to Beat