Two coronavirus-stricken cruise liners have been granted permission to dock in Fort Lauderdale, Florida after local officials reached an agreement with the vessels’ operators. The Zaandam and Rotterdam will now proceed to Port Everglades where hundreds of passengers will disembark and people in a critical condition will be transferred to hospital. Four people have died on the Zaandam and dozens are sick with flu-like symptoms on the vessels. Ahead of the decision to allow the boats to dock, Holland America Line said guests that met US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention health guidelines would be transported home immediately once on land, largely on charter flights. About 10 guests will require immediate critical care once docked and 45 guests with mild illness will be required to stay onboard with the crew until they have recovered. The Zaandam cruise liner last entered port in Valparaíso, Chile, more than two weeks ago and has been stranded at sea with a Covid-19 outbreak onboard worsening after several Latin American countries refused to let it dock. Asymptomatic passengers were transferred to the Rotterdam, its sister ship, off the coast of Panama in a boat-to-boat rescue operation . “Both Zaandam and the Rotterdam have just received clearance for both ships to proceed into Port Everglades,” the captain of the Rotterdam announced to passengers on Thursday afternoon. “I am very happy to share this good news with you. It has been a long journey. Your journey home is ready to begin and we will give you an update on the next steps.” The agreement to let both ships dock in Florida comes after opposition from the state governor Ron DeSantis and several Broward County commissioners who feared that they could not cope with an influx of sick passengers. But after intervention by President Trump earlier this week, the cruise liners have been allowed into port after officials approved a plan from the cruise operators. “It’s a go, everything is signed” said Broward County commissioner Barbara Sharief, who said the plan was briefly held up by the need to get agreements from the company on how they would take responsibility for any additional patients that need hospitalisation. “I’m happy. These people need to get off this ship and go home. I’m glad we could help them.” “They have the final clearance,” said Ft. Lauderdale Mayor Dean Trantalis. “I’m encouraged by the big steps the cruise line has now taken [to ensure passengers get home safely.] It’s a far cry from what they originally offered.” But Trantalis noted that more cruise ships loaded with passengers are waiting to come into Ft. Lauderdale in the next few days – including another ship owned by a Carnival Cruises subsidiary, the Coral Princess. That ship was turned away from Brazil and other South American ports nearly two weeks ago. The company announced on Tuesday that that ship also has passengers with influenza symptoms. “Of course, it’s a concern,” said Trantalis, who originally opposed allowing the Zaandam to come into Ft Lauderdale. “We have no information about the conditions of the passengers on the Coral Princess just yet. But we will use our influence with the county to make sure that any ill passengers are properly isolated and quarantined.” Meanwhile, a financial filing by the Carnival Corporation on Wednesday said there were still 6000 cruise ship passengers stuck at sea on Carnival-owned cruise ships alone. “They are not the last ship, said Trantalis. “I understand there are more ships out there behind them … So it’s a continuing dilemma.” More to follow…