Friday is here and I’m Warren Murray, ready to lead you through what’s on offer in terms of news. Wuhan’s prevention and control taskforce has revised the city’s death toll upwards by 50% from 2,579 to 3,869. The updated figure comes after weeks of scepticism about the reported toll. Meanwhile in the last few hours the business world has begun absorbing the news that the Chinese economy shrank 6.8% in the first three months of 2020. The first such contraction on record for China comes after months of paralysis from the coronavirus lockdown. Britain’s biggest companies handed out almost half a trillion pounds in dividends and share buybacks in the years before the coronavirus crisis, according to a report calling for tough conditions on any taxpayer-funded bailouts. Burgeoning dividend payouts left companies weak going into the Covid-19 crash, as well as fuelling inequality, says the Common Wealth thinktank. It says the government needs to take an equity stake in firms receiving financial support, while job security guarantees should be made, and ministers could also impose bans on dividends and share buybacks, insist on maximum pay caps for top executives, and get assurances that companies will pay their taxes fairly. After attempting to lord it over state governors, Donald Trump has unveiled guidelines for reopening the economy that ultimately defer to them on when and how restrictions should be eased within their borders. The first phase allows for work but only non-essential travel; the second would allow for gatherings of 50 people and non-essential travel; the third allows for schools and organised youth activities to open up as well as large venues under “physical distancing protocols” and bars on the basis of reduced occupancy. David Smith writes that the guidelines are supposedly science-based but fail to set out critical elements like a national testing strategy – something that has proven vital in other countries. Dominic Raab has warned the British public that lockdown measures could last into June and any relaxation now would “substantially increase the number of deaths”. He set out plans for a minimum three-week extension to prevent a deadly “second peak” of infections but also pointed to Boris Johnson’s remark, on 19 March, that it would take 12 weeks to turn the tide of the virus. “That, broadly, is the outline,” Raab said. You can catch up quickly on more news here and our live blog is the place to be for further coronavirus developments. There’s more in our Coronavirus Extra section further down … and here’s where you can find all our coverage of the outbreak – from breaking news to factchecks and advice. More than 3m apply to settle – The Home Office has received 3.4m applications from European citizens for settled status in the UK after Brexit. It puts the government close to its overall estimate of between 3.4 million and 3.8 million people who are eligible to stay. Monthly data shows a backlog of 320,000 applications and researchers at Oxford have warned that many citizens may “fall through the cracks” – such as those in children’s homes, care homes or victims of domestic abuse who may be prevented from applying. The Home Office said there was still more than a year left until the deadline, with an extension possible if someone had reasonable grounds for missing the deadline. Roger Stone retrial bid fails – A federal judge has denied an application by Roger Stone for a new trial. The judge said there was “zero evidence of ‘explicit bias’ against Stone”, Donald Trump’s longtime friend and adviser. Next, Stone is expected to ask an appeals court to throw out his conviction. He has 14 days to do so. Stone was found guilty and jailed over his attempts to sabotage a congressional investigation that posed a political threat to the president. Saudi princess in plea from jail – A senior Saudi royal and granddaughter of the country’s founding monarch has revealed she is in prison and demanded the current ruler and her cousin, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, release her and provide medical care. Princess Basmah bint Saud bin Abdulaziz al-Saud says she is being detained without charge or explanation in Riyadh’s al-Ha’ir prison with one of her daughters. Basmah has campaigned for Saudi women’s rights as well as calling for Saudi Arabia to change from absolute to constitutional monarchy. Human Rights Watch (HRW) says dissenters are being ruthlessly silenced by Mohammed, the heir to the Saudi throne. A string of royals have been among those arrested in a series of purges over the past two years. Great shot – The World Press Photo Foundation has announced the results of the 63rd annual photography contest. Here is a selection of this year’s celebrated images. The leader of the National Farmers’ Union, Minette Batters, says she is optimistic British workers will help rescue the country’s harvest, citing a “real swell of support from people to do this”. But a big problem for UK farmers is that about half the food eaten in the UK usually goes to restaurants and catering – and now there is nowhere for it to go. The cancellation of Wimbledon means its strawberry supplier in Kent is faced with 33 tonnes of perishable soft fruit with no market. “We will find a home for them,” said Marion Regan, of Hugh Lowe Farms in Kent. She was talking to food banks as well as commercial outlets. In Singapore it is feared vast dormitories that house thousands of migrant workers in cramped conditions pose the threat of a surge in coronavirus cases. Health authorities are rushing to test residents, clean up the facilities and find more spacious accommodation. Low-paid women in US poultry factories are leading the struggle for fair conditions and basic safety. As Covid-19 rips through plants across the country, they have a fight on their hands. Julie Roche is a manager of a Buckinghamshire care home that usually has 45 residents. In the past few weeks she has lost 13 patients to coronavirus. She discusses the devastating impact this has had on families, staff and her remaining residents. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/04/16-71157-20200417_TIF_Carehomes.mp3 Rita Wilson and her husband Tom Hanks’ Covid-19 diagnosis underlined how pervasive the disease could be. Wilson talks about the grim side-effects of the drugs she took to combat it, including choloroquine – as well as her rap-aided recovery – to Hadley Freeman. Premier League clubs are divided over the thorny issue of how to end a season halted by coronavirus as they gather today for another extraordinary meeting to try to staunch its impact. The Rugby Football Union could face further multimillion-pound losses after World Rugby revealed the worst-case scenario is that “no international rugby is possible this year”. Devi Sridhar, the chair of Global Public Health at the University of Edinburgh and also a key adviser to the Scottish government on the Covid-19 pandemic, has described the plan to stage the Tour de France in August as a “recipe for disaster”. Formula One teams have failed to reach an agreement to adopt a substantial cut to the budget cap set to be imposed in 2021. Fifpro, the global players’ union, has warned that women’s football is faced with an “existential threat” as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. And Magnus Carlsen’s aura of invincibility was dented for the second time this month when the world champion was defeated 8.5-7.5 in the final of the $14,000 Banter Blitz Cup by the tactical skills of 16-year-old Alireza Firouzja. Shares have actually risen acrpss Asia because China’s economic data, while bleak, was better than expected. The strong open followed an overnight rally on Wall Street powered by buying of Amazon, health care stocks and other areas that are making money from the coronavirus crisis. The pound is worth $.1249 and €1.149 while the FTSE is showing a 2.8% fillip at time of writing. “Lockdown may last into June as pressure builds over exit strategy” – the Guardian on the strain that national cabin fever is bringing to bear on government decision-making. “3 more weeks – the lockdown goes on … and it’s likely to last even longer than that” concurs the Metro. Both the Express and the Times lead with Dominic Raab promising there is “light at the end of the tunnel”. The Mirror keeps up the pressure, demanding to know, after “3 more weeks in lockdown … What then?”. The Telegraph has “No end in sight for lockdown”, also highlighting how the PM’s stand-in did not provide clarity. Though the Sun says Raab has dangled the “Keys to the lock” in the form of “five tests” Britain must pass before restrictions can be lifted – including keeping the NHS safe and a steady reduction in deaths. The i reports oncologists’ fears that “Cancer treatment cutbacks could kill 60,000”. “Wear a mask in the office” – the Mail says a possible government edict would also require them on public transport. The FT has done a big number with the French president: “Macron warns EU will unravel unless bloc embraces solidarity”, in which he says stricken economies such as Italy must be supported as they recover. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com