Allies of the Venezuelan president, Nicolás Maduro, and his bitter foe, the opposition leader, Juan Guaidó, have secretly begun exploratory talks as concerns grow about the possible impact of the spread of the coronavirus, according to sources on both sides. The discussions emerged from concerns about Covid-19, hyperinflation and growing fuel shortages – as well as worries among some members of the ruling Socialist party about how to ensure their political survival under a possible change of government as Washington tightens sanctions, the sources said. The talks, which have no clear agenda, show that allies of both Maduro and Guaidó remain unconvinced they can defeat the other amid a global pandemic and US sanctions meant to push Maduro from office. “There are two extremes: Maduro and those who believe that the virus will end Guaidó’s leadership, and those on the other side [who] hope this crisis will bring down Maduro,” said an opposition legislator in favor of the rapprochement. “I think we have to find solutions.” Seven sources, who represent both sides of Venezuela’s deep political divide, confirmed the talks. Maduro and Guaidó are competing with one another to help combat the effects of the pandemic, with each side convinced the outbreak will undermine the other politically, said the sources, who asked not to be identified. Activists and rights groups around the world have urged the two factions to seek a truce in order to coordinate the delivery of aid and boost gasoline imports. The US state department in March offered to begin lifting parts of the sanctions if members of the Socialist party formed an interim government without Maduro, a plan backed by Guaidó but quickly shot down by the government. Guaidó denied the current talks after the initial Reuters story was published. “This information is false,” he wrote on his Twitter account. “The democratic alternative is united in its cause and there is only one possible agreement to save Venezuela: to form a National Emergency Government, without drug traffickers in Miraflores, that can access international aid that we need.” The state department confirmed conversations between representatives of the opposition and officials in Maduro’s government. “We are ready for dialogue, to understand one another and reach a humanitarian agreement to attend to the coronavirus [pandemic],” Maduro said during a televised broadcast over the weekend, without making reference to any specific set of talks. Maduro assured his government has controlled the coronavirus outbreak in Venezuela with the support of China, while Guaidó accused him of using the pandemic as an excuse for disastrous economic policies. Venezuela as of Monday had reported 285 coronavirus infections. The UN has called it one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to the virus due to the lack of soap and water in hospitals and the overall impoverishment of the population.