Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The number of confirmed deaths from Covid-19 has passed 50,000, according to research by Johns Hopkins University. Italy remains the country worst affected by the outbreak, with 13,915 deaths, followed by Spain, with 10,003 deaths. The US is now the third worst affected country, with 5,316 total deaths. Matt Hancock said the government was hoping to build an “at-scale” diagnostics industry to reach 100,000 tests a day by the end of the month, as he unveiled his five-pillar strategy. Just 5,000 NHS staff have been tested so far. A total of 2,921 patients have died in hospital after testing positive for coronavirus, according to the Department of Health. 163,194 people have been tested, with 33,718 testing positive. Italy registered 760 more deaths from Covid-19 on Thursday, 33 more than Wednesday. A total of 13,915 people have now died from the virus in the country. More than 6.65 million people filed for unemployment benefits in the US last week, according to the latest official figures, highlighting the devastating economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the American economy. The first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, admitted that the number of deaths in Scotland had been under-reported because of mistakes in notifying the government of new fatalities. Partly because of this, the number of Covid-19 deaths jumped 66% in one day, up by 50 to 126 fatalities. Authorities in Germany have so far received 1.1m applications for help from self-employed and small businesses. €1bn has already been paid to them and €1.8bn worth of payments have been approved. Officials in Fort Lauderdale have said an agreement to allow two coronavirus-stricken cruise liners, the Zaandam and the Rotterdam, to dock in Port Everglades should be reached “within a few hours”, after Donald Trump intervened. The pro-independence leader of Catalonia, the region of Spain hardest hit by the coronavirus after Madrid, has abandoned his government’s initial reluctance to seek help from the Spanish army, saying any assistance would be gratefully received. In a column for the Guardian, António Guterres has called for a coordinated global response to the pandemic, but said it must lead to greater global resilience and solidarity.