In hindsight, Jonathon Cartwright should have stayed home. Certainly his wife, Christine, thinks so. But at the time, early March, there were no government travel warnings for London. In Australia, there were a handful of new coronavirus cases each day but no “stay at home” order. The prime minister planned to attend the footy. So Cartwright, 42, flew to London with one of his best friends, Cal, to see his favourite band, Supergrass. Speaking to him now, he’s sheepish, even embarrassed. But he’s an enthusiast and this Britpop band had broken up a decade ago and was re-forming, and this was “definitely one for the bucket list”. The pair caught up with friends in London, went to heaving bars and crowded restaurants. The concert exceeded expectations, with 6,000 people reliving 1990s pop. “We got to go right up close to the stage and just had an absolutely wonderful time,” Cartwright says. “It was one of the best gigs I’ve ever been to.” Boris Johnson, criticised later for being too slow to respond to the coronavirus threat, went to the England v Wales rugby match the same night. This was a quick trip – leaving Melbourne on Thursday 5 March, concert on 7 March, a visit to the Tate gallery on Sunday, back home Tuesday night. “Like a true workaholic,” Cartwright was in his office at 9am the next morning. He’s the managing director, Asia Pacific, of Downstream, a design consultancy. It’s all about open plan and collaboration. There were dozens of meetings with staff and clients. That weekend, Cal rang him. “‘How are you feeling?” he asked. “I said, ‘I’m feeling fine,’ and he goes, ‘I’m not.’” Cal had felt unwell on the flight home but now he was seriously ill, with classic Covid-19 symptoms of high fever and an aching body. He told Cartwright he was going to be tested. The next day, he tested positive. Cartwright had a mild sniffle but nothing more, and put himself into isolation at his Brunswick home in inner Melbourne. On 16 March he attended a testing centre at the Royal Melbourne hospital. The result was positive. Everything changed. His wife, Christine White, a research doctor at the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, had to leave work instantly to self-isolate. Their three daughters – Audrey, 11, Nina, eight, and Stella, five – were pulled out of school. Cartwright was in isolation in the marital bedroom for a fortnight, with food brought to the door three times a day. Everyone he had been in contact with since his return from London had to be traced and told to isolate. Government contact tracers do this work but Cartwright wanted to speak to people personally, particularly his team of 12 at work. Overnight, they began working from home. “It felt a bit like the type of call you’d need to make if you had an STD where you’ve got to call up all your ex-partners,” he says. “I felt terribly guilty. I felt deeply apologetic that essentially my situation had had such a ripple effect on so many other people and their families.” Christine was furious. “She didn’t want me to go in the first place, so talk about the biggest ‘I told you’ so ever in the history of ‘I told you sos’,” he says. “She was right. I was wrong. I took the risk and I fucked up.” He was asymptomatic at first but, as he lay in the bedroom, decorated for calm with sage green walls and a white bedspread, he deteriorated. “I started to lose a sense of taste. I started to lose a sense of smell. I’m usually a person who gets by with about five hours sleep a night, with work and family and sport and other commitments. All of a sudden, I started sleeping for 12 to 13 hours a day.” The sniffles “really set in and it started to become almost this lingering cold that I couldn’t get rid of”. Compared with others, his symptoms were at the mild to medium end. Cal, who didn’t want his surname used, is a similar age and fitness level but had a far more serious illness, with a high fever, a cough and an aching body. Twice a day, someone from the Department of Health and Human Services would call, asking if Cartwright was OK and checking on his symptoms. They were “exceptional”, he says, diligent in tracing his friends and clients, compassionate in dealing with him. When it was over, the first thing Cartwright did was go for a run. “I wanted fresh air, to move my legs.” The world had changed since he’d been cut off – non-essential shops were shut, school holidays were brought forward in Victoria and thousands of people were losing jobs. “It was like a zombie or an apocalypse movie,” he says. “When I went out for the first time, it was completely different.” Cartwright knows he is fortunate. He self-isolated in comfort, with lots of support. He hasn’t lost his job. He lives in a country with excellent healthcare. He says the experience made him rethink what was most important. He didn’t binge on Netflix but he read: Stan Grant’s Australia Day; Robert J Shiller’s Narrative Economics, about how the stories we tell each other shape economic events; and Everything is F*cked, a book about hope, by Mark Manson. And he thought about what we could learn from this crisis. “This is about valuing those people who traditionally haven’t been valued in the way they should: healthcare workers, teachers, police and community professionals. They’re the ones that are actually helping to maintain the fabric of our society at the moment, and they have not always been acknowledged the way that they should be, paid the amount that they should be. “[This] has the potential for a recalibration of what’s right, both for individuals and their health, but also for the community.” Cartwright has recovered and contact tracing revealed that he had not passed on Covid-19 to anyone else. He’s working from home, helping his children learn remotely, trying to make sense of it all. He feels fortunate that he’s escaped so lightly. But there is still Christine, who remains furious with him for putting his own health and that of his family and friends at risk. “I am still in the doghouse,” he says. • Postcards from the pandemic looks at how everyday Australians are coping with immense changes coronavirus has brought to their lives. We’d like to hear your story about how you are managing during this crisis. Email: postcards@theguardian.com