The Covid-19 pandemic is the greatest challenge the world has faced since the second world war. The immediate global health emergency is triggering an economic crisis that, in turn, could massively exacerbate inequality and poverty across the world, including within our country. What’s required now is a co-ordinated global response on an unprecedented scale – both medically and economically. Yet, so far, intergovernmental action has been lacklustre at best – seemingly hindered by the rise in narrow nationalism in parts of the world where we have historically looked for global leadership. It speaks volumes that the UN security council only met for the first time a few days ago to discuss the spread of Covid-19 – a pandemic that, by definition, does not respect national borders, leaving no country immune to its destructive consequences. As Gordon Brown has rightly highlighted, we won’t be able to return to economic growth until we first bring an end to the health crisis in every corner of the world. A failure to do so will only risk a second wave of the virus and slow any economic recovery. So this is a moment to strengthen, not weaken, key international institutions like the World Health Organization. And it’s a moment for broad international collaboration on critical issues like the production of a vaccine and the procurement of medical supplies, testing kits and Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for all our key workers. We will also need to see much greater efforts to co-ordinate a proper global economic response so that we can mitigate the economic impact on people’s livelihoods. We have heard a lot in recent days about how this virus is “a great leveller”. But the truth is that those who are living in poverty or on low incomes are not only more likely to catch the virus – because of high-density living conditions and the fact they often can’t work from home – but are also more likely to be hit harder by the long-term economic shock. As the mayor of London, I’m doing everything I can to foster international co-operation, with existing mayoral networks being repurposed to exchange advice and resources. One thing that all major cities are finding challenging during this crisis is keeping a large public transport network running that is both safe for passengers and staff. Sadly, transport workers in London, including bus drivers, have died after catching the coronavirus. This feels very personal to me as I think about what might have happened to my dad had this virus emerged when he was driving a London bus. Keeping transport workers and passengers safe will always be one of my top priorities, and we’re urgently exploring every possible option to protect our heroic bus drivers, who are ensuring frontline NHS staff can get to work. We are already using anti-viral disinfectant to deep clean where needed. Buses have a panel between the driver and passengers. And we are trialling middle-door-only boarding on several routes, which is now being tried in other cities around the world. Transport for London is also looking into whether it’s possible to source sufficient PPE stock for staff,although there are serious concerns about the PPE supply chain given the national shortage and the need to prioritise our frontline health and social care workers. Over the coming weeks and months, I’m committed to working with, and learning from, other cities and I will continue to urge the international community to tackle this crisis as one. In London, I am highlighting the inspiring examples of people helping each other while encouraging Londoners to save lives by staying at home – under the banner of #LondonTogether. But we need to come together on a global scale too if we are to save as many lives and livelihoods as possible. More than ever, now is a time for far-reaching international collaboration, not narrow populist nationalism. •Sadiq Khan is mayor of London