Hope High Radio 5 Live/ BBC Sounds The Essay (Radio 3) | BBC Sounds Here are a couple of interesting non-virus series to remind us of our old interconnected world, where people lived all tangled up with one another and what happened when they did. Hope High is an excellent documentary podcast about teenagers in Huddersfield who have been groomed into working for gangs. Reporter, producer and presenter Annabel Deas usually works as a news producer for 5 Live but, “frustrated by the endless news reports about a child carrying a knife ‘being in a gang’ – as if that was an explanation” – she spent a year in West Yorkshire, talking to children who carry knives and those who care for them. In the first episode she goes into the school that some of the teenagers attend: North Huddersfield Trust. It’s clearly a brilliant school that goes the extra mile: the head spends hours on the phone to social services, trying to get help for her pupils. Soon we meet the grandmother of one of the boys, Aaron, who is in such peril that he had to be taken to Jamaica for a while to get out of danger. Now he’s back, he can’t stay at his mum’s, for fear of gang repercussions. He goes into care. Social services say that he and his family could move to Manchester, for their own safety, but don’t help them to do so. We meet other children: Josh, Daniel, Steven. All around them there is violence. Knifings on their street. Gunshots, but the shooting isn’t reported. Dangerous people move into their homes. We don’t often hear the children talk, which could make Hope High a little frustrating, but Deas’s hard work and skilled storytelling brings their tales to life. She is direct, visceral – I loved her vivid description of one of the boys eating a McDonald’s – and she makes you understand. The authorities, according to all the parents, don’t get involved enough. The police don’t prosecute children for having a knife, or carrying a small amount of cocaine, or trying to beat up their mum, because they don’t want to criminalise young people. The result? Teenagers think they can get away with it. And social services seem… well, let’s call it distracted, to be charitable. One 14-year-old got involved in county lines dealing. He went missing for three weeks. “Social services were onboard,” says his mum. “I were updating them with any information they needed... they were saying they had a plan, for when he’s caught. But when he came back, they did nothing. Diddly squat.” There was a pattern to her son’s behaviour: she informed the police, reported him as a missing person. She wanted him to be arrested, moved, taken away from her, anything to change his behaviour. But the authorities sat on their hands. Eventually, her son was arrested for a violent assault and sentenced to five years. When he comes out, his childhood will be over. Somewhat frustratingly, Hope High appears to have dropped off BBC Sounds’ podcast recommendations. Perhaps this sort of story seems irrelevant when nobody is going out. But police have said that even now, many young people are still being made to cross county lines to deliver drugs. This grooming is not stopping. Just room to mention Radio 3’s The Essay. Last week it was on the brilliantly interesting topic of single women – written and presented by my fellow Observer writer Rachel Cooke. Cooke is wonderfully well read, but wears her knowledge lightly and with style. In her first essay, she explains that the word “spinster” comes from “spinner”: an unwed woman, orphan or widow who worked with cotton and wool in the family home. Cooke makes the case for replacing “spinster” with “the odd woman”, which I love. She also covers career girls, the divorcee, widows and aunts – all fabulous categories of woman, and Cooke clearly enjoys celebrating each one. They are single, but involved in the world. Alone, but far from lonely. Sounds delightful. Locked TogetherAudible UK Audible makes great audio (podcasts and audio books), which you usually have to pay for. But earlier this month it launched Audible Stories, making hundreds of audiobooks available for free, to help keep kids and young adults entertained during these quiet times. And now it’s given us these: a set of eight warm and funny podcasts made in lockdown by comedy duos (and one collective, the hilarious Kurupt FM boys). French and Saunders chat about hair; Harry Enfield and Paul Whitehouse morph into different characters; Simon Pegg and Nick Frost talk films. Cheering. Absolute Radio’s mental health driveAbsolute Radio, and all its various “decade” stations (Absolute Radio 60s, 90s etc), gives a lot of bang for its buck. On the evening of bank holiday Monday, on the main Absolute station, it staged a resourceful and lovely Front Room festival, with various bands playing tracks live from their homes (here’s Kodaline). Plus, every station is promoting mental health awareness throughout this tricky time, while there’s a series of shows, Time to Listen, which explores music’s positive impact by getting musicians to talk about tracks that have helped them. Excellent stuff. Make a DifferenceBBC Sounds There are plenty of people out there trying to make this strange world a little better and in this podcast, Becca Bryers presents a collection of broadcasts from BBC local radio (in England) that features good people doing good deeds. This is such a sweet show. Lots of cute kids, jolly grandparents and the kind of people who keep society going for no money at all. This week’s episode features Zane, an assistant headteacher who delivers packed lunches every day to more than 100 needy children from his school. No, you’re crying.