Amid the gloom of lockdown, there are plenty of people going out of their way to spread joy to others – whether it’s through a simple gift or some colourful painting. Meanwhile Covid-19 survivors have been paying emotional tributes to the NHS staff who helped them pull through. A video showing the moment 94-year-old Ken Benbow receives a cushion from a carer featuring his late wife’s face has gone viral. Benbow was married to his wife Ada for 71 years before she died in 2019, and had been sleeping with framed photo of her every night. One of his carers at Thistleton Lodge in Preston was concerned he might hurt himself on the glass, so printed the image of Ada’s face on to a cushion for Benbow to sleep with at night instead. “I got you a present,” said 17-year-old Kia Mariah Tobin as she presents Benbow with the gift. In the video he immediately hugs the cushion and wells up with tears, before pulling Tobin in for a hug. “It was lovely, the most precious thing anyone could ever wish for,” said Benbow, appearing on Good Morning Britain. “[Ada] was the most loving, caring beautiful wife anyone could wish to have. She never did a thing wrong in her life. “I cuddle up to [the cushion], it’s so beautiful, it’s so soft and lovely,” he added. A second world war veteran, Benbow joined the Royal Navy aged 17 and was involved in the D-Day operations and the preparations to invade Japan before the war ended. Tobin is one of a number of carers who have moved into Thistleton Lodge full-time to help care for the residents. “I live with my Nan and Grandpa at home so it was a bit hard to imagine leaving them. But I’ve sorted things out for them to get food and supplies,” she said. An artist in Pontefract, West Yorkshire, has received worldwide attention after speculation that her colourful NHS tributes were the work of Banksy. She has since revealed herself as Rachel List, a 29-year-old self-employed artist, who creates her murals early in the morning as part of her daily exercise in order to respect social distancing rules. List started painting the murals after a local business called out for an NHS banner, and she has since painted on a number of businesses that have closed during the lockdown. “I want a bit of positivity for them. I want them to thrive again when all this is over,” she said. “I think people just want to show their appreciation for the NHS. Hopefully I have, in some small way, allowed that message to travel.” One of her latest pieces is a tribute to Captain Tom Moore, the war veteran who has raised more than £27m for the NHS by walking laps of his back garden. Her other works have depicted a policeman, and NHS staff with superhero costumes under their uniforms. A couple in their 70s who said they “don’t do apart” have been discharged from hospital after both recovering from Covid-19. Sidney Moore, 77, was treated at Whiston hospital, Merseyside, in a bed alongside his his wife Jean, 76, and the pair are now recovering at home. “It was our wish to face this together and they made sure we could,” Sidney told the St Helens Star. “Jean is hard of hearing so it helped because then we both could understand what was going on and it stopped me worrying about her. “We’ve never been apart for sixty plus years, we don’t do apart.” The couple were full of praise for the NHS staff who helped them through the virus, with Sidney saying: “It was frightening when we were told we had tested positive, and we were worried that anything could happen, but me and Jean cannot praise everyone enough, everyone from the cleaners to the nurses to the consultants.” Although both are still suffering from a cough and tiredness, they are recovering well at home in Newton-le-Willows, helped out by their son and twin daughters. NHS nurse Uma Pradhan spent 23 days in critical care with Covid-19, and as she was moved to another ward to continue her recovery more than 100 members of staff lined the corridors to applaud her. A video of the scene shows Pradhan being wheeled along in her hospital bed as dozens of staff in face masks applaud and cheer her while she waves and blows kisses back. Pradhan, a nurse at East Sussex Healthcare Trust, said: “I can’t thank all the staff in critical care enough for everything they have done for me. They are truly amazing. I am still in hospital but progressing every day. Everyone has been fantastic.” Kate Murray, a critical care and anaesthetic consultant at the trust, said: “[Uma] has had a really tough battle against Covid-19 […] and has made a remarkable recovery, given how critically ill she has been. “This recovery has been made all the more special given that she is ‘one of our own’. “She is an amazing lady – and a dedicated nurse. One of her first questions when she began to get better was when she could go back to work! “We wish her well – her recovery has given all of us real hope and inspiration during what is an incredibly challenging time.”