The apocalypse needs to end. Anyone who writes about apocalypse today is bound to acknowledge that humans have worried and theorised about it for as long as they have worried and theorised about anything; at some point, the writer is guaranteed to employ the word “eschatological” as a nod to the fact that apocalypse is an essential principle of major and minor religions. Yet for a foundational concept it’s quite hard to pin down. Just as “reality” is elusive in a once-fragmented world that has (very creatively) reassembled itself online, the apocalypse can apply to whatever you want it to: the Greek root means to uncover or reveal, hence the Book of Revelation, hence the hard truths we learn about humanity’s consequential inaction in every apocalypse story. Marxist revolution can be an apocalypse; relationship experts speak about the “Four Horsemen” of divorce. Apocalypse is a shifting abstraction, a deceptively neat encapsulation of cascading associations and ideas. The End is endlessly debatable, everywhere and nowhere, relative, adaptable, accommodating to many levels of interpretation. As the funny refrain in Bong Joon-ho’s apocalyptic film Parasite goes, it’s “so metaphorical”. This is not how many people see it. Along with evangelical Christians, doomsday preppers, and bored Silicon Valley billionaires scheming to colonise Mars or flee to New Zealand, the popular imagination has a pretty intuitive grasp of the apocalypse: it refers to the end of the world, or at least human civilisation. The destruction of everything, or enough of everything that it is impossible to rebuild anything good. According to a YouGov poll conducted in February of this year, 29% of Americans believe an “apocalyptic disaster” will occur at some point during their lifetime; given Greta Thunberg’s popularity, it’s fair to say that many more believe one will take place within their children’s lifetimes. (A majority of those polled by YouGov believed they could survive a week or less after apocalyptic disaster, a self-awareness I find heartening.) Even lovers of hermeneutics will hedge their bets. After all, a non-metaphorical apocalypse could result from a few types of disaster, arriving suddenly or accumulating gradually over time: climate catastrophe; a nuclear war; an unlikely asteroid; a pandemic – likely not the current one – that can’t be contained. While most stories that imagine the apocalypse are not realistic (zombies are another metaphor, the rapid-onset ice age depicted in The Day After Tomorrow a misguided extrapolation, and the Bible not in fact meant to be taken literally) the anxiety that surrounds them comes from a deep sense of pragmatism. Prevailing opinion these days is that the apocalypse is not only going to take place, it’s more likely to take place than ever, especially if you plot the rate of its increasing likelihood on a logarithmic scale very few people know how to read. Plots of all kinds tend to make people very excited. If the worst could happen, it only makes sense that you should act as if it will. Especially if you have children. Here lies the conflict at the centre of Mark O’Connell’s new book, Notes from an Apocalypse: A Personal Journey to the End of the World and Back. The indefinite article, “an” apocalypse, provides a clue to his inclinations. He has a PhD in English literature and notes that “throughout my 20s and into my 30s, the writers who seemed to me to possess the truest vision of the world … were those who rejected most thoroughly the idea that life might be on aggregate a good thing”. Yet we encounter him hovering uneasily in the space between theory and reality, existing in the break of WB Yeats’s line, “The best lack all conviction, while the worst / Are full of passionate intensity”. The merely intellectual approach, untested by actually pressing circumstances, has lately been failing him. On-the-nose signs of impending doom are all around, bombarding him with images of contemporary discord, and they’re really freaking him out. Given its publication date in the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic, critics are calling this book timely, appropriate and prescient. Though the possibility of a pandemic only comes up occasionally in the book, as one option in a series of hypothetical catastrophes, current events generally support O’Connell’s attitude, which is that any collapse will be the result of a complicated system of effects from which a single cause cannot be determined. (If he had to say, though, he would likely reply: “Because capitalism”.) “It was the end of the world, and I was sitting on the couch watching cartoons with my son,” O’Connell writes. As his son giggles at the show, about a little girl and “the comic scrapes she gets embroiled in with her long-suffering bear companion”, dad holds his phone – “my eschatology handset, my streaming service of last things” – above his child’s head, scrolling through Twitter. He stumbles on a video advertised as “soul-crushing” and “heart-wrenching”; naturally, he clicks. Set to a “slow and mournful glissando” played by a cello, the video warns of the effects of climate change and features an “emaciated polar bear dragging itself across a rocky terrain” in search of a morsel of sustenance. It gives O’Connell “moral vertigo, resulting from the fact that the very technology that allowed me to witness the final pathetic tribulations of this emaciated beast was in fact a cause of the animal’s suffering in the first place”. The “absurd juxtaposition” of cartoon and real bear makes him feel “a surge of shame and sadness at the world my son would be forced to live in, a shame and sadness that I in turn was passing on to him”. This is the end of 2016, “the winter of an ignoble year”, when “the more or less hourly vibration in my pocket was a kind of post-traumatic thrum, a bracing for whatever fresh hell I was about to peer into.” Were he childless, or less aware of the reality that humanity demonstrates a horrible resilience in the face of struggle, and suffering is often never redeemed, he’d probably prefer to die in the apocalypse than to pursue whatever violent, desperate life might come after, not that he would have much choice in the matter. “Whatever form the apocalypse came in,” he tells a friend who admits to keeping a well-stocked “go-bag” under her bed, “I would almost certainly be in the first wave of deaths. We both laughed, but I think she knew that I was not entirely joking.” Unsettled, he muses that, “as an individual, as a parent, I wanted the world to live on after me … But perhaps the reasons for my interest in the end of the world were more complicated than I was prepared to acknowledge. Perhaps my terrors and my desires were more intimately related than I knew.” The last four years have seen a spate of articles wondering, in the age of climate crisis and denial: “Is it OK to have a child?” Most writers decide it is, coalescing around the joy of family as a collective good and the (unproven) belief that parenthood may spur people to action on behalf of their children. In 2016 O’Connell’s son is already three, so gaming out the ethics of reproduction is not a thought experiment he bothers long with. This is the closest thing he has to pressing circumstances – for now – so instead he sets out on a series of “perverse pilgrimages” to “landscapes both real and imaginary where the end of the world could be glimpsed”. The internet is followed by a sojourn to the South Dakota prairie, where a former army munitions facility is being transformed into a “survival shelter community” of customisable bunkers for obnoxious upper-middle-class preppers, whose notoriously overboard internet rabbit holes O’Connell has also explored. Then he goes to New Zealand, which truly rich libertarian venture capitalists such as Peter Thiel have designated the optimal place to wait out “systemic collapse” – and where professed socialists such as O’Connell might see the Second Coming in their progressive young prime minister Jacinda Ardern, who has explicity prioritised her citizens’ wellbeing over economic growth. At a conference on Mars colonialisation in Los Angeles he attends a talk called “Liberty in Space” and reflects on how the “fundamentally male narrative of exit, of escape as a means toward the nobility of self-determination” dovetails with American capitalism; if Mars is the backup when Earth is uninhabitable, someone is going to have to be in charge of it. On a camping retreat in a remote, rewilded area of the Scottish Highlands – arranged by a group that believes climate catastrophe is “inevitable”, so people should “hope beyond hope” for a better world to come by learning to reintegrate with nature – he reflects on Dr Seuss’s classic climate-change parable, The Lorax, which he has read to his son. Finally, he and a friend visit the Chernobyl exclusion zone, where they take a depressing guided tour through what he sees as both “the ruins of a collapsed utopian project, a vast crumbling monument to an abandoned past” and “an immersive simulation of the future, an image of what will come in our wake”. There’s a lot of area to cover between not yet and too late. O’Connell zigzags across it many times, but he sticks to well-trodden paths, from relatable observations about his own ultimately hypocrisies to theoretical interpretations: the apocalypse as patriarchy, as white-supremacy, as colonialism, as genocide, as luxury consumerism, as a projection of the individual’s anxiety about his own death, as “nostalgia for the future”. (Thankfully, there are no charts attempting to represent messianic time.) After apologising for travelling to all the locations in the book by plane, acknowledging his carbon footprint is “as broad and deep and indelible as my guilt”, he declares: “My days are a procession of last things, seals opened. I myself am the apocalypse of which I speak. That is the prophesy of this book.” By the end, he fulfils this prophesy by ending up where he started, looking at the news on his phone, but he feels better. “I wonder now whether it is because of or despite the strange series of pilgrimages I have been on that I have come at last to this place of accommodation … it became apparent to me that a state of perpetual anxiety was no way to live. It constituted a kind of retreat, and that that retreat was a kind of dying.” Through what he thinks could be “exposure therapy”, he’s learned to accept that “we have no idea what might come to pass”, but in the meantime being alive is at least “interesting”, in the precocious words of his young son. In a blurb, the novelist Jenny Offill describes O’Connell as “a genius guide through all the circles of imagined or anticipated doom”, and reading his descriptions of his tour of Chernobyl, I thought the word “guide” was very apt. At one point, the group goes into an abandoned school and finds a room in which “a dozen or so toddler-size chairs were arranged in a circle, and on each was perched a rotting doll or distempered teddy bear”. O’Connell has the “unsettling” realisation that “this scene had been carefully arranged by a visitor, probably quite recently, precisely in order for it to be photographed”. A guide’s job is to show you what you expect, just more so: a representation of reality that emphasises what you always believed. It rarely has much to do with the guide’s own life. *** As the literary critic Frank Kermode had it, the apocalypse is a fiction, one that lends humanity a “sense of an ending”. In his book of that name, Kermode argued that “crisis is a way of thinking about one’s moment, and not inherent in the moment itself”. Man arrives in the world in media res, and the apocalypse is a “coherent pattern” he follows to create “consonance” from the discord inherent in the individual’s relationship to the world. (This is also why, when doomsday preppers get the date of the Rapture wrong, they always claim it was due to an interpretative or mathematical error – never because the myth is bunk.) We think about the world as a book, in other words, and “one of the great charms of books is that they have to end”, Kermode writes. The role of the critic is important here; he must stand outside the paradigm to “make sense of the ways in which we try to make sense of our lives”. Near the beginning of his book, O’Connell half-jokingly poses that the apocalyptic fantasies he grew up with in the 1980s were superior to the slow, painful climate collapse facing us today. “Nuclear war … adhered to certain established narrative conventions,” he writes. “You had near misses, global panics … You had plot, was what you had: you had drama. And even more crucially, you had characters.” He goes on to suggest that a crucial difference between the cold war and global warming is that in the cold war, most people were “not among the protagonists and antagonists”, but “bystanders, whose role was limited to cowering in terror”. The trouble with the real apocalypse, he suggests, is that we are all authors of it. O'Connell doesn’t portray himself as a critic, or an author – he portrays himself as the protagonist of a novel But this is a fiction, too – one that makes consonant our individual feelings of power and agency within the overwhelming global system of capital in which we are each insignificant. It’s easily translated into the moral of The Lorax, which O’Connell relies on for his hopeful conclusion: “Unless someone like you cares a whole awful lot, nothing is going to get better. It’s not.” (Similarly, we would like to think decreasing carbon emissions is as simple as convincing enough people to stop travelling by plane.) It follows, then, that for much of the book, O’Connell doesn’t portray himself as a critic, or an author – he portrays himself as the protagonist of a novel. He can’t help but frame the story as a reluctant hero’s journey, a mid-life Bildungsroman. He notes that his usage of the word “pilgrimages” to describe his project is “weirdly religious, even self-aggrandising”, but nevertheless feels it’s too apt to abandon. “I was looking for something in these places, for some kind of enlightenment or edification or even solace.” As he peppers the text with explicit literary references, he also finds himself in situations that quietly imitate art: among others, there are parallels to fictions of Ben Lerner and László Krasznahorkai, whom Susan Sontag called the “master of the apocalypse”. Signs, symbols, explanations of those signs and symbols, and incredible coincidences abound, so often that I suspected O’Connell must have compressed, massaged, or otherwise altered what actually happened to fit the story he wanted to tell. At first, I wondered if his high-flown language was a wink at the gravity apocalypse inspires in people; as the book went on, I had to admit he was mostly serious. In order to create the illusion of seamlessness between his experiences and his thoughts, he’s constantly “realising” things in scene, or else considering them, remembering them, being struck by them, or having them occur to him, though it seems likely he came up with them when reporting was done and he was toiling at his desk. I’m sceptical they just appeared in his mind while he was zoning out at the Heathrow Yo! Sushi. Perhaps these are intended as little apocalypses, to suggest that serious thinking can lead to a break or rupture in one’s life. But most damning is his treatment of other people, which reveals a more significant hypocrisy than claiming to care about the environment while still using an iPhone, the production of which destroys the world. Like his children, his subjects do not ever resemble real people but instead only ever serve some specific, singular purpose in the narrative. Thiel, for example, is “a figure of almost cartoonishly outsized villainy … a human emblem of the moral vortex at the centre of the market”. Most of the women in the book are the same stock character, a reserved sage nodding at O’Connell’s pointlessly spiralling thoughts as she goes on about her more important concerns: care work, sustaining life, “attention”. He introduces his wife as a woman of “unfathomable resilience and practical wisdom, to whom such fugue states of panic and epochal despair were essentially foreign”; she forbids him from bringing thoughts of peripeteia into the home. On his wilderness retreat, a rugged Australian woman helps him set up his tent and avoids embarrassing him with “empathic skilfulness” by explaining that she used to work at a camping store. (He then explains why this is so empathic and skilful.) Even his prepper friend with the go-bag is a source of quietly eye-opening higher perspective: when he says he’d prefer to die in the apocalypse than to see what happens afterwards, she gently points out that women are “already halfway to a dystopia. If she got raped tomorrow, for instance, she was by no means confident that she would go to the cops about it.” In her 1965 essay “The Imagination of Disaster”, Sontag wrote that fantasy allows us to cope with life “under continual threat of two equally fearful, but seemingly opposed, destinies: unremitting banality and inconceivable terror”. When we fail to understand the relationship between fiction and reality, this coping mechanism stops working: all fictions become myths and prophesies. As we tear through history searching for some model to deal with pressing contemporary problems, “prescience” has emerged as the be-all and end-all of artistic accomplishment, inspiring in audiences almost quasi-religious admiration for “visionary” talents. (Kermode points out that the phrase “be-all and end-all” reflects a “pregnant conflation of crisis and an end immanent in it”. Shakespeare came up with it, in Macbeth.) “It’s just like Harry Potter, The Handmaid’s Tale, The Matrix, and Contagion!” social media users marvel when a news item resembles the plots of those stories. To treat these stories as prophesies is to miss the point of fictions completely. They’re supposed to be like life. By attempting to make the reverse true, to make reality fit into a fiction, O’Connell hasn’t really overcome his apocalyptic imagination. He has just passed it off to someone else. · Notes from an Apocalypse is published by Granta (RRP £14.99).