New Zealand has begun moving out of a strict national lockdown to prevent the spread of Covid-19, but the emotional consequences of the shutdown are yet to peak, says one of the country’s veteran scientists. “We’re not yet at the peak of the distress as a result of the lockdown. It will emerge over the coming weeks,” said Sir Peter Gluckman, who was the chief science advisor to New Zealand’s prime minister from 2009 until 2018. “With that will emerge some groups of people who will do well, they will find in the change opportunity, but many people who will be very uncertain, very scared, frustrated, angry, and we know from other disasters that about 10% or more even will progress to actual depression and to suicidality.” However Gluckman also said the country possessed unique assets that could see it navigate the coronavirus crisis better than other nations would. “We’ve demonstrated a lot of cohesion despite the difficulties, there’s been a lot of goodwill, a lot of empathy, and we have another asset,” Gluckman told parliamentarians on Thursday. “We, unlike many other countries, have the virus at least under some level of control.” His comments came as New Zealand recorded its twelfth consecutive day of single-digit Covid-19 case numbers. Three new cases of the virus were reported on Thursday, with no additional deaths. A total of 19 people have died of the coronavirus. Some 84% of people who have had the virus in New Zealand, or probably had it, have recovered according to Ministry of Health figures. There are 235 active confirmed or probable cases remaining. It is the country’s third day of marginally relaxed, level-3 restrictions, which allow more businesses to trade, and people can order takeaway meals. But Jacinda Ardern, the prime minister, warned that she would not rush to relax restrictions further, and urged New Zealanders to continue behaving as though they had the virus. “The last thing we can afford is a spike in cases,” she said. New Zealand has been praised globally for its swift action to address the virus’ spread. But experts, including Gluckman, the former chief science advisor, warned a parliamentary committee set up to scrutinise the government’s response that there were bigger challenges to come. “I am very scared, and I’m not critical because I believe strongly in democracy, that the contestation of ideas that will be inevitable over the coming months as we head to an election will lead to some tensions that may aggravate the situation for some people,” he said. “We must have that contestation of ideas ... but as we look to what the future of New Zealand could be post-Covid, it would be nice to think that we could get into a more inclusive discourse over what that future is.” The country is approaching an election scheduled for September at the same time the full economic toll of the virus is expected to hit, with Treasury models predicting unemployment could reach between 8.5% and 26%. “That trust and cohesion are fragile and will become more fragile, partly as we enter the political season and partly because the crisis at the global level will continue,” said Gluckman. The country had traditionally “not been very good at addressing” issues such as family violence, drug and alcohol abuse, and poverty, he added, and he exhorted the government not to return to “business as usual” in tackling the problems in a top-down way, but to instead rely on “local” solutions.