Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The country reported 399 deaths in 24 hours, lower than Sunday’s figure of 410. A total of 20,852 people have died in Spain, with over 200,000 infected and more than 80,000 cured. The Spanish prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, is expected to ask parliament to extend the national lockdown until 11 May. For the first time since the outbreak began, Italy announced a fall in the number of people currently infected – down 20 to 108,237. It said 454 more people had died – 21 more than the previous day, bringing the death toll to 24,114. “This is positive data as it shows the number of people who are currently positive with the virus is declining,” Angelo Borrelli, the chief of Italy’s civil protection authority, told reporters. The country’s Department of Health and Social Care said 16,509 people had died in UK hospitals since the outbreak began, an increase of 449 on the day before. A total of 386,044 people have been tested, of whom 124,743 have tested positive. US hostility to the World Health Organization scuppered the publication of a communique by G20 health ministers committing to strengthening the WHO’s mandate in coordinating a response to the global coronavirus pandemic. In place of a lengthy, detailed statement, the leaders issued a brief announcement saying gaps existed in the way different countries handled pandemics. The organisation’s director general, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said easing restrictions did not mean the end of any epidemic, adding that bringing the episode to a close would require “sustained effort” on the part of governments and individuals. So-called lockdowns can help to “take the heat out of a country’s epidemic”, but cannot end it alone, he said. Governments must ensure they can “detect, test, isolate and care for every case and trace every contact”. As the UK government’s job retention scheme opened, a month after it was created, the chancellor Rishi Sunak said more than 140,000 firms had applied. The scheme, which offers to subsidise 80% of furloughed staff’s wages up to the value of £2,500 per month, was announced after some companies reacted to the prospect of a lengthy lockdown by immediately laying off employees. According to researchers at Johns Hopkins University, at least 166,794 people have died and 2,432,092 have been infected since the outbreak began. The data, which are based on official releases and media reports, are likely to be underestimates because of suspected underreporting and differing testing and statistical recording regimes. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said that, towards the end of the week, the government would set out a framework for the eventual lifting of lockdown measures. But she stressed that it would not amount to a firm timetable. “It will also be clear in the work we set out later in the week that living with this virus, as we will need to learn to do, is likely to mean some restrictions on everyday life in the form of social distancing for some time to come.” The Spanish government is to propose that the European Union create a €1.5tn (£1.3tn) fund to aid recovery in countries worst hit by the crisis, according to Spain’s El País newspaper. Citing an internal document, the paper reported that Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, was planning to make a formal proposal to his EU colleagues at a summit on Thursday. Sir Richard Branson warned that the survival of his Virgin Atlantic airline depends on UK government support. It has been reported that the carrier is asking for a loan of up to £500m of public money. The Virgin Group boss wrote in a blog post: “Together with the team at Virgin Atlantic, we will do everything we can to keep the airline going – but we will need government support to achieve that in the face of the severe uncertainty surrounding travel today and not knowing how long the planes will be grounded for.”