After a we ek when, in the UK, the number of Covid-19 linked deaths rose, when Public Health England urged the reuse of disposable protective gear, when social care leaders criticised the government’s strategy as “shameful and shambolic”, I am not worried. I know hospitals have plenty of free beds to treat me, that I can get tested should I feel difficulty in breathing (for my husband, who belongs to the “at-risk group”, a call to the GP was sufficient to get the test done the same day), that healthcare staff have the necessary equipment, that, despite more than 4,500 Covid-19 patients dying so far, the death rate is one of the lowest in the world – but then I am lucky: since February I am stuck in Bavaria, one of the worst-affected areas in Germany. The contrast is glaring. German politicians appeal to the public for understanding of their decisions to curb personal freedoms, they don’t need to justify their inaction. German politicians, together with their scientific advisers, explain the reasons for harsh measures, they don’t write off experts. German politicians don’t need to hark back to a glorious wartime spirit, that hardly anyone alive remembers. With their refusal to join an EU procurement scheme for essential equipment, the British government has put Brexit ideology over people’s lives. It is the conceited self-importance of a political elite that regards politics as a continuation of the fun they had in Oxbridge debating societies, that is at the heart of their inability to deal with a serious crisis.Christine FuchsGmund, Bavaria, Germany • Rear Admiral Mathias (Letters, 19 April) may have missed the primary target in his very reasonable summary of Matt Hancock’s performance. In any crisis leadership is critical. It seems clear that Boris Johnson’s commitment and involvement in the Covid-19 crisis can be questioned. This, plus his other characteristics, means he seems to have appointed ministers and advisers who will not threaten his authority. The cabinet are relatively inexperienced and young. Is this because he would feel threatened by older, more experienced colleagues? Of great concern are Covid-19 death rates compared with other countries. Poor leadership has resulted in continued inadequate PPE, contact tracing and testing. Policy on social isolation remains confused, airport arrivals are still not being screened, and transport without distancing is being widely used. In summary, Johnson is responsible, and with a more committed, hardworking, efficient and wise leader, the current situation would have looked a lot better. Wise action can belatedly still make a difference: leadership roles should now go to those who are competent.Paul AbramsHonorary professor of urology, University of Bristol • China is being criticised for only now beginning to give a more accurate number of deaths in Wuhan by increasing its figures by 50% (China denies cover-up as Wuhan coronavirus deaths revised up 50%, 17 April). How is that any different from our government’s insistence on using only Covid-19 deaths in hospital for their daily figures? Office for National Statistics figures for the period up to the end of March show 3,372 deaths in England and Wales only where Covid-19 was the underlying cause; hospital deaths accounting for only 1,789 of these. So an understatement of the government by significantly more than the Chinese increase. It’s time the media to began holding the government to account for persistently understating the problem.Andrew LamkowskiTaunton, Somerset  • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 