The irony. We’re socially distancing and yet we’re more social than ever. Virtual parties, dinners, shows… Any excuse to put our faces on. This Versace SS20 look – a minimalism/upping-the-ante hybrid – won’t require hours of triple cleansing post logging off. Think less foundation, more highlighter. Use a balm, gel or liquid version on the bridge of your nose, cheekbones, temples – and blend. Dip a thin brush into neon pigment, blow off excess and draw a line in the crease of your eye adding highlighter beneath. Add a subtle blush and OTT lip gloss and you’re ready to hit the town. Virtually. 1. Gypsy Shrine Neon Pigment in Orange £6.95, thegypsyshrine.com 2. Max Factor False Lash Effect Mascara £11.99, boots.com 3. Nars Hot Fix Cheek Palette £45, selfridges.com 4. Gucci Éclat de Beauté Effet Lumière Multi-use Gel Gloss £18, harrods.com 5. Lancôme L’Absolu Gloss Rosy Plump £25, lancome.co.uk No matter how many times you read or watch how to give yourself a facial at home, it doesn’t quite stand up to the workmanship of a skilled facialist. Many would argue that facials are a luxury, and while I do concur to a degree, I would also argue that seeing a brilliant aesthetician every couple of months will not only give you better skin, it is financial wisdom. It will save you tons of money on useless skincare products and make the ones you use work better. But right now, stuck at home, that is neither here nor there. Thankfully, I have rediscovered Good Genes. It is a mask-meets-moisturiser treatment (use it as you would your normal serum) that deeply exfoliates the skin without drying it out. Unlike so many glycolic acid products, it isn’t irritating or harsh, because the formulation is balanced out by a prickly pear extract known for its skin-soothing properties. So, aside from those with incredibly sensitive skin, it can be used universally. It claims to decongest skin, refine texture, treat pigmentation issues and smooth out fine lines – and it does so brilliantly. I have used this classic, best-selling product on and off for a few years and I notice remarkable changes overnight. So much so I call it a facial in a bottle. OK, so it’s not quite the same as a two-hour treatment under the magical hands of a trained facialist, but it’s as close as it’s going to get these days. Sunday Riley Good Genes, £85, spacenk.com Sparks flying Formula, the M&S beauty brand, is one of the industry’s best-kept secrets. Their latest range, targeting dull complexions, is a hit in the making. Glow Resurfacing Mask, £12, marksandspencer.com Highly appealing To celebrate the 20th anniversary of this cult product, the facial peel - great for treating blemishes and dark spots – is now available in fun, reusable tins. Dr Dennis Gross Limited Edition Daily Peels, £89, cultbeauty.co.uk Spring awakening This classic gender neutral cologne, a blend of geranium, sandalwood, jasmine and, of course, orange, is a reminder that spring is in the air. Atelier Cologne, Orange Sanguine, from £44, selfridges.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto