It’s the author’s equivalent of the no-trousers-in-class nightmare: your first book is finally published but almost every bookshop across the world is closed. With the outbreak of coronavirus, this once unimaginable vision is now reality for hundreds of writers who have been cruelly caught out – a book newly published and no shelf to put it on. Naoise Dolan is one such author. We were supposed to meet in a London cafe in mid-March, but events intervened and our cosy meeting was hurriedly changed – to a socially distant interview across two park benches, then a very socially distant chat on Skype. The 27-year-old Dubliner, who is here to promote her novel, Exciting Times, groans: “I just did a bunch of interviews in Ireland and now I know every single one is going to start: ‘I met Naoise Dolan in simpler times, in a simple cafe, as she sipped her simple flat white and simply shook hands.’” Her aptly named debut follows Ava, a directionless 22-year-old who leaves Ireland by spending her “abortion fund” on a ticket to Hong Kong. There she teaches English and meets Julian, a 28-year-old Etonian banker, and the two enter a careful sexual arrangement that teeters on becoming emotionally meaningful. As Ava sees their relationship: “It didn’t have a name, apart from hanging out, catching up, or popping in for a chat, which was, to be fair, the content of what we were doing.” When Julian temporarily returns to England, along comes Edith, a Cambridge-educated lawyer a drifter among Hong Kong’s elite twentysomethings. (“Her accent was churchy, high­up, with all the cathedral drops of English intonation,” Ava observes.) Where Julian is emotionally distant, Edith is unabashedly enthusiastic about dating Ava and the two are happy for a while. But for all her clever thoughts about love, sex and power, Ava’s reluctance to tell either Julian and Edith about each other begins to cause problems; as Edith says later: “If you really think there’s nothing intrinsically wrong with fucking multiple people – and you’re right, there isn’t – then why did you lie to me?” I can explain why people do things in a way that completely spooks them Exciting Times is, at its heart, not about the pros and cons of bisexual polyamory but a touching exploration of modern female self-loathing as seen in recent novels such as Ottessa Moshfegh’s My Year of Rest and Relaxation or Sally Rooney’s Normal People. (During her time as editor of literary magazine the Stinging Fly, Rooney published the first excerpt of Exciting Times.) And in a time when even prolific readers are struggling to keep their attention on books, I’ve been pushing Exciting Times on everyone I know: it is the perfect blend of caustically clever and emotionally engaging. Some of Dolan’s pithy observations of her characters are the best I’ve read since Edward St Aubyn. “There was something Shakespearean about imperious men going down on you: the mighty have fallen,” Ava thinks after sex with Julian. Ralph, a self-described “PPEist”, “had voted for Brexit to have tighter borders, and was applying for an Irish passport to avoid being stopped at them.” Victoria “had large teeth. They made it difﬁcult for her to smile without scaring people, which was why Victoria smiled a lot.” Dolan grew up in Dublin, surrounded by books and with no urge to become a writer until she studied at Trinity College. She has lived in Singapore, Hong Kong, Oxford, London, Italy and then Ireland again. “I’m more interested living outside of Ireland than in it,” she says. “Some of that is material reality – it is not nice living somewhere that is very expensive and falling down all around you. But it is also easier for me to be away from people I know.” Speaking to Dolan, it’s hard not to be dazzled by how accomplished she is, both as an author and as a thinker. She doesn’t buy into the idea of “the Author”. (The tale of how Exciting Times came to be could be summed up, as she puts it: “I wanted to write a book, so I wrote one.”) When asked about her thoughts on, say, the role of writers in a time of crisis, she says, seriously: “Well, I seek to dismantle the idea that having a job is a good thing because jobs are an excuse for a social construct whereby a minor social class hoard the means of survival and portion them out as and when they see fit to ultimately allow them to hoard more. But, inasmuch as we need to produce to justify our worth, I guess there is an argument that if people don’t read novels, they will find solace in other ways that deplete our resources more – so, maybe, in a roundabout way, novels ultimately save us from burning fossil fuels?” Such big picture thinking may sound exhausting but it is standard for Dolan, who is watching people’s reactions to the current crisis with interest. “I do wonder, when people I know who aren’t panicked by climate change won’t leave their house over this, how much blind panic should I then be feeling, as the person who is normally reacting to ecological and social breakdown way before everyone else,” she says. “But I’m just gormlessly scrolling Twitter.” Dolan is autistic and finds comfort in small routines, a source of solace now much curtailed. She gives the example of buying a flat white: “Now that sounds like such a ridiculous thing to complain about. But it’s not about the coffee, it is about having a certainty from which things can flow. Because so much of the world is overwhelming to you when you are autistic, being able to put some things on autopilot is a huge relief and lets you make decisions in a reasonable time frame. So buying a flat white tells me I can then look at my emails or write 1,000 words. When one thing goes, the whole ecosystem goes. But it is objectively ridiculous to complain about a coffee.” Does she find it frustrating how quickly great change has happened, planes grounded and allowances made for remote working, as an environmentally minded autistic person who was told such change was impossible? “It is understandable – if you think something will personally impact you tomorrow, you will have a more visceral response to it than if it will kill people in other countries in 10 years’ time,” she says. “But the fact that accommodations can instantly happen is quite annoying. Autistic people have been asking for these allowances for so long – now abled people need them, snap, they’re here.” She doesn’t think calamity makes for better books. “I wasn’t tracking literature when 9/11 happened, being a primary school kid and that,” she says. “But I think the fact that we’re not talking about the great age of 9/11 novels is because, in practice, ecological and societal breakdown makes people worry and not better writers.” The idea of her own novel providing comfort now is “absurd”, she says – but then adds, almost sweetly, “though I hope it does.” She suspects many readers won’t like Ava, for her indecisiveness, her self-hatred, her self-awareness. “They’re allowed,” she says. “But I feel quite vulnerable when people judge things based on whether they like people or not, because I’m not good at presenting myself as likable. I find it jarring when people describe politicians as wooden or cold – not critiquing their policies, but saying: ‘I think his face was insufficiently caring.’” Citing a recent controversy in Irish politics (former Fine Gael politician Catherine Noone describing the taoiseach Leo Varadkar as autistic), she says, darkly: “There are plenty of reasons to criticise Leo Varadkar without saying: ‘He’s on the spectrum.’” Both Dolan and Ava are unsettled by the idea of doing something just because other people are. “You had to pretend to feel sad if you’d been single too long,” Ava notes. “I hated doing that because there were other things I was actually sad about.” Dolan gives the example of small talk about weather: “People say they don’t know why we talk about weather, but we know exactly why: so we can avoid talking about other things and they still want noise. People don’t want to be told that. But I need to know the underlying purpose, why things are the way they are, which means I discover why people act the way they do when others wouldn’t have to analyse that behaviour. I can explain why people do things in a way that completely spooks them.” It is like Ava teaching English: she uses grammar intuitively, but only understands it when unpacking the rules for the children in her classes. “I am allistic as a second language, in that sense,” says Dolan. In several ways, her radar for the minutiae of human interactions, and her wry understanding of why we dance certain dances, is what makes her such a brilliant novelist, at 27 and with one book under her belt. Perhaps it is because she understands there is “one great mystery”, she says, and she’s determined to crack it: “What do other people think when they profess to not think about what I am thinking about?” • Exciting Times by Naoise Dolan is published by W&N (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15