In his 2015 debut novel I’m Jack, Mark Blacklock focused his attention on the marginalised figure of John Humble, more popularly known as Wearside Jack, or the Yorkshire Ripper hoaxer. The thrust of that novel resides in the war of nerves between Humble and Assistant Chief Constable George Oldfield, the senior investigating officer in the Ripper investigation. Oldfield infamously fell so hard for Humble’s hoax that he ignored key evidence from Ripper survivors in pursuit of his own mistaken quest for Wearside Jack. In Blacklock’s new novel, the gritty reality of late 20th-century urban deprivation is replaced by the more outwardly sedate, conservatively hidebound milieu of late 19th-century intellectual bohemia, familiar to modern readers only through the tinted lens of period drama. Hinton manages not only to keep faith with the principles of what Blacklock has referred to as “documentary realism” laid out in I’m Jack, but to expand and consolidate the author’s overarching project as a writer. As with the baseline biographical details assembled in I’m Jack, readers curious enough to check the dates on the timeline in Hinton will discover that all of them tally with recorded history: Blacklock is leading us once again into the uneasy liminal space between fact and fiction. British mathematician Charles Howard Hinton was born in 1853, the son of James Hinton, a pedagogue-philosopher and an early advocate of polyamory. He grew up surrounded by men and women of letters whose enthusiasms flowed freely, firing him with a similar zeal for learning. Combined with his own precocious talent for mathematics, he looked set for a stellar career in the sciences. In 1880, Hinton married Mary Edith Boole, daughter of George Boole the mathematician. Mary soon became pregnant, giving birth in 1882 to George, the first of four sons. Early in 1883, Hinton bigamously married Maud Florence, who at the time was carrying his twins. When the deception became known, he surrendered himself to police and was sentenced to three days’ imprisonment. His career ruined, he was forced to emigrate, first to Japan and then to America where, away from the scene of his misadventures, his reputation gradually recovered. Hinton died of a stroke in 1907, at the age of 53. In the US, he was briefly famous as the inventor of the world’s first mechanical baseball pitcher. In the world of science fiction, he has been more broadly influential for the stories and short novels he based on his 1883 essay “What is the Fourth Dimension?” an early theory of what might now be recognised as quantum geometry. Hinton referred to his tales as “scientific romances”, and there is a strong likelihood that HG Wells was influenced by Hinton in his own later popularising of the term, as well as his enthusiasm for similar ideas – Hinton’s 1895 novella “Stella”, for example, introduces the theme of invisibility expanded on by Wells in The Invisible Man. Hinton’s obsession with Edwin Abbot’s 1885 proto-science fiction novel Flatland resulted in the 1907 homage An Episode of Flatland, which in its preoccupation with temporal and spatial dimensions has left a lasting influence on multiple generations of science fiction writers, from HP Lovecraft to Rudy Rucker. In spite of his achievements, Hinton’s name has drifted into obscurity, and the bald facts of his life provide only the framework for Blacklock’s imaginative reconstruction of a personality that both defied and was ultimately overmastered by the social and intellectual conventions of his time. Indeed, it would be more accurate to say that Hinton is a novel of multiple personalities, tracing not only one adventurous life but filling in the shadowy biographical outlines of his family and descendents, a still-extending line of figures who seem equally extraordinary. The imagined sections are so well in tune with their contemporary source material that we believe in them utterly The overarching subject of Hinton lies in the problem of genius, not only for the ostracised radical possessed of it but for those caught in his tailwind, experiencing the gradual erosion of their autonomy and mental wellbeing. Thus the emotional heartland of Blacklock’s novel belongs to its supporting cast. Both Hinton’s wives were intellectually and creatively gifted, women denied their full potential through a frustrating combination of society and circumstance, while the attention afforded by Blacklock to Mary’s four children offers up some of the novel’s most mesmerising and immersive writing. They exist in a rarefied atmosphere of learning and scholarly opportunity, yet what most flourishes in each of them is a yearning for escape, for self-realisation in a world that appears to be missing a dimension. The artistry of Hinton appears seamless, the imagined sections so well in tune with their contemporary source material that we believe in them utterly. Equally, Blacklock’s introduction of unadulterated source materials into the text, most notably letters exchanged between Havelock Ellis, Olive Schreiner and other members of statistician Karl Pearson’s Men and Women’s Club (a forum for freethinkers that flourished during the 1880s) grants the illusion of incontrovertible reality, even as elusive missing pieces deny us closure. From the remarkable facts about the Hintons, Blacklock weaves a distinct and original fiction, a fittingly four-dimensional representation of lived reality. Questions of societal convention versus individual freedom and Classical enlightenment versus Romantic self-expression play themselves out against a backdrop that, as we familiarise ourselves with its complexities, jumps glowingly to life. This is a dense, multilayered, knotty book, demanding the reader’s full cooperation. But Blacklock’s attention to detail, his imaginative reach, not to mention his willingness to wrestle with problems of geometry, have produced a singular literary achievement. • Hinton by Mark Blacklock is published by Granta (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com.