Start here, and bear in mind that cryptic clues give you, in either order, a definition of the answer (marked in bold in the examples below) and a little recipe for its letters (in the examples, the links take you to our explainers of those recipes). As discussed in the last roundup, we’re expecting a different flavour of timely clues for the foreseeable. Nowadays, a clue can do you the world of good just by evoking a trip outside. Here is a not-so-tough clue from a Telegraph Toughie puzzle by Elgar (known locally as Enigmatist, with whom we have done a little Q&A: 24d Monsieur bathing in a little French river (5)[ wordplay: abbrev. for ‘Monsieur’ inside (‘bathing in’) synonym for ‘a little’ ][ M inside SOME ][ definition: French river ] After you’ve written it in, you can take a few moments imagining a pleasant dip in the River SOMME once this is over. What flora might we encounter during the swim? Pan has an idea … 1d Plant mid-July in scrubland (7)[ wordplay: middle letters (‘mid-’) of JULY inside synonym for scrubland ][ UL inside BRUSH ][ definition: plant ] … namely, a BULRUSH. And Nutmeg (Q&A) dodges wordplay altogether, instead offering a lovely pair of definitions … 21d Apply water to cut flowers (5)[ double definition ] … of SPRAY. If the Guardian’s array of setters are new to you, here is a useful thing to know about Qaos: I do like putting ghost themes into my puzzles (a compulsive impulse, you might say). So you can solve them ‘plain’, but if you spot the hidden theme, you might get an extra sense of enjoyment. This means that some of the clues and answers will refer to the theme while others, such as, I think, this one, are just charming standalone items: 7d Greta trades her soul for unknown European summer house (6)[ wordplay: surname of a famous Greta with middle letter replaced by (‘trades her soul for’) mathematical letter used to indicate ‘unknown’ & abbrev. for ‘European’ ][ GARBO with middle letter replaced by ZE ][ definition: summer house ] And the word GAZEBO is a mysterious one. We often presume, given what it means and its unusual collection of letters, that it has an Asian origin. The problem is that no one has been able to find it. The Oxford English Dictionary suggests that the word might in fact be a joke. It’s not a very funny joke, but it goes like this. There are words like “lavabo” (a ritual washing of hands) which are Latin phrases for something you’re going to do (“I will wash”). And so “gazebo” would then be a jocular way of saying “I will have a good look at some things”. I did warn you that it wasn’t very funny – but it is always a treat to find a word that is, or may have been, artificially created, so to speak. The next instalment of our cluing competition concerns just such a word, from the 19th century. It takes the “-tious” ending from words like “fractious” and tacks it on to a word for something annoying: reader, how would you clue BUMPTIOUS? Many thanks for your clues for PLONK. Dunnart gave us the elegant “Drop of wine” then gallantly alerted us that the same clue has in fact been published by Philistine. The audacity award goes to Combinatorialist for the ornate “It’s carelessly set down: π – 1 + 50 + ⅔ × 1000”. I enjoyed all the plonkers, such as Dogrando’s “Rodney, perhaps forgoing a half of beer, gets some dodgy wine” and Encota’s “Put down tool without hesitation”. The runners-up are GuyNorman, with an intriguing anagram indicator in “OK plan, but not a substitute for booze”, and DeetotheGee’s acrostic (explanation here of that device): “For starters, Poles like only North Korean wine”; the winner is the sly cryptic definition of Mahashivaratri’s “Cheap plasterer!” Kludos to Mahashivaratri. Please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition, and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics, below. Here’s Knut (Q&A) with a clue that looks as if you need to think about classic Italian cinema. But you don’t. 9ac Shoot a film with Loren – not as good as La Dolce Vita (6,4)[ wordplay: make an anagram of (‘shoot’) A FILM and (‘with’) LOREN ][ fanciful definition: not as good as La Dolce Vita ] We’d all settle for a spot of NORMAL LIFE.