In these challenging times, joy can be found in the most unusual places. From powerful paintings to curious sheep, here’s a round-up of today’s uplifting stories to brighten your day. Artists create gallery of NHS portraits Instagram has been flooded with portraits of NHS workers as artists use their skills to pay tribute to those working on the frontline of the coronavirus crisis. The #PortraitsforNHSHeroes project was started on Instagram by Tom Croft, an artist, early in April when he offered a free oil portrait to the first NHS frontline worker to message him. Since then, more than 500 artists have contributed portraits in all shapes and styles. Adrian Hill, an artist in Pontefract, created an oil painting of his wife, Shelley, who works for the Yorkshire ambulance service. Meanwhile Barry Miller created a series of vivid oil paintings depicting NHS workers in scrubs and protective gear, as well as a picture of a police officer. Croft said: “It’s grown quicker than I could have imagined. It’s been amazing. It’s been moving to read all of the messages from NHS key workers about how this is brightening up their day, or at least giving them something positive to look forward to in these incredibly tough and challenging times. “I knew the art community would respond in this way but it’s still wonderful to see it happen in reality.” Croft originally paired up artists with key workers but after a “wonderfully overwhelming” response created a facility for artists to advertise their services and pair up themselves. He said he wanted the project to be “as big as we can go, giving as many thank you [messages] through the form of portraiture as we can”. When the lockdown restrictions are lifted, Croft said, he hoped to hold an exhibition of all the portraits in one place. He is in talks with galleries. Neighbours surprise couple with wedding celebration A couple in Wetherby, West Yorkshire, who had to postpone their wedding due to the coronavirus outbreak were treated to a surprise from neighbours who created a “big day” for them. Phil Richmond, 27, and Allie Lawton, 25, decorated their lounge with balloons, confetti and fairy lights, while their children Lily, four, and Ben, two, became the attendees along with some soft toys. “I did try and make Phil sleep on the sofa [the night before] so we slept apart but he refused,” Lawton told the BBC. She got ready with her bridesmaids via a Zoom (online) call and pretended to walk down the aisle in the living room. “As far as we were aware, that was all we were doing on our wedding day,” she said. Then Lawton’s mother said she had left a bottle of champagne at the end of their drive, and when the couple went to retrieve it they found their neighbours dressed up and outside ready to celebrate. A song for the couple’s first dance was played, and the family were showered with confetti as they walked down a makeshift aisle. “It just gave me the most heartwarming feeling, I was welling up the whole way round,” said Lawton. “We just want to say thank you to everyone on our lovely street […] we never want to move house now.” The window of one house was decorated with an A&P sign surrounded by hearts, while a “Just married” sign was corrected to read “Married soon”. “It will be a day that we remember for ever really,” said Richmond. London marathon in a living room A man in Northern Ireland is planning to run the equivalent of the London marathon in his living room this weekend, after the world-famous event was postponed until October. Col Bignell, 26, a retail worker from County Down, was disappointed at missing his first marathon, but instead will be running the length of his living room thousands of times to cover the miles. Bignell, originally from London, dared his Facebook friends to “give him the push” by giving his post 260 likes. He said he intended to raise money for the NHS with the run. “I’ve marked out the space and it’s around 12ft, so I’ve worked out I’ll be running laps of my front room around 11,500 times,” he told the PA Media news agency. “I’ve seen Tom Moore [the 99-year-old who walked 100 laps in his garden to fundraise for the NHS] and the lady who did the stairs, and thought if they can do it why not do something myself?” Bignell aims to raise £260.20 for the NHS to correspond with the 26.2 miles he will run, and has already raised £140 towards that goal. Sheep investigate empty McDonald’s in Wales A flock of sheep were spotted exploring an empty McDonald’s restaurant in Ebbw Vale, Wales. “Even the sheep in Ebbw Vale are having McDonald’s withdrawals,” joked Andrew Thomas, who photographed the animals. Thomas said he came across the curious flock on Saturday afternoon as he left the Aldi store next door where he had been shopping for food for his mother who was isolating. The sheep are not the only animals to have been spotted in unusual places in the lockdown. A group of playful lambs was spotted spinning on a roundabout in a children’s playground in Monmouthshire. “Even though the park is shut it was great to see these lambs enjoying themselves this morning,” said Gareth Williams, owner of the flock kept at Raglan Farm Park. “It would normally be too busy for the lambs to get a chance. Just hope they don’t get too dizzy.” And who could forget the mountain goats of Great Orme who took over the seaside town of Llandudno last month? And finally … Banksy mural gets face mask A famous Banksy work in Bristol has been modified with the addition of a face mask. Girl with a Pierced Eardrum, which appeared in the street artist’s home city in 2014, is a parody of the painting Girl with a Pearl Earring, by Johannes Vermeer. The mural, at Hanover Place, acquired a face mask in a nod to the coronavirus pandemic. Banksy has been contacted for comment.