Television is on lockdown. New shows will keep arriving for a while because they’re filmed already, but soon schedulers will be subsisting on repeats. Yet, there’s no need to air old editions of 8 Out of 10 Cats – we could use this period to rediscover any number of lost greats. Here are 10 classics that are overdue a repeat. On the Air BBC Two, 1992Despite being David Lynch and Mark Frost’s follow-up to Twin Peaks, this experimental sitcom is seldom seen, especially in the US, where ABC axed it after three episodes. Set in the 1950s, it is a sort of surreal slapstick Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip, centred on a washed-up star whose TV variety show is a farce thanks to the absurdly incompetent crew. After a brilliant opener, it goes round in wacky circles, so maybe just show that episode in a double bill with Lynch’s frightening, laugh-tracked 2002 web sitcom Rabbits. Holding On BBC Two, 1997Written by Tony Marchant and with a cast led by David Morrissey, this has still somehow fallen through the cracks of TV posterity: it is never repeated, and wasn’t even on DVD for years. Those who saw it will still recall its unique vibe of rage, redemption and despair, as a disparate gang of fragile Londoners all feel the shockwaves from a murder. Bleak and astringently funny – Phil Daniels’s bilious restaurant critic is unforgettable – at heart it is a compassionate portrait of urbanites so close together, and yet so alone. Wonder Showzen MTV2, 2005-06We need a network premiere for this weird-com, which was originally seen by about eight people but recently had its hand-washing sketch (“The shame never seems to scrub off”) go viral. A haunted spoof of Sesame Street, it features talking numbers with personality disorders, pre-teens delivering lines such as “I want to be remembered as a creepy loner”, and a segment where kids confront adults: the small girl asking Wall Street traders to “justify capitalism” now bears repeating. Dream Team Sky One, 1997-2007Obviously BBC One should be showing old Match of the Days on Saturday evenings but Sky can chip in by re-airing its bananas soap about purple-clad spice boys Harchester United: for the actually-OK scenes where actors were pasted into match footage; for the chance to relive the prowess of club legends such as Karl Fletcher and (until John Terry blinded him) Luke Davenport; and mainly for the cavalcade of poisonings, coach crashes and people being shot at Wembley after the cup final. In Bed With Chris Needham BBC Two, 1992In the 2000s this documentary’s fandom coalesced on messageboards, realising that, yes, lots of us do remember that metal kid in Loughborough. The cutely edited apotheosis of the “video diary”, it harks back to the era before social media made teens too savvy. Chris – whose crap tache and mullet confirm that, in the English provinces, 1992 and 1986 were the same year – unleashes his impossibly bad thrash band on the world, but it was his pronouncements that made him a one-man youthquake. “All you old bastards out there, you should learn something from this!” Public EyeITV, 1965-75The 1970s offers any number of series with cops or sleuths striding through a brown murk of smoky pubs, dingy digs and violent petty crime. This one is more level-headed than most, showcasing as it does Alfred Burke’s controlled performance as a private eye who is cheap, versatile and a bit too close to the bad guys, as evidenced by him at one point going to prison. Not so much gritty as simply grimy, it is a period piece, but the weary wryness and imperfect, sometimes open-ended, stories feel oddly modern. Play for Today BBC Two, 1970-84Now this is proper TV history, the telly equivalent of a crate full of collectable 45s. Schedulers can take their pick from the best (male) dramatists of the mid-to-late 20th century: Clarke, Osborne, Bleasdale, Hare, Bennett … all of whom tossed off singular dramas for a strand that was rarely bland. Candidates for an airing might include Mike Leigh’s clipped TV debut Hard Labour (1973), Dennis Potter’s disturbing 1976 meta-drama Double Dare, or David Pirie’s gothic horror of wartime paranoia, Rainy Day Women (1984). Home Time BBC Two, 2009Most comedy fans could devise an evening schedule of underrated shows (“Tonight on BBC Two, it’s Colin’s Sandwich, followed by 15 Storeys High, How Do You Want Me?, Catterick and If You See God, Tell Him”) but this one has been lost completely. Co-creator Emma Fryer is a 29-year-old forced by failure to move back from London to Coventry, where parents and old friends (Kerry Godliman, Rebekah Staton, Hayley Jayne Standing) await. A hymn to wistful regret aimed at knackered Britpop kids, it bristles with tart details but has proper sitcom plotting underneath. Dave Allen in Search of the Great English Eccentric ITV, 1974Society’s peripheral figures are a proven route to docu-gold (a shout out here for the outstanding 2015 Storyville film The Lost Gold of the Highlands), but the genre’s never topped this. Dave Allen puts comedy aside, and features himself as little as possible, as he meets an Eastbourne couple who are members of the Sioux nation, a chap with mice in the brim of his hat, and other oddballs. He gets something good out of all of them. After Dark Channel 4, 1987-97Best known for the episode where a conversation about male violence was derailed by a heroically drunk Oliver Reed, this talkshow has much to teach modern TV. It picked one knotty topic per week, then filled sofas with a lively mix of academics, experts and celeb wildcards and let them argue. With no host, no audience and a distinct lack of commentators fighting an unending culture war, it offered a thing that’s now extinct: constructive debate. The Wright WayBBC One, 2013Ben Elton is good again these days because of Upstart Crow, but he was bad with this instantly notorious sitcom howler, a runny mess of brutally forced innuendo. Everyone involved now pretends they weren’t. Bonekickers BBC One, 2008Does mystery-solving drama still work if they’re archaeologists, not cops? No it doesn’t, at least on the evidence of Hugh Bonneville, Julie Graham, Adrian Lester and Gugu Mbatha-Raw digging themselves a reputational crater. Curry & Chips ITV, 1969A vault somewhere contains this Spike Milligan brown-face catastrophe (pictured), along with misjudged race-relations sitcoms such as Mind Your Language and Love Thy Neighbour. Let’s keep it sealed. I Love My CountryBBC One, 2013Brexit was directly caused by this Saturday night atrocity, an aggressively jolly quiz in which celebs answered questions about Britain in front of a foamingly patriotic audience. Animal PassionsChannel 4, 2004We’re ready to re-watch virtually anything. Are we ready for a documentary about Britain’s zoophiles, frankly discussing how they have sex with ponies and dogs? Maybe not yet.