The UK’s highest court has ruled that Morrisons should not be held liable for the criminal act of an employee with a grudge who leaked the payroll data of about 100,000 members of staff. The supermarket group brought a supreme court challenge in an attempt to overturn previous judgments which gave the go-ahead for compensation claims by thousands of employees whose personal details were posted on the internet. A panel of five justices unanimously ruled on Wednesday that Morrisons was not “vicariously liable” for the actions of Andrew Skelton, who disclosed staff information online and also sent it to newspapers. Announcing the decision via live-stream, the court’s president, Lord Reed, said Skelton had leaked the data because of a “grudge” after he was given a verbal warning following disciplinary proceedings. The judge said employers could only be held liable for the actions of employees if they were “closely connected” with their duties at work. He said: “In the present case, Skelton was not engaged in furthering Morrisons’ business when he committed the wrongdoing in question. On the contrary, he was pursuing a personal vendetta, seeking revenge for the disciplinary proceedings a month earlier. “In these circumstances, applying the established approach to cases of this kind, his employer is not vicariously liable.” A statement issued by Morrisons after the ruling said: “The theft of data happened because a single employee with legitimate authority to hold the data also held a secret and wholly unreasonable grudge against Morrisons and wanted to hurt the company and our colleagues. “We are pleased that the supreme court has agreed that Morrisons should not be held vicariously liable for his actions when he was acting alone, to his own criminal plan and he’s been found guilty of this crime and spent time in jail. “A court has already found that Morrisons was not responsible for any direct wrongdoing in respect of this data theft.” In July 2015, Skelton was found guilty at Bradford crown court of fraud, securing unauthorised access to computer material and disclosing personal data, and was jailed for eight years. Nick McAleenan, a partner and data rights specialist lawyer for JMW Solicitors, who represented the group of 9,000 claimants in the landmark class action against Morrisons, said: “My clients entrusted their personal information to their employer, Morrisons, in good faith. “When their information was subsequently uploaded to the internet by a fellow employee, it caused an enormous amount of upset and distress to tens of thousands of people. “The supreme court’s decision now places my clients, the backbone of Morrisons’ business, in the position of having no legal avenue remaining to challenge what happened to them. “My clients are of course hugely disappointed by the decision, which contradicts two earlier unanimous findings in their favour.” The decision overturns previous rulings in the high court and court of appeal, which held that Morrisons was vicariously liable for Skelton’s actions.