European police have foiled an attempt to cheat German health authorities out of millions of euros by selling them non-existent face masks during the coronavirus pandemic. Police action in two countries came as Germany considers progressively lifting restrictions against Covid-19, which has claimed around 3,000 lives in the country. Experts say, however, that any easing would be accompanied by an obligation to wear a face mask on public transport, to prevent a resurgence of infections. Europol said on Tuesday that two companies were contracted by the German government in mid-March to buy face masks valued at €15m (£13m), as global stocks ran low. After a sale failed to materialise off a website, supposedly based in Spain, the two companies were referred to a “trusted” dealer in Ireland, who promised to put them in touch with a supplier in the Netherlands, Europol said. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/04/13-76663-2020414_TIF_tests.mp3 An initial deal was made in which the companies paid €1.5m for the delivery of 1.5m masks. “The buyers initiated a bank transfer to Ireland and prepared for delivery, which involved 52 lorries and a police escort to transport the masks from a warehouse in the Netherlands to the final destination in Germany,” Europol said. However, just before the delivery was due, the criminals said they needed another €800,000 “in order to secure the merchandise”. The buyers sent the wire transfer but the masks never arrived. “It turns out the Dutch company existed, but their website had been cloned. There was no official record of the order,” Europol said. Police and law enforcement agencies, including Europol and Interpol, raced to recover the money. The Irish police’s Economic Crimes Bureau, on a tip-off from Interpol, froze €1.5m in an account in an Irish bank, and identified an Irish company involved. Meanwhile, the Dutch Fiscal Information and Investigation Service tracked down the €800,000, of which €500,000 had already been paid into a British bank account destined for an account in Nigeria. The British bank was able to recall the full amount and return it to the Netherlands, where the funds have now been frozen. Dutch police have arrested two suspects, Europol said.