“Minutes after Pell’s conviction was quashed by the high court, the News Corp columnist Andrew Bolt posted a blog saying the cardinal was innocent and pointing the finger at the ABC for allegedly conducting a witch-hunt to have him convicted.” “The winning photographers, Aji Styawan and Greg Kahn, on opposite sides of the world, captured the stories of the impact of rising sea levels in Indonesia and the US and the resilience with which communities have responded. Their local knowledge, individual photographic style and cultural sensitivity shone through to the grant judges. Both reveal restrained emotion and a surreal sense of place.” “He was promoted to detective chief superintendent with the specific brief of investigating the murders of George Cornell and another Kray Twins associate, Jack “The Hat” McVitie. Read, fearful of his progress being leaked to the Krays, established his office away from Scotland Yard. He was wise to take precautions, because during the investigation a hired gunman was caught at Shannon airport on his way to kill him.” “By the ultimate authority we recognise in this country, he was wrongly imprisoned. He has issued a statement offering Christian forgiveness to his tormentors. He can leave it now to his supporters to rage on his behalf. It is going to be a mighty storm. Category Five. What will be very interesting to watch is whether Rome joins the celebrations.” “While he will forever be remembered as the man who finally nailed the Kray twins, a major factor in his enduring reputation was that he was regarded with great affection, not only by his colleagues but by many in the criminal fraternity, who regarded him as a straight arrow in an era when some of his fellow detectives were far from that ideal.” 6. US acting navy secretary resigns after insulting ousted commander Thomas Modly has resigned after delivering a speech to the crew of an aircraft carrier denigrating their former commander. 7. Appeal judges are reluctant to overturn jury verdicts. So why did they do it for George Pell? One victim of this appeal result may be a loss of public confidence in the jury system. 8. ‘Coughing major’ case not black and white, says Quiz writer The screenwriter behind a new drama based on the Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? scandal has doubts over whether Charles Ingram and his wife were guilty of cheating. 9. Dogs, doughnuts and the day Palace pipped Liverpool to the FA Cup final Crystal Palace had been hammered 9-0 at Anfield earlier in the 1989-90 season but they had the last laugh in the FA Cup. 10. I watched 627 minutes of Adam Driver movies because what else am I going to do “Last Thursday afternoon a lovely email broke through like a ray of sunshine piercing grey clouds on a stormy day. It was an email from a publicist. The subject line: Binge 627 minutes of ADAM DRIVER for free.”