Getty Museum ChallengeMunch’s Scream in toast, Van Gogh in beads, Leonardo in carrots: the Getty’s brilliant challenge to recreate a masterpiece using only three items is becoming a global craze (look out for Piero della Francesca performed by the Guardian’s John Crace). On Twitter and Instagram. Laura Cumming Aubrey Beardsley at Tate Britain: Exhibition TourNew film roaming Tate Britain’s spring blockbuster, homing in on the spectacular details of Beardsley’s black and white art; extra features include historian Stephen Calloway and drag performer Holly James Johnston discussing Beardsley, dandies and drag. Launching Monday 13 April. LC Folk on Foot Front Room festivalSam Lee, Peggy Seeger, Karine Polwart and Seth Lakeman are just some of the marquee names playing this bijou Easter Monday festival, courtesy of the Folk on Foot podcast; donations to Help Musicians UK. Monday 13 April, from 2pm. Kitty Empire Gerry Cinnamon: The BonnyThe 35-year-old Glaswegian balladeer has enjoyed a brushfire, word-of-mouth spread through festival sets and his own tours. Cinnamon’s second album, The Bonny, is out on Friday. His early summer dates have been rescheduled to August and September. KE Dvořák’s Symphony No 7 Good news: the London Philharmonic Orchestra has named New Yorker Karina Canellakis as its new principal guest conductor. Watch her in action with the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra in Dvořák’s stirring Symphony No 7 from Stockholm’s Konserthuset, on demand. Fiona Maddocks Homage to Jerome Robbins: Fancy Free, A Suite of Dances, Afternoon of a Faun, Glass PiecesFour contrasting ballets offer a chance to catch some of the most uplifting, glorious choreography from one of the greatest choreographers ever, with music from Bernstein, Bach, Debussy and Glass, performed by Paris Opera Ballet, one of the world’s great companies. 13-19 April, via Paris Opera Ballet’s Facebook page, or operadeparis.fr Sarah Crompton Selah and the SpadesWriter-director Tayarisha Poe turned heads at Sundance last year with her chilly, stylish debut, unpicking the power games and clashes between students at an elite Pennsylvania boarding school. On Amazon Prime from Friday. Guy Lodge Elizabeth and EssexSimon Russell Beale stars not only as Lytton Strachey but also as Elizabeth I. Robin Brooks’s new play is based on Strachey’s writings and fantasies and on the Queen’s pash on the Earl. Recorded live at the Alexandra Palace theatre, the production draws on the score Korngold composed for the 1939 movie The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex starring Bette Davis and Errol Flynn. Tonight, Radio 3, 7.30pm/BBC Sounds. Susannah Clapp Girls Like ThatA naked photo of a schoolgirl goes viral with toxic consequences in Evan Placey’s award-winning all-female ensemble play exploring the pressures on today’s digital generation. This 2014 work from Synergy Theatre Project and the Unicorn theatre, now on YouTube, was performed by a company of professional and ex-prisoner actors. Clare Brennan #blackAFKenya Barris (creator of ABC’s Black-ish) and Rashida Jones (of Parks and Recreation fame) star in this family-sitcom-style mockumentary series about success, race and wealth. Premiering on Netflix, 17 April. Kadish Morris