The government has urged gambling companies to work harder to stop vulnerable people spiralling into addiction to online casino games during the Covid-19 lockdown. In a letter to the five chief executives of the largest gambling companies, the sports minister, Nigel Huddleston, urged them to go beyond existing proposals laid down by the Betting and Gaming Council (BGC) in a 10-point pledge that has been branded “weak” by MPs. Huddleston called on Bet 365, Ladbrokes owner GVC, SkyBet, William Hill and Flutter to make “safer gambling” messages attached to adverts more prominent for the duration of the lockdown. In the letter, the minister wrote that during this time of what he called “heightened risk” for gamblers, “messages warning of risks and signposting to support need to be more obvious for all potential customers.” While there is limited data on the volume of gambling advertising since the lockdown began, anecdotal evidence suggests firms are compensating for lost revenue from sporting events by increasing the number of ads for online casinos, particularly on social media. The Gambling Commission, which regulates the industry, has reported signs of an increase in the use of online casino games, which are associated with higher rates of problem gambling. About 9.2% of online slot machine and casino customers are deemed to have a serious problem, compared with 2.5% for online sports betting. The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) has also announced an increase in gambling-related complaints since the start of the coronavirus epidemic. One of the BGC’s key safer gambling slogans, “When the fun stops, stop”, has previously been criticised for being ineffective and highlighting the word “fun” in a larger font. Huddleston also told firms to expect a demand from the Gambling Commission for detailed data on customers’ gambling patterns during the lockdown, to determine whether more needs to be done to protect people. “I expect patterns of play to be closely monitored so we can move quickly if there is any evidence of problem gambling increasing,” he said. Huddleston also called for firms to speed up the industry-led review, commissioned by the Gambling Commission, examining potential curbs on controversial VIP schemes, advertising technology and game design. Finally, he asked for an update on plans to increase the gambling industry’s spending on researching and tackling addiction, including a pledge to spend £100m over four years on treating problem gamblers. The BGC issued a 10-point pledge as the lockdown began, promising that firms would not exploit vulnerable people and addicts who may be at increased risk due to the inertia inherent in staying at home for long periods. But in a letter to Huddleston earlier this month, MPs, lords and one of the UK’s top gambling addiction experts said the BGC’s proposals were either weak, vague or already formed part of requirements of their licence to operate. The government has promised to review the Gambling Act laid down by Tony Blair’s government in 2005, and has promised further details later this year. The BGC were approached for comment.