Real Sociedad’s plans to be the first Spanish football team to return to training have been cancelled after the intervention of the secretary of state for sport. Copa del Rey finalists and fourth in La Liga when the state of emergency was imposed owing to the coronavirus crisis on 14 March, Sociedad had intended to restart sessions on Tuesday. The decision had been prompted by the government allowing some non-key workers to return to work this week but the plan was abandoned after a call from Irene Lozano on Sunday night. Sociedad’s squad were to return to their training complex individually and follow strict protocols whereby they would work one after the other rather than in groups. They would not shower there or occupy the dressing room. They had also been told the sessions were voluntary: players who wished to could continue working at home. The club had discussed the plans with local police and health authorities but the decision lay with the government via the Consejo Superior de Deportes, which is in effect Spain’s sports ministry. An email exchange was followed up by a call from Lozano, the CSD head, to the club’s president, Jokin Aperribay. She pointed out that the state of alarm does not allow a return for mass entertainment industries and, although Sociedad’s interpretation of that rule differed from that of the CSD because there was no plan for group work still less public access, the club accepted Lozano’s intervention. The midfielder David Zurutuza said he could not understand the decision but Lozano praised Sociedad’s attitude on social media. “Dialogue and understanding, always,” she wrote. “In order to return to some normality it is vital to fulfil the rules of confinement. Training sessions will return but not as an individual or irresponsible act from football, rather as another step along the path for a society returning to normality bit by bit.” A club statement said: “We are fully aware of our responsibility and we are working on a plan for getting both our athletes and employees back to work following the protocols established by the [health] authorities. Health is the absolute priority, above all other considerations. We want to thank the CSD for their friendly attitude during our conversations.”