A few weeks ago, a man called Brent Underwood arrived for a week-long stay in the uninhabited town of Cerro Gordo, California, which he bought for £1.1m in 2018. He sent the live-in caretaker of this former silver mining resort home when the pandemic began to bite. Then the virus chomped down on the US, it began to snow and Underwood has been trapped there alone for over a month, boiling snow for water. The ghost town is, of course, also haunted by the spirits of dead children. “For the most part, I leave the ghosts alone and they leave me alone. I try to respect their space,” Underwood told the NY Post. If he can only have a go at respecting the ghosts’ space while self-isolating in an empty town, imagine being cooped up with him in a city flat with no garden. There are lots of stories such as Underwood’s doing the rounds. Well, not quite like Underwood’s, because the supernatural element really does give his snowed-in spooktacular an extra show-offy kind of edge, but there are plenty of people who have found themselves stuck in places they did not expect to be stuck in. I am fascinated by each and every one of them and collect them like Panini stickers for my Covid-19 album. There are the low-level modern urban legends, of couples who decided to shack up together permanently, speeding up their courtship, Catastrophe-style, after only a date or two. The bands who were away recording and now have to share a bedroom indefinitely. Then there are the big ones: the couple on honeymoon who found themselves stranded in a fully staffed resort, unable to stop being on holiday. Chris Lewis, an ex-paratrooper, was on a fundraising mission to walk the coastline of the UK; he has been on lockdown with his dog on the uninhabited island of Hildasay in the west of Shetland since the end of March. It has turned into a game of Would You Rather: would you rather be the couple travelling the world on a yacht, who told their friends that they didn’t want to hear any bad news while they were away, so have only just found out that something pretty, pretty bad had been happening while they were accidentally isolating in their watery fun bubble? Or would you rather be dodging the child-ghosts as you contemplate a 26-mile walk through snow to the nearest town, which doesn’t even have a grocery store? For many of us, not having any outside space has been a challenge these past few weeks, but it’s always nice to put it into perspective. All Stanley Tucci had to do was show the internet how he makes a negroni and it was putty in his hands. The actor’s home cocktail-making lesson sent the internet wild last week, which must make him wonder if it’s worth spending months making a feature film, when simply discussing the benefits of a good-quality sweet vermouth earns the equivalent of five-star reviews from seemingly every heterosexual woman on the planet. And the award goes to Stanley Tucci’s tight black polo shirt and thoughts about gin versus vodka, indeed. Children are getting the best of celebrity attempts to serve some educational purpose during the crisis. Brian Cox is teaching them about space and David Attenborough about geography, with a possible side serving of how not to chuck plastic bottles into the sea. Mabel is teaching music and reading. Tom Hardy is doling out the bedtime stories. It’s hard enough to be stuck at home when you can rationalise the importance of sticking to the rules, but it must be impossible to see the rationale for anything when one minute you were at school and the next Danny Dyer is teaching you history. In an era that is not proving to be a strong advertisement for unfiltered celebrity content for grownups no, please show me how you look with nothing but a pillow in front of you – the calm art of mixing a drink is the kind of unfiltered celebrity content to aspire to. Do we adults not deserve Tucci’s cocktail masterclass? I’m a lightweight who gets dizzy from a sniff of Coors Lite, but Tucci made me salivate over the thought of having a negroni out in the wild once again. I have a particular and very specific soft spot for unlikely fans of unlikely television shows; I enjoyed Patti Smith’s memoirs approximately 100% more when she wrote about how nice it was to watch Cracker in British hotel rooms. Discovering that Fiona Apple had named her new album after a line uttered by Gillian Anderson’s character in the BBC2 drama The Fall – she says “fetch the bolt cutters”, as she is about to rescue a kidnapped woman – is another to add to the mental library. I look forward to the day Missy Elliott releases a track about Happy Valley. Come to think of it, I very much would look forward to that day. Fetch the Bolt Cutters is as remarkable as all the rave reviews would have it. There are usually a handful of records a year that take me back to teenage levels of obsession, of poring over lyrics and relistening and consuming, and this is one of them. Apple told NPR that it was supposed to come out in October. “I felt like, well, why wait that long?” she said. It is an untethered record that conjures up freedom and the fact that it does so in this impossible era, without inspiring a drop of resentment for it, is all the more extraordinary. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnist