Born in Essex, Daniel Mays, 41, studied at Rada and was cast in the Mike Leigh films All Or Nothing (2002) and Vera Drake (2004). His other movies include Made In Dagenham, Fisherman’s Friends and 1917. His latest television roles include Sky Originals comedy Code 404 and the Netflix drama White Lines. He is married with two children and lives in London. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Impatience. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Lack of punctuality, and cruelty. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought?A designer green jacket from Selfridges I bought in my 20s for £700, a ridiculous amount of money. My family and friends said I looked like a peace activist and I never wore it again. What would your superpower be?I would stop the polar caps from melting, the seas from rising and extinguish all the fires in Australia. What do you most dislike about your appearance?My teeth: they are not as straight as they could be. If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose?Megalodons: my son was obsessed with them when he was growing up. What is your favourite word?Poppadom. Which book changed your life?My driving test manual. What does love feel like?The highest of highs and the lowest of lows. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Too many old-fashioned whiskies. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?A review that said: “Daniel Mays has the face of a thwarted man cub on the cusp of a tantrum at any given moment.” What was the best kiss of your life?The standup comedian Richard Gadd. We played lovers in the BBC2 drama Against The Law – and he sure can kiss. Have you ever said ‘I love you’ and not meant it?Professionally all the time, and once or twice in reality. How do you relax?I go for a run. How often do you have sex?Whenever the kids are out. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?A utility room. What do you consider your greatest achievement?Bringing two kids into the world, but my interrogation scene in Line Of Duty comes a close second. It was 12 minutes long and, without question, the hardest passage of dialogue I’ve had to learn. What keeps you awake at night?The light in my neighbours’ kitchen because they still haven’t put a blind up. How would you like to be remembered?As an everyman who could act a bit. Tell us a secretWhen I was 13, I was a member of a women’s over-40s tap class.