Dozens of doctors in Pakistan protesting over a lack of safety equipment as they battle coronavirus have been arrested in the south-western city of Quetta. Baton-wielding police broke up the demonstration on Monday by more than 100 doctors and paramedics denouncing shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE) such as masks and goggles. Fifty-three medical staff were detained during the protest, which came as frontline medical workers around the world have been grappling with short supplies of vital safety equipment as the pandemic spreads. A doctor and a nurse died last month in Pakistan after contracting coronavirus, while at least two dozen other medical workers in the country have recently tested positive for Covid-19. In India, doctors wrote on Monday to the prime minister, Narendra Modi, complaining of a backlash against doctors who had spoken out over shortages of critical supplies. The Resident Doctors Association of New Delhi’s All India Institute of Medical Sciences, which represents 2,500 doctors, wrote that criticism of the country’s response to the outbreak was being muzzled. The association’s general secretary, Dr Srinivas Rajkumar, said at least 10 doctors had been threatened by police, transferred or forced to resign. “Don’t target doctors,” Rajkumar said. The Indian government has ordered hundreds of thousands of pieces of protective equipment, but doctors have complained on social media that they have been forced to improvise their own kit.Dr Indranil Khan, a hospital oncologist in the eastern city of Kolkata, said he was questioned by police for 16 hours last month after deleting online posts that showed doctors using raincoats as protective gear. The administration of northern Kashmir region, which is directly controlled by the federal government, said public criticism was “causing more harm than good” and has warned of strict action against those speaking to the media. Coronavirus cases are rising steadily in India, and health experts warn of a further surge. As of Monday, India had recorded 4,281 cases, with 111 deaths. Dr Suhail Naik, the president of a doctors association in Kashmir that represents about 3,000 members, said the administration must take the criticism positively. “They can’t snatch this right [of free speech] from us,” Naik said.