‘There I was, alone in the apartment where she had died, looking at these pictures of my mother, one by one under the lamp, gradually moving back in time with her, looking for the truth of the face I had loved. And I found it.” This poignant recollection occurs early in the second part of Camera Lucida by the French thinker Roland Barthes. Published in 1980, it remains, alongside Susan Sontag’s On Photography, one of the most influential books ever written on photography. In 2004, it was made into a work of art by Idris Khan, whose single mysterious photographic image is titled Every Single Page of Roland Barthes’s Book Camera Lucida. It haunts the writings of the late WG Sebald and, in 2009, it inspired Photography Degree Zero, an anthology of writings on Barthes. The passage above describes Barthes’s discovery of a portrait of his mother, Henriette, aged five, in which she is standing next to her seven-year-old brother “in a glassed-in conservatory, what was called a winter garden in those days”. For Barthes, grief-stricken by his mother’s recent death, the snapshot by an unknown photographer somehow evokes her “unique being”. He writes: “I studied the little girl and at last rediscovered my mother.” The appearance of the Winter Garden Photograph is a pivotal moment in Camera Lucida, shifting the narrative away from the theoretical towards a personal meditation on loss and photography’s intrinsic relationship to mortality. Barthes had begun writing the book soon after Henriette’s death in 1977 – it had just been published when Barthes himself died in hospital of pulmonary complications, a month after being struck by a laundry van near his home in Paris. Although the snapshot initially made Barthes exclaim: “There she is!”, his analysis of it leads him to question the complex – and essentially bittersweet – nature of that epiphany. Like all family photographs, indeed all photographic portraits, the Winter Garden Photograph is essentially a tantalising glimpse of the irretrievable, a cruel reminder of “what has ceased to be”, and like them it evokes a past we often have no lived memory of, but also a sense of our own encroaching mortality. For all its resonance for Barthes, the Winter Garden Photograph is also the essential mystery at the heart of Camera Lucida. In a narrative punctuated by images by the likes of André Kertész, Richard Avedon and Alfred Stieglitz, the snapshot of his mother as a young girl is nowhere to be seen. “I cannot reproduce the Winter Garden Photograph. It exists only for me,” he writes by way of explanation. “For you, it would be nothing but an indifferent picture, one of the thousand manifestations of the ordinary… ” In the 40 years since, by virtue of its very absence, the Winter Garden Photograph has attained an almost mythical aura, so much so that some critics have questioned that it ever existed at all. Nevertheless, it has become firmly lodged in the collective consciousness of photography students and practitioners through the strange, melancholy drift of Barthes’s writing. I cannot be the only photography buff who, while rooting in a junk shop or a flea market stall, has happened on an old, faded photograph of a young girl from another time and thought immediately of Henriette in the Winter Garden. In May 2017, I began rifling though a box of old photos in search of one such image, having received an email from Odette England, an American photographer and academic. It was a request “to submit a single photograph to the Winter Garden Photograph project ... a photographic reflection on Barthes’ unpublished snapshot of his mother”. Now, three years later and just in time for Camera Lucida’s 40th anniversary, England’s ambitious project has come to fruition in a beautifully designed photobook comprising the responses of more than 200 photographers, writers and artists. Entitled Keeper of the Hearth – the French meaning of the name, Henriette – it is by turns fascinating and bemusing. “Every single response was included,” elaborates England. “Forefront in my mind was the question: ‘Who am I to say what constitutes a valid or worthwhile interpretation of Barthes’s Winter Garden Photograph?’ I didn’t weed anything out and would have felt disingenuous doing so.” My contribution is a small portrait mounted on time-blemished card of a young girl from another time, sitting on a chair in a garden, wearing a white cotton smock and flower-bedecked hat. A flea market find, it is, in my mind at least, a portrait of the young Henriette, poised and at ease in the camera’s gaze. On the opposite page, a fragment from Camera Lucida, also chosen by me, reads “… she triumphed over this ordeal of placing herself in front of the lens … with discretion … She did not struggle with her image, as I do with mine: she did not suppose herself.” That last phrase, describing the young Henriette, is pure Barthes, astute and playful. It evokes her youthful poise and confidence – and, by extension, her breeding – and Barthes’s own discomfort when posing for a photographic portrait, a discomfort many of us will recognise. I was not the only contributor to combine image and text. The American documentary photographer Alec Soth responded with a portrait of his own mother stretched out on a sofa, beneath a wall of family portraits, one of which shows him as a young boy, grinning and clasping a ball. His text reads, “Twenty years have passed and so much has changed. But that boy and the way he looks at his mother are pretty much the same.” Soth tells me that the older he gets, the more he thinks, like Barthes, that “every photograph has the aura of death”. “The irony about my selection is that my mom is still alive,” adds Soth, “Nevertheless, when I look at that picture now (it was made 20 years ago), what I see is approaching death. And not just for her!” This sense of time’s inexorable passing is something of a constant. German-born photographer Barbara Diener submitted a picture of her two-year-old self kissing her father through what looks, on first glance, like prison bars. The snapshot was in fact taken on the stairs of their home by Diener’s mother, who titled it on the back: The Kiss. “I always thought it was an interesting photograph – strange and tender at the same time,“ says Diener. “It also works metaphorically for the kind of relationship my father and I had. We were close, but there were barriers we could never quite get around.” Since her father’s death 13 years ago, the snapshot has inevitably taken on an added resonance. “Losing him was one of those life-changing, earth-shattering events I am still processing today. Indirectly, my projects since his death convey a sense of loss or longing.” There is longing, too, in the two photographs chosen by Ka-Man Tse. The first is a black and white group photo from 1964, taken by a relative at a family wedding. It is, she says, the earliest existing photograph of her mother, who was 10 years old at the time. “There she is,” says Tse, “sitting at the end of the table, looking directly at the camera, a child amongst a table of adults, all women.” For her, it carries a similar resonance to the one Barthes identified in the snapshot of his mother. “It’s the chicken in the middle of the table, it’s the look in her eyes, the white socks and her shoes,” she elaborates, referencing Barthes idea of the “punctum” - the incidental detail that can unsettle the viewer with its poignancy. Tse’s other submitted image shows five female hands cradling that family snapshot. “The hands on the right side of the frame are my aunt, who was 71 at the time,” says Tse. “She is actually in the photograph she is holding, but as a teenager. The middle hand is mine, and I’m wearing my own wedding ring in Hong Kong where gay marriage it is neither legal nor recognised.” The past haunts the work of Dan Estabrook, a conceptual artist who uses 19th-century processing techniques to make images that combine photography and collage. “For the last few years, I’ve been using tintypes,” he says, referring to an early process in which chemicals were used to create images on metal, “which I cut up and reassemble like jigsaw puzzles.” In Estabrook’s collage, the young girl in the foreground has no face, her features having been replaced by an oval of polished silver that is a kind of mirror. “To be honest,” he says, “I was a little embarrassed at how literally I interpreted the project — I just wanted to make this unseen thing. The polished silver is there, I suppose, for all the self-reflection the image carried for Barthes, and for us now.” Keeper of the Hearth attests to the continuing resonance of an image none of us have seen and that may not even exist, and to the singular spell of Barthes’s odd, mischievous, melancholy take on photography and its seemingly intrinsic relationship to death. For all that, one has to wonder if Camera Lucida’s importance attests above all to the power of words to evoke the ineffable in ways that photography simply cannot. Keeper of the Hearth by Odette England is published by Schilt.