We have been going for family walks as part of our government-authorised exercise allowance. The threat by Matt Hancock to remove this privilege was silently welcomed by me (although at the time of writing the health secretary has yet to follow through on it). The kids have no interest in going for a walk. They have fully embraced the oceans of videogame time that the lockdown has afforded them. When this first started, my wife and I wanted to protect the children from getting anxious about what was going on. Now I wonder if there’s a good way to inject some anxiety into them, because they are having the time of their bloody lives. After the initial protests, we left the house together, with the kids showing such levels of reluctance that I worry if anyone sees us they might assume they are captive and notify the police. The stress is added to by the fact that we have moved into an unprecedented new era of social etiquette, and so accepted rules have not yet fallen into place. Everybody you come across has the potential to spark outrage because they are not adhering to your specific set of expectations and you are not adhering to theirs. My wife wants to maintain as much distance as possible, and so as soon as we see anybody heading towards us, she moves the kids across the road, before being annoyed that the other party didn’t make the first move. I pointed out to her that we crossed as soon as we saw the oncoming walkers, so it might be argued that she was expecting them to cross before they saw us, which felt unreasonable. Ordinarily, I wouldn’t have said anything, but we have now spent so much time together we are sharing opinions like that with each other. The other day she said the way I put the hot sauce back into the cupboard could be described as “eye-gougingly annoying”. I thanked her for her feedback. My wife has also expressed a distaste for people failing to say thank you after we cross for them. It has been thoroughly pissing her off. We would cross the road, walk past the ungrateful pricks, and then my wife would loudly whisper, “You’re welcome!” She was then put to the test when we did encounter somebody who crossed to avoid us before we had the chance. I waited silently as we walked past them for a “thank you” from my wife, which never came. I was incredibly excited by the prospect of bringing this up, but I stayed casual. “I think my hearing might be going,” I said, “but I didn’t hear you thanking them.” My wife explained to me that she wanted to say thank you, but at no point did they make the requisite eye contact. She also pointed out it could be argued that a man who hadn’t instigated the walk, got the kids ready or taken any kind of ownership of the outing, but instead made snidey comments, could be described as an arsehole. I thanked her for her feedback. We then glanced backwards and saw another couple walking behind us as we approached the final straight before our house. We thought nothing of it until they started to accelerate. We sped up, and then they did too, as if we were hogging the middle lane. For the last section of our walk, we were essentially involved in a chase. We speedwalked on to our street and into our house before expressing our disbelief at the inconsiderates behind us. Regardless of how tough things get, what will always bring a family together is annoyance at other people. And keeping your promise not to put your argument during the family walk into your column. Sorry.