If you could choose to be locked down with any five people, who would they be? It’s a coronavirus parlour game that did the rounds of social media in the early days, back when quarantine was still almost a novelty. The catch was that all the fantasy lockdown houses on offer were stuffed with celebrities, and within every oyster lurked some unappealing grit. Want Nigella Lawson in your quarantine squad? Fine, but you’ll have to take some aggravating Z-lister too. Yet as the siege grinds on, and the well of loneliness deepens, for some the fantasy quarantine buddy game may take a more serious turn. One in four adults understandably say they have felt lonely since this outbreak brought the social shutters clanging down. But it’s the deeper damage done by prolonged isolation whose consequences we will be living with for years to come; elderly people sinking into cognitive decline for lack of another human being to talk to, toddlers missing out on crucial social skills because they can’t learn by playing with other toddlers, singletons wretched at the prospect of months without human touch. When the chief medical officer for England, Chris Whitty, warns of “disruptive” social distancing measures lasting at least to the end of this year or Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, talks of extending some measures into 2021, they’re really only spelling out the obvious: we have no choice but to be in this for the long haul. Any vaccine or cure could be a year away at best and we are almost certainly further than ministers like to admit from a workable mass “test, trace, isolate” strategy. And that’s where the idea of quarantine buddies comes in - although Prof Stefan Flasche, epidemiologist and mathematical modeller at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, prefers the formal term “contact clustering”. The experimental concept he is currently plugging into his model is that instead of keeping strictly to socialising within their own households, a couple of families or a group of friends could agree to form an exclusive social pod. Everyone in it would still avoid anything but essential contact with outsiders, but within the circle of trust, they could relax and let their guard down. Children could play together, adults might pool home-schooling duties to give themselves time to work, and lonely single people could find someone to hang out with. Pod members wouldn’t necessarily move in with each other, but would probably need to live near each other, as well as getting on well enough to tolerate being each other’s main source of entertainment. But crucially, they’d have to care enough about each other’s welfare to be scrupulously faithful to the pod. Like lovers at the peak of the HIV epidemic trusting each other not to sleep around, each member’s safety would rely on the others not sneakily seeing other friends on the side, and taking sensible precautions if they did need to go out. But if the worst happened, and someone did accidentally bring the virus home, at least it should be relatively easy to trace contacts and contain the spread. It will be weeks before Flasche’s modelling produces even a preliminary idea of whether any of this is feasible without pushing the national infection rate unacceptably high. Even then, it wouldn’t in and of itself be an answer to the economic crisis looming if lockdown goes on much longer. But other countries are venturing cautiously down a similar path: Belgium’s elegantly named “deconfinement” committee has proposed letting groups of up to 10 people meet socially once a week, so long as it’s always the same 10. In Israel, up to three families can share childcare. Even in Britain, separated couples shuttling the kids between two households are arguably dipping a toe in this water. It might be hard to police in practice, but if anything this epidemic has shown that when lives are at stake, people are keener to stick to the rules than ministers had anticipated. And as Flasche points out, the longer the lockdown drags on, the greater the risk of desperate people starting to relax the rules off their own bat; if there is any way of doing it relatively safely, now would be the time to find out. As the father of a four-year-old who struggles to interact properly with her friends through screens, Flasche’s initial interest was in tackling small children’s desperation for physical play. But if the risk did prove tolerably low, the next question is what something like this might have to offer older or clinically vulnerable people, condemned under almost every other post-lockdown scenario to staying indoors indefinitely, even if the rest of us start edging back towards normality. The longer this goes on, the less plausible it seems to ask everyone from sprightly pensioners with busy lives to restless teens with chronic lung conditions simply to stay at home for a year or more. If an octogenarian who has lived a long and fulfilling life would rather take their chances with Covid-19 than never see their grandchildren again, is it morally justifiable in the interests of containing the virus to keep them at home, or must we eventually seek the safest way of letting human nature express itself? Loosening the lockdown in any way carries risks, and this would be no exception. While people tend to think of strangers as a threat, in an epidemic it’s those to whom we are closest from whom we have most to fear. One reason Italy’s death rate is thought to have been so high is that extended Italian families often live together or very nearby, allowing the disease to rip swiftly through several generations. Yet there are no risk-free ways out now, only ways of minimising the risk both to an overstretched NHS and to individuals, and difficult conversations about precisely what we are all prepared to bear. Until more research is done, it’s impossible to know whether gradually expanding the quarantine circle of trust beyond immediate households should be part of that conversation. But there’s something about the idea that goes instinctively with the grain of how many people will eventually want to emerge from hiding; not with a rush but gradually, nervously, and preferably in the company of those we love most. Boris Johnson might once have been attracted to the symbolism of lifting lockdown by the anniversary of VE Day, but who would be out dancing in fountains or kissing strangers in the street if it happened on 8 May? The virus will still be out there whenever we are allowed out again, and the physical caution learned over weeks of captivity may be surprisingly hard to overcome. Like hostages emerging blinking from a darkened cell, we may need longer than we think to acclimatise to the light. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist