After Life (Netflix)Gangs of London (Sky Atlantic)Emergence (Fox)Twin (BBC Four) | iPlayerThe Graham Norton Show (BBC One) | iPlayerThe Mash Report (BBC Two) | iPlayerHave I Got News for You (BBC One) | iPlayer Ricky Gervais is, take your pick, ever reinventive (a la Madonna, Lady Gaga, the royals) or ever mutating (the worst kind of spirally viruses, the royals). A year ago, in Tony Johnson, subject of his latest drama, After Life, he combined aspects of past characters: The Office’s gloriously unself-aware Brent; the more savvy Andy Millman in Extras; the saccharine platitudes that sat so ill in Derek alongside gags about mental health or other disabilities. After Life was a surprising runaway hit on Netflix, for an arguably slight comedy about a very singular, small-town man’s depression after the loss of his wife, and how an angry man learned to be kind again. I happen to like Gervais. Many don’t. I relish his takes on some complex aspects of life – freedom of speech, organised religion, disorganised religion of the variety that tends to revere big lumps of rock or small ones of crystal, people who describe themselves as “people people”. I like his loyalty to actors, although with such talents as Kerry Godliman and Ashley Jensen around it’s surely not hard. And Gervais, bless, has done it again – same local paper, staffed by the soft of brain and low of self-esteem, same gallery of township grotesques, same lonely flat occupied by lovely dog Brandy and many long nights of the soul, pills to hand and large glass of red and videos of his late Lisa. And I think I see what he’s trying to do with the formula. To show how every single one of life’s travails, when it angers one inordinately, can be surmounted, no matter one’s grief, by a half-sigh of tolerance, of kindness – as long as the sugar is intercut with Gervais showing how mean he, and life, can be. Part of the problem with this six-part second series is the scatological glee with which he hugs these acid segments. So it’s not enough to have a cartoonishly unempathetic therapist; Paul Kaye has to make Chris Finch (The Office’s rampant misogynist) look achingly woke. Not enough to have am-dram spoiled by a fat kid farting – he has to soil himself on stage. And, no matter that the arc of this second series is ultimately rewarding, hugely if quietly aided by the likes of Penelope Wilton and Diana Morgan – I’m just not sure whether this second journey is worth the lack of laughs it takes to get there. Because it is, indeed, just less funny. And if the message is the only thing, never mind the laughs crude or otherwise, I’m not sure whether it’s worth the saying. In Gangs of London, which dropped a couple of nights ago with all the finesse of a torched body thudding from 80 storeys on to an orphans’ daisied picnic, there is, as normally there has to be in the way of such things, a sudden Vacuum at the Top. Patriarch Colm Meaney, decades building up his criminal empire, and consolidating it to involve and include the more mephitic likes of Albanians, Pakistanis, Italo-Iranians, whatever, in our capital’s melting pot, has been offed, in iffy circumstances, and by a couple of lowlife “pikeys” – their language, not mine. And thus the terrible hardscrabble for a new supremacy begins. It’s actually really good, despite my sell: relentlessly watchable. It probably features fewer C- and F-words than After Life, though that’s saying little, and a plot that, though notionally complex, hangs together when you think about it in hindsight, and a constant menacing air of waiting for the second shoe to drop. It features grand London settings from Fitzrovia to Brick Lane, and an undercover ex-squaddie supercop in the shape of Sope Dirisu. What it does not excel in so far is in being as good as Peaky Blinders: the fiefdom’s sons are too pasty-angry to be Tommy Shelby. Yet. What it does excel in is the violence. At once reekingly godawful and supremely credible, every blow will rattle your teeth: you have to admire the technical skill being put into what’s going on even while cringeing from what’s going on, like watching a country and western concert or The One Show. Emergence is the latest intriguer to come from Fox, and features a plane crash, a lost girl survivor, some sort of telekinesis, some sort of secret military station drone experiment, and so far so yadda yadda snore… but. It also has Allison Tolman, so outstanding in the first televised incarnation of Fargo, and an equally up-to-the-velvet supporting cast, and 13 episodes – always a good sign – and is not, so far, letting me go. Twin, that BBC Four Norwegian thing with all that incredible Lofoten scenery and all that clunky acting, ended last night with two questions. One, will there be a second series? The door was left open, Ingrid staring into the distance, wondering whether twin laconic beardy man might make a better husband than real, now dead, laconic beardy man. Second question: do we care enough? I do, if only to watch lovely wooden boats populated by lovely wooden actors for a few more Saturdays. How long can “live” shows, especially those allegedly based on wit, survive video-calling and self-isolation? Graham Norton seems to work, chiefly because he’s good, and talking one to one, with decent guests, and pauses before question and answer. Plus, he gets to mull on the concept of his own show, the big red chair being designed to let “ordinary” people tell their own “stories”: “That’s the concept anyway. In practice, it’s usually New Zealanders telling how they shat themselves.” For similar reasons The Mash Report is still working, although Nish Kumar is somewhat relentlessly partisan for some tastes. Last week he ran the gamut from such hard targets as Donald Trump to Priti Patel, and then cunningly changed tack, running instead the gamut from Patel to Trump. It’s Have I Got News for You I feel sorry for: still utterly grand, but with everyone isolated – I’d kill for that wallpaper, Paul Merton – all having to make a “laugh-noise” at anyone else’s (or, seven times worse, their own) witticisms, which, coupled with bandwidth fluctuations, tends against fluent interplay. All, however, are still shining high above that dread category of celebrities doing happy-clappy “caring” – Ben Fogle, anyone, wanting us all to clap the Queen’s birthday at dawn? In all of this the BBC is the chief offender, and the latest outbreak of its mumsy “concern” seldom better epitomised than in the running of that dire Don’t Quit poem read by Idris Elba on TV and radio breaks. Dorothy Parker said: “I’d rather flunk my Wassermann [prove blood-positive for rampant syphilis] than read a poem by Edgar A Guest”. In short, it’s doggerel. This Britain, last time I looked, was not noticeably short of adequate writers. Yet we have to revert to a dead, cheap American writer of sub-Hallmark whimsy? Just as well we all know our places.