Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The number of confirmed deaths in the coronavirus pandemic increased to 202,846 on Saturday, according to Johns Hopkins University, with 2,896,746 confirmed cases. The prime minister of France, Edouard Philippe, will on Tuesday present a national strategy for emerging from the coronavirus lockdown to the National Assembly, his office told AFP. An app for tracing contacts of confirmed cases is also due to be unveiled. Seventeen priorities have been identified – these include reopening schools, companies returning to work, getting public transport back to normal, the supply of masks and sanitiser, policies on testing, and support for the elderly. Beijing’s city government has banned “uncivilised” behaviour such as not covering the mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing, in a new set of regulations to improve public hygiene and combat the coronavirus. Rule-breakers will be slapped with fines for offences including not wearing a mask in public when ill, and citizens must also “dress neatly” in public and not go shirtless – an apparent reference to the so-called “Beijing bikini”, in which men roll T-shirts up to expose their stomachs in hot weather. The World Health Organization has warned against “immunity passports” for recovered patients, seen as a possible tool for countries preparing to reopen their economies. “There is currently no evidence that people who have recovered from Covid-19 and have antibodies are protected from a second infection,” said a WHO statement. Reports have emerged that Donald Trump’s administration is considering replacing its secretary of health and human services, Alex Azar, because of early missteps in the handling of the coronavirus pandemic. The Wall Street Journal, which cited six people familiar with the discussions, said frustration with Azar was growing but the administration was reluctant to make big changes while the country was seeking to stop the virus, which has killed more than 53,000 people in the US. A White House spokesman told the newspaper that there was no plan to replace Azar. Mexico’s health ministry on Saturday reported 970 new cases of coronavirus infection and 84 additional fatalities, bringing the total in the country to 13,842 cases and 1,305 deaths. The government has said the real number of infected people is likely considerably higher than the confirmed cases. As rumours about the health of North Korean leader Kim Jong-un continue to circulate, including reports that he is sheltering from Covid-19, a US-based monitoring group released satellite images of what may have been his train parked at an exclusive resort town in the country’s east. A preliminary report, cited by Australia’s chief medical officer as the government advocates the reopening of the country’s schools, says children are unlikely to transmit Covid-19 between each other or to adults. The study, which is still be peer reviewed, was conducted by the Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance (NCIRS). It examined transmission of the virus in New South Wales schools and childcare centres between March and mid-April. State media in Saudi Arabia are reporting that the curfew will be partially lifted for all regions starting Sunday, but that a 24-hour curfew will be maintained in Mecca, according to Reuters. Some economic and commercial activities, including retail stores, will be reopened during Ramadan, from 29 April to 13 May. Australia’s coronavirus tracing app was set to launch on Sunday, despite lingering privacy concerns. The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, confirmed downloading the app would not be mandatory, and instead has likened it to a civic duty, such as buying war bonds in the second world war. He also flagged it as a necessary step to relaxing restrictions. Boris Johnson will return to work on Monday and is “raring to go”, a Downing Street spokeswoman has confirmed. The prime minister has been recovering in his official country residence after spending three nights in intensive care in April. He returns to face a dilemma over whether to ease the coronavirus lockdown, as leading scientists warn that the number of new cases remains much too high.