Welcome to our weekly roundup of developments in the coronavirus pandemic that continues to have shattering consequences around the world. As the pandemic exceeded the grim milestone of 2 million confirmed cases, new diplomatic rows broke out, economic activity has slumped and as some countries move tentatively to relax restrictions others are seeing resurgences in case numbers. US overtakes Italy as country with most deaths The US has suffered more confirmed coronavirus deaths than any other country, and on Friday had reached nearly 35,000 fatalities, with Italy being the second worst affected country with 22,000. China revised the death toll in Wuhan, the hardest hit city in the country where the virus first emerged, up by 50%, to 3,869 from 2,579, citing the addition of patients who had died at home and the late or inaccurate reporting of some hospital deaths. Globally, the number of confirmed cases has doubled in 13 days. The actual number of cases is assumed to be far higher than the official figures suggest, with countries varying in how extensively they are testing and a growing awareness that many people may experience few or no symptoms. Trump halts World Health Organization funding Donald Trump announced on Tuesday that the US would freeze payments to the World Health Organization (WHO) for 60 to 90 days over its handling of the coronavirus pandemic. He accused the global body of “severely mismanaging and covering up” the threat, even though it declared a public health emergency on 30 January – after which Trump continued to hold rallies and compared the coronavirus to seasonal flu. António Guterres, the UN secretary general, criticised the move, saying now was “not the time to reduce the resources for the operations of the World Health Organization or any other humanitarian organisation in the fight against the virus”, in a statement echoed by leading public health figures around the world. However, some said that, while the cut in funding was not justified, the WHO could have done more to scrutinise China’s initial response to the outbreak. Sir John Sawers, former chief of the UK intelligence service, told the BBC that Beijing was not honest when the disease first surfaced and faced “anger” from the international community. Pharma giants join forces to work on coronavirus vaccine GSK and Sanofi are two of the world’s biggest vaccine companies – between them they probably have the largest vaccine manufacturing capability in the world. This week they announced an unprecedented move to join forces to develop a Covid-19 vaccine. Two companies of this size teaming up rather than competing is almost unheard of, but we are not living in normal times and the eventual market for a vaccine is essentially the entire global population. Both are bringing tried and tested vaccine technology to the table – Sanofi is contributing a protein-based vaccine that it already uses for seasonal flu and GSK is providing a so-called adjuvant, which can be added into a vaccine to boost the immune system’s response. The effort is unlikely to be the first to get a vaccine approved – some teams already have candidates in phase 1 trials – but they are unique in having existing capacity to scale up to manufacture the hundreds of millions of doses that are likely to be required worldwide. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/04/16-36986-gnl.sci.20200416.ms.cv19_immunity.mp3 Countries relax lockdowns, but experts say some form of social distancing may need to continue until 2022 Countries around the world are grappling with how to lift social distancing restrictions while avoiding an overwhelming surge in case numbers. In Europe, Denmark, among the first European countries to impose a lockdown in early March, has became the first to re-open schools this week. Austria has reopened thousands of smaller shops and said it will allow outdoor sport such as tennis, golf and athletics from May, Spain has allowed non-essential workers to go back to work and Italy has allowed bookshops and clothing stores to reopen. In the US, Donald Trump unveiled an 18-page plan for “Opening Up America Again” identifying the circumstances necessary for areas of the country to allow employees to start returning to work. However, scientists who have modelled how the pandemic might play out beyond the next few months have concluded that intermittent social distancing may be required until 2022. The paper, published in the journal Science, found that a one-time lockdown was unlikely to be sufficient to bring the pandemic under control and that secondary peaks could be larger than the current one without continued restrictions. The analysis said that additional measures such as a vaccine or treatments could reduce the need for lockdowns, but raised the prospect of resurgences of cases – and the potential need for intermittent cycles of social distancing until 2022. “Predicting the end of the pandemic in the summer [of 2020] is not consistent with what we know about the spread of infections,” said Marc Lipsitch, a professor of epidemiology at Harvard and co-author of the study.