The government could bail out rail and tram networks in cities such as London and Manchester within days, according to reports, as public transport revenues almost entirely disappear during the coronavirus lockdown. Transport has been among the hardest-hit industries during the pandemic, with all but essential journeys banned and people across the UK urged to work from home where possible. A bailout for urban transport networks could come as early as this week, the Financial Times reported, citing conversations with Whitehall officials. The Department for Transport last month suspended rail franchising, effectively renationalising the rail industry to prevent its complete collapse during the crisis. It has also bailed out bus companies with £167m of funding over the next three months. However, transport operated by local bodies – such as the London Underground, Manchester’s Metrolink and Liverpool’s Merseyrail – was not included in the previous bailouts. London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, told BBC Radio London on Tuesday the government was talking to Transport for London (TfL) and other public travel providers around the country about grant support. TfL will not be able to continue to pay people beyond the end of the month, Khan said. If it does not receive support TfL would have to consider cutting services and jobs, he said. “We have cash reserves which we’re eating into,” he said. “Frankly speaking, because we’ve lost 95% of passengers on the tube, because we’ve lost 85% of passengers on buses, we’re struggling.” The mayor of Greater Manchester, Andy Burnham, said the whole of the Metrolink system could be suspended if there was no money forthcoming, according to the Liverpool Echo on Tuesday. In Liverpool, demand for Merseyrail has fallen by 83% during the crisis. In Manchester, Metrolink patronage is down by 95%, meaning the network will lose about £5.3m per month, even after the cost savings. On 13 April Metrolink made just £8,900, compared to £480,000 on 2 March before lockdown restrictions were imposed. TfL has reported that daily revenues are down by 90%. At the same time, it has temporarily suspended the congestion charge and emissions charges, putting further pressure on the body’s finances, a spokesman said. Advertising revenues have fallen to a “negligible amount”, the spokesman said, while the body has given 100% rent relief to tenants in its properties for three months. The Department for Transport has been contacted for comment.