Formula One is investigating how to begin the season behind closed doors at European races. Nine grands prix have been called off because of coronavirus but the F1 sporting director, Ross Brawn, said every option is being considered and believes it may be possible to hold up to 19 races. The Canadian Grand Prix became the latest race to be postponed on Tuesday. The following day the Ferrari team principal, Mattia Binotto, confirmed teams were willing to accede to radical changes to the racing format and to extending the season into next year if necessary. F1 faces a major financial shortfall if racing does not take place. The first race set to take place is the French GP on 28 June. Brawn said F1 is making plans on the assumption of the easing of restrictions imposed across Europe. “Our view is probably a European start will be favourable and that could even be a closed event,” Brawn said in a vodcast on Sky Sports. “We could have a very enclosed environment where teams come in on charters, we channel them into the circuit, we make sure everyone is tested, cleared and that there is no risk to anyone. “We have a race with no spectators. That’s not great but it’s better than no racing at all. We have to remember there are millions of people who follow the sport sat at home. A lot of them are isolating and to be able to keep it alive and entertain people would be a huge bonus in this crisis. But we can’t put anyone at risk.” F1 had already assented to a closed-door meeting. The Bahrain GP was to be held without spectators in March. Brawn believes permanent circuits would be able to prepare for a race with a short lead time if they are not required to accommodate fans, provide marketing and organise tickets. The British Grand Prix set the end of this month as the latest point to begin preparing the circuit for the race scheduled for 19 July. Binotto acknowledged two-day meetings were already under discussion and Brawn revealed F1 is considering a punishing schedule to maximise the number of races. “If we were able to start at the beginning of July we could do a 19-race season, [It would be] tough, three races on, one weekend off, three races on, one weekend off,” he said. “We have looked at all the logistics.” He also recognised there was a finite period in which F1 could conclude a world championship. “Eight races is the minimum, [according to] the FIA statutes,” Brawn said. “We could achieve eight races by starting in October. So if you wanted a drop-dead point it would be October but there is always the possibility we could run into next year. That’s being explored.”