O-T Fagbenle is on career-defining form as washed-up former boyband member Maxxx, looking to relaunch his career and win back the affections of his ex-girlfriend, the supermodel Jourdan Dunn, in this new comedy series. Reduced to playing grimy nightclub PAs after destroying his early 2000s R&B group with his drug-fuelled antics, Maxxx is determined to get his life back on track and support his adopted son Amit – but first he has to convince a public who largely think he’s either dead or a Craig David lookalike. Ammar Kalia The indefatigable chef continues his series of no-frills home-cooking recipes to make during the coronavirus quarantine. Today’s offering includes satisfyingly simple takes on fresh pasta and home-baked bread, as well as an eggless chocolate pudding and a nutrient-packed seven-vegetable sauce for that pasta. AK Materials engineer and designer Zoe Laughlin delves into the theory behind classic designs in this new series, starting with a “personal obsession”: trainers. How are some of the most ubiquitous shoes on the planet made, and how are makers innovating? And how will her own bespoke pair turn out? Hannah J Davies Terrible news devastates the McGregor family and as Meggie (Helen Baxendale) reels, an enraged Callum (Jack Rowan) sets out to discover what really happened. Sephy offers her support, but can she really help at this moment of crisis? Especially when her own “bubba” is about to be inaugurated. Ellen E Jones As if the current travel restrictions weren’t galling enough, celebrity chefs Gordon Ramsay and Gino D’Acampo take to the road once more with First Dates’ Fred Siriex to inspire more wanderlust on a US road trip. The trio begin in Mexico, searching for the perfect breakfast. AK For the past 20 years, Channel 4 has followed five children with disabilities to see how they fare through life. In tonight’s episode, Zoe isn’t sure if she wants to continue at university; Emily’s disability is presenting some challenges as she works the hospital wards; and William and Shelbie’s futures remain unclear. Ali Catterall Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again, 7.30am, Sky Cinema Musicals The 2008 success of Phyllida Lloyd’s Abba-singalong came out of the Aegean blue, and now here we go again: Ol Parker’s sequel is a five-star triumph, cannily blending the young Donna’s (Lily James) 1970s Greek island adventures with present-day wedding problems. Paul Howlett