Many theatre-makers have responded to the coronavirus lockdown by seeking to re-create a sense of community. Whether it’s the Zoom-based talking heads of the Show Must Go Online’s Shakespeare marathon, the collage of images in St Helens Theatre Royal’s Rapunzel: The Lockdown Panto or the bring-your-own-laughter-track banter of the Stand comedy club’s weekly mixed bills, they are using the internet as a conduit for the shared experience. Rona Munro comes at it from the opposite direction. In a time of isolation, the playwright has turned inward, offering five monologues which are introspective and reflective. Written and rehearsed speedily, to fill the gap left by Donny’s Brain, which had been scheduled to premiere at Edinburgh’s Traverse, they reveal the inner workings of minds isolated and alone. Even the funnier ones feel solitary. Director Caitlin Skinner makes them even more so by placing the cameras up-close and intimate. The five actors, who created the characters with Munro, are seen with only the scantest suggestion of their surroundings – a clothes-horse here, a radiator there – as if they have been reduced to their thoughts. For a moment in the first episode, we see no more than Jacob’s beard, as the hand-held camera swings him in and out of view. Played by Bhav Joshi, he is in prison for a violent attack, but his confinement is as much psychological as physical. In Siobhan, the fourth instalment, Roanna Davidson gets so confidential she pulls us right inside her mouth. How’s that for an internal monologue? Munro acknowledges the outside world, but her characters are in retreat. They are sheltering from injustice, uncertainty and guilt. Whatever their circumstances, they are in emotional lockdown, taking stock, readying themselves. The plays range from the oddball intensity of Fern, in which a prostrate Lauren Grace confesses to her crayon addiction (“I just need to colour my moods”), to the dark comedy of Mr Bubbles, in which Michael Dylan plays a children’s entertainer haunted by a formative trauma. Along with Suzanne Magowan as Clemmy, a mother with a secret (available to view from Sunday evening), they are each trapped in a moment of anxiety, a point of stasis before their worlds, like ours, kick back into action. • Available online until 2 May. 