The British Horseracing Authority said on Wednesday the suspension of racing in Britain until 30 April, which was announced in March, will be extended indefinitely. It also stressed it continues to plan for a resumption of some meetings next month if the lockdown is relaxed sufficiently to allow racing behind closed doors. In a statement after an online meeting of its board the BHA also said that because of the “very strong likelihood” restrictions on mass gatherings will continue even if some aspects of the lockdown start to ease “racing with crowds will not be possible until June at the earliest”. Racing was suspended on 17 March for six weeks and the fact the extension is for an indefinite period will be seen by some as an indication it is not expected to resume even behind closed doors for many weeks. The BHA has spent the last month planning for a return without crowds at the earliest opportunity and is reluctant to set a fixed period for the extension to give it greater flexibility if the crisis eases sooner than expected. A scheme to stage meetings at tracks with hotels on site, such as Lingfield and Newcastle, where jockeys, officials and other essential staff could be quarantined, could be put into action in a matter of days if pressure starts to ease on NHS resources. The BHA’s statement to accompany its announcement said its “plans continue to allow for a resumption in May if that is possible” and this would be “behind closed doors only” with “tough biosecurity measures” to keep any risks to a minimum. “We stopped racing in March to protect the health and safety of the public and to limit demands on the NHS,” Nick Rust, the BHA’s chief executive, said. “It’s right to continue this suspension until the pressure on the NHS allows for a resumption and we can ensure the safety of those taking part. “We’ll continue to develop a range of options drawing on the expertise of our participants and racecourses. But for now, we are all focused on supporting the national effort, maintaining social distancing restrictions and taking care of our people and our horses.” Ireland was the last major racing nation in Europe to suspend its racing schedule on 25 March but racing has continued behind closed doors in Australia, Hong Kong, Japan and at a handful of tracks in the United States. Germany recently set out plans for a scaled-down racing programme to resume from 1 May.