The British government reacted desperately to delays in securing urgently needed supplies of personal protective equipment from Turkey on Monday evening, dispatching an RAF plane in an attempt to force Ankara to release them. The plane, one of three that have been waiting to be dispatched to pick up the shipment of 400,000 protective gowns for NHS staff, took off from RAF Brize Norton on Monday despite earlier ministerial assurances that the matter was on the brink of being resolved. By the time the flight took off there was no indication from the Turkish authorities that the equipment had been approved for export. The RAF transport planes have been on standby at Brize Norton for days waiting for the go-ahead to pick up 84 tonnes of urgently needed medical clothing and equipment, including the 400,000 gowns made by Turkish suppliers. With a series of deadlines set by UK ministers missed, the British government has blamed its Turkish counterpart for causing the delays. But after one cabinet minister said the government had hoped the three planes would be able to take off on Monday afternoon, British sources admitted that the Turkish authorities had not confirmed the supplies were ready to be picked up. Instead, the RAF was ordered to put one of the three transport planes – an Atlas A400M – into the air in the hope that it would help speed up the process on the ground in Turkey, even though it would not be able to pick up all the ordered equipment on its own. “We call it pre-positioning,” a military source said. The flight time from London to Turkey for the planes is a little under five hours, meaning that the gowns and other supplies cannot arrive into the UK until Tuesday at the earliest, although ministers had previously promised the transport would take place on Sunday. The culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, told the BBC on Monday morning that the delays were down to “challenges at the Turkish end” but appeared to suggest the issue was about to be resolved. He said: “I don’t want to start making more and more promises, but I understand that flight will take off this afternoon and those [gowns] will be delivered.” NHS officials expressed disappointment that the delivery timetable announced by ministers had slipped again, having on Sunday urged the government to avoid making pledges of equipment that it could not be sure of fulfilling. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, said: “It’s disappointing that having raised expectations about the additional PPE consignment coming from Turkey, there is still no sign of it. “We have called on the government and national leaders to be careful about announcing information about consignments of PPE from overseas until they know they have arrived, are unpacked and the kit has been checked to ensure it passes our safety tests.” At the Downing Street briefing on Monday afternoon, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, acknowledged the issue, but did not give any further updates on when the gowns might now be received. “We are working to resolve the Turkish shipment of PPE as soon as possible following some unexpected delays at the weekend,” Sunak said. He noted that 140,000 gowns had arrived from Myanmar and said that “every possible option” was being explored. Three dozen crew for the mission had been previously told to expect takeoff “in the late afternoon”, according to defence sources. The other planes in the intended transport were another Atlas A400M and a C-17 Globemaster, the largest of the three. Along with many countries, Turkey has banned the export of PPE and other vital medical supplies without government approval, leading to several cases of lengthy delays. The shipment was originally due to arrive on Sunday, the third such shipment to arrive from Turkey this year. Turkey’s presidency did not immediately respond to several requests for comment on the reasons behind the delays in allowing the equipment to be picked up. According to the Italian daily Corriere della Sera, an order of 200,000 Turkish-made masks was held up for 17 days last month until Italy’s prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, raised the matter in a phone call with the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. On 3 April the Spanish government accused Turkey of holding on to a shipment containing dozens of respirators, citing efforts by Turkish officials to shore up their own supplies amid the coronavirus pandemic. The shipment was released the next day after Ankara agreed to exempt the cargo from the export ban. Five million masks sold by Turkish companies to Belgium before the export ban were also delayed, leading Belgium’s health ministry to file a criminal complaint. Turkey, a major medical equipment manufacturer, stepped up production when the Covid-19 outbreak reached neighbouring Iran. Turkey did not confirm its first case until 11 March. Since then the rate of infection in the country has become one of the highest in the world. The local news outlet Hürriyet quoted the interior minister, Süleyman Soylu, as saying authorities would seize factories if companies did not agree to sell medical supplies on an exclusive basis to the health ministry. Ankara has also sent PPE aid shipments to Armenia, Libya, Israel, the Palestinian territories and several Balkan states.