Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: Boris Johnson was moved to an intensive care unit after his condition worsened, Downing Street confirmed. A spokeswoman said the move was a precaution in case the prime minister needs ventilation. Johnson was admitted to hospital on Sunday, with officials saying the symptoms of coronavirus from which he has been suffering were persisting. According to Johns Hopkins University, 1,337,749 people around the world are known to have been infected, while at least 73,917 have died. The scale of the outbreak is likely to be greater as some countries are suspected of underreporting their figures. The researchers say 275,883 people have recovered. Dominic Raab will deputise for Johnson while the latter is in hospital. In a televised interview, the foreign secretary said the UK government’s coronavirus fight would continue and ministers would focus on implementing the prime minister’s plan. The French president Emmanuel Macron said he hoped the UK prime minister made a speedy recovery, while the US president Donald Trump said he was praying for Johnson. Canada’s prime minister Justin Trudeau and the Irish taoiseach Leo Varadkar were among those to send their best wishes. Prominent figures from across the UK’s political landscape offered their support to Johnson as his condition deteriorated. The death toll in French hospitals increased by 10% in a day to a cumulative total of 6,494, the country’s health minister Olivier Véran said. He added that, including partial data about the number of people who have died in nursing homes, the total death toll from the disease rose to 8,911 from 8,078 on Sunday, also a rise of 10%. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said 8,910 people had died as a result of the pandemic and the country had 330,891 reported cases. The country will reopen daycare centres and schools for children in first to fifth grade starting 15 April, if the numbers of coronavirus cases and deaths remain stable, its prime minister said. Other restrictions will remain in place until at least 10 May and the ban on big gatherings will stay until August. The country had recorded the fewest deaths in any day for two weeks but Monday’s figures showed the numbers accelerating again, with a further 636 new deaths; 111 more than the number registered on Sunday. That brought the toll in Italy to 16,523. The number of current new infections increased by 1,941 – a rise of 2% since Sunday and the lowest day-to-day rise registered since 30 March. The latest figures released by health authorities in Greece offered a glimmer of hope. The prominent infectious diseases expert, Sotirios Tsiodras, said data suggested the country was “flattening the curve”.