The spread of Covid-19 in the United States points a blacklight on the structural and violent racism that has plagued black Americans for generations. Along with disproportionate rates of coronavirus cases and deaths facing black people in Wisconsin, Michigan, Maryland, New Orleans and New York, among others, this pandemic amplifies how unjustly police enforce their authority. Recent incidents in New York and Philadelphia make it clear that aggressive policing could become even more normalized, with black people the frequent victims. When Covid-19 emerged in east Asia, outside observers lauded the Chinese and South Korean governments for their response, which included rigorous policing methods that helped slow the spread of the virus. Both countries reduced their cases within a relatively brief period and used surveillance technology to track the movements of their residents. In South Korea, developers have used public data to create various informational tools, like a map warning residents of movements of those carrying the virus and alerting them of locations they should avoid. The procedures also drew detractors in the America media, who warned that government surveillance for public health could violate citizens’ human rights and privacy. These are fair assessments, particularly in an era when personal data is bought and sold to nefarious actors, and black Americans are on high alert about third parties using their data to impede fair elections. However, what distinguishes America from much of the world is that there is no coordinated health infrastructure or federal government procedure to coincide with emergency uses of surveillance technology and robust social distancing enforcement. In the US, widespread police authority already exists, but there are few systems to provide a public good, and instead we are faced with private terror, rendering individual acts of aggressive policing virtually meaningless. In Philadelphia, for instance, a requirement to wear face masks on public transit reportedly resulted in a black rider being manhandled by several officers, with what appears to be almost eight or nine officers surrounding him when he was forced off a public bus. The commonsense solution, as the Intercept reporter Aída Chávez noted, was to hand him a mask. Further, officers may have potentially escalated the public health risks by being in close contact with the rider. Widespread police authority already exists, but there are few systems to provide a public good Likewise, police officers in New York City apprehended a young boy, who appears younger than 12 years old, for purportedly selling snacks on a public train. After several officers accosted the boy, they then dragged him up the subway station stairs and reportedly detained him in a station police precinct. While the officers’ conduct may not have been related to enforcing social distancing measures, the pandemic, at the least, gives police an incentive to arbitrarily terrorize vulnerable communities even further. Both of these incidents underscore a racist system that leaves black Americans with limited options and harsher repercussions, which are intensified when anxieties about public health are at a fever pitch. Black people are more likely to use public transit and hold essential jobs that prevent them from working from home, resulting in ridership that is probably disproportionately composed of more black, low-income riders in the midst of a stay-at-home order. And many are homeless and looking for any methods to make ends meet. A woman alleging to be the young rider’s mother in New York City stated that they were homeless and their son selling snacks, a common practice on city trains, was their “only means of survival”. These disparities have not materialized by happenstance. Public policy has shaped America’s racial inequalities in health and housing, creating an ecosystem of injustice. This includes New Deal-era housing policy that excluded black Americans from homeownership, which was the primary driver for wealth-building among white Americans. The segregation this racist housing policy perpetuated forced black people into neighborhoods with lower-funded schools and hospitals and fewer grocery stores and parks. Without equal access to high opportunity neighborhoods and schools, decades of black Americans have been cornered into lower-paying jobs and concentrated poverty. Today, that means they are also forced to involuntarily serve on the frontlines of a public health crisis. Enforcement of social distancing is a necessary response to a pandemic, and the federal government’s inability to coordinate a consistent message about social distancing may cost thousands of lives. But we need leaders and policies who devote public resources to ending human suffering, rather than to promoting punishment. The status quo leaves enforcement of social distancing in the hands of a police system built on brutality. It will do more harm than good, particularly to black Americans who are yet again the most vulnerable. Malaika Jabali is a freelance writer, activist and attorney