And now, here are the alternative coronavirus stats: • more than half a million people have recovered. • In almost all the worst affected countries, the number of new cases reported each day is falling. • In the time it took Covid-19 to kill 120,000 people this year, 36 million babies were born. • The vast majority of infected individuals show no symptoms, according to an (albeit small) study from China. • £17m. The amount you can raise by walking around your garden. That’s not to say everything is fine and we’re all going to live happily ever after. These are just statistics, and like all stats they are selective and skewed. Remember that the next time you read a frothy news story peppered with data about death, recession and worst-case scenarios. Better still, skip the bad news for a few minutes and graze on the sweetened grass of Upside journalism this week, which included: • How Covid-19 brought Britain back together. 20-minute podcast. • the businesses helping out in the pandemic effort Two minute read. • refugee chefs feeding health workers. 3 course meal. • Post modern: letterbox-shaped products come into their own. One-minute read • Pop-up bike lanes – a coronavirus innovation. Two-minute read. • The stranded Brits helping out. Two minute read. • Having a good crisis: the bidet. Two minute sluice. • Having a good crisis: the cello. Quick tweet. Neighbour is playing a cello concert in her front garden to raise money for charity. Everyone on our street has come out to watch. #coronaverse pic.twitter.com/R3gt4NSOTo • How to rebuild: the expert view. Three-minute read. • Unexpected blessing #79: clean air. Great before-and-after pictures. • The Upside of lockdown. Daily miniseries. • The best lockdown orchestras. Three-minute symphony. And in non-Covid news this week: • Record collapse in carbon emissions. Two-minute read. • The deaf workers weaning a capital city off plastic. Three-minute read. • The antidote: your favourite non-Covid reads. Weekly browse. And also this week, a new occasional category of chucklesome stories of the week which included: • The literary map that missed out Scotland and Wales. • The Spanish writer unimpressed with British table sauces. • Britain stockpiled toilet paper. Americans stockpiled water. In New Zealand, they stockpiled… sex toys? One-minute read. It’s not a great time to be in the news business, alas, with newspaper outlets shuttered and advertisers tightening their belts. But it’s a great time to be in news. A Guardian page was clicked on more than 2bn times in March. And a host of other outlets around the world, from Iraq to the Philippines, are reporting a readership surge. If only there was a way of persuading readers to pay a little towards keeping the press alive… This piece in Canada’s National Post on the shoppers buying grocery for healthcare workers. We also liked the New York Times wrap up of all the solutions journalism operations out there which, like the Upside, are enjoying something of a boom. And we chuckled at moments in the wildly popular Some Good News YouTube show. Worth a look: Thanks to everyone who has sent offerings to our email address. Do keep them coming. Regrettably we can only publish a fraction of what we receive. Maria Mackay sent in something rather brilliant from Dunedin. Of course Capt Tom has replaced Major Tom in our affections, so Mackay essayed a reworking of the David Bowie epic. Too much to quote here, and we are not clear on copyright rules, so just a delicious extract for you: Planet Earth has flu But there’s something I can do… Laura Marley sent in a sweet video of reception class children performing the toilet roll challenge in Adlington, Lancashire. It is a thank you to the NHS and thank you, and recognition, of all those out there keeping us all going. Delivery drivers, refuse collectors, carers, supermarket colleagues. I’m sure there are many people out there taking risks to help others. It also brought us together and the kids loved seeing each other. We hope it makes people smile. Liz Shakespeare not only has a promising surname for a writer. She has a postbox in her front garden. And she’ll mail you one of her novels if you run out of reading material. I can post a book to you or to one of your friends or relatives, while obeying the Stay At Home order. If you need to send a birthday present, a get well present, or just want to escape into another world for a while, choose a book set in Devon from my website In the parts of Europe that tiptoed their way out of lockdown this week. Also at a virtual seminar on the rise and rise of solutions journalism. You can hear the Upside having its say after 1 hour and 15 minutes.