Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The number of confirmed deaths in the coronavirus pandemic increased to 203,670 on Sunday, according to Johns Hopkins University. The World Health Organization has warned against offering “immunity passports” for recovered patients, which are being considered in various countries as a possible tool to allow a gradual reopening of the economy. In a scientific briefing note, the WHO said: “There is currently no evidence that people who have recovered from Covid-19 and have antibodies are protected from a second infection.” Deaths from coronavirus in Italy rose by 260 on Sunday, 155 less than on Saturday, and the lowest day-to-day increase since 14 March. The death toll now stands at 26,644, while the number of people who have recovered has risen to 64,928. Spain’s daily death toll dropped below 300 for the first time in weeks as it partially relaxed the lockdown. On Sunday, children aged under 14 were allowed outside to exercise for the first time since mid-March. The daily rise in the death toll in the UK announced on Sunday was the lowest since the end of March. The number of deaths in UK hospitals from coronavirus rose to 20,732, an increase of 413 in the last 24 hours. The daily Covid-19 death toll in New York state was markedly lower on Sunday than it was on Saturday, with officials recording 367 fatalities, compared with 437 a day earlier. Narendra Modi gave a radio address to urge the country’s 1.3 billion citizens to strictly comply with the nationwide lockdown, as the number of confirmed cases increased steadily despite the month-long curfew. Officials in Iran, the worst-hit country in the Middle East, said there were 60 deaths from the coronavirus in the past 24 hours, taking the total to 5,710. The new set of regulations to improve public hygiene and combat the coronavirus include a ban on behaviour such as not covering the mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing. The country reported 6,361 new cases on Sunday. Sixty-six people died with the virus in the past day, bringing the total death toll to 747, Russia’s official crisis response centre said.