The Spanish government has defended its decision to allow some non-essential workers to return to their jobs in factories and construction sites this coming week despite warnings that any relaxation of confinement measures could lead to a rise in contagion. The World Health Organization has said there could be a “deadly resurgence” of the coronavirus if countermeasures are lifted too soon, while one of the Spanish government’s own experts has said he thought it would have been sensible to keep non-essential workers at home for longer. Speaking on Saturday afternoon, the country’s health minister, Salvador Illa, said Spain remained in strict lockdown and that people were only allowed out to go to work or to buy food or medicine. “We still have very, very drastic restrictions in place,” he added. Illa said that the ban on non-essential workers travelling to work had only ever been a temporary measure intended to reduce the pressure on Spain’s overstretched intensive care units. The minister insisted that all decisions were “taken on the basis of consensus” and that the government followed the recommendations of experts. Illa also said the current lockdown could go on for a few more weeks at least. “As the prime minister has already said, it’s very probable that these measures will be in force beyond 26 April,” he said. “Spain is not de-escalating; we remain in lockdown.” He said the government was following the disease’s movement on a daily basis and adapting its response accordingly. “We are maintaining the current measures - and haven’t ruled anything out,” he said. “The information we have at the moment confirms a slowing down of the disease and the growth in new cases is much lower than it was last week, or two weeks ago, or a month ago. “But today we still have 4,830 new cases and that means we need to stay in lockdown. We know this is a big sacrifice for everyone, but it’s one that has to be made. If the epidemic carries on going in the same direction, we may be able to alter the response, but it will always be done prudently, cautiously, and on the basis of the scientific evidence we have.” The Spanish government has advised people to maintain careful physical distancing as some of those who cannot work from home begin to resume their jobs. It has also said face masks will be handed out at metro and rail stations.