Malcolm Turnbull is pleased he no longer is a politician but is in no mood to retreat from a public life. In this exclusive interview with Guardian Australia in the wake of his memoirs, he demonstrates that he hasn’t abandoned his sharp-edged views on Australian politics. Nicholas John Crilley, 34, pleaded guilty to 54 offences, including grievous bodily harm, deprivation of liberty and torture, following the 23-day attack in June 2017. The total number of deaths from the attack reached 23, including the gunman. The newly identified victims included a woman out for a walk, a care aide on duty, and a volunteer firefighter. ‘Spall expects to be asked about two things in interviews: his weight loss and his father. When it comes to nepotism there’s a pithy response: “Accusations of nepotism?” he asks, rhetorically. “They’re not accusations – they’re facts. I benefited from nepotism.” On his weight loss (he shifted five stones before the romcom gig), he’s more guarded now.’ ‘Their dominance on the buzzer continued after the music round, with captain Caleb Rich coming into his own with six stunning starters in the second half that brought his team to an astonishing 275 points at the gong. To put that into perspective, that is more than the combined score of both teams in some finals. And that, ultimately, is what made this final so special.’ ‘He gained the reputation of being calm and trustworthy in a crisis. At Cape Town in the notorious ball-tampering match of 2018 he was the third umpire and it was his job to inform the on-field umpires what was about to be shown on the screens. He kept them on an even keel, beginning with: “They’ve got some pictures for you and they’re not of Table Mountain.”’ ‘“And what shall one write about today, hmm?” The question is, of course, rhetorical. Fellowes will write about period-specific toffs and their plucky, plebbish subordinates and he will call it Downton Abbey. Then, following a brief phone call from his agent, Fellowes will grudgingly proceed to cross out the words Downton Abbey and in their place write something like “Belgravia” or “The English Game” instead.’ ‘Sharon and Ian estimate they spend about £200 a month at the online store but it’s actually around £800. The first scales begin to fall from their eyes when they are shown how to buy products more cheaply from Amazon’s sites in other countries and are introduced to price tracker websites that show them how even prices here, which they had assumed were fixed (and by extension fair) actually fluctuate wildly.’ ‘V’landys’ influence is significant. When it comes to sporting administration in Australia, he is a strongman who has built his base on an ability to deliver, force of personality and sheer will. A man who is willing to argue that the Melbourne Cup should be moved is a man afraid of nobody and a man not concerned about either enemies or political chicanery.’ ‘In a useful news diversion a bloated, 14-person taskforce formed to consider reconstruction in the Scottish Professional Football League convened for the first time on Monday. A vote will be required to approve any of its recommendations. No sniggering at the back.’