James Cook’s critics can relish the irony that a global pandemic has diminished the planned lavish commemorations of his east coast Australian arrival 250 years ago today. Many Indigenous people and supporters of their causes and sensibilities rightly view the lieutenant as the doorman for so many ills that followed, including the smallpox epidemic of 1789 that killed as many as seven in 10 Aboriginal people of the new colony for which Cook’s arrival paved the way. We’ll hear much today about how Cook brought “enlightenment” to a continent that has staged the world’s longest continuous civilisation for 100,000 years. The boosters will insist that commemorating divisive Cook – whose first act on landing on 29 April 1770 was to shoot one of the Indigenous men who challenged him – is also, somehow, the means to Australian reconciliation. The member for Cook – named in the navigator’s honour – and prime minister, Scott Morrison, summed up one side of the Cook divide when he said: “As the 250th anniversary nears we want to help Australians better understand Captain Cook’s historic [1st] voyage [of discovery] and its legacy for exploration, science and reconciliation. That voyage is the reason Australia is what it is today and it’s important we take the opportunity to reflect on it.” Over the past century Australia has used Cook’s name, his ethos and “spirit” of adventure when commemorating everything from Australia Day and Anzac, to Remembrance Day, the centenary of the establishment of Melbourne and federation. There is no doubt Cook was complex, both morally and in legacy. He was the foremost British navigator and cartographer of his epoch, a man who was not born to the admiralty and made his way to the top through merit. Official commemoration will laud Cook today. But it will do so in isolation from his many complexities and flaws But like many at the vanguard of the Enlightenment, his views on white racial superiority (as I’ve written previously, he viewed this country as a great place for an imperial cattle run and land grab) seriously compromised the tenor of his limited dealings with, and capacity to understand, the Indigenous people of this continent and others. As American writer Barry Lopez muses in his book Horizon, “Cook is often held out as someone who embodied all that was right about the Enlightenment – informed thinking, curiosity about the world, a commitment to the ideals of humanism. But he also ... represented the dark side of the Enlightenment, a belief that there was only one right way to govern, to organise one’s economy, to worship God, and to think. All other ways were primitive (ie, unenlightened) and those practicing them were assumed to be far behind on Progress’s inexorable path.” Australia officially cherry-picks from the Cook “discovery” story (omitting his naive, arrogant violent encounters with Aboriginal people and much else) just as it does from the Anzac foundation myth (leaving out massacres by Australian troops, defeat and retreat at Gallipoli, cowardice and the ill-treatment and addictions of damaged veterans). That’s how victors tend to talk history. What strikes me most when I read Cook’s journals is how fortunate he was (despite his own stupidity and arrogance, and due to the restraint of the Indigenous people he mistreated on his three voyages of discovery) not to have died much earlier in the way he did in 1779 when the Hawaiian locals chopped him to bits for abusing their customs and generosity. It’s amazing it didn’t happen in 1770 when fixing his HM Bark Endeavour after its near-disastrous holing on the Great Barrier Reef at Wabalumbaal (he renamed it Endeavour River). That’s when Cook’s men filled the deck with precious, giant green turtles – a staple food for the locals. The Aboriginal men came in a delegation. They asked for just one of the turtles back. The crew refused. A fight ensued, the locals repelled. One Indigenous man was shot as the tensions over the turtles – and Cook’s inability to understand the importance of them to the Aboriginal inhabitants – heightened. Similarly, we will probably hear little today of Tupaia, the Tahitian high priest who helped direct the Endeavour across the ocean from island to island, eventually to New Zealand and to the east coast of Australia. Each of Cook’s three voyages took advantage of the knowledge of indigenous Pacific navigators. Like Bungaree, the Indigenous Australian guide on Matthew Flinders’ circumnavigation (there is a monument in Sydney to Flinders’ cat but not to Bungaree!), Tupaia is forgotten in Australia alongside the great navigator. Indigenous Tahitian Tupaia died of a ship-borne virus (how snippets of history can resonate so sadly at the most unanticipated times) aboard the Endeavour while it was docked in Batavia in December 1770. Official commemoration will laud Cook today. But it will do so in isolation from his many complexities and flaws – and from the terrible experiences of generations of Indigenous people in the clash of continental civilisations for which Cook arguably paved the way. • Paul Daley is a Guardian Australia columnist