Identical twins Adam and Erik live very different lives: one – Adam – as the owner of a successful tourist business in the windswept coastal town of Lofoten in Norway, and the other – Erik – a lonesome, surfing beach bum, drowning in debt. The pair haven’t seen each other in 15 years when an accident during a reunion causes their lives to dramatically intersect once more. Game of Thrones’ Kristofer Hivju plays both Adam and Erik in this dark, atmospheric Norwegian thriller. Ammar Kalia For those left bereft by the cancellation of this year’s Grand National, worry not as the CGI experts have come to the rescue. Now in its fourth year, the Virtual Grand National does what it says on the tin: running a simulated race based on the previous form of real-life horses. Will Rathvinden triumph again? AK The fly-on-the-wall doc that shadows students training to become RSPCA inspectors continues. The hopefuls have now reached the halfway stage in their packed year of evaluation, but as well as dealing with real-life cases outside the classroom, they must also tackle one of the toughest modules yet: euthanasia. Graeme Virtue With the royals currently beset by scandal, controversy and the coronavirus, a look back at one of the most fondly regarded, in a previous time of crisis. Here’s how the Queen Mum inspired devotion during the blitz, insisting that the royals remained in London during the raids, and touring the East End. Ali Catterall Pioneer of painterly self-expression or controversial objectifier of women? This striking one-off doc takes a look at the career of the 16th-century Renaissance painter, from court portraitist to revered master, analysing his radical questioning of the ethics of seeing. AK Doing their bit to fill that gaping football-shaped hole in the Saturday schedules, this series sees Gary Lineker, Alan Shearer and Ian Wright rehashing familiar pub arguments. Who are the best players you’ve seen, in each position? This week it’s the goalkeepers they’ve struggled to beat. Phil Harrison Ghost Stories, 10.45pm, BBC Two Writer-directors Andy Nyman and Jeremy Dyson adapted their stage horror show to create this spooky portmanteau film. There’s a touch of Dyson’s The League of Gentlemen in the dingy settings for these tales, with Paul Whitehouse and Martin Freeman adding to the downbeat proceedings. Paul Howlett