After reflecting on the “needs of the game”, the NRL has come to a mutual agreement with its chief executive, Todd Greenberg, to part ways, effective immediately, as the game in Australia fights to extract itself from a financial crisis caused by the coronavirus epidemic. The NRL’s chief commercial officer, Andrew Abdo, will take over the role on an interim basis while a replacement is sought for Greenberg, who had held the position since March 2016. “It has been my great honour and privilege to be the CEO of the NRL for the last four years,” Greenberg said on Monday. “Despite the variety of challenges and pressures I have loved every single minute of the journey. Our growth over the last four years has been extraordinary and I am very proud of my contribution to the game.” Greenberg’s latest and greatest challenge arrived with the Covid-19 outbreak, which forced the 2020 season to be suspended after just two rounds. The league is seeking a return date of 28 May but is yet to offer details of exactly how that would happen. The chief executive’s position had come under intensifying scrutiny and Channel Nine fired a scathing broadside this month, accusing the league of “squandering” millions of dollars under his tenure. How a broadcast arrangement with Nine and its fellow major broadcast partner, Foxtel, would look in a modified season remains uncertain, although on Monday Nine’s chief executive, Hugh Marks, for the first time reaffirmed the network’s commitment to the NRL. Greenberg had been kept out of meetings with Nine last week but he had vowed to lead the charge on fixing the financial concerns raised by the broadcaster in an email to staff as late as last week, before his stint abruptly ended. “I am indebted to the game for the variety of opportunities and experiences that have been provided to my family and I, and we leave with many great memories and life long friendships,” Greenberg said. “My sincere thanks to all the stakeholders across the game, particularly the fans who are the lifeblood of rugby league,” he said. “Their unwavering passion for the game is wonderful. “I remain in awe of the players’ skill and bravery to play this game week in and week out and I thank all of them, both past and present for their friendship and support. “My thanks also to the staff and executive team at the NRL. It has been an absolute honour to lead this team of talented, resilient and hard working professionals.” The former boss of Canterbury, Greenberg became the NRL’s head of football in 2013 before he took over the reins in 2016. His first major challenge came in the form of Parramatta’s salary-cap scandal, while off-field behaviour proved his biggest test until coronavirus. The ARL Commission chairman, Peter V’landys, thanked Greenberg for his involvement in the game over the past seven years. “The role of chief executive of the NRL is one of the most challenging and difficult roles in Australian sport, with a diversity of passionate stakeholders,” V’landys said.