Players and owners must “share the pain” of the financial crisis facing football to prevent clubs and leagues going out of business, the Football Association chairman, Greg Clarke, has warned. Clarke issued a stark message on the consequences of the coronavirus crisis to the FA council on Tuesday, when he insisted it was time for the game’s stakeholders to finally agree on the financial sacrifices needed to “keep the game alive”. Four weeks into the suspension of the football calendar, and despite continued talks between the Professional Footballers’ Association, the Premier League and EFL, no agreement has been reached on players taking wage reductions or deferrals, or a combination of both, up to 30%. The decision of profit-making Premier League clubs such as Tottenham and Liverpool to put non-playing staff on furlough has also damaged the game’s reputation, although Liverpool have since reversed their move following widespread criticism. The Football Association announced on Monday that it could face losses above £150mand that its highest earners, including England manager Gareth Southgate, had agreed to reduce their pay by up to 30%. The organisation is also putting staff on furlough. Clarke, who is taking a 25% pay cut, has outlined the dire consequences facing the professional game without a united response. “Football faces economic challenges beyond the wildest imagination of those who run it,” he said. “The pandemic will be followed by its economic consequences and all business sectors will suffer. “We face the danger of losing clubs and leagues as finances collapse. Many communities could lose the clubs at their heart with little chance of resurrection. In the face of this unprecedented adversity, all the stakeholders within the game from players, fans, clubs, owners and administrators need to step up and share the pain to keep the game alive.” Sunderland and Crewe confirmed on Tuesday that they were putting playing and non-playing staff on furlough. Premier League Newcastle, Norwich and Bournemouth have also taken up government assistance during the crisis, with Sheffield United reported to be also considering the move, and Clarke insists top-flight clubs are also at risk in the developing financial crisis. He added: “Everyone should understand that the Premier League clubs are not immune from the impact of this and whilst they are impacted to different degrees depending on their cost base, the potential overall financial impact is huge. “We must have a plan to ensure that English football is not decimated should this season be lost and next season blighted. We hope we do not need this plan as we are all determined to finish the professional football season, however we would be fools not to develop such a contingency plan. Those that lost their clubs because English football did not rise to the challenge would rightly judge us harshly. “Time is pressing as football burns through its cash reserves with no sign yet of a resumption of the game. Pointing fingers serves no purpose. It is time for the stakeholders to agree common cause to save our game. Contribute. Football is a team game and now is the time for teamwork.” Clarke confirmed the FA remained committed to completing the season, providing government and medical advice allows. He said: “We are committed to finishing the professional football season as this resolves the issues of promotion and relegation together with title winners on merit. However, we may not be able to finish the season as football is not our priority, human life is, and we will do as the government directs as the pandemic unfolds. Further down the football pyramid, our leagues have requested that the season is curtailed and that decision rests with the FA council.”