The president of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) has “temporarily” stood down and his abrupt departure referred to the Charity Commission. Alan Jones, who is also a professor at Queen’s University in Belfast, informed RIBA’s council this week that he was stepping back from his role. He was elected by colleagues for a two-year term as president and took up the post in September. Jones runs an architectural practice, Alan Jones Architects, in County Antrim. RIBA notified the Charity Commission by sending it a “serious incident report” – a requirement if it suspects a significant matter has arisen. The reason for his departure has not been disclosed. Kerr Robertson, RIBA’s honorary secretary who will take over the presidency for the time being, said: “The RIBA president, Alan Jones, has brought a sensitive matter to our attention, which we are investigating and, in line with regulations, we have informed the Charity Commission. “Alan Jones has temporarily stepped back from his day-to-day duties as RIBA president. It would not be appropriate to comment further at this stage. “We will be working as hard as ever during the president’s time away to ensure minimum disruption to the RIBA business. The RIBA is led by a team of dedicated senior trustees and expert staff, who will continue to support our members and represent their interests at the highest levels.” A spokeswoman for the Charity Commission said: “The RIBA has acted in line with our guidance, by submitting a serious incident report to the commission in connection with the recent stepping down of the charity’s president. “We are currently assessing information provided by the charity. We are unable to comment further at this time.” Jones did not make any comment when contacted by the Guardian but referred questions back to RIBA. He is the 78th president of the professional body, which was founded in 1835 and supports UK architects. Jones was a member of the jury for the 2019 Stirling prize, RIBA’s annual award for the best new building. 