We sometimes talk about the Guardian’s stable of setters as if there is one lot who have been around forever and a bunch of newer, rowdier setters. Setters like Paul, who can be mischievous, funny, even smutty. In fact, as of this weekend, Paul has been a Guardian setter for a quarter of a century. Saturday’s puzzle – I think of Saturdays’ as prize puzzles even though the unpleasantness has put a pause on actual prizes – is a reprint of the first puzzle Paul created for this paper … with some changes. And its first iteration, in 1995, did not come quickly. In the early 90s, John Halpern – as he was then – was a postgraduate student: the subject was maths and music, that pair of passions we find common to setter after setter. Perhaps as a warning to a possible future self, the young Halpern says he used to wake at 5am, take a cup of tea to the train station near his home and watch the commuters setting off. “I was going to become a cryptic crossword setter. The rest of the world was mad. I was the only sane one.” After a couple of years of clue-writing, he had two puzzles that he thought might be good enough to send to his favourite setter – Araucaria, who has been a favourite setter to many. He got a lunch invitation in return. “Without him,” Paul tells me, “I’m not sure where I’d be.” The uncrosswordy pseudonym, Paul, is a tribute to his brother, who died when Halpern was 18; their father had died three years earlier and, he says, “Araucaria became my father figure. I loved him. I mean, loved him, as a man.” And when Araucaria picked him up for that lunch and Paul saw the condition of his Fiat Uno, he realised that crosswords make nobody rich. Paul himself quickly became a favourite of many solvers, because of what he told me in 2011 was the key to a good clue: “the smile factor”. Put simply, he’s tremendously funny. He’s also fair. The Guardian’s crossword editor Hugh Stephenson says that a key piece of Araucaria advice heeded by Paul is “that in the battle of wits between setter and solver, the aim of a good setter is to ensure that the solver, perhaps after a struggle, must be able to win.” It would be remiss not to mention now that Paul can also be deeply rude. Sometimes the rudeness is right there in the clue; other times you might miss it, such as the puzzle with answers including HORSEMEN, WIDOW TWANKEY, CHARDONNAY, SCUNTHORPE, HOT WATER and, well, MISHIT. Has having become a father and the subsequent years of contact with bodily fluids made him more or less prone to this kind of thing? “I think tackling a Paul puzzle is considerably less messy than potty training,” he says. “Incidentally, ‘Potty train (4)’ was a clue in my very first puzzle.” Paul had thought this might have been the gem that got him hired until, 15 years later, a stranger in a pub pointed out that while the answer (LOCO) can mean “potty”, it doesn’t really mean “train” so much as the locomotive engine part of a train. Over the years, Paul has become an evangelist for wordplay, seemingly always out and about: TEDx talks, workshops, a memorable marathon where he set a puzzle while running, a book and of course, in the current age, the inevitable Zoom solves. How does it feel to have become one of the old guard? “Hit me where it hurts, why don’t you?” He claims to keep young by borrowing ideas from children’s books: “I recently defined HUMAN CANNONBALL as ‘He’s fired’, which came from there. I don’t see myself as old guard – yet.” OK then, what does the reworked version of the original puzzle (which will feature in his next newsletter) tell us about how he’s changed? We’ll avoid spoilers, but one change is at 14 across (“Nowadays I would be very careful with mental health issues”) and another is at 13 down, which Paul says “was an unpleasant and negative word”. “I would avoid these nowadays”, he adds; “I hope I’d be more present to my commitment to making people happy.” Job done. Here’s to the next 25 years.