This fascinating, deeply moving documentary tells the story of six female survivors of Auschwitz as they attempt to restart their lives away from the horrors of Europe in 50s Los Angeles, the epicentre of American aspirationalism and consumerism. Despite the women being put under pressure to keep quiet about their pasts, their experiences coloured every aspect of their lives, from their activism to their attempts to help other survivors confront similar histories. Interviews and historical testimony combine to create a nuanced picture of trauma. Ammar Kalia This adaptation of HG Wells’s classic dystopian narrative, starring Gabriel Byrne, reaches its tense and chaotic conclusion. The survivors are left to try to destroy their alien invaders once and for all. Meanwhile, Sacha’s visions continue, providing a frightening image of the future. AK Having dissected a trainer and a toothbrush, the designer and materials engineer Zoe Laughlin concludes a trio of engaging experiments by having a go at headphones. While investigating noise cancellation, she looks at technology that may soon make the physical object redundant. Jack Seale Gordon Ramsay, Gino D’Acampo and Fred Sirieix clamber back into their motorhome. Tonight they head to San Francisco – home to 61 Michelin-starred restaurants, legal cannabis and goat yoga – travelling to Napa Valley by hot air balloon and making fortune cookies in Chinatown. Ali Catterall Often accused of vandalism, theft and even violence, Traveller communities can be a much maligned presence in Britain. The reporter Anja Popp investigates, going on patrol with rural police and hearing from Travellers who feel that they are victims of prejudice. AK With almost 3.5 million people in the US living with hepatitis C – many cases of which were caused by intravenous drug use and needle sharing – Vice travels to Huntington, West Virginia, to see one of the communities that has been hit hardest by this under-reported infection. AK Fargo (Joel and Ethan Coen, 1996), 10.35pm, ITV4Snowy Minnesota is the setting for the Coen brothers’ brilliant, bloody, surreal comedy, a study of evil deeds arising from grindingly mundane motives. Frances McDormand won an Oscar for her pregnant smalltown police chief Marge Gunderson, who is landed with a triple murder case. Paul Howlett