It’s funny how quickly the strange and unfamiliar become routine. After weeks of awkwardness at the supermarket checkout, suddenly the choreography is getting easier: I’ve almost mastered the new rhythm of packing, waiting decorously for the cashier to move their hand away before swooping on whatever they’ve passed across the scanner. Even the sight of conveyor belts being doused with disinfectant after every customer seems almost normal now, although it shouldn’t. Supermarket workers have been the forgotten heroes of lockdown, valiantly turning up to work for not much money in one of the few public places the virus can still easily spread, providing the only friendly faces some customers will see until next week. All of which makes the constant appeals over the in-store PA for shoppers to download self-scanning apps – don’t check out, just zap everything as you sling it in the trolley and go! – frankly disconcerting. It sounds the kindest thing, shielding till staff from our filthy germs. But what stops me signing up is a nagging worry about what happens to the cashiers when most people no longer need them. Doing them out of a job seems no way to reward their service. But is queueing at their checkouts morally any better, if all it does is endanger them? Here then is the horrible choice coronavirus will spring on us as the working world creaks slowly back to life: between lingering fear of infection on one hand, and the relentless march of automation on the other. Recessions don’t so much change the world as speed it up, accelerating trends already rippling beneath the surface. And even before this epidemic hit, a much-quoted Office for National Statistics study estimated around 1.5m British jobs were at high risk from automation. Now the epidemic is pressing fast-forward on all of that, with four in 10 companies surveyed by the consultants EY admitting they’re now bringing forward their plans for automation. Machines can still pass on the virus – think of all the grubby paws touching that bank ATM before yours – but at least they don’t get sick themselves. Microsoft’s CEO, Satya Nadella, said this week the software giant had seen “two years’ worth of digital transformation in two months” thanks to coronavirus shifting our lives abruptly online. Expect more big names to disappear from the physical high street (why mooch around shopping malls if you can’t even try things on, with changing rooms expected to stay shut even when fashion stores reopen, and beauty-counter testers a relic of our unhygienic past). Bank branches were already closing in droves before the epidemic, but here is the perfect excuse to shut more. And that’s not all. The authors of an Oxford University study thought that by 2035 it would be possible to automate 86% of restaurant jobs, three-quarters of retail jobs, and 59% of recreation jobs. By unlucky coincidence, those are among the very industries hardest hit by an epidemic now demanding quantum leaps in efficiency if some companies are to avoid going under. The business secretary, Alok Sharma, will shortly publish detailed safety guidance for opening businesses back up. But we know that social distancing will be in place until at least the end of the year, or maybe longer without a vaccine. When people can’t safely hotdesk, stand side by side on a production line, or even queue up for lunch together in the canteen, the only realistic way of operating many offices and factories will be with far fewer people moving around the same space. For some, that might just mean more working from home. But how does, say, a fast-food restaurant kitchen churn out the same number of burgers with less than half the staff? The best employers will move heaven and earth to protect their people, but for some the obvious answer is automating, and slashing the wage bill. What has saved many jobs until now is that new technology tends to be expensive and disruptive, annoying customers. But disruption is the new norm, and if lockdown has intensified a craving for human contact it’s also left both businesses and customers strapped for cash. Online yoga at home can’t match the conviviality of a live class, but if it’s cheaper and safer than going to the gym, people might settle for it. This week’s mass redundancies at British Airways, meanwhile, reflect the harsh reality that the days of middle managers hopping unthinkingly on a plane to Brussels or Frankfurt probably aren’t coming back. Weeks of being forcibly grounded have taught companies that video meetings have their drawbacks, but they’re cheap by comparison. What could have been a gentle managed decline for aviation, driven by the climate crisis, now looks like more of a crash landing with knock-on consequences for others reliant on business travellers: hotel chains, cab drivers, expense-account dining. It has never just been about robots taking work from humans, but technology reinventing processes in ways that mean the work is no longer there to be done. Like every technological revolution before it, this one will surely bring some changes that genuinely enhance our lives, even some that may protect us from shocks to come. We’d barely have survived this one if it hadn’t been for the high-speed broadband that makes working from home feasible, or the consolations of Zoom calls and family WhatsApp groups, and this time the race for tests and vaccines may drive valuable innovation in pharmaceutical industries. But the coming turmoil will be tough on the low paid and low skilled, on older workers who don’t have years left to rethink their choices, on people whose lives were already precarious and now will get more so. The economist Nouriel Roubini warns ominously of a new wave of automation “further fanning the flames of populism, nationalism and xenophobia” as wages are forced down all over again. The idea that taxing our new tech overlords, and redistributing the money to support a happy life of leisure for all, will resolve all this is comforting but scarcely credible. A major rethink of tax and welfare systems will obviously be part of the answer. But a universal basic income can’t realistically be high enough to guarantee the good life for everyone, and lockdown has taught us there’s only so much sourdough most people can bake before starting to crave something real to do. There are no easy answers here, only the grim certainty that if politicians don’t start grappling seriously with the question then once again they risk being overtaken by events. Britain planned for a pandemic like this for years, but still wasn’t ready for it. Don’t let the same be true of its aftermath. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist