The confusion that the authorities have spread about social distancing is coming home to roost in the form of “Covidgilantes”, who are now infesting social media sites with their condemnations of those trying to go to work, go shopping or take some exercise. It seems that ignorance of the circumstances or relationships of their targets is no bar to abusive comments. And if the rules are unclear they are more than willing to invent their own. This has already led to the closing off of our local Mutual Aid Facebook page to public view, and so a valuable community resource has been spoiled. There is undoubtedly a minority who are failing to observe the rules, but most people are doing their best to conform while continuing to get through this difficult time.Richard GilyeadSaffron Walden, Essex • Does this Tory government not realise that hundreds of thousands of families with children, including stroppy teenagers, are living in high-rise blocks of flats and, just down the road from me in Leeds, in back-to-backs, many without even a front yard (UK sunbathers may trigger stricter coronavirus lockdowns, 5 April)? If they don’t go to their local parks, how are they supposed to exercise or even get fresh air?Janice Gupta GwilliamMalton, North Yorkshire • With regard to enduring isolation in Antarctica (‘Start a daily routine – and make the weekends different’: the isolation experts’ guide to lockdown living, 1 April) , I avoid despair while obeying the lockdown instructions for over-70s by remembering my grandfather, Captain William Colbeck, a member of the Southern Cross British expedition to Antarctica (1898-1900). Ten men in a small hut on Cape Adare for a year: no radio, no telephone, and two months of total darkness. They survived. Colbeck was later captain of the relief ship Morning, which got Scott’s Discovery out of the ice in 1904.Sandra MargoliesNew Cross, London • I don’t know how many readers find themselves in a similar position to ourselves, with a house full of propagators containing seedlings of tomatoes (three varieties), French beans, greenhouse cucumbers, courgettes and more, but unable to source growbags and compost since all the local nurseries are deemed non-essential and are closed. We are normally self-sufficient (and give away much more) in all of the above during the summer. Alcohol is deemed essential, but digging for victory isn’t?Dr Rob Drew and Dr Pam McAtheySouthgate, London • David Hockney makes a good suggestion about taking up drawing, while dismissing photography (David Hockney urges us to escape lockdown through a pencil, 4 April). But as a keen amateur photographer I have thousands of slides and negatives lying around in the attic that I am scanning into digital files. Posted on Facebook pages dedicated to film photography, they have been admired by countless viewers, providing much-needed therapy for myself and others alike.Dr Allan DoddsBramcote, Nottingham • Thank you, Elliot Dallen, for your poignant words and generosity of spirit (Terminal cancer means I won’t see the other side of lockdown, 2 April). I’m 80, fit and well, and I didn’t know how I would cope with isolation. Then I discovered drawing – no skills before. I practise every day and become completely absorbed, and can forget the pandemic for long periods. Our daughter, Kate, died of cancer in 1980, so I’m not immune to early tragic loss. Hope Elliot lives through this pandemic, but whatever happens his generous spirit will be his comfort and joy to him, his family and friends.Jude McGowanLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 