In the sample clues below, the links take you to little explainers from our For Beginners series. If you’re new to cryptic crosswords, hello. (That doesn’t mean, to be clear, that I’m withholding a hello from seasoned solvers; I know we’re all prone to oversensitivity.) Most cryptics have no themes: they’re like a collection of 30-odd mini-posers that interlock. Sometimes, though, you notice a connection between some of the words you’re writing in. Most often, this is unannounced but hard to miss, like the one from Crucible (who we interviewed here) with this corker of a clue: 25ac Shell supports her in painting atrophied bananas (9)[wordplay: anagram (“bananas”) of ATROPHIED][definition: she is a figure who is supported by a shell in a painting] It reads like a description of an oil company trying to recover its reputation by funding the work of an artist with fairly unpleasant output. But most words are doing something quite different to how they appear. “Shell” is not a proper noun; “painting” is not a verb; “bananas” is not a noun and the tricksy-looking “atrophied” is just the word we need to jumble to get APHRODITE, as Venus is known in ancient Greece. So once PLATO and MINOTAUR and the rest start to appear, the theme becomes clear. In other puzzles, it is possible to finish, with all entries correct and much fun had, without noticing there was a theme there at all. So it is with Raich, who starts off like this (skip to the next section if you think you might enjoy this amusing puzzle): 6ac On returning, well off, embracing wife in city (7)[wordplay: ON (“On”) backwards (“returning”) + synonym for “well off” containing (“embracing”) abbrev for “wife”][ON + RICH containing W][definition: city] Indeed, you easily could solve the clues for OFF, READY and WHEN I COME HOME without spotting any connection, and possibly even the clue … 16d Hear thieves? Nonsense! (8)[wordplay: soundalike (“hear”) of a word meaning “thieves”][soundalike of nickers][definition: expression equivalent to “Nonsense!] … for KNICKERS might not remind you of that acronym that Mary Whitehouse found so objectionable. Talking of acronyms you might find in a second-world-war film, here’s Brendan with a clue that doesn’t take the usual approach to wordplay: 17ac First characters assembled in military mess (5) The puzzle has a beginnings-and-endings theme, including this clue … 14ac Initial combination that’s familiar in a mass (7)[wordplay: synonym for “familiar” (as a noun) inside A (“a”) & scientific abbrev. for “mass”][CRONY inside A & M][definition: initial combination] … for ACRONYM, and the acronym LASER is clued with reference to its being an acronym, as is the “military mess” one, SNAFU. We looked recently at how the Fanny Adams in “sweet FA” is a person called Fanny Adams, and not a stand-in phrase to represent some swearing (the sweary sense was applied later). We’re probably all familiar with what the F in SNAFU is doing: by contrast, it absolutely refers directly to the F-word. And so if you were the kind of person who expects that language will behave in predictable ways, and that origin determines meaning, you would expect “snafu” to be much ruder than “sweet FA”. Language can be a contrary beast, though. “Sweet FA” retains a bit of spice even today, whereas “snafu” shows up unapologetically in the headlines of the New York Times … THE DOWNING OF FLIGHT 655; Military Errors: The Snafu as History (1988) D‐Day at Dover a Snafu As US Dinghy Capsizes (1975) The 5:54 “Snafu” Explained Fully (1974) … even in more buttoned-up eras … Snafu in Vietnam (1964) HITS IN THE HINTERLANDS? SOLVING A SNAFU IN “NO TIME FOR SERGEANTS” (1956) … and the Times is a newspaper that gets complaints when its crossword has SCUMBAG as an answer, because of something that word used to mean. Maybe SNAFU’s being such a pleasing collection of sounds helps it avoid the pitchforks. Other times, a word or phrase causes a stink because of an original meaning that never really existed. “Rule of thumb” has nothing to do with archaic and barbarous laws, and there is likewise no problem with the subject of our next challenge. There was a brief and confusing conversation about whether it originated in the slave trade (it didn’t), culminating in the Guardian introducing a typo to a letter from our foremost lexicographer of slang. Reader, how would you clue NITTY-GRITTY? Many thanks for your clues for BUMPTIOUS. I thought it had potential, then, after publication, wondered whether the letters were unhelpful. I was wrong to worry. The whole thing is worth your perusal, for such plausible surfaces as Jabberwox’s “Obnoxious bum is up to no good”, Croquem’s “Forward? Behind? I spout rubbish!” and Patjberry’s now hyphenless “Mixed up, but I’m so cocky?” The audacity award goes to Encota for the not-that-audacious-by-our-standards “Over-confident recycled computer business chucks out broken screens”. The runners-up are Lizard’s striking “Swaggering tramp beginning to prance round in new suit” and PeterMooreFuller’s splendid “Bang on time with bills — pleased with yourself?”; the winner is Schroduck’s warming “Sign of pregnancy: this ovum’s oddly puffed up”. Thank you to all setters for the comfort of puzzles. I’m almost reluctant to single out any clue, but this sign-off is always a good opportunity to share a smile. So let’s enjoy what the Sunday Telegraph setter makes the final word do in this clue … 11ac Site of traffic island for pedestrian (6-2-3-4)[double definition, first ignoring punctuation, second more allusive] … for MIDDLE-OF-THE-ROAD. Take care. Here’s a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs