The England and Wales Cricket Board has been forced to push the Hundred’s launch back to 2021 amid an admission from the ECB chief executive, Tom Harrison, that empty grounds are now the “only option” if the sport can somehow get under way this summer. And with the English game facing a potentially ruinous £300m loss in the event of coronavirus wiping out the season – 1 July is the current start date but not remotely guaranteed – the ECB chief executive refused to rule out the idea of seeking private investors for the Hundred’s eight mothballed teams. Speaking to Sky’s Cricket Show, Harrison said: “I think people are understanding that behind closed doors is our only option this year. The thought of crowds this summer is not something that is realistic in the context of the public health crisis.” While it is hoped international cricket and the T20 Blast are possible in the event of a green light from the government, empty grounds and possible travel restrictions for overseas players meant the Hundred’s 12-month delay was no surprise. But Harrison’s apparent openness to external investment marks something of a sea-change in ECB thinking. Oakwell Sports Advisory, a consultancy firm that has worked previously with rugby investors CVC, recently produced a report that suggested the ECB look to sell equity stakes in the eight Hundred teams – including shares for the 18 first-class counties – as a way of raising capital. Co-authored by a former ECB employee, the Oakwell report suggested this model could open up possible tie-ins with Indian Premier League owners that, along with fresh money, might increase the possibility of India’s star players featuring in future editions. Harrison said: “[As regards the] point about opening opportunities for a different kind of business model, yes it does. Maybe coronavirus and the financial impact forces us to look at some of those opportunities. “But that is something we will do with the game, and certainly not something we will jump into, because we are broadly in a strong position. I am confident that, in partnership with the game, we can build our way out of this.” Harrison claimed that the Hundred, under its current structure, was due to become just the second domestic league after the IPL to make a profit in its first year, stating the costs to be £40m with projected revenues of £51m. This does not, however, include the £24m annual dividend paid to the 18 counties and the MCC. “Obviously that’s all changed because of the situation that we’re in, but it doesn’t dilute the case for the Hundred and it doesn’t dilute any of the excitement or the effort that we’re going to be putting into it for 2021,” Harrison said. As things stand the counties have each received roughly half of this year’s promised £1.3m payment from the Hundred as part of the £61m rescue package announced in March. The first instalment of the ECB’s new £1.1bn five-year rights deal with Sky and BBC is said to have been paid but clearly the numbers down the line will be affected by the loss of major matches this year, such that there is already talk of an extra season needing to be added to the contract. The much-debated Hundred will also need a renewed marketing drive given an already drawn-out gestation period has been extended by 12 months, while the ECB is yet to confirm compensation for the 120 contracted players or whether another draft will be required. One issue is that a number of squads contain Kolpak players who currently qualify as ‘locals’ but will technically become overseas cricketers from 2021. It is just one detail to iron out amid an avalanche but Harrison is determined the competition must take place. He said: “I have never wavered one bit about the validity of the case for the Hundred. I think it’s definitely the case we made some mistakes in terms of how we presented it to the cricket market. “[But] we took that one on the chin and since then we have been really clear about what the benefits of the Hundred are; the benefits for all we care about in cricket, our county institutions that been around for 150 years, four-day county cricket, Test cricket.”