The Duke and Duchess of Sussex appear to be planning a wide-ranging non-profit empire, including websites, films and their own awards, according to trademark applications lodged in the US under the name of Archewell. The first clear indications of how Harry and Meghan intend to rebrand themselves as non-working royals are revealed in an extensive list published on the United States Patent and Trademark Office website. Archewell, derived from the Greek word arche, meaning “sources of action”, was the inspiration for the name of their son, Archie Mountbatten-Windsor, the couple have revealed. It replaces the Sussex Royal brand they had originally trademarked in the UK, but were banned from using by Buckingham Palace. The application, lodged on 3 March in Beverly Hills, covers items from educational materials, clothing, stationery and a nutrition and general health website, possibly modelled on Meghan’s successful The Tig lifestyle site, which she shut down following her engagement to Harry. Harry and Meghan, who are  setting up home in Los Angeles, are said not to have wanted to announce their plans at this time, but felt they had to respond after details of their application were discovered by the Daily Telegraph. A statement issued on their behalf said: “Like you, our focus is on supporting efforts to tackle the global Covid-19 pandemic but faced with this information coming to light, we felt compelled to share the story of how this came to be. “Before SussexRoyal came the idea of ‘Arche’ – the Greek word meaning ‘source of action’. We connected to this concept for the charitable organisation we hoped to build one day, and it became the inspiration for our son’s name. “To do something of meaning, to do something that matters. Archewell is a name that combines an ancient word for strength and action, and another that evokes the deep resources we each must draw upon. “We look forward to launching Archewell when the time is right.” A source said the list of trademarking categories was extensive for “protection purposes only”, and urged caution about “picking out specific items” to try to predict what the couple will actually do. Despite the application including “support groups” for the emotional wellbeing of people in need, it is understood there are no plans for such groups. Further details would be released in due course. From the application it appears the couple are contemplating their own awards for “entities and individuals who have made significant charitable contributions”. Archewell would also be used for downloadable magazines, audio books, motion picture films and television shows. Fiction and non-fiction books are listed, along with calendars, posters, stationery, journals and even paperclips. Clothing items include socks, rainwear, footwear and headwear. Under charitable services, the application lists promoting public awareness for a variety of causes and developing and co-ordinating volunteer programmes and community service projects. There is mention, too, of a website featuring content related to philanthropy, and charitable fundraising including scholarships for programmes and grants, and organising special events. Last week, the couple bowed out of the royal family with a final post on their official SussexRoyal Instagram account, which will now remain inactive along with their website.    