No 17 on my plan of things to do when things change: take the 7.25am train from Roma Termini to Ravenna, walk out of the station in search of the first place that will serve me a piadina romagnola, then eat the warm fold as I walk towards Piazza Del Popolo. Until then, I will make them at home. Why has it taken me so long to make piadine? Why has it taken me so long to discover the basic pleasure of making a child-like dough of flour, bicarbonate of soda, water and olive oil, to roll it into plate-sized circles, prick them all over with a fork, cook them in a hot pan until they take on leopardprint to rival that of Bet Lynch, then fold them around soft cheese, salty ham and some of the rocket we should be rationing for the tortoise. Like focaccia, piadine have ancient roots and probably take their name from the Latin plàdena o plàtena. Traditionally, they were cooked on a testo, an absolutely flat terracotta plate that was warmed in wood ovens until hot enough to cook the rounds of dough. The evolution of wood-fired and gas cookers meant a terracotta testo could be heated directly on the stovetop, and the evolution of cooking utensils in the 1970s meant it could be made from cast iron and aluminium, which became common. The first flat I rented in Rome had a testo, not that I knew what it was at the time. To my ignorant eyes, it looked like a large aluminium ping-pong bat with a bulbous wooden handle that was slightly too long for the cupboard, so pushed it open slightly. Useless and annoying, I thought: more fool me. According to Allesandro Molinari Pradelli in his book about the Food of Bologna, the first mention of piadine was in the Descriptio provinciæ Romandiolæ, a statistical report about the region Romagna 1371. It notes that piadine, like all early breads, were unleavened, made solely from flour and salt. Over time, lard was incorporated into the dough, milk or wine replacing some or all of the water, and maybe a proportion of mother yeast starter was added. The inclusion of bicarb and modern baking yeast is a relatively new habit, as is the replacement of lard with olive oil, which doesn’t give the characteristic shortness, but does gives good flavour and is ideal if, like me, you live with a vegetarian. The key to piadine is eating them while they are really hot. This means gathering everyone around and having all the fillings ready: slices of salami, prosciutto or ham, soft cheeses such as stracchino, gorgonzola or cream cheese, also some greens, such as rocket or watercress. As soon as your piadina comes out of the pan, fill and spread one half, then fold the other half over. Eat immediately, ideally with a cold beer or glass of lip-staining dry lambrusco. Prep 10 minRest 1 hr Cook 5 minMakes 6 500g plain flour125g lard or 80g olive oil1½ tsp bicarbonate of soda15g salt180g water To serveSalami, prosciutto, ham, soft cheeses (stracchino, gorgonzola or cream cheese) and, if you wish, greens such as rocket or watercress. If you are using lard, use your fingertips to rub it into the flour until the mix resembles fine breadcrumbs. Add the salt, bicarb, water and, if you are using it instead of lard, the olive oil, and bring everything into a consistent dough. Wrap in a cloth and leave to rest for an hour. Cut into six pieces and then, one by one, roll them into thin (1-2mm) plate-sized discs (about 22cm in width). Use a fork to prick the discs all over. Warm a nonstick pan until it is hot. Cook the discs one by one, giving them about two minutes a side and turning them continually, so they cook evenly. You want them to acquire leopard-like spots. Serve while still hot, folded around prosciutto and/or cheese. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.