A global pandemic calls for a global concert and Lady Gaga has come to the rescue with her celebrity contacts book, enlisting the likes of Elton John, Coldplay’s Chris Martin, Paul McCartney, Lizzo, Billie Eilish and even the Friends of Sesame Street to raise our spirits and celebrate the heroic efforts of our health workers while we remain in lockdown. The show will be live-streamed around the world and featuring musical performances as well as interviews with key front line workers. Ammar Kalia As the race across South America enters its final stages, the personality clashes are increasingly as interesting as the contest itself. Emon and Jamiul are falling out over money. Jen and Rob have plenty of cash but can’t agree on how to spend it. Dom and Lizzie, however, are enjoying a purple patch. Phil Harrison Why do some loaves fall apart at the waggle of a butter knife? Are bagels really full of morphine (i.e. poppy seeds)? And what’s the difference between mascarpone and cream cheese? All these answers from the Food Unwrapped team, who also find out what keeps icing sugar so light and powdery. Ali Catterall When it debuted at Sadler’s Wells in 1995, Matthew Bourne’s Swan Lake ruffled a few feathers with its sinister staging and all-male corps de ballet but still helped turn its choreographer into a superstar. This performance filmed in 2019 is a fitting way to mark the show’s 25th anniversary. Graeme Virtue Dooley turns her inquisitive gaze to a female prison facility in Ohio where inmates with life sentences without parole are given a supportive environment in which to serve their time, including having pets, relationships and the freedom to make as many calls as they like. AK TV’s most thrilling duo return for a third season of Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s cat and mouse caper. With Eve (Sandra Oh) left for dead in Rome and Villanelle (Jodie Comer) trying to go about her life as normal – whatever that means when you are a globe-trotting killer – a new opportunity soon rears its head. AK Tolkien, 6pm, Sky Cinema Premiere The author’s estate didn’t think much of it but the Finnish director Dome Karukosi makes a fine, heartfelt biopic of JRR Tolkien’s life, showing how the romantic fantasy of The Lord of the Rings grew out of his horrific experiences of the Somme. Nicholas Hoult is the idealistic young Tolkien. Paul Howlett