‘They were at close quarters, Gould recalls, made all the more so by the conspicuous, gilded .45 automatic in Elvis’s belt and the watchful presence of his manager as well as the singer’s father, Vernon. It was clear to Gould that they would not let their “cash cow” out of their sight and he said so, urging Presley to “leave ‘Elvis’ here and come out, be a free spirit”. “Elvis says to me, with his gold gun in his belt: ‘You’re crazy, man.’ I said: ‘Elvis, I ain’t crazy. I’m scared, just like you.’”’ ‘Inter had just made history, becoming the first Italian side ever to win a treble of Serie A, the Coppa Italia and the Champions League. And now we knew that it was exactly that: history. Mourinho’s time with the club was over, he was not coming back.’ “I believe at the beginning there was an initial motivation and then I think it turned to randomness,” RCMP commissioner Brenda Lucki said on Sunday evening. “We don’t know for sure and we’re going to have to do a lot of work on finding the motivation … a lot of background, profiling type of events and a lot of crime scene processing.” ‘He calls telekinesis and telepathy “gifts from this higher order, the source, the god, whatever, that allows us to understand the higher power and higher order in ourselves”. He once hired a coach, Pepe Imaz, who probably taught him about telepathy and levitation, and whose techniques include extremely long hugs.’ ‘Heading up the Corpus Christi contingent was Ian Wang, nicknamed Grandmaster Wang by fans for his extensive knowledge of 1980s music – he correctly identified a song by hip-hop group Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five after hearing only a second of the intro.’ ‘It’s now a self-parody on autopilot, where everyone cooks scallops with minted pea puree, followed by chocolate fondant for pud; where Instagram food bores “deconstruct” dishes that were just fine before, while Wallace and Torode yell into their faces like a wine-flushed Jeremy Clarkson in a Cotswolds carvery.’ The first victim identified was Royal Canadian Mounted Police constable Heidi Stevenson, a mother of two who had served on the force for 23 years. “We have lost one of our own while she was protecting others,” said RCMP chief superintendent Chris Leather on Monday afternoon. “This is the definition of a true hero.” ‘After a first half of few chances and a good goal by Andy Gray disallowed for offside, things livened up on 58 minutes when Gray stabbed in a volley after good work from Graeme Sharp. Fifteen minutes later Trevor Steven scored from close range at the back post after a corner and that seemed to be that. But then came the worrying bit.’ ‘The messages, revealed in court documents filed at the high court on Monday, show Harry repeatedly tried to make contact in the days before the televised royal wedding in May 2018. Thomas Markle, who lives in Mexico, had been expected to walk his daughter down the aisle in the ceremony at Windsor Palace, and was revealed by the Mail on Sunday to have helped stage paparazzi pictures of himself preparing for the wedding.’ ‘“It was becoming clear that Mark and I would miss each other, and neither of us were sure if we’d see each other again,” she says. Shortly before she left, the two went for a final night out in central London, which ended in a goodnight kiss at Oxford Circus tube station.’