‘Malcolm Turnbull’s new memoir is a sweeping account of events from his early childhood to being forced out of the prime ministership in 2018. Given Turnbull’s tumultuous exit from public life, and the history wars that have followed, many readers will be interested in the former prime minister’s reflections on Scott Morrison, the man who replaced him. Here are some of the standout passages.’ ‘Some of his past associates will not appreciate their appearances in this book, and there will be claims of confidences betrayed. But Turnbull clearly believes he dispenses trust too readily and that some of his political acquaintances and co-workers didn’t deserve it.’ ‘News Corp operates like a political party, working closely with rightwing politicians to influence policy and elections and to destroy politicians who won’t agree to a partnership with the Murdochs, the former Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull says.’ ‘A Tasmanian family has been united with a long lost sheep seven years after they were separated by devastating bushfires that also burned down their farm. Prickles, as she is now known, was a little lamb when she became trapped in a 200-acre bush block at the back of the massive property during the bushfires of 2013.’ ‘His book is never better than when it attacks Scottish ideas of English oppression. Where it fails is its refusal to recognise that England has changed – from a stable and predictable neighbour into a volatile, abrasive and rather friendless country going who-knows-where.’ 6. Every Stephen Frears film – ranked! The director’s last two projects – Quiz and A Very English Scandal – have been big hits on the small screen. So where should you start with his movies? Film critic Peter Bradshaw rates his favourites. 7. Guardian Australia owes Malcolm Turnbull thanks – but not favours ‘In a revelation that may confound those who take a hyper-partisan view of politics, Malcolm Turnbull’s new memoir outlines the part he played in the establishment of Guardian Australia. As Turnbull writes, in the seven years we have been operating, Guardian Australia has only rarely endorsed his or his government’s policies.’ 8. I’ve never seen … Top Gun ‘Make no mistake: there is no gay subtext to Top Gun. It’s more the case that gayness is the very text itself, the only possible reading available.’ 9. My favourite game: Barcelona v Real Madrid, La Liga 2010 ‘Cristiano Ronaldo pushed Pep Guardiola. José Mourinho looked bewildered on the bench. And Sergio Ramos’s brutal, vengeful hack left Spain teammates at each other’s throats four months after they won the World Cup together. Pain was etched across Lionel Messi’s face but it was Real Madrid who had been brought to their knees.’ 10. Can Marvel help Spider-Man’s Sam Raimi escape from Hollywood purgatory? ‘Thirteen years ago, as Sam Raimi wrapped production on Spider-Man 3, few would have imagined that it would not be until 2020 that the director of The Evil Dead stepped behind the cameras on another superhero movie.’