Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: Infections worldwide stand at 3,041,550, according to the Johns Hopkins tracker. More than 211,000 people have died. The US still has the most deaths, followed by Spain, France and then the UK, which now has 21,092 fatalities from the virus. Donald Trump has said the US will conduct “serious investigations” into China’s handling of the coronavirus outbreak and could pursue the country for billions in damages because China “could have stopped” the coronavirus. In his return to his daily White House briefing after an absence of two days, Trump also said he “does not” take responsibility for reports that people have may ingested disinfectant after his comments last week on its effectiveness. The head of the Japan Medical Authority said it would be “difficult” to hold the Olympics, even after it was delayed until 2021, unless a vaccine is developed. “Unless an effective vaccine is developed I think it will be difficult to hold the Olympics next year,” JMA president Yoshitake Yokokura told reporters in Tokyo on Tuesday. “I’m not saying at this point that they shouldn’t be held. The outbreak is not only confined to Japan ... it’s a worldwide issue.” New Zealand has moved to level-3 restrictions, allowing some businesses to reopen if they abide by strict social distancing rules. Around 75% of the economy is now operational, but workers were told to work from home if they could. There was much excitement at the reopening of restaurants and cafes for takeaway. Australia’s most populous state, New South Wales, said it would allow up to two adults to visit any house from Friday. Sydney’s iconic Bondi Beach re-opened for the first time in weeks for swimming and surfing. Australia recorded just 12 new cases of the virus nationally in the 24 hours to 6am on Tuesday and a total of 84 deaths. More than 2,200 Indonesians may have died from Covid-19, without being recorded in official death totals, according to a Reuters analysis. The official death toll is 765. The director general of the World Health Organisation, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has said he is concerned about people missing vaccines for diseases such as polio and measles because of the coronavirus pandemic. “Children may be at relatively low risk from severe disease and death from Covid-19 - the respiratory illness caused by the novel coronavirus - but can be at high risk from other diseases that can be prevented with vaccines,” said Tedros. The National Health Commission said half of the new cases were imported. A total of 82,836 confirmed cases have now been reported in China, with 77,555 cases discharged from hospital and a total of 4,633 deaths.