The government has moved to shore up shaky local authority finances, announcing a £1.6bn cash injection for English councils to prevent a series of town halls collapsing into insolvency as a result of the spiralling costs of the coronavirus pandemic. The housing, communities and local government secretary, Robert Jenrick, praised local government workers as “unsung heroes” and said the extra cash – which followed an earlier £1.6bn injection in March – would enable councils to maintain essential services. The announcement followed dire warnings that the costs of providing extra services as a result of the coronavirus outbreak, such as social care and housing rough sleepers, coupled with shrinking income from council tax and parking charges, had pushed several councils to the edge of bankruptcy. There was widespread panic among councils earlier this week when Jenrick suggested in a meeting with council leaders that ministers were no longer totally committed to a promise in March to “do whatever is necessary” to support local government financially through the crisis. But on Saturday Jenrick gave an apparently clear commitment to continue to meet the extra costs of tackling coronavirus at local level: “I promised local government would have the resources they need to meet this challenge and today demonstrates my commitment to doing just that,” he said. “We stand shoulder to shoulder with local government and my priority is to make sure they are supported so they can continue to support their communities through this challenging time.” The Conservative chair of the Local Government Association, Cllr James Jamieson, welcomed ministers’ swift response, saying that the latest cash injection would give councils “breathing space” as they struggle with the spiralling costs. He added: “It is also reassuring that the secretary of state has reiterated his promise today that councils will get all the resources they will need to cope with this pandemic. This commitment needs to be rock solid and consistent so councils can stay focused on leading the local response to the greatest challenge we have faced as a nation for decades.” However, council sources were clear that this may not be the last time the government would need to intervene to stabilise council finances as the costs of social care, personal protective equipment, housing rough sleepers and providing support to vulnerable “shielded” residents continue to mount. Cllr David Williams, the chairman of the County Councils Network, said: “We do not know how long the outbreak will last for, so the financial situation for councils must be kept under review, alongside a commitment to underwrite lost income from council tax. “Coronavirus poses both short- and long-term challenges for our places. It is clear that councils will have a huge role to play in helping our communities and businesses back on to their feet, but we will need to be adequately resourced to do so.” A letter to Jenrick this week from the Local Government Association, seen by the Guardian, warned that some authorities were nervous about continuing to sustain existing high levels of spending without guarantees from government. It said some councils were preparing to issue a Section 114 [insolvency] notice and impose “extreme cost-cutting and rationing measures” to rein in budgets. Some councils have seen up to 20% of council tax direct debits cancelled so far in April as a result of the economic impact of Covid-19. “This is a clear signal that income from council tax will be reduced sharply this year, with no guarantee that this can be recovered in future years,” the letter says. Councils are also haemorrhaging income from parking fees, leisure centre fees and other charges as a result of the lockdown. Councils rely on fees and charges to finance about 10% of their budgets, on average, although this reliance rises to about 25% for county councils. Rob Whiteman, the chief executive of the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy, said: “Today’s welcome news is a step in the right direction but more will be needed to ensure councils can maintain services in areas such as adult social care, homelessness and for other vulnerable groups.”