Anybody felt deeply fulfilled while cleaning the lavatory lately? No, me neither. Novelist Joanna Trollope (author of Aga sagas) has been talking about women and domesticity. According to her, while women are now in the workplace, they also try to dominate the domain because they’re “emotionally ambitious”. They want to make men dependent, then resent men for it. “You [women] can’t have it every which way,” says Trollope. “It’s classic passive aggressive behaviour.” She says women want to control the domestic arena “because it’s a manageable control”. “When you’ve had your heart broken, almost the best thing you can do is clean the bathroom – because tap polishing is one of the things you can control.” Where to start? Ms Trollope seems to be arguing that women perceive the “domestic domain” as some Game of Thrones-type scenario, where they perch on giant dragons, refusing to give up their kingdom. At home, we hiss, spit and plot to undermine our emotionally castrated menfolk in order to pursue our sacred lady-calling, to… what exactly: stick a wash on, mop the kitchen? I’m sure most women agree that we can think of far better things to get “emotionally ambitious” or even “controlling” about. This is the central insult embedded in most discussions about housework: that women give a hot damn, that feminine identity is entwined in something as dreary as dragging around a vacuum cleaner. It requires discussion only because, even today, it remains a gendered tinderbox of unfairness and grievance. Not just that (it can also be about class and society), but which gender is lumbered with most housework (take a wild guess) remains a useful barometer of true equality in the home. It’s surely clearer than ever right now (with us all jammed in together) that mythologising housework is a mug’s game. It is essentially about practicality, not emotions or power-plays. In my experience, most women don’t orgasm while cleaning loos, process emotional pain as they polish taps or feel omnipotent as they change duvet covers. Just like a man, they’ll think a job needs doing, so they do it. The biggest lie ever told to women – and about women – is that they find domestic chores any more interesting, fulfilling or defining than men do. As Trollope must herself have noticed (having her own oeuvre summed up by a domestic appliance), women are only diminished by such a false and reductive view. No one in their right mind would scheme and manipulate to do more housework. Women are generally happy for men to control and dominate in this boring and repetitive “domain”. Knock yourselves out, guys, we’ll be lying on the sofa, surfing Netflix, chucking down chocolate biscuits, feeling all sad and disenfranchised. Anyone want to take a bite out of New Zealand prime minister, Jacinda Ardern? She’s now available in cake form, but you’d need to be exceptionally hungry and desperate. Comedian and television presenter Laura Daniel has said she’s “deeply sorry” to Ardern after an attempt to pay tribute to her in cake form went awry. Daniel was responding to the challenge of making a cake without flour, depicting a New Zealand icon, and posting it on Instagram. At first glance, the cake resembles the creature that climbed out of the well in The Ring, but closer inspection reveals it to be so much more than that, while simultaneously managing to be so much less. Based on Ardern’s cover shot for the biography, An Extraordinary Leader, the cake is anything but ordinary. The ghostly pale icing is smeared on as if in some confused baking-themed “dirty protest”. There are blackly dribbling eyebrows and lank liquorice strands of hair. The nose is a slightly bigger dollop of icing. Blue eyes stare out horribly. The representation of Ardern’s red top makes it appear as if the cake has had its throat slit. The daubed lips say “Joaquin Phoenix’s Joker just found your lipstick”. And what Daniel’s cake lacks in flour it makes up for in realistic teeth. Never mind apologising, Daniel should be congratulated – this must be the first cake to say: “Eat me… before I eat you.” While Ardern has been applauded for her leadership during the coronavirus outbreak, Daniel has also provided a valuable public service. With people in the UK and across the world taking up lockdown baking, her cake is a masterclass in what not to do. People can take comfort in the fact that, however dodgy their baking, it will never be as bad as Daniel’s. Obviously it’s vitally important to observe the lockdown. Still, are some people taking their surveillance duties a little too seriously, to the point where a citizen’s arrest culture is sprouting? Large numbers of people are tipping off the police about neighbours or challenging people in public spaces. In the main, fair enough – I’ve also felt like saying something when heavy-breathing desperadoes jog past, splashing sweat around. And, sorry young people, you shouldn’t be meeting to enthusiastically snog on park benches. However, while social policing has to happen, does there need to be so much of it when it comes to minor infractions? Occasionally, it’s necessary to report someone to the police, or have a word in public, and sometimes it really isn’t. It seems perfectly possible to, say, pass someone sitting alone on their coat in the park, or two people standing far apart having a brief chat, without erupting in righteous rage and laying down the law. • Barbara Ellen is an Observer columnist