‘Amy Schumer has announced that she has changed her new son’s name – after realising it sounded like ‘genital’. She’s not the first famous person to give an awkward moniker to her offspring.’ ‘Beneath these attacks lies an important ethical question about what is generally referred to as “trial by media”. Should the media publish serious allegations against people before, after and during court processes? Did the reporting about Pell step over a line?’ ‘The ball had barely landed when the first punches were thrown, Adrian Shelford swinging at Brian Johnson as the Australian full-back went down in the opening tackle. By the second tackle Johnson’s compatriot Les Boyd was seeking Shelford out with his left jab. The game was 12 seconds old. Most heavyweight boxing bouts go deeper before seeing any arm movements of note.’ ‘It’s the $58m question. Amid more rumblings of reluctance from Fox Sports to see out the final three years of its six-year broadcast deal, how best can Australian football secure its future?’ In a message that appears to be directed at her nephews, William and Harry, and their respective wives, Kate and Meghan, Anne told the interviewer, Katie Nicholl: “I don’t think this younger generation probably understands what I was doing in the past and it’s often true, isn’t it?’ 6. Michael Sheen’s impersonations – ranked! The actor is currently wowing viewers as Chris Tarrant in Quiz, but he has a long line of uncanny impressions in his back catalogue. 7. Charles and Diana Ingram to challenge guilty verdicts in Millionaire case ‘The human rights lawyer Rhona Friedman told the Guardian she had agreed to take on the case after becoming convinced the couple were the victims of a miscarriage of justice. She intends to allege that audio evidence may have been altered before it was presented to the jury.’ 8. René Higuita’s scorpion kick is a thing of beauty – so let’s debunk it ‘For too long now (not that anyone would notice) I have been avoiding confrontation, trying to keep gainful employment by just offering inoffensive platitudes and harmless nostalgia. Well not any more. I’m here for clicks and retweets. Here to cause controversy for the sake of it. The 5G conspiracy theorist of football.’ 9. Sanders warns his loyalists it would be ‘irresponsible’ not to support Biden ‘Do we be as active as we can in electing Joe Biden and doing everything we can to move Joe and his campaign in a more progressive direction? Or do we choose to sit it out and allow the most dangerous president in modern American history to get re-elected?’ 10. Katharine the great white shark re-emerges after evading trackers ‘The rediscovery comes as surprise to the team, as Katharine disappeared from radar more than a year ago, causing alarm among her many followers.’