Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: According to researchers at Johns Hopkins University, at least 102,026 people have died as a result of the pandemic. The Baltimore institution says at least 1,681,964 people have been infected, while 374,509 have recovered. The French death toll passed 13,000, the health ministry director Jérôme Salomon said. A further 554 deaths were confirmed in French hospitals and 433 in care and retirement homes. Restrictions will remain in place in Italy for another three weeks, the country’s prime minister has said, although a few types of shop will be allowed to reopen from next Tuesday. Giuseppe Conte said: “This is a difficult but necessary decision for which I take all political responsibility.” The US president said he is creating a second taskforce that will include a council tasked with deciding when to ease restrictions. But Donald Trump, who has repeatedly pushed the idea, insists he is not determined to reopen the economy if he is advised that to do so would endanger public health. Turkey has put in place a two-day lockdown in 31 provinces, including Istanbul, Ankara and other major cities, its interior ministry said, adding that the curbs will begin at midnight and end at the same time on Sunday. The country’s known death toll stands at 1,006 people. Kenny Dalglish tested positive for the virus while in hospital for treatment on a separate infection, his family announced. The 69-year-old former player and manager was admitted to hospital on Wednesday for a course of intravenous antibiotics and, in line with current procedures, underwent a test for Covid-19 despite displaying no symptoms of the illness. The government must urgently look into if and why black, Asian and minority ethnic people are more vulnerable to Covid-19, the head of the British Medical Association said, after it emerged that the first 10 doctors in the UK named as having died from the virus were all BAME. The country recorded 980 deaths in a day, the worst such toll since the outbreak began, taking the cumulative total of those who have died in hospitals to 8,958. The health secretary, Matt Hancock, said about 19,000 tests are being carried out each day. The UK prime minister has been “able to do short walks, between periods of rest, as part of the care he is receiving to aid his recovery”, Downing Street said. Johnson was moved out of an intensive care unit on Thursday. Hancock said the government is issuing guidance on who needs personal protective equipment and who does not, adding that it will only be used when there is a clinical need. He promised that equipment will be distributed to hospitals daily from next week and production and imports will be increased for the future. Ministers have come under increasing pressure over their continued failure to provide all health workers with the means to protect themselves.