Messages wishing Boris Johnson a speedy recovery have been pouring in from across the political divide amid calls for the prime minister to take a break from leading the country to allow full recovery from Covid-19. Donald Trump also passed on his nation’s best wishes to the UK leader, who was admitted to hospital on Sunday with continuing Covid-19 symptoms. The US president told his daily coronavirus press conference: “All Americans are praying for him.” He added: “He’s a great friend of mine. I’m sure he is going to be fine. He’s a strong man, a strong person.” Labour’s new leader, Sir Keir Starmer, and his predecessor, Jeremy Corbyn, both wished Johnson a speedy recovery while the former prime minister Tony Blair, who was hospitalised himself briefly in 2003 to correct an abnormal heart rhythm during his premiership, said Johnson’s hospital situation must be “hellish”. Blair told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “I have every sympathy and solidarity with him. I know it must be a hellish situation to be in.” There were also messages of support from the Scottish National party leader, Nicola Sturgeon, the Liberal Democrat MP Layla Moran and the Labour backbencher David Lammy, one of Johnson’s fiercest critics, who said: “The whole country wants you to return to full health as soon as possible.” Get well soon @BorisJohnson. The whole country wants you to return to full health as soon as possible. https://t.co/LvvRBMDJVd There were also calls for Johnson to reflect on his health and take time out from Downing Street if necessary rather than soldier on. The former head of the civil service Lord Kerslake said it would be “sensible” for Boris Johnson to “step back” if he was not well enough to carry out his role for now. He told the Today programme: “I think in the end if he’s not well, he will have to reflect on this because the job’s tough at the best of times and it’s doubly tough now.” Michael Gove’s wife, the Daily Mail columnist Sarah Vine, suggested Johnson’s failure to shake off the virus was linked to his commitment to continue leading the nation’s battle against the virus. “Boris has worked non-stop throughout his illness – and now we see the result,” she tweeted. Boris has worked non-stop throughout his illness - and now we see the result. Asked whether Johnson should hand over control during his illness, Blair said: “I’m not going to second guess them on that. “He knows the state of his own condition and he will be judging it carefully himself, I’m sure.” A Downing Street spokeswoman said the prime minister’s admission to hospital had been a precautionary move taken “on the advice of his doctor” because he had continued to have “persistent symptoms” 10 days after testing positive for the virus. Johnson tested positive last month along with Matt Hancock, who has recovered. His chief medical adviser, Prof Chris Whitty, also self-isolated. Johnson’s pregnant 32-year-old fiancee, Carrie Symonds, also had symptoms but said on Saturday she was feeling better. From an apartment above 11 Downing Street, and with food brought to his door, Johnson continued to lead the government’s response and chaired meetings via video conference. He has posted a series of video messages since then, initially appearing in a suit and tie, but in the latest post on Friday he appeared weary, sitting in a chair with his shirt open at the neck. “Although I’m feeling better and I’ve done my seven days of isolation, alas I still have one of the symptoms, a minor symptom, I still have a temperature,” he said. The pound briefly fell 0.4% against the US dollar to $1.2215 on the news before trimming some losses to trade at $1.2230, down 0.3%.