When Australia finally emerges from lockdown, what kind of world will we find ourselves in? According to these stories of neighbours pulling together in isolation – to help each other, to entertain each other, to simply share a wine together – we have good reason to hope it will be a friendlier one. If you’ve got your own experience to share, please join us in the comments below. To help get you started, we asked Guardian staffers to nominate theirs. On the night before the lockdown was announced, I went to the pub and met a neighbour there for the first time. He invited me to join the neighbourhood WhatsApp group and it’s been great. Neighbours with a car picked up some furniture for me from a faraway Bunnings (I do not drive); others have done shopping runs for each other. We’ll get messages when someone’s strawberry patch or veggie garden is overflowing; there’ll be offers of books or old furniture after a clean out. And twice a week, our house and others have been visited by “the Bread Batman”: a neighbour who takes twice weekly orders for fresh, posh bread from a bakery in the nearby town of Trentham. The loaves are delivered warm to our door, but just as important is the chance to interact with another human we don’t live with. And then there are the impromptu concerts. They used to happen most days at 2pm, and now they occur at random times – prompting a WhatsApp to the rest of the group: Luca is singing. We’ll all stand socially distanced outside his house while he drags an amp and mic out and treats us all to a 30-minute performance of Italian classics. We dance. We sing. We no longer feel particularly isolated. – Brigid Delaney, columnist @lucasartori_3 #italiansong #volare #mamboitaliano#bellaciao #italy #gigformybeautifulneigbur A post shared by  Luca Sartori (@lucasartori_3) on Apr 11, 2020 at 12:02am PDT We share a backyard in the inner west with three men in their 20s who live underneath us in a share-household. With everyone confined to the property – where we usually just bump into each other hanging up washing – we decided to have regular socially distanced dinner parties in the garden on Saturday nights. There is a DJ, a uni student and a tradie – he is the only one who gets out during the day to work. On Saturday nights we sit outside at separate tables and share the food both households have cooked, and chat away for hours. It’s something we never would have done if not for Covid-19 restrictions, and has been a surprising highlight. – Amanda Meade, media correspondent I’m minding my 77-year-old mum’s flat for the duration – she went north to help friends in Queensland before the lockdown began. It’s only a small apartment building but there has been a constant stream of people knocking on the door to check on her, or leaving notes offering to get her groceries or go to the chemist. It’s reassuring to know that, were she here, so many of her neighbours would be looking out for her. – Nikki Marshall, production editor I’ve always made an effort to get to know my neighbours and have been lucky to have some great ones over the years. Mark and Lisa next door on one side water my plants when I’m away and knock on my door to check in, and Din on the other side of me delivers newspapers and leaves the weekend paper in my driveway for me every Saturday. I’ve left flowers from my garden for my neighbours, and gift cards to apologise for noise coming from my apartment when I needed some repairs done. Since lockdown, I’ve left toilet paper out for them, and the family who lives up the driveway have a little note in their window with a rainbow drawn by their kids. Lots of the kids have been drawing rainbows on the footpaths and scrawling cute messages in chalk. It’s nice that we knew each other by name before the world changed. – Melissa Davey, Melbourne bureau chief A few weeks ago I was doing the Good Weekend quiz in the backyard with my housemates when our neighbours started yelling answers over the fence. They’re another young share house, and they moved in just as lockdown got really intense, so we haven’t actually met them yet. Now we know their names and have a weekly, 10am appointment to do the Saturday quiz. I’m hoping we can have a backyard beer and meet them face-to-face once this all calms down a bit more! – Laura Murphy-Oates, Full Story podcast presenter When my children were small, Friday nights were the highlights of the week. All the neighbours and their kids congregated on the front wall of my garden for a cup of tea/glass of wine and debrief about the week. The kids rode their skateboards, bikes and scooters up and down the footpath and we ordered takeaway fish and chips for the weekly picnic dinner on the nature strip. As they all grew older, sport, homework and social lives took over. But on the weekend two of my neighbours again joined us for a weekly debrief out the front. Admittedly they stood on the grassy verge and we stood several metres away by our front door, but it was the first time we had seen them in several weeks. It felt like old times. – Alison Rourke, UK/US site editor for Asia Pacific region Email: sign up for our daily coronavirus newsletter App: download it and never miss the biggest stories Social: follow us on Facebook, Instagram or Twitter Podcast: listen to our daily episodes on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or search "Full Story" in your favourite app While reclining in bed on a Sunday afternoon I could hear music playing from within our estate. It went on for several hours – an eclectic megamix of songs from the 90s and 00s – and then it stopped very suddenly. The cops had been called to our block as there were reports of an illicit party – but it turns out it was one of our neighbours putting on a DJ set to entertain the residents and kids in the block. The police left shortly afterwards as there was no party; everyone dancing was doing so from their balconies, and observing physical distancing. A week later a poster appeared in our stairwell: DJ Trey was back by demand, and taking requests! It’s been one of the nicest distractions during this time of social isolation, and brought a lovely sense of community to our block. – Kate Waldegrave, editorial assistant Inspired by the book We’re Going on a Bear Hunt, Lane Cove council has taken cues from a game being played in windows around the world and instigated a “bear hunt” for kids by encouraging residents to place bears/stuffed toys on their windowsills. It’s a great, safe activity for kids to engage with when walking around the neighbourhood – and in that same spirit, I also came across this gorgeous offering of free, handmade, iso-friendly Anzac biscuits on Saturday. – Emily Dale, HR director Do you have a story of nice neighbours in lockdown? Share it in the comments below.