Germans have been advised to stay at home as much as possible and continue to apply physical distancing as official data appeared to indicate the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic was once again accelerating. The basic reproduction number (R), indicating how many new cases one infected person generates on average, has come to be seen as the key indicator over whether restrictions on public life can be loosened after Angela Merkel stressed the importance of keeping the number below one. On Tuesday, the German government’s disease control agency, the Robert Koch Institute (RKI), announced the reproduction number for Monday 27 April had risen to 1, after having put it as low as 0.7 in mid-April. Lothar Wieler, the RKI’s president, later specified that the reproduction rate for Monday was 0.96, and therefore technically still below one. Scientists believe the basic reproduction rate of Covid-19, R0, to lie somewhere between 2.4 and 3.3. Without measures taken to curb the spread of the virus, the rate of new infections would grow exponentially until about 70% of the population has been infected. Wieler appealed to the German public to “preserve our success” of having prevented health services from being overwhelmed by continuing to apply physical distancing even though federal authorities have already begun to relax restrictions on social movement. “Let us continue to stay at home as much as possible, keep observing the restrictions and keep a distance of 1.5 metres from one another,” Wieler said. The medical expert also warned of pinning too many expectations on a single indicator, saying that “R is only one index among many”. As German politicians are increasingly divided over the speed at which social distancing measures should be relaxed, the negative news of the rising reproduction number had sown some confusion, especially with latest official data also showing new cases of confirmed infections with Covid-19 dropping below 1,000 cases for the first time in almost seven weeks. Other scientific institutions studying the spread of the pandemic in Germany question whether the downward trend of recent weeks has in fact been reversed, as the RKI’s numbers suggest. In theory, the reproduction number is calculated by dividing the number of new infections by a weighted number of infectious people. In practice, perfectly accurate numbers on both of these counts are impossible to ascertain and even available data on new infections is compiled with a lag of a few days. The reproduction number is thus always an estimate. For its own estimate of the reproduction number, the RKI attempts to take into account the time lag by ignoring data from the last three days and back-dating known cases to their likely day of infection around a week earlier. The reproduction number announced on Tuesday can therefore only give an indication of the pandemic’s development at a point about a week and a half ago, when a relaxation of social distancing measures had been announced by Angela Merkel but not yet come into effect. Alternative models for estimating the reproduction number have been developed by the Technische Universität Ilmenau, in the eastern state of Thuringia, and the Helmholtz Centre for Infections Research in Braunschweig. Statistician Thomas Hotz, of Ilmenau University, said the model used by the RKI had a tendency to “smoothen out” the number of new infections by the method in which it tried to correct for the reporting delay. Hotz said his own model did not indicate a sudden rise of new infections, and that he believed the reproduction number was likely to stay below one in the next few days.