Donald Trump is “decapitating the leadership of the intelligence community in the middle of a national crisis”, senior Democrat Adam Schiff has charged, after the president fired the inspector general of the US intelligence community late on Friday night. “It’s unconscionable,” Schiff, chair of the House intelligence committee, told MSNBC. “And of course it sends a message throughout the federal government and in particular to other inspectors general that if they do their job as this professional did, and Michael Atkinson was a complete professional, they too may be fired by a vindictive president.” Atkinson, a Trump appointee, determined that a whistleblower’s report was credible in alleging Trump abused his office by attempting to have Ukraine investigate his political rivals. According to a justice department legal opinion, Atkinson expressed concern that Trump potentially exposed himself to “serious national security and counter-intelligence risks” when he pressed President Volodymyr Zelenskiy to investigate Democratic presidential hopeful Joe Biden and his son during a call on 25 July last year. Late on Friday, Trump said in a letter to Congress that Atkinson no longer had his “fullest confidence” and would be removed from his position in 30 days’ time. The news came as the death toll from the coronavirus pandemic in the US passed 7,000 and the White House faced continuing criticism for its handling of the response. “He’s settling scores,” Schiff said of Trump. “We’re in the middle of this pandemic and thousands of people are dying and he is retaliating against people who are on his enemies list and doing it in the dead of night.” On Saturday morning, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi called Atkinson’s firing “a brazen act against a patriotic public servant who has honorably performed his duty”. “This latest act of reprisal against the intelligence community threatens to have a chilling effect against all willing to speak truth to power,” Pelosi said. “The president must immediately cease his attacks on those who sacrifice to keep America safe, particularly during this time of national emergency.” Whistleblower Aid, a group which supports “individuals who, lawfully, report government and corporate law breaking”, said Trump was “implementing a direct assault on critical federal oversight mechanisms implemented in the wake of Watergate”, the 1970s scandal which brought down Richard Nixon. “Now is the time for truth telling,” the statement said. “The lives of Americans depend on whether public servants like Michael Atkinson and Capt Brett Crozier, former commander of the USS Theodore Roosevelt, can carry out their duties without interference, fear or retaliation.” Crozier was fired this week, after crew members on his US Navy aircraft carrier were infected with Covid-19 and an appeal for help was leaked. Trump was impeached by the House, where Schiff steered proceedings, but acquitted in February after a trial in the Republican-held Senate in which Schiff led a team of managers prosecuting the House’s case. Schiff’s remark about Trump “decapitating” the intelligence community also took in the recent departure of acting director of national intelligence Joseph Maguire, who was controversially replaced by Trump loyalist Richard Grenell. Maguire also backed the whistleblower’s action. The Axios website reported on Saturday that Trump is considering placing Steve Feinberg, a billionaire investor and political ally, in the Office of the Director of National Intelligence. In the heated atmosphere of Trump’s Washington, language as forthright as Schiff’s is common. For example, in January, as the impeachment trial began, CBS News reported that Republican senators had been warned that if they voted against the president, “your head will be on a pike”. Only one Republican, Utah senator and former presidential nominee Mitt Romney, voted to convict the president and remove him from office. On Saturday, the top US federal watchdog promised to continue to conduct “aggressive” independent oversight of government agencies. Michael Horowitz, chair of the Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency (CIGIE) and the inspector general at the Department of Justice, said in a statement Atkinson was known for his “integrity, professionalism, and commitment to the rule of law and independent oversight”. US inspectors general, charged with independent oversight of federal agencies, were recently tasked with broad surveillance of the government’s response to the coronavirus, including the historic $2.3tn package to mitigate its economic impact. “The inspector general community will continue to conduct aggressive, independent oversight of the agencies that we oversee,” said Horowitz. “This includes CIGIE’s Pandemic Response Accountability Committee and its efforts on behalf of American taxpayers, families, businesses, patients and healthcare providers to ensure that over $2tn dollars in emergency federal spending is being used consistently with the law’s mandate.” Democrats have expressed concerns about how the fiscal package will be doled out through the US treasury, headed by Steven Mnuchin. “We’re not here to create a slush fund for Donald Trump and his family, or a slush fund for the treasury department to be able to hand out to their friends,” said Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts.