A number of NHS and private healthcare staff, from heart surgeons to nurses, porters and volunteers, have sadly lost their lives to the coronavirus in the UK. The government says there have been 27 verified deaths of NHS staff during the pandemic, but others have also died. The Guardian has recorded 50 deaths that have been reported in the news, although the true scale of those who lost their lives is likely to be higher, as not all deaths will be in the public domain. Many family members of those who have died have complained that those in the health profession are not being given adequate protective equipment as they deal with coronavirus cases. If you want to share any further names and stories with us, or feel there are some people we have missed, then please drop an email to sarah.marsh@theguardian.com. We hope to document, understand the causes behind and pay tribute to those who die working on the frontline of the pandemic. These are some of the first tragic cases. We will be adding to the cases in a database and hope to examine further these deaths. Occupation: Radiology support workerPlace of work: King George hospital in GoodmayesDate of death: 15 April 2020 Amrik Bamotra had been a radiology support worker at the King George hospital for the past four years and was a porter there before that. He is survived by his wife, daughter and son. Tony Chambers, the chief executive of Barking, Havering and Redbridge university hospitals trust, said: “Amrik was well-liked among his colleagues, who have shared how friendly, chatty and kind-hearted he was, and that he was caring and compassionate to all patients. They said he treated everyone like his own family.” Occupation: Healthcare assistantPlace of work: Bolton NHS foundation trustDate of death: 15 April 2020 Lourdes Campbell was employed by Bolton NHS foundation trust. The chief executive, Fiona Noden, announced her death, saying: “It is with deep regret and huge sadness that I share with you the devastating news that we have lost a friend and colleague to the terrible Covid-19 virus. “Lourdes Campbell, one of our healthcare assistants, died yesterday on our critical care unit. Lourdes, known as Des to her colleagues, had worked with us for nearly 13 years.” She added: “She was a well-liked and valued member of the team, known for working extremely hard. She was dedicated to patient care and her colleagues respected her quiet, diligent and compassionate approach.” Occupation: Theatre assistantPlace of work: Wrexham Maelor hospitalDate of death: 15 April 2020 Andrew Treble had worked at the hospital for almost 40 years. His 17-year-old daughter, Emily, said: “He was such a lovely man, I’m proud to call him my father. He’s helped me through so much and he has always been there for me. “He always cheered me up by watching Laurel and Hardy together. He was so kind, so loving and he will be missed forever.” Occupation: Healthcare assistant and first-year student mental health nursePlace of work: Barnet, Enfield and Haringey (BEH) mental health trust in LondonDate of death: 15 April 2020 Ade Raymond was described by colleagues as a “compassionate” and “inspirational” man who had “always wanted to become a nurse”. The first-year student mental health nurse, studying at Middlesex University in north-west London, also worked part-time as a healthcare assistant. Jinjer Kandola, the BEH trust chief executive, said Raymond was a “highly respected” team member. She tweeted: “It is with great sadness that we confirm the loss of our colleague & friend Ade Raymond due to coronavirus. A much-valued member of the team who was studying for a nursing degree.” Occupation: NursePlace of work: Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS foundation trustDate of death: 13 April 2020 Gladys Nyemba, a Zimbabwean nurse, was based in Nottingham for Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS foundation trust. Occupation: UnknownPlace of work: Weston General hospital in north SomersetDate of death: 13 April 2020 Amarante Dias worked at Weston General hospital. Dr William Oldfield, the medical director at University Hospitals Bristol and Weston NHS foundation trust, said: “Amarante will be greatly missed and we are ensuring that staff have access to support to help them at this difficult time. We will not be commenting further and ask that everybody respects the privacy of the family at their request.” The Weston-super-Mare Association of Malayalees also paid tribute to Dias. In a post on Facebook, it said: “Our deepest sympathy and prayers to you and your family, [Amarante Dias] will be deeply missed.” Occupation: Associate specialist in neurorehabilitationPlace of work: Royal Berkshire hospital in ReadingDate of death: 13 April 2020 Dr Peter Tun had been in intensive care at Royal Berkshire hospital, where he worked. Royal Berkshire NHS foundation trust (RBFT) would not confirm if he had tested positive for Covid-19. His sons said: “Our family is immensely proud of our superhero Dad. “He used to say: ‘Treat all your patients like they are your own family’ and this speaks to the type of character that he had,” they said in a statement. “To us, he was simply the best human we know and we will miss him every day.” Occupation: NursePlace of work: Agency nurseDate of death: 13 April 2020 Josiane Zauma Ebonja Ekoli had been ill for about a week when she was admitted to Leeds General Infirmary, a hospital where she used to work. In a tribute, her daughter Naomie told the PA news agency she wanted her mother to be remembered as “God-fearing, strong, beautiful and caring”. “It meant everything to be a nurse, she’s being doing it for as long as I remember, more than 30 years,” she said. She added that her mother, who had worked on a coronavirus ward, called the provisions of personal protective equipment (PPE) available “poor”. “If they don’t work, then we won’t be treated, so the least they could do is up the PPE so they can make sure it doesn’t happen to another family,” she said. Jill Foster, the chief nurse at Harrogate and District NHS foundation trust, said Ekoli, known as Josie, was a “much-valued” member of staff. Occupation: Nurse Place of work: St Mary’s hospital in Pread Street, LondonDate of death: 12 April 2020 Melujean Ballesteros was originally from the Philippines, and died at Royal Brompton hospital in Chelsea. Her son, Rainier, said his mum had a fever and a cough before her condition worsened. He said: “[My mum] started her career at St Mary’s hospital in 2002; she loved her work as a nurse. She was a dedicated and very caring nurse.” Rainer added that he convinced her to visit the hospital when her condition worsened. She is survived by Rainier, another son, Bryan, 38, who also lives in the Philippines, and her husband, Luis, 64, who lives in the UK. A spokesman for Imperial College Healthcare NHS trust, which runs St Mary’s hospital, said: “We are very sad to confirm the death of one of our nurses, Melujean Ballesteros, who worked at St Mary’s hospital from 2002. “Melujean was well-known across the hospital for her kindness and compassion. She made a big impact on the lives of her colleagues as well as her patients, she will be greatly missed.” Occupation: Healthcare assistantPlace of work: Southmead hospital in BristolDate of death: 12 April 2020 Maureen Ellington died in the early hours of Easter Sunday after testing positive for the virus. Colleagues at Southmead hospital described her as a “kind-hearted, compassionate and caring” person while her family said “she would light up any room she entered”. Her manager, Suzanne Moss, said she and her team had been “devastated” by Maureen’s death. “To receive the sad news that an irreplaceable member of our team has sadly passed away has had a deeply devastating impact on us all.” She added: “Maureen was a kind-hearted, compassionate and caring person and she brought all these attributes into her ward practice, which made her a highly valued member of the team. “Maureen put the patients and colleagues before herself and always had a smile on her face. She will be greatly missed and forever in our hearts.” Occupation: Plaster technicianPlace of work: Doncaster and Bassetlaw teaching hospitalsDate of death: 12 April 2020 Kevin Smith had worked at Doncaster Royal Infirmary for over 35 years. Richard Parker, the chief executive at Doncaster and Bassetlaw teaching hospitals, said he was a well-respected and hugely popular member of the team, who “was renowned for his warm personality, diligence and compassion”. He added: “I am incredibly thankful to colleagues who cared for Kevin, and for their tireless efforts during this time.” Smith’s daughter, Ellie Whitley, wrote on Facebook: “It’s so overwhelming to see so many amazing comments for such an incredible person who loved his job and everyone he worked with for many years. “Thank you everyone. We will all miss him greatly but never forget him, ever!” Occupation: NursePlace of work: Luton and Dunstable university hospitalDate of death: 12 April 2020 Mary Agyeiwaa Agyapong was pregnant when she died, and her baby was delivered successfully. She had worked for five years at Luton and Dunstable university hospital. A hospital trust spokeswoman said the nurse’s child was “doing very well” but could give no further information. Agyapong was admitted to hospital on 7 April, having tested positive for Covid-19 two days previously. David Carter, the chief executive of Bedfordshire Hospitals NHS foundation trust, said she was a “fantastic nurse and a great example of what we stand for in this trust”. “Our thoughts and deepest condolences are with Mary’s family and friends at this sad time,” he said. Colleagues have paid tribute to Agyapong, who also went by her married name, Mary Boateng, on a fundraising page set up to support her family. One former colleague said Agyapong had “devoted her life to the NHS as a nurse”. Occupation: Housekeeper on hospital wardPlace of work: North Middlesex university hospital in Edmonton, north LondonDate of death: 12 April 2020 Cheryl Williams worked as a housekeeper on an elderly patient ward, and died on Easter Sunday. Sharing a picture of Williams to Facebook, the NHS trust said her contribution to patient care at the hospital was “irreplaceable”. North Middlesex university hospital NHS trust said: “With greatest sadness, we can confirm the death of our much-loved colleague Cheryl Williams.” Occupation: PorterPlace of work: John Radcliffe hospital in OxfordDate of death: 11 April 2020 Oscar King Jr, a Filipino hospital porter, died on Saturday after contracting Covid-19. On a fundraiser page to support his family members, he was described as a “loving husband” as well as a “devoted father” to his 10-year-old daughter. King Jr had worked at the John Radcliffe hospital in Oxford for more than 10 years, “always doing his job with great enthusiasm and joy”. His wife is also believed to have been taken to hospital with severe symptoms of the virus. Occupation: Matron for older adult mental health servicesPlace of work: Hillingdon hospital in greater LondonDate of death: 11 April 2020 Sara Trollope was praised for her empathy and support for older people with dementia. Dr Paul Hopper, the divisional medical director for Hillingdon, paid tribute to the mother of four: “Sara had that unbeatable combination of kindness, selflessness and total determination to get things right for patients. She was an example to every one of us.” Occupation: NursePlace of work: Prince Charles hospital in Merthyr TydfilDate of death: 11 April 2020 Gareth Roberts worked as a nurse across the Cardiff and Vale health board area for more than 40 years. The husband, father and grandfather died in hospital in Merthyr Tydfil. A friend said he had little to no protection from the virus, which the health board said it would investigate. “He didn’t have PPE. In the beginning he said he didn’t have anything,” his childhood friend Janette Leonard said. Roberts was also a husband to Linda, a father to Ceri and Dean and a grandfather to 16-year-old Zac, whom he and his wife brought up after their son Dean passed away 11 years ago. Occupation: NursePlace of work: St Charles hospital in west LondonDate of death: 10 April 2020 Amor Padilla Gatinao had worked in the NHS for 18 years, and her husband, Mario, said he believed she caught the virus while working at St Charles hospital. Speaking to Sky News, he said: “Our youngest child is 14 years old and it is so hard. The pain is unbearable. “I called the ambulance and they came to the house but refused to admit her to the hospital. They told her to take paracetamol. Her whole body was in pain. She couldn’t eat. She was diabetic and also had a heart condition. “I don’t know why the government did not do more to protect NHS workers, like my wife. She was neglected. My children’s lives will never be the same again.” Padilla Gatinao was a clinical nurse assessor who moved to the UK in 2002. Occupation: NursePlace of work: A number of local hospitals in WalesDate of death: 10 April 2020 Leilani Medel was a nurse in Bridgend, where she had lived for more than 10 years working in care homes and hospitals. Her aunt, Shiela Ancheta, who lives in the Philippines, has paid tribute to her niece. “We are very sad because we can’t go there to visit her family because of the travel ban. Although she was my niece, she is six years older than me. She was like my older sister,” she said. Also posting on Facebook on Good Friday, Ancheta said: “In this distressed time, we express our love, concern and condolences to the bereaved family of my niece, Leilani Medel, 41, from Bridgend, Wales, born in Divisoria, Santiago City, who passed away due to Covid-19 pandemic.” Occupation: NursePlace of work: Velindre cancer centre in CardiffDate of death: 10 April 2020 Donna Campbell was described by colleagues as a “beautiful, kind-hearted friend”. She had worked at the cancer centre for many years, initially as a volunteer. Velindre university NHS trust said: “She was often found singing and dancing, entertaining patients and staff, making everyone smile. Donna will always have a special place in our hearts and we will all want to send our heartfelt sympathy and love to her family at this very difficult time.” Occupation: Orthopaedic nursePlace of work: Alexandra hospital in RedditchDate of death: 10 April 2020 A highly experienced trauma and orthopaedic nurse, Julie Omar had been self-isolating at home after developing symptoms, Worcestershire acute hospitals NHS trust said. Her condition deteriorated and she died at home. She leaves behind her husband, Laith, and a grown-up daughter. The trust’s chief executive, Matthew Hopkins, said: “It is with great sorrow that I have to share with you the sad news that a much-loved member of our nursing team – Julie Omar – has died.” He added: “Julie was a dedicated and highly experienced trauma and orthopaedics nurse who had most recently been working as a sister on ward 14 at the Alexandra, but she will also be known to many of you on the Worcester site from her time with the trauma team there.” Occupation: Hospital porterPlace of work: John Radcliffe hospital in OxfordDate of death: 10 April 2020 Elberto Rico, who was Filipino, died on Friday from suspected coronavirus. He was a father and a husband who had been working as a porter at the John Radcliffe hospital since he arrived in the UK in 2004. A fundraiser set up by his daughter, Carla Rico, said: “He was always working and would prioritise others needs’ firsts. He would walk around the hospital with a smile on his face and very rarely would he call in sick from work.” Occupation: Locum registrarPlace of work: Great Western hospitalDate of death: 8 April 2020 Dr Edmond Adedeji was a locum registrar in the emergency department. He died after being cared for in the intensive care unit, having tested positive for Covid-19. The 62-year-old had worked as a locum registrar in the emergency department since August 2019. His family said in a statement: “We as a family are grateful to God for the life of Dr Edmond Adefolu Adedeji. He died doing a job he loved, serving others before himself. “We would like to thank the staff and his colleagues for looking after him during his final days. He leaves behind a wife, three children and three grandchildren.” Occupation: DoctorPlace of work: Homerton university hospital in LondonDate of death: 8 April 2020 Dr Abdul Mabud Chowdhury, a consultant urologist at Homerton hospital in Hackney, east London, died after spending 15 days in Queens hospital, Romford. In March, he wrote a Facebook message to Boris Johnson outlining the urgent need for PPE for frontline staff and calling for testing for healthcare workers to be fast-tracked. He told Johnson that healthcare workers “are in direct contact with patients” and have a “human right like others to live in this world disease-free with our family and children”. Philip Glanville, the Labour mayor of Hackney, hailed Chowdhury as a “hero” who died serving the borough. In a tweet he added: “I hope his death wasn’t as a result of continuing issues around testing & PPE, but it raises Qs. A sobering reminder of the lives being lost to keep us safe & the contribution BAME staff make.” Occupation: GPPlace of work: Volunteering in North Clacton, EssexDate of death: 8 April 2020 Dr Fayez Ayache had retired as a GP at Suffolk’s Constable country medical practice, but he had been working part-time as a GP in North Clacton, Essex. He had volunteered to help refugees from his native Syria, where he trained as a doctor before moving to the UK in 1973. He died on 8 April after being diagnosed with pneumonia and Covid-19. Dr Sharif Al-Ghazal, a consultant plastic surgeon at Bradford Royal Infirmary, paid tribute on behalf of the Syrian British Medical Society. He said: “Dr Fayez was a kind-hearted man who always went out of his way to assist his patients, even at great personal cost. He was loved by many; and more recently over the last few years has tended to the needs of newly arrived Syrian refugees.” His daughters Layla and Katie said: “He was the most kind-hearted, loving, generous and caring man we knew and he was an incredible and amazing doctor having worked as a GP, ENT consultant and surgeon in the NHS and private sector for over 40 years. We are truly devastated and will miss him dearly, he was a true foundation in our lives.” Occupation: Care home nursePlace of work: Wolverhampton-based care agency Totally CareDate of death: 8 April 2020 Elsie Sazuze, from Birmingham, worked at a Staffordshire nursing home and was described by a friend as “dedicated to helping people”. After falling sick at home, she was taken to Good Hope hospital in Sutton Coldfield where she died, leaving behind her husband, Ken, a 22-year-old son and a daughter aged 16. Originally from Malawi, she had trained and worked at New Cross hospital in Wolverhampton and was employed by the Wolverhampton-based care agency Totally Care. A childhood friend, William Fungatira, said: “Elsie was a naturally quiet person but very caring, friendly, cheerful and resilient. She had a passion to always help others. She was dedicated to helping people.” He set up a fundraiser for her family, which reads: “Following the tragic death of Elsie Sazuze, a practising NHS nurse, who succumbed to Covid-19 on the morning of 8 April 2020 at Good Hope hospital in Sutton Coldfield, this is an appeal to well-wishers to raise funds which will help the bereaved family in alleviating the financial burden that their circumstances present.” Occupation: NursePlace of work: Hammersmith hospital in LondonDate of death: 7 April 2020 Donald Suelto was described by friends and family as a nurse who was “dedicated” to his job and “proud to work for the NHS”. He had previously worked as a nurse in the Philippines before moving to the UK for a job with the NHS 18 years ago. His niece, Emelyne Suelto Robertson, told Nursing Times that she hoped the news of her uncle’s death would remind people to stay home “because this is the reality of frontline nurses”. Suelto Robinson, who works as a nurse in Scotland, said her uncle had died alone at home after self-isolating with symptoms of Covid-19 and was found by police on Tuesday. “My uncle is really a hero for all of us,” she said. “He really offered his service to our NHS here in the UK and he was really dedicated to his job.” Occupation: NursePlace of work: Colindale medical centre in BarnetDate of death: 7 April 2020 Alice Kit Tak Ong had been a nurse in the NHS her entire working life, having arrived in the UK from Hong Kong to study nursing in the early 70s. She spent time as a midwife and later as a diabetic specialist nurse. For the past 20 years she had worked in the community. She was still working full-time across two surgeries and running baby clinics when she fell ill with the coronavirus. On 7 April, two weeks after she was admitted to hospital, the 70-year-old died at the Royal Free hospital in London. At the end of her life her family were unable to visit because of the risk of infection to her husband, Marcus. Her daughter Melissa Ong, 37, said her mother had spent her life helping and caring for others. “She was completely dedicated to her work, that’s what she was doing until the moment she was taken ill,” she said. “She loved her job and she loved her patients.” She said the family had been inundated with messages of condolence and love. “She had a very good heart and very generous personality. Everybody loved her.” Occupation: NursePlace of work: St Cross hospital in RugbyDate of death: 7 April 2020 Leilani Dayrit died of suspected Covid-19 after giving 16 years of service to the NHS. In a fundraiser set up to help the nurse’s family, Araial Ilustre said: “Her sudden tragic passing left behind her loving husband and her most beautiful legacy, her daughter. She is a ray of sunshine to those people who were fortunate to meet her. “Her beautiful smile mirrors her beautiful heart full of love. Her strong will power to surpass any trial in life and her optimism resonates to everyone.” Dayrit was nicknamed “Mummy Lei” by the children of her friends. She was one of eight children, and grew up in Vigan City in the Philippines. As a young woman, she was a member of a performance arts club. She finished her nursing degree at the University of Northern Philippines. Occupation: Heart surgeonPlace of work: The Cardiff and Vale University health boardDate of death: 6 April 2020 Jitendra Rathod was an experienced and admired heart surgeon. A father of two, he died at the University Hospital of Wales in Cardiff, where he was an associate specialist in cardiothoracic surgery. The Cardiff and Vale University health board said he had worked in the cardiothoracic surgery department since the mid-90s. “He was an incredibly dedicated surgeon who cared deeply for his patients,” the board said. “He was well-liked and greatly respected by one and all. He was a very compassionate and a wonderful human being.” The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, paid tribute to Rathod, while the former Welsh Conservative party leader Andrew RT Davies said: “He was highly regarded in the medical profession in Wales. My thoughts with his wife and two sons.” Occupation: Healthcare support worker and district nursePlace of work: Inverclyde health and social care partnershipDate of death: 6 April 2020 Janice Graham was a healthcare support worker and district nurse. When she died at Inverclyde Royal hospital, she was believed to be the first NHS worker to die in Scotland from the coronavirus. Speaking to STV News, her son, Craig, said: “I am so proud of her and there will not be a day that goes by that I will not think about her.” Louise Long, the chief officer of Inverclyde health and social care partnership, said: “Janice was a valued team member in our district nursing and evening services team and brought kindness and compassion to patients and colleagues.” Occupation: Patient discharge plannerPlace of work: Aintree university hospitalDate of death: 6 April 2020 Hailed as an unsung hero, Barbara Moore died after testing positive for coronavirus, Liverpool university hospitals confirmed. The chief nurse, Dianne Brown, said: “Barbara’s loss is an awful blow to us all, and she will be missed so much by all of her colleagues.” Moore was responsible for making arrangements to allow patients to safely leave the hospital. She joined the hospital team after spending most of her career as a care worker for people with disabilities. A spokesman for her family said: “Barbara dedicated her life to caring for others and doted on her two beautiful children and grandchildren.” Occupation: NHS care workerPlace of work: Central and north west London NHS foundation trustDate of death: 5 April 2020 Emily Perugia was a member of the care connection team in Northwood for the Central and North West London NHS foundation trust. She was engaged to James Day, who also works in the contact centre, and they had recently moved into their first home together. One of her friends shared on Facebook: “To Emily Perugia shine bright lovely stay at home it saves lives we lost one of our own last night all our thoughts are with family and friends of Emily what a lovely girl! “This virus is evil and we need to beat this together by staying home please everyone do as we are asked and stay in let the NHS fight this and stop the spread of the evil that is upon us.” Occupation: NursePlace of work: Royal Victoria Infirmary in NewcastleDate of death: 5 April 2020 Rebecca Mack, from Morpeth in Northumberland, had worked as a children’s nurse at Newcastle’s Royal Victoria Infirmary before going on to a job with NHS 111. She had no known health problems, and fell ill after a work training session in Derby. She was self-isolating alone at her home when her symptoms worsened. Mack called for an ambulance and left the door open for paramedics. They found her dead in her home, her mother, Marion, told the Newcastle Chronicle. She said: “We couldn’t have wished for a nicer daughter. She was so caring. She was just the light of our lives. I can’t even begin to imagine life without her.” The mother of a boy whom Mack nursed when he had leukaemia said: “She could make kids smile when they were that far down.” Her friend Sarah Bredin-Kemp said Mack would be “so missed”. She wrote in a Facebook post: “We lost our beautiful Rebecca Mack on Sunday to Covid-19. She was a devoted friend, an incredible nurse and an unapologetically imperfect person.” Occupation: GPPlace of work: Valence medical centre in DagenhamDate of death: 4 April 2020 Described “a selfless and compassionate doctor”, Syed Zishan Haider was a practicing GP who was committed to serving his community in Barking and Dagenham. He was a senior partner at Valence medical centre, and also worked as a senior homeopathic physician at the Royal London hospital for integrated medicine for over 30 years. His daughter Samina said: “His dedication to help people everywhere, be it professionally or personally was unwavering. We are truly astounded as to how many people have reached out to share a story of his kindness, and continue to receive touching tributes from colleagues, patients, friends and family alike.” She added: “He was a loving, cheerful and dedicated husband, father and grandfather. We are left with a void that can never be filled. We would like to pay tribute to all the NHS staff who treated him, and those risking their health in all areas of frontline services.” Occupation: Retired mental health workerPlace of work: Central and North West London NHS trustDate of death: 4 April 2020 Glen Corbin had recently returned to work as a bank healthcare assistant. He worked at Pine Ward at Park Royal centre for mental health (PRCMH) for many years, joining shortly after it opened in 1995. Central and North West London trust released a statement on its website saying: “One of our own, Glen Corbin, a staff member from Brent, has very sadly died and his colleagues have written an appreciation note below. “He was the ‘go to’ person who knew everything about the ward and how to get things done. He was instrumental in helping turn things around [at Park Royal] and supporting the senior management team at the time. It is no secret he hated paperwork and the thing he valued most was being and working with service users.” The trust added that he had been looking forward to his 60th birthday later this year. “Every time we had staff moves, Glen was always the first to say that he didn’t want to go anywhere else and that he would never be able to replicate the good experiences he had on Pine Ward,” they said. “PRCMH without Glen is hard to imagine and he delighted in telling everyone he was so much looking forward to travelling back home to his beloved homeland when he wanted, in his words ‘to get some sun on my back,’” the trust said. Occupation: Consultant geriatricianPlace of work: Kingston hospital in south LondonDate of death: 4 April 2020 Dr Anton Sebastianpillai died in Kingston hospital just over two weeks after completing his last shift there. He is reported to have come out of retirement to help the hospital tackle the coronavirus. Sebastianpillai died four days after being admitted to the hospital’s intensive care unit. He qualified as a doctor at the Peradeniya University medical school in his native Sri Lanka and later wrote an illustrated history of the island. The school praised his “brave commitment to serve the NHS”. Dr Thusiyan Nandakumar, a fellow Tamil working in the NHS, tweeted: “Dr Sebastianpillai put himself at risk to help save others. A remarkably courageous and selfless role model.” Occupation: NursePlace of work: Walsall Manor hospital in the West MidlandsDate of death: 3 April 2020 Areema Nasreen worked for 16 years at Walsall Manor hospital, where she died after contracting the coronavirus. Nasreen, who had three children and was from Walsall, developed symptoms on 13 March, including aches, a high temperature and then a cough. Her family said she had no underlying health issues. Her sister Kazeema Nasreen, 22, a healthcare assistant at the same hospital, said Nasreen was “an amazing nurse” and urged others to take the virus seriously. In a tribute posted on Facebook, her friend Rubi Aktar said: “She was the most loveliest, genuine person you could ever meet, she went above and beyond for everyone she met. I’m so grateful that I had the honour to call her my best friend, she saw me at my best and my worst and accepted my every flaw. I am so broken that words can’t explain.” Occupation: NHS care workerPlace of work: Unclear if employed in NHS at time of deathDate of death: 3 April 2020 Elvira Bucu was an NHS care worker and mother of three. In a fundraising page, a family friend said her family had been struggling to cope with her death as her husband also tested positive. They said: “Elvie’s death was sudden, unexpected and we are all still in shock. She only just turned 50 and she still had her whole life ahead of her. She was still yet to see her daughter get married, she was still yet to live the life she planned and worked so hard for. “She was still yet to know what it was like to become a grandmother. She was still yet to fulfil her dream of becoming a nurse.” Occupation: NursePlace of work: Aintree university hospital in LiverpoolDate of death: 3 April 2020 Liz Glanister, a staff nurse, died in hospital after testing positive for the virus. The Liverpool university hospitals NHS foundation trust chief nurse, Dianne Brown, said: “It is with great sadness that I can confirm that Liz Glanister, a long-serving staff nurse at Aintree University hospital, sadly passed away at the Royal Liverpool University hospital on Friday after being tested positive for Covid-19. “All our thoughts are with Liz’s family at this time and we offer them our sincere condolences. Liz will be sadly missed by all those who knew and worked with her.” Liverpool’s mayor, Joe Anderson, also paid tribute to her “sacrifice”. “Words cannot express how much a debt of gratitude this city owes to Liz Glanister and her colleagues,” he said. Occupation: NursePlace of work: Watford General hospital in HertfordshireDate of death: 3 April 2020 John Alagos is believed to be the youngest medic in the UK to die from coronavirus. His mother, Gina Gustilo, said her son fell ill during a 12-hour shift but was allegedly not allowed to return home due to short-staffing. She told the Mail on Sunday: “I asked: ‘Why didn’t you come home?’ He said he had asked other staff but they said they were short of staff and they did not let him go.” Gustilo described how she then advised her son to take paracetamol, but just minutes later, found him unconscious and “turning blue” in his bed. A spokeswoman for Watford General hospital described him as “very popular” and said he would be “missed greatly”. She added: “Our staff are fully briefed on the symptoms of Covid-19 and we would never expect anyone to remain at work if they were showing these symptoms or indeed were unwell in any way. “We have always kept our staff updated on the latest PPE guidance to make sure they have the right level of protection.” Occupation: NursePlace of work: Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother HospitalDate of death: 2 April 2020 Aimee O‘Rourke was an NHS nurse and mother of three girls, Megan, Mollie and Maddie. She died at the hospital where she worked. She studied at Canterbury Christ Church University before joining the NHS in 2017. She started showing symptoms of the coronavirus about two weeks before her condition deteriorated and she was taken into intensive care at the QEQM and put on a ventilator. Her daughter, Megan Murphy, wrote on Facebook that it had always been “us 4 against the world!”, and said she and her sisters would now look after each other. “Look at all the lives you looked after and all the families you comforted when patients passed away … you are an angel and you will wear your NHS crown forever more because you earned that crown the very first day you started,” she wrote. A family friend has set up a GoFundMe page to raise money for O’Rourke’s family. A colleague, Lucy Page, wrote: “Aimee O’Rourke taught me to fight for what I believe in and gave me courage so many times to do it.” Another colleague, Soraya Zanders, said:“Aimee cared for many patients in her time as a nurse. She brought warmth and comfort to many.” On the evening of the day she died, family and friends lit candles and clapped in her honour during the weekly Clap for Carers. Occupation: DoctorPlace of work: Charing Cross hospitalDate of death: 2 April 2020 A British-Egyptian doctor, Sami Shousha died two weeks after contracting the virus. He specialised in histopathology, or diseases of the tissue, and trained at the Royal Free hospital and London’s School of Medicine. He had worked for more than 40 years at Charing Cross hospital, joning in 1978, and he managed the breast histopathology service. Speaking to Middle East Eye, his nephew Abdelrahman Shousha said: “He was very keen on going to work on his final days despite the health hazards. However, most likely, his work did not involve direct contact with Covid-19 patients.” He is survived by his wife and two daughters. Occupation: MidwifePlace of work: Princess Alexandra hospitalDate of death: 2 April 2020 Lynsay Coventry was the first publicly confirmed fatality of a serving NHS midwife in England linked to Covid-19. Her family paid tribute to her as a “very well-respected midwife”, adding: “Our hearts are broken at the loss of our loving, wonderful and caring mum, sister, daughter and grandmother. We each know how much she loved and cherished us. Her love for us all was unfailing and her strength in the way she cared and supported us will fill our memories.” Relatives said she had trained as a midwife later in life to “follow her dream”. She saw the midwifery team at the hospital ‘“as her other family”, the family statement said, noting how proud she was of her work. She had worked at the hospital for a decade. Lance McCarthy, the chief executive of the hospital’s NHS trust, said Coventry would be remembered “for her professionalism and commitment to the women she supported”, adding: “Her loss will be felt by the maternity team and colleagues from across the organisation.” Occupation: consultantPlace of work: University Hospital Lewisham in south-east LondonDate of death: 31 March 2020 Dr Eric Labeja-Acellam, originally from Uganda, is said to have died at King’s College hospital. His wife, Jennifer Lawala, a well-known musician in Uganda, also contracted the coronavirus. She told Mirror Online: “If God could allow two people to go at the same time, I would want to go with my husband. I don’t know how I survived.” Talking about the last time she saw her husband, she said: “He held my hand, he didn’t want to let go of my hand when the ambulance came to get him. “I told him, ‘you are going to come back’ and he asked, ‘can you come with me?’ The ambulance wouldn’t allow it.” Occupation: Part-time locum and retired medical directorPlace of work: Princess Alexandra hospitalDate of death: 31 March 2020 Dr Alfa Saadu had nearly 40 years’ experience in the NHS. He died at the Whittington hospital in north London. He had been a medical director at the Princess Alexandra hospital in Essex and Ealing NHS trust, and had worked at many hospitals in the capital. The former president of the Nigerian Senate, Dr Abubakar Bukola Saraki, posted his condolences on Twitter. He said Dr Saadu had been a chairman of the Kwara State Association, a community leader and traditional office holder as Galadima of Pategi. His son, Dani Saadu, said of his father: “He was a very passionate man, who cared about saving people. As soon as you spoke to him about medicine or what was happening with the NHS his eyes would light up – he was very passionate. “He was working part-time as a locum as he just could not fully retire. He just loved medicine so much. He worked for the NHS for nearly 40 years in different hospitals across London and he loved to lecture people in the world of medicine; he did so in the UK and Africa.” Occupation: Healthcare assistantPlace of work: Goodmayes hospital in east LondonDate of death: 29 March 2020 Thomas Harvey caught the coronavirus and died after treating patients with only gloves for protection, according to his family. It is claimed Harvey fell ill after helping a patient who later tested positive for Covid-19 and eventually died on 29 March. He had been signed off work more than two weeks earlier when he developed symptoms including a cough, shortness of breath and body aches. His family said that if he had had the correct personal protective equipment, he might still be alive. Goodmayes hospital claimed there were “no symptomatic patients on the ward”. However, a former colleague told the BBC that Harvey contracted the virus after treating a patient who later tested positive. Occupation: ENT consultantPlace of work: Queen’s hospital in BurtonDate of death: 28 March 2020 A respected ear, nose and throat consultant, Amged El-Hawrani was one of the first confirmed hospital frontline workers to die in the UK after testing positive for the coronavirus. His death prompted tributes from ministers and senior health leaders. In a statement, his family said he was “a loving and much-loved husband, son, father, brother, and friend”. “His greatest passions were his family and his profession, and he dedicated his life to both,” they said. “We would like to thank all those involved in his care for their kindness and compassion during his illness. They worked tirelessly for their patient, as he would have done for his own.” Occupation: Hospital pharmacistPlace of work: Eastbourne District General hospital, East Sussex Date of death: 26 March 2020 Pooja Sharma died a day after her father also passed away from the coronavirus. A friend, Amarjit Aujla, paid tribute on Facebook: “Her laughter was contagious and her random calls made my day. From when we were in primary school until we last spoke two weeks ago, you gave me nothing but love, support and a tummy ache with all the laughter. “Life can never be the same without you my dear friend.” Lara Stacey Young, a nurse in the area, said: “So many people will be devastated. She was such a lovely soul.” Sharma’s father, Sudhir, 61, was an immigration officer at Heathrow, but officials said it was likely he had contracted the virus elsewhere. He had been away from work since 7 January due to “underlying health problems”. Occupation: Bus driver running service to hospitalsPlace of work: NottinghamDate of death: 26 March 2020 Andy Howe worked on the Medilink service, which took NHS workers and patients to hospital. He died on the way to hospital after falling ill, his employer said. A spokesman for the RMT union said: “We are saddened by the news of Andy’s passing. “We’re also angered by the reports we have received about a lack of duty of care for Andy, his colleagues and the wider public.” He said this included reports of toilets and buses not being cleaned properly, and a lack of protective screens or masks. CT4N, the operator of the bus service, denied the allegation and said it had been “rigorously following government health and safety advice”. Andrew Grieve from CT4N said Howe was a “popular” and “well-respected” member of the team and said everyone was “devastated” by his death. Occupation: SurgeonPlace of work: Volunteering in A&E departments in the MidlandsDate of death: 25 March 2020 Adil El Tayar was the first working NHS surgeon known to have died from Covid-19 in the UK. He had been volunteering in A&E departments in the Midlands to help the NHS cope with the virus. “He wanted to be deployed where he would be most useful in the crisis,” said his cousin, the broadcaster Zeinab Badawi. “It had taken just 12 days for Adil to go from a seemingly fit and capable doctor working in a busy hospital to lying in a hospital morgue.” His former colleague Abbas Ghazanfar, a renal transplant surgeon at St George’s hospital in Tooting, described Tayar as a “noble human being” who was a “hardworking, dedicated surgeon”. Occupation: GPPlace of work: Eastwood group practice, EssexDate of death: 25 March 2020 Dr Habib Zaidi died in intensive care at Southend hospital in Essex, 24 hours after being taken ill. He and his wife, Dr Talat Zaidi, 70, were both managing partners of Eastwood group practice and had served three generations of families in the area for nearly 50 years. The couple’s four children all work in the medical profession. Their daughter Dr Sarah Zaidi, also a GP, said his death was “reflective of his sacrifice”, adding: “He had a vocational attitude to service.” She said: “We can’t mourn in the normal way. We can’t have a normal funeral. He left a gaping hole in our hearts, but a loss that is also felt within the community that he devoted almost his entire life to. We are praying for the safety of everyone right now.”