Lauren Franklin Thu 30 Apr 2020 12.25 BST


Last modified on Thu 30 Apr 2020 12.27 BST Cleo Crawford, 10“I really like to watch drawing tutorials on YouTube Kids. There are lots of different channels you can look at, so I just go by which one looks the best for what I want to draw. It can be anything, perhaps a doughnut, and the tutorial will show you how to do a doughnut with some cute eyes on it. “I like craft and baking videos too, but painting is what I like the most. I’ve painted loads of things. My grandma is a good painter, she painted a picture of her house and it looked exactly like it.” Mason Crawford, eight“There’s this app called Times Table Rock Stars, where you’re constantly doing maths – it’s like a maths machine. They’ll give you a question, like 7 x 11, and you’ve got to get it really quickly, and then the next question comes. The better you do, the more of a rock star you become, so you start off as a support act, and build up to a rock hero. “I’m a regular rock star at the moment, which means I can answer questions in under three seconds, and my sister is a headliner, the level below. I didn’t really know my times tables before the game, but now I do and it’s so much fun. And you can challenge your teacher. I did that once but, well, who do you think won? I beat my mum and dad, though.” Michael Gouveia, eight“I love ScratchGarden.com for learning maths because it is really fun and there’s cool rap music I can dance to. I love counting by twos, threes and fours, all the way to 10s and 100s, because the rhymes make it easier to remember. So I’m dancing and singing when I’m learning my numbers. It’s like music therapy too as it helps me relax. I love the rocket ship and the dancing robot. “I even let my little brother Raphael join me, as he dances too and then claps for me when the song is finished. As a treat I watch the Scratch Garden Bloopers afterwards, which have jokes and puzzles about a salamander. It really makes me laugh.” James Follen, 13“I’m using my gaming platform, an Xbox One, to keep in touch with my friends during this time. We play games such as Minecraft and Sea of Thieves. We are able to chat and mess around while playing and it’s similar to phoning your friends, but instead of lying on the sofa we are interacting with each other in the virtual world. We talk about family, school and lockdown while also building houses, surviving or journeying on missions.”Kaci Gibson, 12“Futbin is an app that’s great for discovering up-and-coming football players and their potential. “It’s pretty cool knowing quite a lot about football. I’d say I’m pretty much a football encyclopedia – ask me something and I’ll know it. “My favourite stat at the moment is that Manchester City have no fans, well not enough! They can’t fill their stadium as they just don’t have a good fanbase. Sadly, Liverpool always sell out and Man United do most of the time. “England are best for women’s football. USA are pretty good, but England, yeah. I prefer women’s international football over men’s. The men don’t get anywhere in tournaments for one, and, second, they just roll around on the floor like babies.” Indy Williams, six“Waffle and Friends is a game about a dog, and I love it. I go on to CBeebies games and use the keys on the computer – you know, the up, down and side ones – to explore around Mrs Hobbs’ house, but you can go to other places too. Waffle has friends, one is a cat called George, and they can go into each other’s houses. “There are people who need stuff, like Gramps needs a microphone, and it’ll be hidden in the house. When you find something, you take it to the person who needs it. “I once met Waffle from the TV programme Waffle the Wonder Dog in real life, and found out they actually use two or three dogs for filming.” Vodafone #KeepingTheUKConnectedWe know that now, more than ever, it is important for children to keep connected to their friends and to the routines that make them feel safe and happy. That’s why every day, we at Vodafone are working hard to maintain our network. So even when we’re apart, nothing can stop us being together. Stay up to date with the latest information on what we’re doing to keep the UK connected. Find out more 