The makers of Line of Duty return with the second season of their missing-child drama, starring Lennie James as Nelly, a man on the hunt for his abducted and estranged daughter. Having ended the first series by rescuing a trafficked young woman, Grace, the pressure is now on to see whether she holds the clues to locating his daughter or whether there is another, larger ruse at play. James is on searing and superb form throughout, powered on by adrenaline and his trademark yellow jacket in his gruelling hunt. Ammar Kalia The culinary contest continues as the nation’s top chefs battle it out to see who gets the chance to cook at a banquet celebrating Britain’s finest children’s literature. This week is the Scotland heats, featuring the chefs Gordon Jones, Roberta Hall, Ross Bryans and Amy Elles, cooking up their tricky starters. AK It’s time to see how the female students are getting on as year 11 draws to a close. As ever, what’s striking about these stories is how much less margin for error these students have than would be the case for similarly gifted kids from more fortunate backgrounds. Which makes their triumphs all the sweeter. Phil Harrison Chef Eddie Huang’s sitcom series about his childhood in Orlando, Florida, continues for its third season. Tonight’s double bill sees the Huang gang heading to Taiwan and patriarch Gene questioning his pursuit of the American dream, as well as Eddie’s guide to middle school for little brother Emery. AK Mae Martin’s comedy continues to oscillate skillfully between hilarious and excruciating. As the reluctance of George to come out of the closet – or tonight, the cupboard – starts affecting her and Mae’s sex life, the joke where she’s bad at making up lies on the hoof generates several huge laughs. Jack Seale This distastefully titled series nonetheless provides a much-needed spotlight on some of the 7,000 people living in the UK with dwarfism. Narrated by Warwick Davis, the opener follows 18-year-old Louis, who is training to become a chef, and fashion designer Mary. AK The Road, 6.55pm, AMCIn a desolate, post-apocalyptic America, a father and son trudge through a land devoid of colour and hope, evading the cannibalistic gangs searching for victims. John Hillcoat’s adaptation of Cormac McCarthy’s Pulitzer-winning novel is relentlessly downbeat but moving. Paul Howlett