The big thing my husband and I have just swept through during lockdown is the third season of Ozark on Netflix . It is a very intense show, starring Jason Bateman and Laura Linney, who get wrapped up in working for a Mexican drug cartel and laundering their money. It is a brilliant, sprawling drama with fantastically drawn characters and I absolutely love it. I didn’t really know when season three was coming because life takes over, so it just surprised us and arrived at the perfect time. There is a new character in it called Ben and I could not take my eyes off him: the actor who plays him, Tom Pelphrey, is extraordinary at portraying an intricate picture of mental health and being bipolar. He had me laughing and crying in the space of an episode. I love watching him and imagining that I could do a similar role one day. There is one scene with Ben that I keep coming back to in which he has a mental breakdown in a car. There is so much going on in the storyline then and it is reduced to this incredible moment. It is so complicated to portray mental health in a real way and I thought this was beautifully judged; it showed the terror as well as the chaos that can explode. Ozark is gripping, but it is also gritty and dramatic, so we have also needed something comforting to balance that out and that has been Gilmore Girls, also on Netflix. I started watching it a couple of years ago when my daughter was just born and I wanted something soothing. My husband initially took the piss out of me for being into such a saccharine show and then one day he walked in on me during what was probably the cheesiest moment I had come across so far and he was hooked. Now we dip into that for a bit of relief, as everything is always well in Stars Hollow, the fictional town in which it is set. Of course we have to watch the TV that our two-year-old likes to watch too, which is extremely light relief. She is crazy for a Russian animation show, Masha and the Bear, which is on Netflix at the moment, as well as a new series of Waffle the Wonder Dog, which is like catnip to her – I have no idea why. We have watched all the episodes so many times I could recite them all verbatim. But when it’s on, everything goes nice and quiet for a bit which is lovely, so I don’t mind watching a bit of that. I am a fan of a lot of the shows I have worked on, too, so I am watching series three of Killing Eve, but I’ll probably cringe when my scenes show up. I think that’s a normal reaction, though. It would be weird if I was just waiting and cheering for my every appearance.