Tom Brady, JJ Watt and Adrian Peterson are among eight unanimous selections to the 2010s NFL All-Decade Team announced on Monday by the NFL and the Pro Football Hall of Fame. Also chosen on every ballot of the 48-member Hall of Fame selection committee are Von Miller, Aaron Donald, Joe Thomas, Marshal Yanda and Justin Tucker. All but tackle Thomas and guard Yanda are active. Four of the unanimous players – Brady, Miller, Yanda and Tucker – won Super Bowls during the decade. “Being elected unanimously is really, really cool,” said Tucker, who has worked with the same long snapper and holder since breaking into the NFL in 2012. “There’s kind of a lot going on in the world right now, so it’s hard to be super excited about stuff that happens in the football world, but it is still an incredible honor.” The NFL's 2010s All-Decade Team Offense! pic.twitter.com/Yrd8VshcVU Seattle have the most honorees with five current or former members on the list: linebacker Bobby Wagner, safety Earl Thomas, cornerback Richard Sherman, running back Marshawn Lynch and coach Pete Carroll. Brady is joined at quarterback by another NFL champion, Green Bay’s Aaron Rodgers. Brady took three of his six Super Bowl victories during the decade with New England, going 141-42 overall, and recently left the Patriots as a free agent for Tampa Bay. Rodgers went 112-63-2 in the decade. Peterson, the only non-quarterback to win MVP honors in the 10-season span, is accompanied by Lynch, Frank Gore and LeSean McCoy in the backfield. Darren Sproles is the flex player – and one of the punt returners. Calvin Johnson, who becomes eligible for the Hall of Fame next year, is joined by Julio Jones, Larry Fitzgerald and Antonio Brown at wideout. The tight ends are Rob Gronkowski and Travis Kelce. Along with Thomas, the tackles are Jason Peters, Joe Staley and Tyron Smith. Yanda’s fellow guards are Zack Martin, Logan Mankins and Jahri Evans. Alex Mack and Maurkice Pouncey are the centers. Up front on defense with end Watt, a three-time Defensive Player of the Year, and tackle Donald are ends Calais Campbell, Cam Jordan and Julius Peppers, tackles Geno Atkins, Fletcher Cox and Ndamukong Suh. Wagner’s and Miller’s mates at linebacker are recently retired Luke Kuechly, Khalil Mack, Chandler Jones, and Patrick Willis. The three cornerbacks are Sherman, Darrelle Revis and Patrick Peterson. Safeties are Earl Thomas, Eric Weddle and Eric Berry. Selected as defensive backs, in recognition of slot cornerbacks and other versatile players in the secondary, are Chris Harris Jr, and Tyrann Mathieu. Tucker is joined by Stephen Gostkowski as placekickers. Shane Lechler and Johnny Hekker are the punters. Tyreek Hill and Sproles are the punt returners, while kickoff returners are Cordarrelle Patterson and Devin Hester. Carroll and Bill Belichick are the coaches.