The Indian actor Rishi Kapoor, who built a career as one of Bollywood’s romantic heroes, has died of leukaemia at the age of 67. Kapoor, part of a famous Bollywood family, was admitted to hospital in Mumbai on Wednesday and died on Thursday, according to a family statement. “The doctors and medical staff at the hospital said he kept them entertained to the last,” said the family in a statement. “He remained jovial and determined to live to the fullest right through two years of treatment across two continents. Family, friends, food and films remained his focus and everyone who met him during this time was amazed at how he did not let his illness get the better of him.” Kapoor had returned to India last September after undergoing treatment for cancer in the US for almost a year, and was admitted to hospital twice in February. His father, Raj Kapoor, and grandfather, Prithviraj Kapoor, were doyens of Bollywood, the vast Hindi-language film industry based in Mumbai. Kapoor began acting as a teenager and received the National Film Award for his debut role as a child artist in his father’s 1970 film Mera Naam Joker. He went on to act in more than 90 films, often as the romantic lead, and became well known for his talents in singing and dancing. In one of Bollywood’s most legendary love stories, he ended up marrying Nitu Singh, who had co-starred as his love interest in several films. Their son Ranbir Kapoor is now also a current top Bollywood actor. Kapoor’s career experienced a revival over the past decade as he took up supporting character roles in Bollywood films. The ctor’s death came a day after that of another Bollywood giant, Irrfan Khan, at the age of 53. Fellow Bollywood actor and Kapoor’s co-star star Amitabh Bachchan tweeted: “Rishi Kapoor gone … Just passed away … I am destroyed.” Priyanka Chopra said Kapoor’s death was the end of an era, adding: “Rishi sir your candid heart and immeasurable talent will never be encountered again.” My heart is so heavy. This is the end of an era. #Rishisir your candid heart and immeasurable talent will never be encountered again. Such a privilege to have known you even a little bit. My condolences to Neetu maam, Ridhima, Ranbir and the rest of the family. Rest in peace Sir. pic.twitter.com/TR6GVSN4m7 The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, said Kapoor was a powerhouse of talent: “I will always recall our interactions, even on social media. He was passionate about films and India’s progress.” With India currently under lockdown, the Kapoor family issued a statement to urge fans not to publicly gather to pay their respects to Kapoor as is the tradition in the country. Kapoor’s last comment on Twitter had been to ask people to stop attacking those on the medical frontlines of coronavirus in India, writing: “We have to win this war together.” Kapoor’s family said: “In this hour of personal loss, we also recognise the world is going through a very difficult and troubled time. There are numerous restrictions around movement and gathering in public. We would like to request all his fans and well-wishers and friends of the family to please respect the laws that are in force.” Kapoor’s popular hits included Laila Majnu – a story of legendary Indian lovers – Debt, Moonlight, Sometimes, Sea and Lightning. In 1999, he directed Let’s Go Back. He switched to supporting roles in the 2000s and popular movies included Namastey London and Love Aj Kal, or Love Today And Tomorrow. He acted until recently and his last movie, The Body, was released in 2019. Kapoor is survived by his wife, son and daughter.