Mark Townsend’s disturbing report highlights the legacy from George Osborne’s austerity programme (“Domestic violence cases soar as lockdown takes its toll”, News). As the country remains in lockdown, our social services are stretched beyond their limits. Draconian funding cuts and the subsequent closure of refuges have left thousands of men, women and children at the mercy of abusive partners. Many people will suffer in silence, trapped in situations that restrict their ability to contact an organisation that can help them. With an increase in the number of incidents expected over the coming months, it’s critical that the government confirm a date for the second reading of the domestic abuse bill. The importance of this bill cannot be overestimated, as it provides additional protection to victims. And the government needs to ringfence the funding it has promised to ensure a safer future for these often unseen victims.Stuart CarruthersLewes, East Sussex Alan Mitcham is right to point out that the rapid spread of the coronavirus is due to mass international travel, primarily by plane (Letters). Air travel, disproportionately undertaken by the rich, has enormous costs that are paid for by us all, instead of by the participants. It turns epidemics into pandemics and is enormously damaging to the climate. After this crisis is over, we must not return to business as usual. In the next crisis, all planes must be grounded immediately. In the meantime, aviation must be taxed far more.Richard MountfordHildenborough, TonbridgeKent Today, the vast majority of schools are closed and millions of children across the UK are being home-schooled for the first time. Across the planet, that number is approaching a billion. It is incumbent on all of us to do what we can to help them. Extensive research from top academics in many countries has shown that simply turning on the subtitles for children’s television improves literacy. Dramatically. In fact it may double their chance of becoming a proficient reader, in particular those children between the ages of six and 10. As former ministers, secretaries of state, civil servants, charity CEOs, business leaders and academics, we all now call on Sky, Netflix, Amazon Prime, YouTube Kids, ITV, Channel 5 and the BBC to all turn on the subtitles, by default, for children’s TV programmes. This needs to be done as a matter of urgency. This simple change will make the world of difference to millions of young people at this extremely challenging time. You can find out more at the website www.turnonthesubtitles.org. Stephen Fry, Cressida Cowell, Baroness Floella Benjamin, Dr Ranj Singh, Zenna Hopson, Lord Storey, Lord Knight, Baroness Lane-Fox, Errol D’Souza, Prof Ralph Tabberer, Jonathan Douglas, Mike Dickson, Shuna Kennedy, Sir Michael Barber, Lord Foster, Prof Stephen Heppell, Dr Kate Cowan, Antonio Gould, Tom Hall, MT Rainey, Sir David Mellville, Benita Somerfield, Dr Brij Kothari, Jim Fruchterman, Robert Lynch, Deborah Nichols, Annika Small, Michael Acton Smith, Kate Robertson, Alok Singh, Sara Olsen, Scott Norton, Jonathan Seaton, David Angrave, Dame Julia Cleverdon, Baroness Helen Liddell, Oli Barrett, Henry Warren, Steve Haines, Brett Wigdortz, David Wood, Alex Smith, Paul Lindley, Bob Carolgees, Prof Alison Baverstock, Ravi Gurumurthy, Su-Mei Thompson Your editorial included a list of political aims for the new Labour leader (“Competence and clarity are the key, but Starmer needs a persuasive vision”). In this you were in company with many politicians and political commentators. What I have found amazing in this list and virtually all the others is the omission of what is probably the single factor underlying more social problems than any other: the appalling state of Britain’s housing. We know that the number actually homeless is more than 300,000; “hidden” homeless probably number more like 2.5 million and another 2.5 million have difficulty affording rents or mortgages. Around 3.6 million homes are overcrowded. People affected suffer stress, ill health and many must feel sheer desperation. Crime levels are undoubtedly affected too. But probably the worst effects are those on children. What is more likely to damage the life prospects of a child than living in overcrowded housing, probably in damp conditions, with overstressed parents and probably not enough food because the rents are so high? Yet virtually no mainstream politician will put housing into a list of their main priorities. It seems that this is an issue our political leaders simply do not want to tackle. Jeremy CushingTaddyforde, Exeter In your leading article on the Labour leadership outcome, you comment that the questions you pose “can only be answered by a party of the left”. Certainly we shall need a party of the left, but what kind of left? The realisation that civilisation can be so deeply undermined by a single virus prevents a return to a complacent view that we can continue to become for ever better off economically. The political problem that faces Labour is that the left is predicated historically on economic determinism and class conflict, both of which are now obsolete – if for no other reason than the resources to achieve them will not be there. The future will have to promote human values, co-operative structures in industry and community solidarity. These are more the territory of Liberals than Labour and the real question is whether the political parties can reassess their long-held historical values to accommodate an entirely new challenge.Michael MeadowcroftLeeds Those seeking a blanket ban on burning across our moorlands are too often guilty of allowing political agendas to drive the conservation debate (“Grouse shoots scrapped as heather burning is banned on moors”, News). Burning vegetation in the uplands is an essential tool in wildfire management and mitigation. It can increase biodiversity. It is site dependent. It is wrong to say that you should always burn or never burn.Gareth DockertyNunnington, York Nick Cohen is right to argue that social care needs a long-term funding solution, and that this should draw on the wealth of those pensioners who can afford it most (“Why are we gambling with the lives of elderly people and their carers?”, Comment). He goes astray, however, in endorsing Theresa May’s 2017 manifesto proposal to achieve this. This would have required the cost to be borne by those randomly struck down by particular illnesses, and was justifiably derided as the “dementia tax”. A superior application of the principle was Andy Burnham’s earlier proposal for an end-of-life charge on estates. The key is to pool risk across the age group: inheritance tax, capital gains tax on housing or an annual wealth tax could all be ways to achieve this.David GriffithsHuddersfield Mike Power’s account of Canada’s experience legalising cannabis was fascinating (“Why Canada’s joint endeavour failed”, Magazine). It is important to emphasise that cannabis presents a risk to mental health. In 2017, the US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine published a comprehensive report about cannabis use and serious mental illness: the higher the use, the greater the risk. As a psychiatrist, I see this every day: some people’s mental health is very severely affected by cannabis. We all need to work to reduce the harm that cannabis causes across society. Legalisation without clear public health messages would be the worst of all worlds.Brendan Kelly, Professor of PsychiatryTrinity College Dublin