It is likely that you are first made aware of cricket’s return as you walk the crowded pavement of the city at the fall of a spring day. The newsboys are calling “Football edition!” but there is now nothing inimical in the cry. It is no longer the bodeful thing you heard the August before, when cricket died in yellow sunshine and mists. Now, indeed, the cry strikes you as rather desperate – the tyrant is about to be deposed. For there flashes from the window of a shop nearby the white blade of a cricket bat. First herald of the return! And no poet wandering spring lanes will discover a lovelier harbinger of the happy summer to come than the cricketer discovers in this first sight of a bat, after the long waiting through winter-time. You, of course, decide at once to enter the shop and possess a bat. Last year’s is still a good one, but the old fellow deserves a little rest nowadays. Besides, one really does need two bats. One’s average may be modest, but there is no denying the power of one’s strokes ! ... The man in the shop takes you down twisting stairs into the cellar; they always sell bats in the cellar, for some reason. And in the dim light of the cellar you see old footballs lying about, looking rather outmoded. Melancholy appurtenances of the deposed tyrant, they will shortly be stowed away, to be forgotten — for a while! The ritual of making yourself the possessor of a bat now begins. Kreisler over a fresh violin, or a woman over a new hat, is not more judicious. The grain must be quite straight “like the one in the window.’’ It never is, of course. How you balance it, and what exquisite strokes you make with it at an imaginary ball. Spooner could not exceed your grace now! Then the journey home with the new “weapon.” Strange how much embarrassment it means to you. Why should the act of moving through a city holding in one’s grip the main instrument of the greatest of games involve an act which cannot be conducted with dignity? The preliminary “knocks” at the nets with the new bat are, of course, highly critical and exhausting to the nervous system. The ground is muddy, and after the first stroke that you achieve you look at the face of the willow and are scandalised. It had the purity of driven snow a moment ago, and now it is obscene. Moreover, you have smitten a ball with the edge and it is dinted. Agony of mind for you beyond words! But soon the wine of the game gets into your head. A mighty swipe into space completes the state of intoxication. Now are you reckless with the new toy. What’s a bat for anyway! Hit ‘em hard, hit ‘em high, hit ‘em often! Why cannot one bat like this in a match? (You overlook the fact that at the nets there are no fieldsmen with big hands ready to make a ludicrous anti-climax of your towering blows.) Of course you can bat. Those December misgivings about middle age and its limitations are banished. This summer, you feel your average will move well beyond “point something” to figures with a decent sonority about them. The very sweet of the year is in these April days that open the season. The first visitations to the old pavilion – what ineffable poetry is in it for all good cricketers! You turn the key in the rusty lock. The place has stood quiet through the interminable winter, through all the dark nights. And you are awakening life in it again. Open the door reverently, for hero one is engaged in solemn ritual. The odour which is in all cricket pavilions – and nowhere else in the world – is in your nostrils, the odour, surely, of last summer, and ever so fragrant. Once inside, you disturb the echoes with your footsteps on the wooden floor. In the corner is somebody’s cricket shirt with the sleeves hopelessly inside out. It has been here since last September, and because of that it is now holy. And on the bench is an old boot with last summer’s turf in the spikes. You take it in your hand, and fragrant brown dust falls... Your little sentimental journey does not last long, though. Soon the little shanty is noisy with overgrown schoolboys. Thompson, forty if he is a day, is in the toils of an obstinate cricket shirt and singing a comic song. There are others, some with their unsupported trousers fallen over their boots, the crease gone for ever. One is conscious of huge limbs. There is congestion in the old nets. Jones, whom you last saw in King Street with spats and an umbrella, exposes a hairy chest as he tries desperately to get a length. The grass is churned into a quagmire. And tomorrow there will be a certain stiffness is the joints. But you will despise your Melton overcoat now. For the wind has blown through your flannels again, and gone are the infirmities of winter. You have troubles still, of course. But it is not your chest, your digestion now; it is your length, your cue past point. And so you pass into the summer. Evenings in the setting sun, the crack of the bat about you; Saturday afternoons mainly spent in perspiration at mid-on — hard work, there, but a fine place for watching the shadows fall over the cool grass at the wane of the day. And so the cricketer finds the sweet of the year — his only solicitude coming from the sense that it is all so fleeting. Too soon will August be here again, with its sad mellowness and the old cry, this time chilling the heart indeed — “Football Edition! Special!” Neville Cardus was the Manchester Guardian’s cricket correspondent from 1919 to 1940. Read more: How great romantic Neville Cardus changed sports writing for ever.