Global Citizen, organisers of the eight-hour One World: Together at Home livestreamed benefit concert, have announced that the show raised $127m for coronavirus relief efforts. The concert, co-organised by the World Health Organisation (WHO) and Lady Gaga, featured intimate performances from global music stars at home as they self-isolated during the coronavirus crisis, including the Rolling Stones and Billie Eilish. Songs were interspersed with messages from actors such as Matthew McConaughey and Lupita Nyong’o, as well as other figures including Michelle Obama and Oprah Winfrey. While the two-hour television broadcast portion – also screened by the BBC in the UK with additional performances from Paul McCartney, Tom Jones and more – was framed as a gift to essential workers, the preceding six hours invited donations, with the bulk of the cash coming from corporate sponsors. The WHO’s Covid-19 Solidarity Response Fund will get $55.1m, while $72.8m will go to charities such as food banks and housing providers. The WHO fund is used to allocate tests and treatment, and to support development of a vaccine. Inevitably, the fundraising took on a political tinge, coming shortly after Donald Trump withdrew US funding for the WHO. Speaking to Variety, Hugh Evans, chief executive of Global Citizen, said: “It is not uncommon for world leaders of all stature to try to point fingers, because politics is in some instances about survival. And so I think that it’s not so surprising that it has become a political football. But I think that what we have to remember is that there’s no second World Health Organisation. There’s only one.” Beyoncé and Alicia Keys each highlighted how the disease was disproportionately affecting African Americans. Keys cited a study that found 33% of those hospitalised with the virus in the US were black, despite African Americans counting for 13% of the US population. “Pre-existing health conditions and lack of access to information and affordable healthcare, and economic and societal circumstances, are some of the reasons why it’s most prevalent amongst communities of colour,” she said. Beyoncé, who voiced support for, among others, essential workers across healthcare, sanitation, said: “Black Americans disproportionately belong to these essential parts of the workforce that do not have the luxury of working from home, and African American communities at large have been severely affected by this crisis … this virus is killing black people and in an alarmingly high rate here in America.” She cited a report that found 57% of fatal cases in her home city of Houston were African American. The show was well received, with Piers Morgan, who had previously criticised Lady Gaga’s involvement, apologising to her for his earlier comments. “This was a great initiative that raised a fortune, entertained people, & will help save lives,” he tweeted. “It was also a perfect illustration of a major star using their profile properly in this crisis. Congrats & sorry for originally questioning it.” Lady Gaga tweeted after the show: “Thank you with all of my heart for watching #TogetherAtHome, sharing in a global moment of kindness with each other, and spreading positive and loving intentions. We love you.”