As government pumps enormous spending into the Australian economy to keep it on life support during the Covid-19 shutdown, talk is starting to turn to the fear of the long-term debt we are taking on. This fear is due to the belief that the federal budget is like a household budget. If we borrow, we must pay it back, within the term of the loan, or our children will be paying it instead – or so the story goes. The story is fiction. Public debt is not like household debt. When someone takes out a mortgage to buy a home, they borrow against the value of that home – the property is the asset against which the loan is secured. The term of the loan is set so that the borrower can pay it off during their working life, while they maintain income sufficient to service the debt. When the federal government borrows, it also does so against an asset, which is the productive capacity of the Australian economy. Unlike a household mortgage, there is no time limit on repayment, because the national economy has no finite lifespan: Australia will never “retire”, it will continue to generate income through productive economic activity. Therefore, the government can roll over its debt indefinitely, provided the nation’s economic activity continues. And as the nation’s economy grows, the size of the debt in proportion to national wealth, measured as gross domestic product, shrinks commensurately. Australia’s public debt is low compared with other advanced economies. Net debt is currently around 20% of GDP, and even with the additional debt accrued in recent weeks, is expected to reach only 26% in the next six months. At the end of the second world war, Australia’s debt was equivalent to over 120% of GDP, but Australians were not paying off this debt for generations. The postwar years in Australia are remembered as a “boom” time that created the most prosperous middle-class society on earth, with rising standards of living and falling inequality. Average weekly earnings increased by an average of 11.15% annually between 1948 and 1958, and we enjoyed the strongest and most stable period of economic growth in our history, averaging 4.2% of GDP in the 1950s and 5.3% in the 60s. Strong economic growth effectively shrank the war debt as a proportion of GDP, so that it was returned to prewar levels in just 10 years. This happened because, rather than focus on paying off the debt by cutting spending and raising taxes, the Australian government in the postwar years concentrated on creating a full employment economy, building a robust manufacturing sector, creating the Commonwealth employment service to help people find work, and making significant public investments in productive infrastructure, including a large build of public housing. Seventy-five years later, as we begin to think about our own economic reconstruction, we would be well advised to learn the lessons of our post-war success. What comes next is critical. Any expectation that the economy will “snap back” to normal operation in the aftermath of this crisis is fanciful. Yet already we are seeing arguments to raise the GST to pay off the debt. Some are calling for a delay to the annual increase in the minimum wage. And, predictably, we have seen a renewed push for further deregulation and tax cuts for business, on the promise that they will somehow, at long last, “trickle down” to create jobs and boost household incomes. As we begin to emerge from the lockdown, there is likely to be a fierce battle waged over what comes next These arguments presage a push for the Australian government to implement austerity measures to pay off public debt as soon as possible. Yet evidence from countries that took such an approach after the GFC shows that this leads to soaring poverty and inequality and stifles economic growth, reducing our ability to pay down debt. It is not the debt itself that poses a risk to future generations of Australians; it is that we may respond to that debt by cutting public spending and further shrinking the economy, undermining their ability to build good lives in the years ahead. The key to ensuring our children are not punished for our debt is to strengthen the economy in which they will live and work. They will need good jobs with decent incomes; a strong social safety net; access to affordable housing; and the opportunities provided by a world-class education. All these things were needed, and were becoming harder to find, even before the pandemic hit; all can be realised by investing in the productive capacity of our nation. Reconstructing our economy will require more government borrowing to finance investment in carbon-neutral infrastructure, renewable energy generation, R&D incentives that encourage business to invest, and a rebalancing of the demands of paid labour with unpaid work and care. Government must lead the way, but it cannot act alone. The cooperation of business, unions, community organisations and every Australian will be needed to restore our way of life – not only to recover from the immediate crisis of Covid-19, but to deal with the existential emergency of climate change. As we begin to emerge from the lockdown, there is likely to be a fierce battle waged over what comes next. On one side will be a push to return to the kind of economic activity that has fuelled inequality, and contributed to the crisis of anthropogenic climate change, while holding down wages and living standards for working Australians. On the other side is an opportunity to reset our society and create sustainable economic growth, by investing in a full-employment economy, shifting our industrial activity to a carbon-neutral footing, rebuilding our manufacturing capacity and recognising the value of work in the foundational economy that provides the care and services we have relied on so heavily during the lockdown. Only the latter approach will ensure that our children have a future to look forward to, rather than to fear. • Emma Dawson is executive director of public policy think-tank Per Capita. On Wednesday, she will talk with the federal shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, on the topic “Debt or Destitution: the hard choices facing Australia” as part of Australia at Home