1) While most of us are cooped up indoors, it’s a great time to dig out old games consoles from the attic to reaquaint yourselves with some old favourites. Or, indeed, to check out some that are … less classic. Sure, there’s Sensible World of Soccer and Fifa, but there’s also Tehkan World Cup – play it here … and Kick And Run … and Dream Soccer ’94 or indeed Alpha Denshi’s Exciting Soccer from 1983. If you still have Flash, Roby Baggio’s Magical Kicks is willing and able to distract you for whole evenings and weekends (if not, here’s a clip) … failing that, there’s always Nihon’s Free Kick. Nevermind NBA Jam and Arch Rivals, here’s Street Hoop (aka Dunk Dream), All-American Basketball on the Speccy and the Master System’s decidedly ungreat Great Basketball. Forget Pole Position, Virtua Racing and Super Sprint, the cool cats are all about Tail To Nose: Great Championship. And Road Rash is all well and good, but don’t forget Kick Rider and Alex Kidd’s BMX Trial. Don’t dig out World Class Leaderboard, Links, Golden Tee and Sensible Golf … instead here’s Major Title, Greg Norman’s Shark Attack … Lee Trevino’s Fighting Golf … or have a swing at the Atari 2600’s My Golf. Punch Out is the most memorable arcade boxing game, but here’s Ring King, KO Punch, and George Foreman’s KO Boxing, the latter featuring our hero gorging on hamburgers between rounds to up his energy levels. Tennis heads may fondly recall Pete Sampras Tennis, but here’s Passing Shot and Playmark’s Super Slam. The John Madden series gets the plaudits from American football lovers, but Tehkan’s Gridiron Fight is worth a look, as is John Elway’s Team Quarterback … or go seriously retro with the medieval-themed Pigskin. Finally, forget Konami’s Track & Field and Hyper Sports for your button-mashing and joystick-waggling … try Brian Jacks Superstar Challenge … or indeed Geoff Capes’s Strongman Challenge 2) More retro fun: to accompany our recent MBM of Scotland’s famous 1978 win over the Netherlands, here are some highlights. And you’ll be wanting some half-time analysis too (one minute in) including Jimmy Hill, Jock Stein and Billy Bremner. While on Tuesday we revisited Manchester United’s famous fightback against Juventus in 1999. Here’s the key action. 3) The virtual Grand National takes place this weekend, in lieu of an actual Aintree event (gamers can saddle up Diamond Derby instead). Tiger Roll’s hopes of a third successive win were scuppered by the race’s cancellation – catch up with his first and second respectively. 4) Toilet-roll keepie-uppies etc from footballers on lockdown, and Kenny Dalglish attempts to show he still has it, with mixed though watchable results. 5) Second-rower Mick Cassidy takes the ball for Wigan against Australia in a Central Park “friendly” in 1994, gets absolutely clattered by Ian Roberts, but brushes it off fuss-free to get up and play the ball. Another friendly rumpus here too: Les Boyd v Ellery Hanley during the 1989 Warrington v Wigan meeting in Milwaukee. 1) Benjamin Massing’s infamous assault on Argentina’s Claudio Caniggia at Italia 90. 2) Skydiving: the sheer intensity of a flying suit basejump. 3) More vintage Johan Cruyff, for Ajax. And Jan Molby on the Dutch master’s last game. 4) And another legend, this time in NFL – Tom Brady. Here’s SuperBowl 51 in full, and some of Brady’s less memorable moments. 5) The brilliant and underrated Dejan Savicevic. 6) One for Sunderland fans: the 1973 FA Cup final in full. Spotters’ badges: Pboro fan, whobroughtoranges, salfordexile66, ILikeChips, Germit, Stefano73, GeoffHa Guardian YouTube football channel Do subscribe, if you fancy. Guardian YouTube sport channel Do subscribe, if you fancy.