‘There are some gaits from hell out there. Arms flail around, above legs uncoordinated with them; often the legs barely coordinate with each other. They are making it so hard for themselves and will surely get injured. It’s not their fault; it’s unlikely they’ve ever been taught how to run properly.’ These had been 119 of the most intense World Cup minutes: a relentless back-and-forth between two of the sport’s foremost nations. The game remained deadlocked only because Lukas Podolski couldn’t beat Gianluigi Buffon at the end of a five-on-five, while Alberto Gilardino and Gianluca Zambrotta hit the woodwork of a goal they concluded to be cursed.’ ‘Brandon Blackwell, from Queens in New York, had never left his home country when he decided he wanted to win a British quiz show. On trying to apply, however, he realised that he would need to be a UK resident, and since he was planning to study for a master’s anyway, he decided to look for courses in Britain.’ ‘The leak of the book was initially seen as a bit of mischief by Liberals who were not big fans of Turnbull when he was prime minister. But the publishing industry sees it as an example of a copyright infringement which is damaging to their finances and survival. “The area is incredibly remote and there is a possibility that they have suffered some misadventure in the bush, but we also need to rule out any possibility of foul play.” ‘“What the fuck is the matter with her?” he said, before complaining about Rathbone’s questions in an earlier part of the session. Elin Jones, the assembly’s llywydd – equivalent to speaker – attempted to rescue the situation as Gething continued his rant.’ ‘Big Oil and its corporate and banking representatives have, according to this film, found a way to use the green movement for their own ends, and to get their mitts on the huge subsidies that taxpayers around the world are handing over to anyone claiming to be developing renewable energy resources, which turn out to be the same old fossil-fuel entities in different packaging.’ ‘Britain agreed to let Anne Sacoolas, the driver charged with killing 19-year-old motorcyclist Harry Dunn, return to the US on the basis of an “apparently illogical” interpretation of the law on diplomatic immunity, according to the most senior civil servant at the Foreign Office.’ ‘Why not introduce a digital component to the great tidy-up? Your laptop’s downloads folder might not literally collect dust, but whether physical or digital, the longer you leave things to fester, the harder they become to eventually deal with.’ ‘Finally. Someone with actual power and clout prepared to stand up to the despotic thugs of Saudi Arabia, and lobby the Premier League to block the proposed takeover of the cherished community institution Newcastle United. But wait. Who are these mysterious philanthropists? Oh. Hello there, Qatar. Right. That’s a bit awkward.’