Jennifer Aniston in The Morning Show. Steven Spielberg resurrecting his Amazing Stories. Oprah Winfrey given free rein over whatever form and content she likes. And now Captain America in Defending Jacob. The Apple TV+ policy of securing big names for splashy projects to highlight the new streaming platform’s presence in an overcrowded market shows no sign of faltering. A heavily bearded Chris Evans has set aside his shield (and razor) to play assistant district attorney and devoted family man Andy Barber. He has, in the manner of all standard American TV crime series, an implausibly muscular frame beneath his expensive suit, a noble mien and a thin, loving wife (Michelle Dockery) with mandated wife-length hair (below the shoulder, stopping just short of lower-mid-back) and a sweetly caring job that embeds her deeply in their community (running a charity residential centre for traumatised children). You can be sure they would both socially distance responsibly in a pandemic. Their son Jacob (Jaeden Martell) stops gaming when told, keeps on top of his homework and, if he nurtures a passion for The Catcher in the Rye and slightly fancies himself a Holden Caulfield – well, he’s young. You just have to wait these things out. But the story opens with Andy facing indictment by a grand jury. “I believe in the system,” he insists. “I just want the truth to come out.” The Barbers’ perfect life, it turns out, has been upended by the arrest of Jacob for the murder of Ben Rifkin, a fellow student at his high school who was stabbed in nearby woods. What began as apparent mudslinging on social media – “Everyone knows you did it,” runs a post; “You have a knife. I’ve seen it” – was transformed into something quite different with the discovery of Jacob’s fingerprint on the label of the sweatshirt Ben was wearing when he died. Before the print was discovered, however, Andy found and disposed of the knife that Jacob did indeed own. Just to have, the boy tells his parents. Just to be cool. They are shocked and disappointed, but that doesn’t mean they contemplate that he could be the killer. Questions of the son’s guilt and the father’s complicity (given a further twist by Andy’s own troubled childhood and a floating anxiety about the sins of the one being visited on the other) thicken the dramatic stew nicely, even if it does feel like one we’ve been served many times before. The script needs more seasoning. People say things such as: “Don’t you dare shut me out right now!” and “There’s nothing you wouldn’t do for him?” in between giving brave nods to cop and lawyer friends who are Just Doing Their Jobs as the machinery of the law clanks into motion around them. What does mark Defending Jacob out, as the eight-episode series wears on, is its detailed, intimate portrayal of a family under pressure, as the parents become pariahs in the town and doubts about Jacob’s innocence erode their resilience from within. At times, it becomes as much a mood piece as a thriller. Dockery brings out Laurie’s inherent brittleness as she wrestles with potential outcomes and realises that the supposedly unconditional love of a mother for her child might be tested to the utmost. Martell treads such a fine line between ordinary teenage reserve and possibly sociopathic detachment that you cannot guess which way the plot will jump. And Evans is great as the lawyer who can hardly believe what is happening to him – and still less the fact that he cannot right it by sheer brute force of brainpower and will. Arguably, Evans’ star wattage has tended to be a little dimmer than others in his cohort (he’s outshone by most of the other Chrisses’ charisma for a start) and it’s always made sense that he was cast as Marvel’s blandest superhero, but on the small screen his star quality is compressed and he becomes that much more compelling. Approached as a crime drama, Defending Jacob might seem a little slow and underbaked, but as an ensemble character piece it hits the mark. All our new concerns about privacy, privilege and predators are woven into it, along with older, enduring fears such as how can we ever truly know someone, even if we created them, and how far love and loyalty will, rightly or wrongly, take you.