With lockdown looking likely to continue for the foreseeable, people are going that extra mile to bring joy to the lives of others – through dance, bicycles or simple sunshine. Staff at Queen’s hospital in Romford, Essex, took time out over the weekend to wheel two recovering Covid-19 patients outside in their beds to enjoy the sunshine. “This recovering Covid-19 patient was taken outside by staff to receive one of the greatest therapies available to us, the sun!” said Barking, Havering and Redbridge university hospitals NHS trust as it posted the image. Patrick Thoeung, Sharon McLoughlin, Mari Fantocchi and Katie Hayes, from the physiotherapy team, took the two patients outside on Saturday. “We felt very privileged to be part of our patients’ rehab and recovery,” said McLoughlin. As of Monday, Royal Mail will stamp all letters with a message to celebrate the 100th birthday of Capt Tom Moore, the war veteran who has raised millions for the NHS. He becomes a centenarian on Thursday, and all stamped post up until Friday will be marked with: “Happy 100th Birthday Captain Thomas Moore NHS fundraising hero 30th April 2020.” Royal Mail said it was “honoured” to introduce the special postmark for Moore, whose fundraising total reached £29m on Monday morning. More than 100,000 birthday cards have already been sent to Moore, and a Royal Mail spokesman said sorting machines at the South Midlands mail centre have been adapted to re-route all the cards into a dedicated collection box. Hundreds of bikes abandoned at railway stations are to be renovated and donated to key workers to help them get to and from work during the lockdown. Every month about 20 abandoned bikes arrive at Southern Rail’s maintenance depot in Horsham, Sussex, where they are stored in case owners decide to recover them. Govia Thameslink Railway, which runs Southern Rail, has teamed up with Handlebars, a bicycle repair service which will renovate the bikes and supply them to key workers free of charge. Andre Noble, a mechanic at Handlebars, has assessed all 272 bikes. He said: “We have seen a tonne of bikes in various conditions ... Only the safe ones will go out to key workers and the rest will need a bit of love first!” A video of 200 residents taking part in a physically distanced Saturday Night dance routine has gone viral. Neighbours at Canon Mooney Gardens in Ringsend, Dublin, took part in the mass dance on – appropriately – Saturday, and organisers marked spots eight feet apart to ensure safe physical distancing. Spread around the car park in the middle of the estate, dozens of residents perform the well-known moves to Whigfield’s 90s smash hit “Whigfield, next time you could come sing it for us to dance to,” said resident Rebecca Larkin as she posted the video on Facebook.