What a wonderfully caring article by Rosie Hughes (‘I feel fear and guilt’: an NHS junior doctor on the effect of getting Covid-19, 14 April). She shouldn’t apologise for revealing her emotions to relatives of deceased patients, I’m sure they will take great solace from knowing someone cared. Hopefully, when this pandemic is over, this topsy-turvy economy of ours, where gamblers – investment bankers, fund managers, etc – are rewarded to excess, will be straightened out, and brave, caring and useful people such as Rosie will be much better appreciated.Peter L HepworthLeigh-on-Sea, Essex • Rosie Hughes’ moving account of her experiences working on the frontline highlights many issues (including the one of personal protective equipment). Dominic Raab finally admitted on 13 April that the problem is not only with demand but also with supply (Timeline of UK’s coronavirus PPE shortage, 13 April). I applaud the efforts of many communities, including my own (Ryedale Scrubs for the Community), who have taken action into their own hands by amassing an army of volunteers to produce a large amount of PPE, including face visors using 3D printers, to supply local nursing homes, GP surgeries and hospitals. Why has the government got this so wrong?Carol FergusonThornton le Dale, North Yorkshire • Marina Hyde (With 1,000 deaths a day, our leaders should be facing far tougher questions, 10 April) hits the nail on the head, as do all the letters you published . How many more times do we have to hear this inept government talk about “ramping up” supplies of PPE and testing? If these promises had been fulfilled, the country would be awash with supplies. Who do we believe? The essential workers on the frontline or ministers in the media pretending to know what they are doing? This government is floundering, but thinks we are stupid enough to believe their feeble attempts to present a face of competence and compassion. When this is over, let’s maintain pressure for an honest reckoning of what was done wrongly and why – in a timely fashion so that the same mistakes can be avoided in the future. Because there certainly is going to be a similar event again.Joyce WormaldBishop’s Stortford, Hertfordshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 