New Zealanders have donated hundreds of thousands of dollars to feed hungry zoo animals in the midst of lockdown as the prime minister announced coronavirus lockdown restrictions would continue for at least three more weeks. Orana Wildlife Park on the outskirts of Christchurch is home to 400 wild and domestic animals, including chimps, meerkats, rhinos and giraffes. The zoo has been shut to the public during the lockdown, with keepers, deemed essential workers, working split shifts to stay safe. Unable to earn any income from visitors, which usually accounts for 95% of its revenue, the zoo is now struggling to pay its weekly NZ$70,000 (US$42,000) food bills, and has appealed to the general public for help. The gorillas alone eat NZ$800 (US$485) worth of vegetables every week. In just four days more than 4,000 Kiwis have donated more than NZ$230,000. The wildlife park is the country’s only open-range zoo and is home to over 70 species of endangered animals from New Zealand and around the world. According to the givealittle appeal, the government’s wage subsidy only covers 40% of the park’s operating costs. “These costs are impossible to put on hold and include enormous food bills, huge electricity bills to keep our animals warm in the cooler weather and essential veterinary costs,” the appeal reads. “Our important New Zealand native conservation work continues, such as Kiwi chicks have recently hatched and must have access to heated brooder units in these crucial early stages.” The huge sum raised will be enough to keep the park operational under the extended lockdown, with hopes cooped up Kiwis will flock back for visits with the animals – many of whom are missing their human friends – once restrictions are eased. More than 1,400 cases of coronavirus have been recorded in New Zealand and 12 people have died. The country has been in lockdown for a month. On Monday the prime minister Jacinda Ardern said level-4 restrictions would end on 27 April and the country would move to level-three restrictions until at least 11 May. She said the elimination strategy needed to be given a fighting chance. Keepers at the park said they were “overwhelmed and humbled” by the successful appeal. 