A cult comic from Spain’s 1970s counter-culture has been relaunched online to help relieve the tedium of the nation’s lockdown. The subversive comic El Víbora (The Viper) published 300 issues between 1979 and 2005 but now it’s back – briefly – by popular demand, according to the comic’s Barcelona-based publisher, Emilio Bernárdez. “It’s an act of solidarity with people who are bored at home,” Bernárdez said. “We wanted to do something. But we’re not health workers so this is what we came up with. We’re very close to our readers and so many of them asked us to revive El Víbora we decided to bring out a special issue that brings together our contributors’ favourite strips. The response from the cartoonists has been fantastic.” The comic was always subtitled Comix for Survivors, in reference to those who had lived through Spain’s 40-year dictatorship, which ended with the death of General Franco in 1975. The publication will reappear as The Viper for Survivors, this time referring to Covid-19. Most of the content will be recycled from past issues but the front cover features a newly commissioned cartoon by Aroha Travé bearing the slogan “Go fuck yourself, Covid-19”. Bernárdez explained that, although they will only publish one issue, which can be accessed for free, it won’t all be published at once. He said: “Altogether it may run to 300 pages but we will publish around 40 pages a week. There is so much material because so many contributors wanted to take part. There are also new works that are about coronavirus. We will publish every Wednesday until the end of the lockdown.” El Víbora played its part in Spain’s transition, not just from dictatorship to democracy but from sexual and cultural repression. Much of the counter-culture that emerged elsewhere in the 1960s was delayed by a decade in Spain, when it exploded in a frenzied and sometimes disastrous embrace of sex and drugs and rock’n’roll. One reader, Joan Fumaz, who was 17 when the comic produced its first edition, said: “To understand the impact of El Víbora you have to put yourself in the skin of an adolescent of that time. “Sex was taboo but I could buy this comic that had stuff about junkies, prostitutes and transvestites. It opened our eyes. We all read El Víbora, we all smoked weed, but we still had to go to Mass every Sunday and kiss the priest’s ring and be told we weren’t old enough to make our own decisions. “I think my first decision before I became an adult was to buy El Víbora.” Gina Rosquelles, who was 20 at the time, said: “El Víbora was a transgressive publication. It had the air of something not exactly fresh but really different. It was a real break from tradition and also carried a lot of suggestive images.” The comic followed in the tradition of the underground comic movement in the US and UK. Leading cartoonists of the American movement, such as Robert Crumb and Gilbert Shelton, were among El Víbora’s contributors. Crumb has donated a cartoon for the coronavirus issue. “All subversive comics in Spain today owe something to El Víbora,” claims Bernárdez. At its peak, the comic had a monthly circulation of 80,000 copies.