Virgin Australia has gone into voluntary administration after the federal government again ruled out saving the airline. This will be the biggest, airline collapse since Ansett in 2002. “The government is not in the business of owning an airline. But we do want to see two airlines continue,” the finance minister, Matthias Cormann, told Radio National on Tuesday morning. “There is the opportunity to ensure that this comes to a successful conclusion, but if the government steps in would actually make it harder to find a sustainable private sector-led, market-led solution,” he said. But Cormann stressed the government wanted to see two airlines in the future. The move will put more than 10,000 jobs and more than $1bn in prepaid tickets at risk. The airline, which has been largely grounded since 25 March due to the coronavirus crisis, will appoint John Greig, Vaughan Strawbridge and Richard Hughes of big four accounting firm Deloitte as administrators. The move comes after the federal government rebuffed its plea for a $1.4bn loan as part of a wider bailout of the industry and despite duelling offers of support from New South Wales and Queensland. For Queensland the collapse of the airline will be especially harsh, unions warned. “In Queensland alone, in Brisbane there’s 5,000 employees. There’s 10,000-odd direct employed by Virgin, and another 5,000 contractors that contract to Virgin. It’s an enormous amount of people that’s going to be affected by this, as well as their families,” Queensland state secretary of the Transport Workers’ Union, Peter Biagini, said. He said it’s “fanciful” to think another airline could easily replace Virgin in Australia. NSW is expected to propose support for a reconstituted airline, provided it bases itself out of the new aerotropolis being built at Badgerys Creek. Virgin Australia employs 10,000 people whose jobs are now in jeopardy. Also to be decided is the fate of its fleet of about 130 planes, many of which are mortgaged to the hilt, and almost $1.2bn in customer ticket bookings. The move also sparked fears of sky-high airfares for consumers if bigger rival Qantas is once again able to establish dominance of the Australian market. Administration is likely to wipe out the value of stock in the group, including that held by dominant shareholders Singapore Airlines, Chinese groups Nanshan and HNA, the government of Abu Dhabi through state airline Etihad and billionaire Richard Branson. However, administration may also help a buyer to reduce or eliminate a debt mountain of more than $4.8bn owed to banks that has crippled the airline as it continued to burn through cash while its planes were grounded. It may also be able to close parts of the airline that are not performing well, such as budget arm Tiger. This would allow Virgin Australia to eventually fly again, even if in a reduced form. It is understood that chief executive Paul Scurrah is likely keep his job for the time being. Over the past fortnight Scurrah has been fighting against what he sees as a campaign against Virgin Australia by Qantas, as well as dealing with a government that repeatedly said it was committed to keeping two airlines in Australia but has so far been unwilling to bail out the company. The government has offered the industry about $700m in reduced fees and charges, but these are only of value if planes are flying. It has also offered $165m to underwrite Virgin Australia and Qantas operating a “minimum domestic network servicing the most critical metropolitan and regional routes”, but because this money only covers the cost of operating the flights it does not improve Virgin Australia’s financial position. Its collapse raises the prospect of Qantas once again enjoying a monopoly over major Australian air routes, as it did after the collapse of Ansett in 2002. This resulted in fares rising, the former competition tsar Allan Fels told Guardian Australia. The Flight Attendants’ Association of Australia said it was important that governments gave thought to what they wanted the aviation industry to look like after the coronavirus crisis passed. “We cannot have a complete abandonment of competition. It took 20 years to get Virgin to a position where it was a competitor to Qantas,” FAAA’s manager of industrial relations, Steven Reed, said. “We need Virgin is some form, so that people can afford to fly on Qantas,” he said. “People should recall what the airline industry was like when there was no meaningful competition under the two airline policy of the 1970s and early 1980s. “Unless the government caps airfares, then the market will set fares and it will be back to $1,000 return to Melbourne, or $3,000 return to Perth [from Sydney].” Virgin Australia has been in the red every year for the past five years, running up losses of more than $1.6bn. It lost an additional $88m in the six months to the end of the year. TWU national secretary Michael Kaine said administration would be a “terrifying moment for thousands of Virgin workers” and repeated his previous calls for the federal government to bail the company out. “The prime minister has promoted the concept of hibernation, of keeping viable businesses afloat through this crisis. That must include Virgin and the only way to do that is a government equity stake in this business.” The company has been considering appointing administrators since at least last Tuesday.