Prep 15 minCook 40 minServes 4–6 1.8kg whole chicken, or 1.25kg bone-in, skin-on chicken thighs or legsSalt and black pepper4 tbsp olive oil1 lemon, cut into thick slices crossways, seeds removed2 shallots, peeled and halved lengthways4–6 medjool dates, pitted4 thyme or oregano sprigs, plus extra for serving2 tsp ground urfa chilli or 1 tsp chilli flakesFlaky salt Heat the oven to 210C (190C fan)/425F/gas 7, and season the chicken all over. Put two tablespoons of oil in a large casserole dish over a medium–high heat. Add the chicken to the pot breast side up and press lightly, so the skin comes into even contact with the bottom of the pot. Brown the legs and render the excess fat. (If using thighs or legs, sear them skin side down.) Cook until the chicken is nice and browned, about five to eight minutes. Add the lemon, making sure the slices come into contact with the bottom of the pot, and the shallots. Cook until lightly caramelised – about two minutes. Add the dates, herbs and 250ml water. Sprinkle the chicken with the chilli and put the lid on. Transfer to the oven and roast until the dates are plump, the lemon slices are jammy, and the chicken is almost but not totally cooked through, 20–25 minutes. Remove the lid and drizzle the chicken with the remaining two tablespoons of olive oil. Return to the oven, and roast until the top of the chicken is a glistening golden brown and the liquid is reduced by a half – another 20–30 minutes, depending on whether you’re using parts or a whole bird. Rest for 10 minutes before carving. Serve alongside the shallots, lemon slices and dates, with some more herbs and flaky salt sprinkled over. Prep 5 minCook 5 minServes 6 225g cream cheese or ricotta, preferably at room temperature185g soured cream or labneh60g tahini2 tbsp waterSalt and black pepper60ml olive oil2 tbsp white sesame seeds1 tsp ground turmericFlaky salt Combine the cream cheese, soured cream, tahini and water in a food processor and pulse until well blended and creamy. Alternatively, use a fork or spoon; there might just be a few lumps, which is fine. Season. Heat the olive oil and sesame seeds in a small frying pan over medium heat. Cook, swirling occasionally, until the sesame seeds are toasted and fragrant, about two to three minutes. Add the turmeric and remove from the heat. Transfer the cream cheese mixture to a serving bowl and top with the sesame- turmeric oil. Finish with flaky salt and more pepper before serving. Prep 15 minCook 20 minServes 4–6 125g raw shelled walnuts, coarsely chopped125ml olive oil, plus extra for drizzling4 anchovy fillets1 garlic clove, peeled and finely grated750g green beans, trimmed1 lemon, thinly sliced, seeds removedSalt and black pepper2 tbsp wholegrain mustard1 tbsp white-wine vinegar3 tbsp finely chopped dill Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/450F/gas 8, or heat a barbecue grill to medium–high. Put the walnuts and 60ml of the olive oil in a medium pot over a medium heat. Cook, swirling occasionally, until the walnuts are toasted – two to three minutes. Remove from the heat and add the anchovies and garlic, swirling to dissolve the anchovy. Set aside. Put the beans and lemon on a baking tray. Drizzle with enough olive oil to lightly coat, and season with salt and pepper. Roast (or grill), tossing once or twice, until the beans and lemon start to char in spots – 12–15 minutes (or eight–10 minutes if grilling). Combine the mustard, vinegar and remaining 60ml olive oil in a large bowl and season. Add the bean mixture and toss to coat. Transfer to a serving platter and top with the walnut mixture and dill. Prep 10 minCook 15 minMakes 24 90g unsalted butter310g icing sugar90g unsweetened cocoa powder1 tsp salt2 large egg whites1 large egg225g chocolate (at least 67% cocoa solids), chopped60g finely chopped hazelnuts, almonds, pistachio nuts, pecans or walnuts (optional)Flaky salt Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Line two trays with baking paper. Melt the butter in a small pan over a medium heat, until starting to foam and brown – about three to four minutes. Stir the butter from time to time so that the solids don’t stick to the bottom. Leave to cool. Whisk the icing sugar, cocoa powder and salt in a medium bowl, until combined. If you want to, you can sift them all first. Using a spatula, mix in the egg whites, whole egg and browned butter, stirring until you have a smoothish mixture – any small lumps are fine – followed by the chocolate and any nuts you want to add. Using a spoon, drop 2.5cm blobs of the batter on to the baking trays, about 5 cm apart. Take care, as they spread a lot. Sprinkle with flaky salt. Bake until the cookies have flattened considerably and look baked through and a bit wrinkled – about six to eight minutes. Let them cool before eating, so they can firm up. • Recipes from Nothing Fancy: Unfussy Food for Having People Over, by Alison Roman (Hardie Grant)