The National Theatre’s celebrated productions of Frankenstein, directed by Danny Boyle, and Antony and Cleopatra, starring Ralph Fiennes and Sophie Okonedo, are to be streamed for free as part of its National Theatre at Home initiative. Nick Dear’s adaptation of Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein was staged in 2011, with the inspired idea of Benedict Cumberbatch and Jonny Lee Miller alternating between the roles of Victor Frankenstein and the Creature on different nights. Audiences will be able to see both actors in each role, as two versions will be shown on consecutive evenings (30 April and 1 May). “The actors complement each other perfectly rather than provide a contest,” wrote the Guardian’s Michael Billington in his review. “Boyle’s production is a bravura triumph in which Mark Tildesley’s design provides a whole series of visual coups.” Simon Godwin’s epic 2018 production of Antony and Cleopatra, handsomely designed by Hildegard Bechtler and starring Fiennes and Okonedo as the tragic lovers, will be streamed on 7 May. Fiennes and Okonedo were named best actor and best actress at the Evening Standard theatre awards for their performances in the show which, like Frankenstein, was a hot ticket at the enormous Olivier theatre. Their co-stars include a metre-long live snake: four constrictors were used throughout the run. In addition to its weekly theatre streams, the National has announced a monthly virtual quiz, featuring questions on sport and history as well as theatre, with stars of stage and screen taking on the role of quizmaster. The first will take place on 27 April with questions asked by Helen Mirren, Lenny Henry, Lesley Manville and Ian McKellen, who has his own regular quiz at his London pub, the Grapes. The National has already streamed three popular productions during the shutdown caused by coronavirus. The riotous comedy One Man, Two Guvnors clocked up more than 2.5m views over the week it was available. It was followed by adaptations of Jane Eyre and Treasure Island. The fourth stream, which takes place on Thursday night, is Twelfth Night starring Tamsin Greig.