Wimbledon, one of the centrepieces of the British summer sporting calendar, has been cancelled due to the coronavirus pandemic, the All England Club has confirmed, the first time the tournament will not be held since the second world war. The Championships were scheduled to run from 29 June until 12 July but, as tennis officials prepared for emergency talks this week, cancellation swiftly became unavoidable. Unlike one-day sporting events, Wimbledon functions more like a festival, held over two weeks in the vast All-England Lawn Tennis Club, which contains 40 tournament and practice courts occupied by competitors and staff throughout the tournament. This means Wimbledon requires at least two months of preparation before the event, which is incompatible with the government’s current lockdown and guidance on social distancing. As players reacted to the announcement, attention particularly focused on the two most successful players at Wimbledon, Roger Federer and Serena Williams, both finalists in 2019, who at 38 years old will not have many more opportunities to win there. “I’m Shooked [sic],” posted Williams. “Devastated,” wrote the eight-times champion Federer on Twitter, adding: “I can’t wait to come back next year. It only makes us appreciate our sport even more during these times.” The All England Club chairman, Ian Hewitt, said in a statement: “This is a decision that we have not taken lightly, and we have done so with the highest regard for public health and the wellbeing of all those who come together to make Wimbledon happen,.”After January’s Australian Open and Roland Garros in May, Wimbledon traditionally marks the third major in the tennis calendar. Last month, the spring clay-court season was scuppered after the French Tennis Federation blindsided the other major tennis stakeholders – the ATP, WTA, ITF – by unilaterally shifting Roland Garros from its intended 24 May start to 20 September, just a week after the US Open is due to end on 13 September. As grass is only a viable playing surface during the spring and summer months, postponement was not a realistic option for Wimbledon. In coordination with Wimbledon’s announcement, the ATP, WTA and ITF tours announced that professional tennis will not return before 13 July after the cancellation of the other summer grass court events. The tour has been suspended since the cancellation of Indian Wells on 9 March, the day before it was set to begin.“While in some ways this has been a challenging decision, we strongly believe it is not only in the best interests of society at this time, but also provides certainty to our colleagues in international tennis given the impact on the grass court events in the UK and in Europe and the broader tennis calendar,” said the All England Club’s chief executive, Richard Lewis.Beyond the practical sporting repercussions of Wimbledon becoming the first cancelled slam event so far, it is also a reflection of the continued decimation of summer entertainment. Wimbledon has always stood as a curiosity in the world of tennis. It is as much an annual fixture in the summer London social calendar as it is a sporting event. The 2019 edition had an aggregate attendance of 500,397, with spectators from all corners of the world, many of whom attended as much for the experience of tasting strawberries and cream and being seen as for seeing the tennis itself.While most other tennis tournaments have attempted to modernise and adapt for a new generation of fans, Wimbledon continues to tip its hat towards tennis’s traditional country-club base wherever possible and each year it is dotted with spectators who arrive dressed in formal suits and gowns, topped off with elaborate hats. They will have to wait another year.