Italy’s prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, has warned of the break-up of the European Union, as unprecedented pressure was piled on northern states to give way and unlock €500bn (£438bn) of economic support for the countries hit hardest by the coronavirus pandemic. After 16 hours of talks since Tuesday, EU finance ministers will reconvene by videoconference on Thursday afternoon with the financial markets seeking signs of accord and politicians warning of a make-or-break moment for the bloc. “It’s a big challenge to the existence of Europe,” Conte told the BBC. “If Europe fails to come up with a monetary and financial policy adequate for the biggest challenge since world war two, not only Italians but European citizens will be deeply disappointed.” The negotiations on the latest element of the EU’s fiscal response to the epidemic has exposed deep divisions between north and south, and reignited feelings of bitter enmity last experienced during the financial crisis. The Dutch government with the support of Germany, Finland and Austria, has led rejection of the central demand of the Italian government for so-called “coronabonds” which would involve all EU member states borrowing from the markets on the same terms. The issuing of joint bonds would create joint liability and make borrowing more expensive for the wealthier northern member states as it cheapens it for the rest, at a time when the gap between German and Italian bonds is rising. The Dutch parliament has backed its government on its approach, with politicians warning that anti-EU sentiment would be inflated in the wealthier member states as well if the electorate concluded that their money was being misspent. Austria’s finance minister, Gernot Blümel, said the Netherlands were not standing alone. “That is out of the question for us,” he said of the issuing of coronabonds. “That remains the case. We were also not in favour of this formulation because the idea opens the door to a mutualisation of debt ... It was not just the Netherlands.” A second stumbling block is the conditions that should be attached to credit issued by the eurozone bailout fund, the European Stability Mechanism. About €240bn of unused lending capacity could be made available to the hardest-hit countries, such as Spain and Italy, but there are stark differences over the terms and conditions to be applied. The Netherlands again has said it wants the credit line to be conditional on the money being spent to boost economic growth and balance budgets once the crisis is over. Italy and Spain are aghast at the suggestion of ‘“economic surveillance” and want there to be merely a reference to the need to observe EU budget rules post-pandemic. With the stakes high, a French official described the Dutch position as incomprehensible ahead of the crunch negotiations on Thursday. Sources suggested that Germany was likely to push for “economic surveillance” to be dropped while ensuring there would be something similar to replace it that would sound more politically acceptable. Peter Altmaier, Germany’s minister for economic affairs, said: “It’s important that we take this decision today on the €500bn that is in discussion – that’s an incredibly large sum of money that we could use to help a lot of people, especially in the hardest-hit countries, Spain and Italy. “I have confidence that [German finance minister] Olaf Scholz, together with his colleague [French Finance Minister] Bruno Le Maire, can push this forward today and we are all working on that together.”