When the lockdown is lifted, more shops and perhaps schools are likely to reopen first, along with workplaces where continued physical distancing is practical. At the very back of the queue will likely be the places and people who provide cultural stimulation, diversion and entertainment for the rest of us, shining a light on who we are and what we do. Netflix may never have had it so good, as housebound populations seek diversion in their laptops and flatscreens. ITV has found ways of making a drama, in four parts, out of the coronavirus crisis. But many actors, dancers, writers, musicians, set designers, roadies, photographers, sound recordists and film-makers must languish in an artistic form of purdah for the foreseeable future. Who knows when the next packed gig, or sold-out theatre, will echo to cheers and applause? For the most part, this is a world where employment is perilously short-term and cashflow precarious. Some small theatres and venues may never make it to the other side of this crisis. Bank accounts are running dry. The creative industries in Britain employ two million people and a third of those are self-employed – more than double the national average. Many have set up as one-person limited companies to make themselves easier to employ. As a result, they have fallen through the cracks of the chancellor Rishi Sunak’s schemes to protect jobs and incomes. Other freelancers will not have access to payments under the self-employment income support scheme until June. A creative sector normally worth £110bn to the economy may lose a generation of impoverished talent to the economic devastation caused by coronavirus. Over a hundred MPs and high-profile cultural figures, including David Puttnam and Floella Benjamin, have backed calls for a dedicated package of assistance. In a letter to the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, the signatories pointed to the example of Germany, where Mr Dowden’s counterpart, Monika Grütters, made specific provision for creative industries in a €50bn aid package for small businesses and freelancers. The assistance comes in the form of grants, loans and housing costs. Cities and regions have also played their part. In Berlin, freelance artists have been able to access €5,000 with minimum bureaucracy attached. A spokesman for the city’s leftwing senator for culture, Klaus Lederer, said: “It is our absolute aim to preserve the overwhelming richness and variety of Berlin’s cultural life for a vibrant future.” In a time of crisis art becomes more central to our lives. Arts Council England has provided £160m to help theatres and arts organisations survive. But broader and deeper assistance, along the lines of the German model, is needed. Until a month ago, Britain’s creative industry was the fastest-growing and most dynamic sector of the economy. As we continue to be confined to the sofa, Netflix sensations such as Tiger King will keep us entertained. But our cultural alternatives will be diminished when Britain re-emerges from lockdown, unless we do more for our creative industries now.