In the build-up to the general election of 1987, Margaret Thatcher agreed to an interview with Smash Hits, the now defunct fortnightly pop magazine that had an estimated readership of 3.3 million. By way of attempting to avoid disaster, a prime ministerial aide called Christine Wall wrote her a briefing note that now reads as if it were intended for a visiting extra-terrestrial. The most surreal passage was about the Beatles. “Probably the two most famous BEATLES songs amongst many hits are YESTERDAY which has been recorded by hundreds of people including FRANK SINATRA AND ELVIS PRESLEY,” Wall wrote, “and ALL YOU NEED IS LOVE which was performed live in front of 640,000,000 people on TV in 1968.” The latter dateline was wrong – the event in question actually happened in 1967. And on the day of the interview, it was clear that Wall’s brief and inaccurate summary had failed to sink in: before it ended and she got back to privatising everything, Thatcher had managed to credit the Beatles with recording the Tornados’ 1962 hit “Telstar”. To reduce anyone’s biography to a single sentence is clearly silly, but in the case of John, Paul, George and Ringo, it was cosmically absurd. Very few other people have packed so much into eight years in the public eye, nor managed to channel so many social and cultural changes. Three years on from on from his 2017 book Ma’am Darling: 99 Glimpses of Princess Margaret, it is this surfeit of material that allows Craig Brown to once again subvert the conventions of biography, and tackle his latest subject via 150 self-contained chapters that range from single anecdotes, to compact essays, to lists. In doing so, he prises the basic story away from its standard telling, and delights in a motley supporting cast united by their brushes with Beatledom – from Thatcher, Kenneth Williams and the playwright Joe Orton, to the German communist Walter Ulbricht. Most of what is here is sourced from other books, and much of it feels familiar. But when Brown alights on less well-trodden material, his panache as a writer and understanding of the Beatles’ significance rarely let him down. A key theme is the disorientation they caused among an older establishment, both in the UK and the US, and how wrong a lot of people were. Noël Coward thought them “totally devoid of talent”; the conservative writer William F Buckley Jr reckoned they were “so appallingly unmusical, so dogmatically insensitive to the magic of the art that they qualify as crowned heads of anti-music”. The journalist Malcolm Muggeridge chanced on the nascent Beatles in Hamburg in June 1961, when they were the leather-clad nightly attraction at the Top Ten Club. He described “ageless children, sexes indistinguishable, tight-trousered, stamping about”, and a group with “weird feminine faces ... bashing their instruments, and emitting nerveless sounds into microphones”. As a summary of the early Beatles’ magic, that actually isn’t bad. If the material here about the Beatles’ collision with the old and staid is full of insight and humour, the chapters that deal with well-known stories do not fare quite as well. In the absence of any new insights, there is probably no need for anyone ever to return to the occasion in 1964 when the Beatles met Bob Dylan in New York and he introduced them to marijuana, nor the famous evening in 1965 when they spent time with Elvis Presley. That said, even if some of the best stretches of the book fall short of being revelatory, they are often so well told that they acquire a new freshness. For example, most students of Beatles history know that Paul McCartney lived for a time with the family of his girlfriend Jane Asher in Marylebone, and was thereby immersed in the world of the progressive London middle class. But what is new is Brown’s own observation: “If I could be any Beatle, at any time, I would be Paul in his Wimpole Street years, living with Jane, cosseted by her family, blessed by luck, happy with life … and with wonderful songs flowing, as if by magic, from my brain and out through the piano.” As those words suggest, Brown is a fan, who empathises with the other fans whose love for the Beatles forms a neat counterpoint to his stories about the hostility and bafflement from an older generation. One such fan was Maxine, who lived in Cleveland, Ohio, and whose words appear in a brief selection of letters. “Dear Beatles, Please call me on the telephone.” she wrote. “My # is 629-7834. If my mother answers, hang up. She is not much of a Beatle fan.” • One Two Three Four: The Beatles in Time is published by 4th Estate (RRP £20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on orders over £15.