In a time of complexity and uncertainty what could be more straightforward and reassuring than Neighbours? With the show celebrating its 35th year, the cast and makers recall its early days of shaky sets and dodgy wardrobe choices, fan phenomena and decades-long onscreen relationships. “I was only vaguely aware of Star Trek. I knew that Kirk was a tough guy, Spock was logical and McCoy was goofy. I also knew that some losers were so into this stuff that they could have conversations in Klingon. But about 10 minutes into this adventure I knew I had no choice but to become one of the devoted – and frequently mocked – Trekkies.” This is a second appearance in these lists for our venerable Country Diary, which every day captures a short, heady moment from around the UK. It has a small but very dedicated audience. This instalment is a lovely opportunity to see why … and to find out why orchids take their name from the Greek word for testicle. “Every passing twang or drone of a sitar still evokes his name.” Book reviews have been another staple of the antidote. Neil Spencer’s piece condenses and evaluates Oliver Craske’s definitive biography of the unassailable maestro and guardian of his country’s music, a relentless workaholic with a turbulent and promiscuous personal life. Jacob Steinberg looks back fondly on “a glimpse of what might have been”, when a young West Ham team powered by Carrick, Cole and Lampard overcame a full strength Manchester United. 6. High Fidelity at 20: the sneakily dark edge of a comedy about bad breakups Stephen Frears’ smart adaptation of Nick Hornby’s novel of stunted growth remains as compelling as ever with one of John Cusack’s best performances. 7. Lockdown watch: John Landis on seeking solace in Zero Mostel movies Blues Brothers director John Landis on Panic in the Streets, The Producers and the delights of early 1930s horror. 8. Moshpit mayhem: the northern club where punks rampaged to Hellbastard The Station was a legendary hotspot where cider-fuelled punks would pogo to Rancid, Death Zone and more. Chris Killip reveals how he photographed the pummelling chaos. 9. Rihanna makes history: ‘Did I ever imagine that I would see a durag on the cover of Vogue?’ The singer appears in fashion magazine wearing a sartorial symbol of black power. 10. A zoologist’s view of Tiger King: a crass exposé that could do some good The smash-hit documentary lets the murder-mystery take centre stage. But it also cunningly conceals a powerful message about the cruelty of small-scale zoos.