Hang on, wasn’t this on at 4pm yesterday? Shame I overslept. C- He is the nation’s hero, keeping families fit and donating all profits to the NHS. Fully attired in classic “left my PE kit at home” pants and vest, 10 minutes of star jumps, burpees, press-ups, bunny hops, lunges, push-ups, leg raises, crab kicks and sit-ups later, I’d like to kill him. My neighbours probably think I’m being beaten up. Ten more mins and I’m spent. Still, could be worse. Friday’s lesson is in fancy dress. A Wait? I could have been watching Mr Really Wild pointing out the mating call of the osprey from his garden in the New Forest instead of PE? Schoolboy error. B- Luckily I haven’t missed this other wildlife bloke. Today’s he is doing a live Q&A. Did you know they named an Ecuadorian frog after him? You do now. B Myleene’s class, with Myleene Klass, out of Hear’Say. Geddit? This isn’t just three blind mice on the recorder. With help from her daughter Ava, today we learn about vibrations and sound waves, with dry marker pens and how to build a “glass harp” in The One Where The Klasses Play The Glasses. (Clever, huh?) My kitchen sounds like a B movie. I am not killing anyone in here, honest, neighbours. B- Previous lessons from the Blue Peter presenter include experiments with water in a pink jumper; how the brain works reclining on a burgundy sofa; and the mystery of time lying on a bed in a brown cashmere jumper. Today’s livestream on alien beings and conspiracy theories is delivered in an oversize roll-neck fisherman’s jumper. It is a sunny 23C out, suggesting that her husband gets to set the temperature. Good work, Charlie; I’m an 18.5C man, too. B+ In today’s lesson with Maddie Moat off of CBBC’s Maddie’s Do You Know? and hubby Greg Foot, we learn how to make an accurate solar system out of fruit. You’ll need a peanut (Mercury), a raspberry (Venus), another raspberry (Earth), a blueberry (Mars), a watermelon (Jupiter), a honeydew melon (Saturn), an apple (Uranus) and orange (Neptune). I own none of these. The best I can muster is a crescent-moon banana. C+ Walliams is uploading 30 of his short stories daily as part of his Elevenses With... Today is Humbert The Hungry Baby, which Walliams reads in true defiance of the David Walliams “Gay-O-Meter” which the Sun used to measure how camp he appeared each week. Best enjoyed cross-legged on the carpet. A+ She won Strictly in 2019 with Andy off Emmerdale. Today we’ll be dancing for 30 minutes to the theme from Spider-Man. Or maybe you will. I still haven’t recovered from PE, so I spend 30 minutes eating crisps while admiring Oti’s curtains. B Who said maths has to be boring? Not Carol. Spot the retro video game as you practise multiplication to run over ghosts like in Spy Hunter; practise addition to stop aliens plummeting to their death like in Lemmings; and practise your counting by chucking snowballs at Yetis like in Whac-A-Mole. I set a new personal best of 16. I’m a 40 years old man. You do the math. A- Remember when you used to eat lunch at your desk? A sandwich, a sit down, and a bit of Darcey throwing some shapes it is. B+ The Bake Off host, comedian, artist and jumper enthusiast has held four art clubs so far: mythical creatures, fave TV/film animals and Italy, and this week: music. Upload your masterpieces, and Noel will tweet the best, although he seemed to miss my musical entry – the banana from the front of the Velvet Underground & Nico. B++ Today’s podcast – How Pandemics Made the Modern World – is a bit too close to home, so I switch over to some classic History Today from Newman & Baddiel instead. That’s you, that is. B Jamie’s Keep Cooking & Carry On series is designed to substitute whatever you’ve got to hand. For today’s minestrone soup you’ll need bacon, carrots, garlic, bay leaves, celery, onion, kale, stock cube, tomatoes, beans, cabbage, pasta and parmesan. I have none of these, so for dinner I eat my fruit salad solar system/Velvet Underground banana. B This is a real thing. C++ Who couldn’t drift into the land of nod with the dulcet tones of Play School’s Lady Floella reading The Hare & The Tortoise? Night. A+