As international borders were shut and airlines stopped flying, I scrambled to get out of what may just be the safest place on earth at the moment – Samoa, one of the last countries without a case of coronavirus. Fighting to come home to the US as the gravity of the coronavirus pandemic became apparent felt ironic from the start. The feeling has only grown stronger as I sit alone, writing these thoughts with a fever as the death toll from coronavirus in the US continues to climb. I’d spent two months studying in Apia, the capital of the Pacific nation, with a group of 14 American students, learning about the resiliency of Pacific communities in the face of climate change and globalisation. My escape must start with an introduction of our program director, Dr Fetaomi Tapu-Qiliho, and her fleet of conveniently positioned cousins. Dr Taomi, as we call her, has experience with national emergencies. She’d maintained her students’ safety and programs through the 2006 military coup d’état in Fiji and the 2019 measles epidemic in Samoa. But this was a global emergency, and the struggle swiftly developed into one of getting us home, not assuring our stay. The School for International Training (SIT) cancelled our program on a Monday and the one flight per week connecting Samoa and Hawaii leaves every Friday. Under the assumption we’d be leaving at that time, we took full advantage of the four open days to say goodbye — an evening of song with our host families, one last night swim off the sea wall and a trip to the island Savai’i. Our last afternoon on Savai’i, my friend Lily received a call at the boardwalk. It was her mom, stuck in the Netherlands, calling to tell her nearly her entire family across three US states had contracted coronavirus. I was sitting near Lily when she found out; she seemed to sob and laugh simultaneously, the news still unprocessed. I listened to the ocean as I waited for her to hang up; this strange tide was coming in, whether or not we were ready. I noticed an unnamable tension on the ferry ride back from Savai’i. People had begun to wear masks and step more carefully around me. There were suspected cases quarantined near the airport, and the government of Samoa, unbeknownst to us, was preparing to enter a state of emergency. As we packed, they ordered the airport control tower to reroute our plane to Nadi, Fiji, as no planes from the US were to land in Samoa. When the news came, I spent the night glued to my phone, communicating furiously with my 14 counterparts and Dr Taomi. She’d reworked the plan—we’d fly to Nadi in two days and catch our flight to Honolulu from there. But just a few hours later, Samoa, American Samoa, Fiji and Tonga closed their borders. The flight to Nadi ceased to exist. I called my parents, but couldn’t tell them when I’d be home. The next day, Dr Taomi moved us into a house owned by her church community, who generously prepared a meal for our arrival. At lunch, the news broke that all the suspected cases in Samoa tested negative. People were cheering and pulling out all the Vailima beer and wine they could reach beneath the massive cow in the freezer. Our exit plans were indefinite, but I found profound joy and acceptance in that home. For four days, we danced, cooked and rested together as the US embassy navigated diplomatic discussions with the Samoan government and the governor of American Samoa to aid our exit. American Samoa is just 70km east of the independent nation of Samoa, but as it is a US territory, it looked like our surest route home to the mainland US. Dr Taomi had a cousin who offered to fly us to American Samoa on a chartered flight, we just needed clearance. Once in American Samoa, we could catch one remaining flight scheduled to leave the territory for Hawai’i the next week. One night during a group meeting, a mass breakout of 36 prisoners at the Tanumalala prison occurred. At that point, I wasn’t surprised, it seemed a reasonable addition to the chaos. Dr Taomi jumped to her feet and called another cousin – this time, one who ran a security company. The guards who came lounged in plastic chairs on the lawn, joking and watching the streets flash red and blue all night long. We were to see those lights again on our journey home, this time after we had made it to American Samoa and were huddled in the back of a yellow school bus racing along the coast toward a quarantine facility. Police escorts surrounded us, alarming the locals as if we were the virus itself. Other Americans joined us at Sadie’s By The Sea, a beachfront hotel co-opted by the Department of Health to quarantine transiting travellers. During our three-day stay, we were divided into rooms and asked to go no further than our porches, but that didn’t break our group morale. We conference-called on the hotel phones and leaned from the porch pillars to see each other. On my roommate’s 21st birthday, a group of Americans nine balconies away finessed her a beer. One of the department of health nurses, Sweetheart Nua, asked that our escorted bus ride to the airport take place during golden hour so that we might enjoy a fleeting glimpse of her country as we left. Leaving quarantine, I rested my head in the open window listening, this time not to the sirens, but to the joy in my friends’ voices. A double rainbow hovered above the Pacific—a bridge we’d soon use to cross home. In Samoa, we learned of va, the inseparable relational space that exists between individuals and their family, community and nation. It gives the Samoan ‘self’ meaning through relationship with others. We’re home because the innumerable amount of people who fought for our return relied on the strength of their connections and relationships. My semester may have ended prematurely, but I learned my lesson on Pacific resiliency.