The unfolding coronavirus testing fiasco dominates the major UK newspaper front pages after the daily death toll hit climbed to a new record and it emerged that only 2,000 NHS staff had been tested. “Shambles” says the Mirror’s headline alongside pictures of the latest two health workers to die from the disease – including retired doctor Alfa Saadu, 68, who was volunteering at the Queen Victoria memorial hospital in Welwyn, Hertfordshire. Tomorrow's front page: 'Coronavirus crisis shambles' #TomorrowsPapersTodayhttps://t.co/fgLOUyu98P pic.twitter.com/Y4Avr8NuY9 The Mirror also has a picture of an empty drive-through testing station in Chessington, Surrey to emphasise its point – an image also used across the width of the Times’ front page under the headline “Virus testing plans in chaos”. The Mail focuses on the “statistic that humbles ministers” with the headline “550,000 NHS staff only 2,000 tested”, in what it calls the “latest shocking example of our testing scandal”. It goes on to claim that its reporting has “finally” stung Boris Johnson into action, and quotes the prime minister as promising to “massively increase” testing. Thursday's @DailyMailUK #MailFrontPages pic.twitter.com/r6uefMZIdi There’s a similar line on the front of the i – “NHS frontline staff let down on testing” – and the Metro – “Ridiculous”. The Guardian has the story about the 2,000 NHS tests on its front page but prefers to lead with a different angle: “Virus patients more likely to die may have ventilators taken away”, looking at the terrible dilemma being faced by medical staff who may have to decide which people should be kept on the critical machines. The Telegraph also wonders about the testing disaster with the headline “Questions without answers” over a picture of the business secretary, Alok Sharma, at Wednesday’s Downing Street media briefing. The paper – which has carried many front page pictures of Johnson portraying his policy in a positive light – says the government was unable to explain why its testing strategy was failing, why so few NHS staff had been tested and how it was going to manage an exit from the lockdown. The front page of tomorrow's Daily Telegraph:'Questions without answers'#TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/Bzr2WlK3cF The Express also spares the prime minister any direct blame, instead deflecting fire on to the banks which it says must step up to help the economy in return for being bailed out in 2008: “We bailed you out now do your duty”. The Sun just has the words “Clap of honour” on its front page in a clarion call for readers to support Thursday night’s nationwide ovation for NHS staff. Tomorrow's front page: 'Brits are urged to carry on clapping their support for NHS workers' https://t.co/gmZUcsumoY pic.twitter.com/zCLuZqN7g8 The FT reports on the damage to the economy and says “Jobless claims rocket by 1m as virus delivers shock to economy”. Just published: front page of the Financial Times, UK edition, Thursday 2 April https://t.co/hOgMeZk9N8 pic.twitter.com/EXGEKuYIag The Scotsman is also concerned about the economy, but chiefly that of Edinburgh: “Festival cancellation will be ‘catastrophic’ for business”, its headline reads.