At this strange, scary moment, as we’re forced to stay inside for our safety, it has become a catastrophic period for many industries, the world around us pausing long enough for certain parts of our lives to seem obsolete. But as the numbers have shown, while cinemas temporarily shutter their doors, we’re streaming more than ever, reliving old content while remaining desperate for the new. It’s a theoretically ideal time, then, for a splashy new name in the game (the huge numbers attached to the post-quarantine launch of Disney+ in Europe signify this) and so today, with the US arrival of Jeffrey Katzenberg’s $1.75bn Netflix-challenger Quibi, all eyes are on our phones to see if forking out for yet another streaming service seems justifiable. To understand what differentiates Quibi requires an explanation of what a Quibi is, a groanworthy attempt at combining the words quick and bite, the sort of name that gets suggested in a brainstorm before being met with crushing silence and an immediate lunch break. A quick bite is anything between seven and 10 minutes, designed to be watched on a commute or in a queue, a way to fill a gap in the day. Original films are separated into chunks while unscripted reality or competition shows are shortened and all are designed to be viewed on your smartphone and your smartphone only. But the problem Quibi faces is that, for most of us, those gaps have been erased by the pandemic and instead we desire longer-form content to dominate the many, many hours we’re spending at home. It’s a gimmick that, for now at least, doesn’t really work and it’s also a gimmick that, with or without Covid-19, would need to be supported by content that would transcend the novelty of the platform. When Netflix kicked off its original slate, it was with House of Cards, a substantive and slickly entertaining series that would have become an awards magnet wherever it had landed. But with Quibi’s ambitious launch of 50 shows and films, nothing in the 24 titles sent to critics feels robust enough to stand up anywhere else, a big pile of unnecessary stuff that’s digested as quickly as it’s forgotten. While big star involvement has been touted in ads, the high-profile names are mostly resigned to low-investment non-fiction shows, such as the well-intentioned yet ultimately too self-congratulatory Thanks a Million, which sees stars such as Jennifer Lopez give money away to those who need it and the bizarre, Reese Witherspoon-narrated nature doc Fierce Queens, which tries to package the lives of cheetahs into the plot of a CW high school show. The films are then led by lower wattage stars who can’t quite handle the weight of the task, with Game of Thrones alum Sophie Turner struggling with plane crash thriller Survive (which features an uneasy did-we-learn-nothing-from-13-Reasons-Why self-harm how-to in the first episode) and Liam Hemsworth as the empty space in the middle of Most Dangerous Game, some familiar b-movie schlock about human hunting that also features Christoph Waltz going full ham for the umpteenth time. Elsewhere, things remain underwhelming. Two familiar MTV shows get rebooted – Chance the Rapper’s Punk’d with disappointingly D-list punkees and an unintentionally creepy take on Singled Out that takes a pool of potential love matches who are already in the lives of the person picking between them – and both suffer from the abbreviated format. The pranks on Punk’d are over before you know it and before the “celebrities” have truly started to crack while a refreshingly diverse Singled Out speeds through every stage with such careless abandon that it’s impossible to care about the result. There’s also a Nailed It-style food show called Dishmantled in which contestants have to guess what dishes are being thrown at them – as with many of Quibi’s titles, it feels like a 30 Rock cutaway joke – and a Chrissy Teigen vehicle called Chrissy’s Court which can’t turn its not entirely heinous setup (Judge Judy but with petty non-legal personal issues) into anything worth clicking on. Like a lot of the shows, it’s the kind of throwaway junk you might leave on in the background while using your phone to do something else, but Quibi’s platform demands both complete attention and a willingness to actively seek these things out. The problem is that for an initial line-up, there’s nothing particularly buzzworthy. The ones that almost work (Funny or Die’s Flipped coasts on the comic appeal of the stars Kaitlin Olson and Will Forte while Murder House Flip stands out because of its barmy premise: a home makeover show for a house where a spate of killings took place) don’t work enough to demand a subscription. The 90-day free trial will surely attract some curiosity but unless there’s a steep uptick in quality, most will probably drop out before paying. In short, as Quibi seems to prefer it, the majority of its initial lineup consists of shows we don’t need right now on a platform we don’t really want. It’s an idea born in an LA conference room that will probably die in the real world, content for content’s sake, teasing something bigger and better that doesn’t seem to come. We might all have more time than ever right now but there still isn’t enough time for Quibi. Quibi is available in the US now with a UK date yet to be announced