If we are honest, most of us yearn for the easy gratification and vicarious glamour of a globe-spanning thriller – the only reason we don’t watch them every day is that they so often come encrusted with musty denim masculinity and conservative geopolitics. In 2018, Killing Eve swept all that away with one flick of its wrist. Here instead were women effortlessly revolutionising all the traditionally male roles, with every line of Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s script a casually spat pearl. Sandra Oh was Eve, an MI5 desk-jockey with a reckless interest in a series of elaborate murders. Jodie Comer’s Villanelle, the culprit, was one of TV’s best ever stone-cold assassins. Those first few kills, spread across pristinely hip continental locations and soundtracked by smoky French-language pop, were so, so cool, setting up Villanelle as a crazed nihilist who was unimpressed by her own invincibility, nonplussed by money and tired of her impeccable wardrobe. The only time she wasn’t bored to death was when she was watching someone die. There was a golden period at the start of Killing Eve when we felt like we could watch her do her deliciously terrible thing for ever. But it couldn’t last for ever. In the end, it lasted … about four-and-a-half episodes. At the core of the story is a pas de deux between Eve and Villanelle. We can imagine why they are obsessed with each other (they both have a different woman inside them screaming to get out, and each sees this person in the other) but dramatically speaking, it has never been nailed down. It was just sort of … announced. In London, Eve was told that a woman had likely committed all these wonderful, awful crimes. Meanwhile, in Moscow or Ljubljana or the 3rd Arrondissement or wherever, Villanelle was told about the woman heading up a new off-books unit dedicated to tracking her. Each instantly decided they were besotted with their new life-defining nemesis and that was that. This problem of a central dynamic with no solid foundation has never been satisfactorily resolved. Eve’s desire to swap domestic comfort for international peril has come closer to working over time but, despite repeated attempts to give Villanelle a plausible motivation for not doing what the programme’s title teases, she remains a mood, not a character. The show could only survive for as long as this capricious deity never met the ruffled everywoman Eve – but it opened the oven door to check on that souffle halfway through season one, whereupon Killing Eve stopped being diaphanous and untouchable and started resembling one of those comedy thrillers where a humble putz, mixed up with the mob, keeps surviving due to massive contrivances. It seemed almost cruel when Waller-Bridge, like the songwriter in a platinum-selling band handing their guitar to a fan and saying “write the next album”, relinquished her showrunning duties for seasons two and three, which duly played the same chords slightly off beat. Writing dialogue as smart as Waller-Bridge’s is hard. Replicating the rush of Killing Eve when it was fresh out of the box is impossible.