Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The total number of confirmed coronavirus cases around the world is at 2,699,338, while 188,437 deaths have been recorded, according to Johns Hopkins University. Ecuador’s health minister has said the country’s coronavirus case total is twice as high as previously confirmed, as authorities added 11,000 new infections that resulted from delayed testing. The new cases will be added to the confirmed total of 11,183 infections. The country has registered 560 deaths. Algeria has become the latest country to announce it will ease confinement measures from the first day of the holy month of Ramadan on Friday. The full lockdown in Blida province will be replaced by a curfew, while a curfew in nine provinces, including Algiers, will be shortened. Four people in a Palestinian refugee camp in Lebanon have tested positive for the coronavirus, a health official said, bringing total cases in the settlement to five. Residents of the Wavel camp in the eastern Bekaa Valley were tested after a Palestinian refugee from Syria was admitted to hospital in Beirut with symptoms. The 2020 European Athletics championships, due to be held in Paris at the end of August, have been cancelled because of the coronavirus pandemic, organisers have announced. A number of major sporting events, including Wimbledon and the British Open, will not be held this year. Cameroon has freed over 1,300 prisoners in its two main cities in an effort to ease overcrowding and limit the spread of the coronavirus. The country’s justice minister said that 608 prisoners had been freed in Douala, its largest city, and another 700 released in the capital, Yaoundé. Armenia switched off street lights nationwide on Thursday evening as president Armen Sarkissian acknowledged the coronavirus lockdown has affected the annual commemoration of the victims of the first world war-era genocide by Ottoman Turks. In place of the traditional torchlit procession, lights were switched off and church bells chimed across the country, while many lit candles or mobile phone flashlights at windowsills. Dubai has become the latest city to ease lockdown restrictions, announcing that cafes, restaurants and shopping malls are to reopen with a maximum capacity of 30%. Public transportation services, including the subway, will resume from 26 April. The Czech Republic is speeding up plans to relax its coronavirus lockdown by two weeks to get all shops, restaurants and hotels running again by 25 May, as the number of infections stabilises. The number of cases have declined in recent days, but the easing will be reversed if the situation worsens again. Peru’s reported coronavirus cases have rapidly increased this week, reaching 20,914 on Thursday. The country has recorded 572 deaths, and the number of recorded coronavirus cases in the country has doubled in the last nine days. 