During Chelsea’s remarkable win at Arsenal I sent messages to a couple of people at the FA who have been involved in women’s football for many years. I told them how proud I feel about where the Women’s Super League is at the moment. It is the best product in the world, in my opinion, and the showcase fixture on Sunday showed that once again. We saw a celebration of quality goals and fine football, epitomised by the way Chelsea got hold of Arsenal and simply pinned them up against the wall by their throats. Arsenal definitely had an off day but Emma Hayes’ side were sensational in their attitude, work rate and application. Joe Montemurro blamed himself for the defeat, saying he had set his team up incorrectly in a 4-4-2 diamond, but I wonder if that was a case of a manager protecting his players to some extent. Arsenal certainly looked better when Lisa Evans and Beth Mead came on but we need to appreciate just how good their opponents were. Chelsea made sure Arsenal simply couldn’t get bodies forward or achieve any kind of rhythm, and they are set up superbly now. Their strength in depth far outweighs Arsenal’s, and that is something Hayes has been working towards for a couple of years. I can now see them winning the league pushing on at European level after that, thanks to her planning and foresight. It may be #BlueMonday but there is nothing to be sad about for @ChelseaFCW fans 💙 pic.twitter.com/BqMKyMCYyD Manchester United are now in the driving seat for that “best of the rest” fourth spot after their win over Spurs. They will have targeted that at the start of the season, knowing that there would be stutters and periods of learning after coming up. This win gets them back on track, even if it was a slightly flattering one against a team they know inside out from playing in the second tier. Spurs hit the woodwork twice and continued to show why they were worthy of promotion; they have not looked like fighting relegation at any point and that is a huge credit to them. Ella Toone’s late red card emphasised that this is still a young side that will have its ups and downs, so the next couple of weeks will be a very instructive experience for them. Bend it like B̶e̶c̶k̶h̶a̶m̶ Zelem#BarclaysFAWSL x @katiezel pic.twitter.com/GRbNjEUxuO Three of Manchester City and England’s most reliable players ensured they got what they needed out of the weekend. Steph Houghton, Jill Scott and Ellen White are three of the first names on the teamsheet for club and country; they linked up for White’s first-minute opener at Birmingham before Scott set up a second goal for Keira Walsh. City knew one of their rivals would drop points but still had to do the job in the early fixture. Birmingham are always very tough and stubborn so a big scoreline was never likely and that quick start was crucial. It was a case of getting their noses ahead and staying in the title race, because slip-ups against mid-table teams can cost you the league. Nick Cushing deserves credit for keeping his team’s levels high despite his imminent departure. A masterclass in finishing from @keira_walsh 👏@ManCityWomen's lead doubled in style#BIRMCI #BarclaysFAWSL pic.twitter.com/MnicBYvOW4 Two young internationals made the difference at either end for Everton against Reading. Sandy MacIver is a 21-year-old goalkeeper I know very well, having coached her several years ago when she was at the centre of excellence. She is back from a spell in the US and, while I had not expected her to start straightaway, she did brilliantly. I’m sure she has a big future with England. Up front it was Chloe Kelly who stole the show with a matchwinning hat-trick. Everton had looked a little average in her absence at Manchester City and she made such a difference here, she brings such positivity, flair and creativity. I feel Everton have finally got their identity back, with everyone at the club buying into a long-term strategy. They are due to play their first game at Walton Hall Park in April and it adds to the selling point they can now offer prospective new players. 🚩 @Chloe_Kelly98... DIRECT FROM A CORNER!#EVEREA #BarclaysFAWSL pic.twitter.com/uiqPm91Un2 A couple of weeks ago I suggested Rachel Furness could be the difference in Liverpool’s survival bid, and that may have already proved the case. What a huge win it was for them at Bristol City, hauling them off the bottom, and they will be coursing with belief that they can go on and finish the job now. Furness scored the winner but she adds so much more, dragging everyone with her by her performances, her actions and even her talking on the pitch. She leads by example and players like that are indispensable in their situation. At the end of the season, if Liverpool are looking back and wiping their brow at a close shave with the drop they may well see her arrival in the winter as the reason they are still in the top flight. As for Bristol, they made three signings in January but showed little response and their situation looks ominous. Clinical at the back post from @Furney1988 👊@LiverpoolFCW are ahead against Bristol City#BRCLIV #BarclaysFAWSL pic.twitter.com/cXkC6fsHMH West Ham are growing something really special. Their crowds keep increasing, there is a real community following at the club and a real pride that they have developed something so exciting from scratch. Their win over Brighton means they won’t be worrying about relegation. Matt Beard’s recruitment of young players has been outstanding and one of those he brought in, Alisha Lehmann, scored twice late on to get them out of trouble on Sunday. She is just 20 but continues to shine and has such a cool head. Brighton continue to be uncertain, one minute looking to be out of the relegation battle and the next seeming to be back in it. Staying up this season would be a success for them.