Alun Wyn Jones will turn 38 when the 2023 World Cup starts, but Jonathan Humphreys expects the Wales captain to be competing in what would be a record-equalling fifth tournament. Humphreys, the Wales forwards coach, was filling the same role at the Ospreys when the Lions second row Jones started his regional career in 2006. He remained with the Swansea-based side until 2013 when he became part of Scotland’s management team and became part of Wales’s set-up after last year’s World Cup. “Alun Wyn was 19 when I first came across him,” said Humphreys, a former Wales captain. “He was playing in the back row for Swansea at Bristol. Then he was man of the match at Glasgow and within four games he was playing for Wales. “His career has not surprised me. I saw him do some incredible things as a young player and even now he can still get better. I have a strong relationship with him and kept in touch when I moved to Scotland. He has such an influence on all the teams he plays for and I think he can go through to the next World Cup because players in Wales are incredibly well looked after.” Jones was named as captain for Wales’s Six Nations campaign having led them to the grand slam last year and a place in the World Cup semi-finals. Wales were then coached by Warren Gatland who is in charge of the Lions in 2021 when they tour South Africa and he is anticipating Jones being in the selection mix. Jones has won 143 caps, nine for the Lions and will join the record holder, Richie McCaw, on 148 if he appears in Wales’s five matches in the Six Nations. Only two players have appeared in five World Cups, Samoa’s Brian Lima and Italy’s Mauro Bergamasco, while Jones has made 21 appearances in the tournament, one behind McCaw and Jason Leonard. Jones’s former Wales teammate Jamie Roberts has announced he will leave Bath with immediate effect to play the 2020 Super Rugby season with Siya Kolisi’s Stormers. Roberts, capped 94 times by Wales and with three Lions Test appearances, arrived at the Recreation Ground from Harlequins in 2018 and has been granted early release from his contract. “It has long been a goal of mine to play in the southern hemisphere. While I’m looking forward to wearing the shirt, my key drive is to perform on the pitch, win week in week out and to help to drive success,” said the 33-year-old centre. To replace Roberts, Bath have signed Fiji centre Josh Matavesi from Newcastle with immediate effect. Meanwhile, Welsh Rugby Union chief executive Martyn Phillips is to step down in the summer with the search for his successor already under way. Phillips has been responsible for appointing Wayne Pivac as Wales coach following Warren Gatland’s exit after the World Cup and for implementing measures to stop Welsh internationals leaving the regions for English or French clubs. He will depart after five years in the post and was at the helm when record turnover of £97m was recorded for 2017-18.