“Memory itself is a form of architecture”: the American writer Carmen Maria Machado quotes Louise Bourgeois at the beginning of this book. How then do we pile up the bricks that we need to make a house? A “dream house” at that. And what if the dream house is no longer where you feel safe? What language do you use as the dreams start to crumble and you feel you are disintegrating and disgusting? Once you were an object of desire and a desiring subject, and now you are nothing. You can only speak one language – “the language of giving yourself up”. This is a memoir about abuse, a book that speaks into the silence of abuse between queer women (“domestic abuse”, as it’s ineptly called). Sometimes the author uses “lesbian”, sometimes “queer”, but most of the work and activism she references is that of out lesbian writers. The African American poet Pat Parker has said: “First forget I am a lesbian. And second, never forget I am a lesbian.” Reading Machado’s extraordinary book one is caught in this ambiguity. The relationship that she describes is so familiar. She meets a woman who is in an open relationship and who has to have her. Machado is completely in sexual thrall to her. It is perfect. Her full body – “zaftig”, as she describes it – is now worshipped. But then her new partner no longer wants to be in an open relationship and no longer wants to share her with anyone. She flies into jealous rages accusing her of wanting to fuck everyone else, including her own father. She scares her, grabs her, rages at her, frightens her. Belittles her, breaks her down. It is the expression of this breaking down in the form and structure of the book that makes it a tour de force. The relationship is reimagined though every possible genre: as folktale, as American gothic, as Mrs Dalloway. The abuse and its repercussions are examined through a range of lenses, and the various viewpoints come together in Machado’s narrative. It’s an effective device: searching for a way to make sense of what has happened, she is driven to create. The archive on domestic violence in the queer community is itself liminal. She has quoted the Cuban American scholar José Esteban Muñoz: “Queerness has an especially vexed relationship to evidence … when the historian of queer experience attempts to document a queer past, there is often a gatekeeper, representing a straight present.” What gets left out then? Where are the gaps? Machado begins to name them – to actually go there. The abuse between women resembles the abuse between men and women. Or does it? Is a simple butch/femme dynamic any real explanation here? Machado looks at historical cases: in 1892 Alice Mitchell slit her lover Freda Ward’s throat in Memphis; Annette Green shot her abusive partner in West Palm Beach in 1989. In the first instance, women such as Mitchell were considered mad. If sex between women was acknowledged, “it still acted as an unmooring from gender”. It still does of course. It is the expression of breaking down in the form and structure of the book that makes it a tour de force The “battered woman” defence began to be used by the late 1980s and Machado’s discussion of gaslighting – she goes back to the 1938 Patrick Hamilton play Gas Light and the two 40s films it inspired – is superb. Indeed so much of what she details constitutes what we now recognise as “coercive control”. She points out that abusers are rarely cackling maniacs: they just want something and know how to get it. Machado is always aware of the court of “queer history”, which can at times feel homophobic in itself. The queer community has used the rhetoric of gender roles as a way to somehow “absolve queer women from responsibility for domestic abuse”. There have been those who argued that this could and should be handled only within the community, this smuggling of patriarchy into the paradise of lesbianism. Well now the silence is broken; it is shattered in this work into a multitude of ingenious retellings and understandings. Everything in the book is aware of its own perspective. This is challenging and thrilling. There is never one reading.Memoir here is resurrection, rebirth and archive. In the Dream House is a dark jewel reflecting something startling – familiar and strange. “Most types of domestic abuse are completely legal,” she tells us casually. Machado runs rings around the truth, but here it is anyway, and here she is, reclaiming her power. • In the Dream House is published by Serpent’s Tail (RRP £14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.