Saracens’ international players have been given the all clear by Eddie Jones and Warren Gatland to take a sabbatical season in the Championship and still be selected for England and the Lions next year. The club’s coach, Mark McCall, said the plan could lead to many of Saracens’ leading England players, such as Owen Farrell and Maro Itoje, staying at Allianz Park while playing only occasionally in the second tier to recharge their batteries for the autumn internationals, Six Nations and the tour of South Africa. McCall’s comments came as Saracens called for the publication of an independent audit into the club’s salary cap breaches that led to it being docked 35 points, fined £5.36m and condemned to relegation last week. Premiership Rugby confirmed it was making preparations to publish the document and would release more details “in the coming days”. Fears that Saracens’ relegation will lead to an exodus of players appears misplaced with McCall saying he believes his squad will “look quite familiar” after they drop into the Championship following talks with most of his squad earlier this week. “A key driver for our established international players is whether they can get picked from playing rugby in the Championship and would they be selected by Eddie for the autumn internationals and Six Nations,” he said. “And obviously there is a lot who also want to go on the Lions [tour] at the end of next year. However Eddie is on the whole happy to select players who are established, Warren Gatland the same.” McCall suggested his top players would most likely play “some games, but not that many” in the Championship but the situation would end up benefiting both the players and the Lions as they would have time for their bodies to heal after years of rugby. “A lot of these players have been on a treadmill for a long time and they get short off-seasons because they are always on tour,” he said. “Most of our established internationals are 27, 28. So they are at that stage where they have been on this treadmill for 10 years. I think they are seeing it as a positive where next year can be one where they are freshened up, physically recover and get better, play enough rugby and go on a Lions tour at the end of it fresh, which is not normal.” McCall cited the cases of Richie McCaw and Dan Carter, who had sabbaticals before returning to lead New Zealand to World Cup glory in 2015. “You’ve seen New Zealand players having sabbatical-type seasons,” he said. “It would be like that. I think Warren Gatland is keen to get as fresh a Lions team as possible to take to South Africa and our situation, in a funny kind of way, is going to help him.” McCall also denied that a lack of top-flight rugby next season could lead to his international players losing the sharpness needed to play at the highest level. “Between us and Eddie we will be able to come up with a plan for each player, which will satisfy those demands,” he said. Away from the discussions about the salary cap, McCall confirmed Billy Vunipola would be out for at least 16 weeks after breaking his arm. The Saracens interim chief executive, Ed Griffiths, has denied suggestions that keeping all his Lions players in the Championship risked pushing the club over the salary cap again. “I am certain that in 2021/22 there will be no doubt Saracens are fully compliant with the salary cap,” he said. Griffiths also confirmed Saracens had no approaches from Premiership clubs for their England players. “I have received all these calls from other clubs talking about players that they would be interested in [but] do you know the people that nobody was interested in? The England players,” he said. “That is just the reality. I am not saying that to make a point. When other clubs said would x be available or would y be available it was not those high-profile England players. The reason is that many clubs have decided that the best way to put together a competitive squad is not to employ England players because they are expensive and they are away a lot of the time.” Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels The new Saracens chairman, Neil Golding, has apologised to the club’s fans for “letting them down” but said he was surprised by the suggestion the club were objecting to the publication of the independent report in November that led to the club’s relegation. “Since my appointment on 9 January, I have spent considerable time in discussions with PRL and nobody has asked me what my position is on the matter,” he said. “To confirm, we are keen for the report to be published in full and I have made Premiership Rugby aware of this. It would provide much needed context and clarity.”