James Bond is getting on a bit – the first film came out 58 years ago – but it seems his latest adventure will still sound fresh, with the 18-year-old star Billie Eilish appointed as the youngest person ever to compose and record the theme song for an 007 instalment. It is the biggest musical U-turn in the franchise’s history: from Dame Shirley Bassey’s towering vibrato filling the Royal Albert Hall, to whisper-pop that sounds tailor-made for AirPods. Of course, Bassey is the first name that springs to mind when talking Bond themes, given she has sung three, the most by a single artist. But who is more Bond – Bassey or Eilish? Bassey’s contralto vocal is practically synonymous with Bond: ask anyone to sing the first theme song that comes to mind, and they will probably force a wobbly imitation of Bassey’s Goldfinger. Eilish’s voice is just one part of the fabric of her universe: she is also a songwriter and a creative director. Together with her brother Finneas, who co-writes and produces her music, she infuses her tracks with weird field recordings, such as the sound of her teeth being drilled, or samples from TV sitcoms. She may not sing like a traditional Bond star, but might she make the first Bond autonomous sensory meridian response anthem – with the sound of Aston Martin leather seats squeaking, or an olive gently sloshing in a martini glass? Bassey set the benchmark for old-school glamour in the Bond universe – as she sang on Diamonds Are Forever: “Unlike men, diamonds linger.” Eilish, on the other hand, dresses more like a SoundCloud rapper; she has said that she chooses her baggy, neon outfits to avoid being sexualised. It may be easier to imagine Bassey sitting at the bar with Bond as he growls “shaken, not stirred”, but Eilish would undoubtedly handle the action sequences more readily in her androgynous getup. For that, she wins this round. (Although here is hoping she does not make an action video as literal as Madonna’s 2002 fight with herself. Eilish’s goth-pop alludes to violence and monsters, but is all about internal drama: social anxiety, depression and low self-esteem are frequent themes. Her life, too, was undramatic until she unexpectedly became a global superstar: she was home-schooled by her actor parents in LA. In comparison, Bassey has a biopic-worthy backstory: one of seven children of a single mum, in the only mixed-race family in her area of Cardiff. She had her first child at 17, and made a career in the face of immense odds and personal tragedy. Much as we would love to see a Bond movie in which he confronts his inner demons and goes to therapy, Bassey’s high stakes feel more suited to the spy’s life-or-death pursuits. Bassey wins this one. Obviously. She has lungs that could power the UK’s wind turbines and take us sailing to carbon-neutral by 2030. But in a 2009 Guardian interview, she told us how “amazed” she was, late in her career, to discover that she has a powerful “soft voice” that she never uses. Eilish uses her voice to beguiling effect. She is a well-trained, impressive singer live – she got her chops in a choir – but she doesn’t sing with force. All in all, it seems Bassey is more suited to the spy flicks than Eilish – but Eilish is too cool to try hard. In this respect, perhaps she is a bit more Bond, after all.