Gabriella Le Breton Arguably, we don’t need a doctor to tell us that mucking about in beautiful snowy mountains is the perfect antidote to stress, or that cheese-smothered meals in cosy mountain huts are good for the soul. As the Club Med ski report 2019/2020 revealed, 89% of Brits believe that skiing and snowboarding have a positive impact on their mental health, with half of those polled stating that they feel calmer during a winter sports holiday. And there’s science to back it up: merely being in the great outdoors is shown to lower blood pressure, reduce levels of the stress hormone cortisol and deliver a healthy dose of mood-boosting vitamin D. Cardiovascular exercise, meanwhile, releases smile-inducing endorphins and dopamine. As the Mental Health Foundation confirms: “Even a short burst of 10 minutes’ brisk walking increases our mental alertness, energy and positive mood.” With the Club Med report showing that nearly three-quarters (73%) of British winter holidaymakers spend on average four hours or more skiing and snowboarding each day, that’s a lot of happy hormones bouncing around the pistes. No matter how much time you spend on the slopes, the pleasure of being in the mountains never gets old. Emily Sarsfield, skier and Olympic ski cross athlete, says: “Skiing makes me feel peaceful, relaxed and at one with myself. It’s almost like dancing – it’s unreal.” When Sarsfield isn’t skiing competitively she shares her passion for the sport through private ski instruction. Accustomed to stilling her own nerves ahead of global competitions, she’s ideally placed to bring some mindfulness to her lessons. “When I’m teaching, my clients sometimes get stressed and fearful. I’ll stop and encourage them to take a moment to take a few breaths, soak up the views, absorb the calm and remember why we’re skiing – to explore this beautiful world – and those fears invariably disappear,” she says. The Club Med ski report also reflects the extent to which Brits are embracing activities other than skiing and boarding during their winter holidays. Hiking tops the list of most popular additional activities, with 44% of those polled enjoying winter walks while in resort, a further 34% going swimming and 24% hitting the gym. However, holidaymakers are by no means limited to such familiar activities, with a host of off-the-beaten-piste adventures awaiting discovery, from snowshoeing and Nordic walking to yoga and meditation. And while we’re getting mindful, what better place could there be for a digital detox than the mountains, whose infinite pleasures offer ample distraction from your emails and Instagram feed? Research shows that significant use of the internet, smartphones and social media is linked to stress, depression, anxiety and insomnia. So, with three in five (61%) of those polled claiming they spend less time on social media during their winter sports holiday compared with their summer break, a ski trip could be just the detox you need. It’s a sign of the mindful times that resorts and winter sports companies are increasingly catering to those eager to combine skiing and boarding with diverse non-ski activities, from dog-sledding and ice-climbing to outdoor yoga and qi gong. In response to demand from its clients, the all-inclusive Club Med is launching a new initiative this winter at properties in France where guests can swap half days spent on the slopes for wellness experiences such as yoga, swimming and spa treatments. It’s a trend that Rosie Cardale, a qualified physiotherapist, yoga and pilates instructor, has experienced first-hand while working in the French Alps. “Incorporating physio treatments, yoga and pilates classes into ski holidays is fast becoming the norm for many holidaymakers,” she says. “My clients, who range from veteran skiers accustomed to regular physiotherapy and yoga at home, to infrequent skiers seeking to recover from an injury quickly, consistently report feeling more energised and stronger, both physically and mentally, after time spent in the snow.” According to Cardale, setting aside some time for mindfulness is actually the secret to getting the most out of your winter holiday. “Find some downtime to fit in some gentle breathing exercises – ideally in the warmth of your hotel or chalet or even on a long chairlift. It can do wonders for your body and mind,” she says. “And if you get a chance in the evening, stretching will really help you to make the most of the next day on the slopes.” Finally, if the stress still creeps in while you’re on the slopes, just remember Sarsfield’s mantra: “If you’re lucky enough to be in the mountains, you’re lucky enough!” Club Med, founded in 1950, is the pioneer of the all-inclusive concept, offering nearly 70 premium resorts in stunning locations around the world including North and South America, Caribbean, Asia, Africa, Europe and the Mediterranean.