It might not be audible through the noise of England’s post-election sparring, but in Scotland the complex consequences of a simultaneous Conservative majority and SNP landslide are attracting noisy debate. Nicola Sturgeon has claimed a “renewed” mandate to hold an independence referendum, while the Conservatives have retreated from their “Tell Her Again” campaign slogan to the safety of Westminster supremacy. Back in London, Elizabeth Windsor has already reaffirmed her government’s refusal to grant a section 30 order, which would devolve to Scotland the power to hold a referendum. The SNP and Conservatives are already seizing the opportunity for confrontation, each brandishing their respective anti-Tory and unionist credentials against the other. Scottish Labour, however, remains caught between the two. Towards the end of the general election campaign, the Scottish party – highly autonomous from the UK party, though still embedded within it – appeared to come to life, making explicit, respectful overtures to independence supporters to extend their ambitions for social justice and transformation to the whole United Kingdom. Yet the late-blooming confidence of party activists and strategists withered as the results came in: the SNP seized back all six seats Labour had gained from it in 2017. Richard Leonard, the Scottish Labour leader, has begun a review and a “listening” exercise to work out what went wrong. But with less than 18 months until the next Holyrood election, the party’s referendum policy is posing serious problems. Labour, Leonard argued during the election, was opposed to both independence and a second referendum, but would be willing to grant a referendum in the second half of a Labour government’s term in office should the Scottish parliament elections in May 2021 return a pro-referendum majority. But by claiming it will only respect a renewed Holyrood mandate for a referendum that it opposes, Scottish Labour is implicitly telling its pro-independence target voters to opt for the SNP or Scottish Greens in 2021. If they do vote Labour, they risk their votes being interpreted as a move against a second referendum. Squeezed between the Scottish Conservatives’ approaching monopoly on unionist votes, and the SNP and Scottish Greens in the pro-independence camp, the party’s dilemma is far from over. Leonard has attempted to stake out some kind of distinctive terrain by digging up proposals for a constitutional convention that were buried without fanfare in Labour’s 2015 and 2019 manifestos. This was itself an echo of the Scottish constitutional convention, established in 1989, which drew together Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the great and good of Scottish civil society to formulate plans for a Scottish parliament and then demand them on behalf of the people. The convention’s effective founding statement stated that its signatories – including all but one of Labour’s Scottish MPs – “acknowledge the sovereign right of the Scottish people to determine the form of government best suited to their needs”. This populist rhetoric was not matched by popular involvement, and the convention was more of a defensive manoeuvre against the Thatcherite centralisation of power at the time than a genuine popular front. Labour’s recent convention proposal is for a more carefully curated vision of the public via the slow, deliberative procedures of a citizens’ assembly. But this does little to inject it with the populist immediacy of shortcuts such as “independence” or “Brexit”. This – the policy’s advocates would argue – is the point. But in such a cautious form, it fails in its political task. Many in the Labour party – especially in Scotland – believe that Scottish demands for democracy, sovereignty and national recognition are little more than poorly articulated complaints about low wages and delayed trains. Yet the language of “economic transformation” has demonstrably failed to corral sufficient popular discontent into Labour’s camp. Their opponents, on the other hand, have found more success by translating the economic and social consequences of the financial crisis and austerity into broader democratic and national claims against a distant, discredited elite, in London or Brussels. Labour’s proposal for a convention makes this problem worse, detaching Scotland’s constitutional questions from the social, cultural and economic context that gives them power. Focusing only on public spending and ownership – under the quietly condescending banner of “real change” – while parcelling up the rest in a talking shop is not a serious alternative to the new constitutional politics. For the next five years, Scots cannot be expected to keep quiet and tolerate a Tory majority pledged to a hardening Brexit and a series of increasingly ominous constitutional reforms of its own. The lifeboat of independence may be rickety and untested, but it is currently far more plausible than Scottish Labour’s timid invitation to redesign the ship while it sinks. There is no political sense in standing on the sidelines, helplessly declaring that Labour would stop it all if it could. A second independence referendum has a popular mandate from two successive elections. If Johnson refuses to respect that democratic demand between now and the 2021 elections, Scottish Labour cannot risk getting crushed in the rush to reinforce it. Scottish Labour is highly unlikely to endorse a break with the UK any time soon. Relevant data is thin on the ground, but polls last year suggested that between 60 and 70% of Scottish Labour members and at least half of the party’s remaining voters are still unconvinced by independence. It can regain some wider constitutional credibility, however, by showing a renewed willingness to have the argument, and by letting the Scottish people – rather than a Tory majority – decide its outcome. Not only would support for a new referendum show that the party has listened to those pro-independence voters who have punished it repeatedly since 2015, but should the Conservatives be pushed into granting a referendum after 2021, it might also force Labour to clarify and promote its own distinctive, socialist agenda for the transformation of the British state, with the future of the union in the balance. It is an opportunity it cannot afford to miss. • Rory Scothorne is currently completing a PhD on the radical left and Scottish nationalism between 1968 and 1992