Almost everyone you speak to believes in upward social mobility; how could you not? No one can disagree with the proposition that your talent and hard work should take you as far as it can in life. Yet Britain is a deeply divided nation. After 20 years of improvement, poverty levels are on the rise again. Social mobility has flatlined. The upper reaches of our industries and institutions are sclerotic and riven with privilege: “a closed shop at the top”, as the Social Mobility Foundation put it. Only 7% of the British population attend independent fee-paying schools. And yet in my own profession, 71% of barristers have attended independent schools, and only 29% are state educated. Although only 1% of the population is educated at Oxbridge, 78% of the bar attended those universities. It is not a coincidence that these worlds mirror each other so closely. Barristers move seamlessly from one stone-built, green-lawned quad to the next, their colleagues and mentors people who have glided through the same ancient institutions, with remarkably similar mindsets and outlooks. The military recruits nearly three-quarters (71%) of its officers from the privately educated. In government, 49% of MPs attended private schools, and, at the time of writing, 64% of the cabinet did (with 36% attending private schools and Oxbridge). What is it about these schools that apparently leads to a much more successful life in modern-day Britain? What precisely is holding back the 88% of our population, who are currently educated at comprehensive schools, from these top positions in society? My book is partly an attempt to understand how, and why, we find ourselves in this shocking situation in a society like Britain, which claims to value fair play and opportunity for all. It is important to be clear that my own story marks me out as an anomaly in terms of social mobility. In many ways, the part of this book that draws on my own experiences is a series of truly unlikely events over which, at the beginning, I had no control, but which have shaped my life and the man I am today. It is a story of hope and despair, tragedy and trauma, luck and ambition; a story of death and survival. It is about what it means to arrive in Britain with little understanding of the culture, the language, the political context, or really anything at all. It is a story of navigating through all of this, of the sustained resilience required, and of the deep search for meaning amid the suffering and indignities. It explores how I have ended up where I am today, working in one of the elite and ancient professions, and supposedly now part of the “establishment”. So, yes, it is about social mobility and how to dream of a different destiny, but it is also about life, choices and opportunities, or lack of them. My book has been painful to write. There were moments when the tears flowed: all the sorrow, missed opportunities, mistakes, sleepless nights, rejections, the needless family feuds – and how so much of it was avoidable. And yet, at the same time, it was all necessary. Any story about social mobility is never going to be easy to tell. We may measure social mobility in different ways, but it is ultimately a story about hope, and of wanting to take control of your own destiny; even if, in reality in this country, most of it has already been settled on your behalf before you’ve understood any of this because the circumstances into which you are born will overwhelmingly determine what future you’re likely to have. There are hardly any second chances. Successive governments have sought to realise a “classless society” but the truth is that we have created its opposite: a caste-based society where privilege and wealth are concentrated in the hands of the very few. As we confront a chaotic and broken parliamentary system, profound inequality and a potentially disastrous Brexit, it is hard to think of a more challenging time for our deeply divided country. According to a survey of 5,000 people conducted in 2018 by the Social Mobility Barometer, over half of us think that central government should be “doing more on social mobility; and 36% think that employers should be doing more”. (I would love to meet the 5% who think that enough is being done.) Together, the overwhelming majority of people think that the answers to these intractable issues lie with our elected officials and with policy, and those who create and sustain jobs. If this is not a cry for a new consensus to be built, then I don’t know what is. Ultimately, the promise made by “social mobility” in the way that we understand it today is a false one. The situation we have now only works for a tiny few, leaving the rest of us scrambling around, prepared to fight to the death for the remaining scraps. This is not only unsustainable; I would go as far as to say that the convulsion we are seeing in major western societies is partly because people have realised that the pie has never been sliced fairly, and the idea that wealth would eventually “trickle down” was only ever a pipe dream. The reality remains that for a young refugee boy, who buried his father at the age of nine, arrived in Britain without his mother, and was brought up in poverty and among profound deprivation, the chances that you would be writing a book like mine are minuscule. Not impossible, but highly improbable. In that context, what politicians should really be saying is that the chance of you succeeding in Britain today is down to many factors: the wealth and profession of your parents; the kind of school you attended; your mental and physical health; and the quality of your early environment, in terms of stability and attention. You’ll need to work harder than you ever imagined – and hope that whatever talents you have, given the fast-paced development of automation, are going to still be needed when you grow up. You’ll need a lot of luck as you go; and let’s hope that, along the way, someone explains the unwritten rules of the world you want to join. And you’ll need to make it through all that with your belief in yourself still intact. And then – maybe – you’ll make it. It’s a bit of a mouthful but it is a damn sight more honest than anything with the word “meritocracy” in it. • People Like Us by Hashi Mohamed is published by Profile (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over