The all-female W Series has made a major advance in its aim of putting a woman into Formula One. It was announced on Thursday that two of the championship’s races this year will be held as part of F1 meetings at the US and Mexican Grands Prix. After a successful inaugural season in 2019 the expansion of the series beyond Europe and into a partnership with F1 for the first time was hailed as crucial by the W Series chief executive, Catherine Bond Muir. “The tide is rising for all women in motorsport,” she said. “Other brands and series are now looking very carefully at our drivers, so we are already starting to achieve our ambitions. We are closer to getting women into F1.” Formula One is eager to expand its appeal by increasing the diversity of its drivers and approached the W Series to bring it to a race weekend. This year’s W Series season which begins in St Petersburg in May, will consist of eight races, with the final two meetings in Austin and Mexico City in October. The W Series covers the costs of all its drivers, with its aim of giving them the opportunity to race and in doing so gain exposure to advance further in the sport. “This is of crucial importance,” said Bond Muir. “Progressing in motor sport requires access to a lot of money, because you need support and sponsorship as well as talent. What this will give our drivers is much bigger and better platforms to promote themselves.” Formula One has not had a women driver since Lella Lombardi participated in the Austrian Grand Prix in 1976. That it was F1 that came to the W Series is indicative of the impact it made in its first season, acknowledged by F1’s sporting director, Ross Brawn. “In just one year, W Series has contributed significantly to increasing interest in the topic of diversity and inclusion in motorsport,” he said. “We are convinced that our sport must offer equal opportunities for men and women to compete together. It is no coincidence that improving the diversity of the F1 grid by supporting and promoting driver talent from underrepresented backgrounds is one of our strategic objectives.” Last season the championship consisted of six meetings, all in Europe as part of DTM (Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters) meetings and was won by Britain’s Jamie Chadwick, who earned prize money of almost £400,000. She was taken on as development driver by the Williams F1 team and will defend her title this year when the series also awards 15 super licence points to the winner. 40 points are required to qualify to drive in F1. The success of the W series has already revitalised the careers of several of its drivers and the increased exposure they will receive as part of an F1 weekend will be of import as they pursue backing to continue racing. The series is still funded by private equity but now has a major partner in Rockit phones and Bond Muir believed it would only continue to grow. “We have always said we have bold and ambitious plans to expand across the world,” she said. “These two races represent a sensible expansion in 2020 and hopefully we will expand across the other side of the world towards Asia in 2021.”