For the first time, a graphic novel has won the Newbery Medal, the oldest and most prestigious children’s book award in the US. The win places cartoonist Jerry Craft alongside titans of American literature including Madeleine L’Engle, Louis Sachar and Beverly Cleary. Craft’s graphic novel New Kid follows the life of Jordan Banks, one of the only children of colour at a prestigious private school. Announcing Craft’s win, Newbery committee chair Krishna Grady called it a “distinct and timely story”. “Respectful of its child audience, it explores friendship, race, class and bullying in a fresh and often humorous manner … It is, simply put, a ‘distinguished contribution to American literature’,” said Grady, referring to the criteria of the prize, which is given by the Association for Library Service to Children. Established in 1922, the Newbery has gone to titles including L’Engle’s A Wrinkle in Time, Sachar’s Holes and Cleary’s Dear Mr Henshaw. Craft told School Library Journal that he hoped the win would help legitimise the graphic novel format – and show that stories featuring African American characters who “are not driven by misery” can also succeed. “There are very important books that talk about slavery and civil rights or police brutality or gang life, but I really wanted to add to their narrative by adding a boy who has a mom and a dad, a family who loves him, a support system, neighbours,” he said. “More than anything, I wanted to give 10-year-old Jerry Craft a book he could read and say was his own. That was probably the reason I was not a reader until I was an adult. The things I had to read in school couldn’t have been further from my life. Or if it was someone who looked like me, it couldn’t be further from the life I wanted to live when I got older.” Also announced on Monday was the winner of this year’s Caldecott Medal, which is awarded to the artist of “the most distinguished American picture book for children”. It was given to Kadir Nelson for his illustrations in The Undefeated, Kwame Alexander’s poetic love letter to black life in the US.