Awkwafina Is Nora from Queens is a smartly refractive title, as it performs a double reflection: Awkwafina, a breakout star of the past couple years with scene-stealing turns in Crazy Rich Asians, Ocean’s Eight and The Farewell, which won her a Golden Globe earlier this month, is Nora Lum from Forest Hills, Queens, New York. Nora from Queens is also the name of Awkwafina’s new show on Comedy Central, loosely based on her life – or, more accurately, an alter-ego of the ascendant star handicapped by her own aimlessness, taking too many Adderall to play video games and living with family. That alter-ego is Nora Lin, a 27-year-old mostly unemployed woman who lives almost exclusively in impulse mode, be that smoking weed, masturbating or insisting on making conversation in the car she drives part-time for an Uber-like rideshare service. (Said car is detailed with Hot Wheels-style flames.) She lives in Forest Hills with her widowed father (BD Wong) and beloved grandmother (Lori Tan Chinn), in a room that still has an MTV poster and appears to have not been cleared since her high school days in the late 2000s. The five episodes screened for critics mostly revolve around Nora and her floundering attempts to settle on the ground floor of adulthood – to cash a check, hold a job, have her own space – with commentary from her prickly, disaffected dad and blisteringly profane grandmother. Armed with fanged observations (“I freak out old people, I remind them of ’Nam”) and self-delusions (“I’m not a hoarder, I collect things”), Nora is an archetypical TV version of her generation: smarter than her stalled maturity suggests, too wry for her aimlessness to be that depressing, definitely more broke than is realistically possible for life in New York. When a neighbor tells her he doesn’t want to “end up like one of those losers who just lives with their parents at home and floats through life like a townie log”, she feigns offense and treats it with a typically millennial sense of detachment: “Sick burn, dude! Wanna dab?” The raunchy female slacker premise is, by now, its own genre; Girls, Broad City, and Inside Amy Schumer all reveled in their characters’ messiness, their post-recession aversion to career-building, high faith in the immediate fix and taboo-breaking frankness about sex and female bodies. Even Fleabag, the breakout dramedy about a millennial woman overcoming grief and disassociation, set its tone with Phoebe Waller-Bridge narrating while having sex or on a toilet. Nora from Queens doesn’t blaze any new trails in the candor and slack departments, but it does give the female slacker a welcome new perspective: that of a second-generation Asian American woman (like Awkwafina, Nora is Chinese on her father’s side, Korean on her mother’s) in a multi-generational household. It’s a show that, unfortunately, probably wouldn’t have been made even a couple years ago and – like Hulu’s Ramy, another small-scope show prioritizing the second-gen American millennial experience – brings a fresh look at the voices, jokes, households and settings TV can include. But whereas Ramy deftly explores the characters’ interweaving Muslim, Egyptian and American identities post-9/11, Nora from Queens mostly sticks to the surface: her grandmother finding job listings on Weibo, for example, or a white woman telling Nora her “English is so good”. The thinness of the show’s plot thus puts a hefty burden on the shoulders of Awkwafina as the show’s star, and she demonstrates once again to be an energetic, compelling performer, especially when it comes to physical comedy. Her stardom is undeniable. But the wattage of her presence paradoxically highlights the show’s conceptual weakness: this Nora from Queens, the real one, is probably in many ways like her character: clever, game, fiery. But she’s also scrappy, ambitious, industrious – the type of person who gets fired from her book publishing job for publishing a rap video called My Vag on YouTube and turns the virality into a star-making career. Why play the slacker, confused version of yourself, when the evidence to the contrary is so clear? Given that there has only been five episodes and an already impressive slate of entertaining guest stars – Natasha Lyonne, Jaboukie Young-White and particularly Bowen Yang as her uptight tech bro cousin Edmund – there’s reason to believe Nora from Queens will grow to fit its star. There are snippets of the real Nora’s upstart energy throughout the episodes, when she wonders aloud about purpose (then hits the bong) or says she wants to fight a job she wants to come to. That’s the Nora from Queens I’m interested in getting to know, but she’s not quite here yet. Awkwafina Is Nora from Queens starts on Comedy Central in the US on 22 January with a UK date to be confirmed