Inevitably, this column, my last, begins with the letter I. It is because, of all the capitals, an opening “I” takes least space in the current design of Journal, the title of the opinion pages of the printed Guardian where Open door also appears fortnightly. In the paper, space ends abruptly, deadlines are hard, distribution is physical, the product perishable, the audience geographically bounded and culturally familiar, and the archive is static in ink. In digital formats, none of that necessarily applies. In the readers’ editor role in recent years I have had a unique vantage point from which to watch Guardian and Observer journalism develop in both the print and digital realms, and to discern similarities and differences in the audiences for each. Strongly growing digital audiences are global, vast, multicultural and increasingly important contributors to keeping this journalism organisation sustainable. The commercial environment is harsh for longstanding newspapers, two of which are definitely the Guardian, born 1821, and the Observer, 1791. Looking back through past Open door columns, many of the issues that have arisen were familiar, and will be back in some form or other: tragedy; fame, including royal fame; terror, too many times by far; dependability; the cruelty of states; prejudice and memory; change, redesign, misunderstandings and adjustments; offence, coarse language, disputation and misjudgment. Fake news is not new, but its recent forms are virulent and threaten democratic norms in new ways. I entered the world of newspapers in 1977 when digital technologies were barely flickering. As I leave, the development I find most interesting (and wish I could see more of) is the intermingling of human and artificial intelligence. It is spreading in many parts of life, and it will grow in journalism too. As it does, the humans will need to be vigilant to preserve notions that have both guided and reflected the best in journalism during its first few hundred years. They must remember the distinctly human traits that often figure in the best work: empathy, irony, mercy and whimsy among them. I have had chances to draft or administer codes in several jurisdictions, so as a parting exercise I tried to distil the editorial standards that I hope human and artificial collaborators will adopt and adhere to in their combined endeavours. Be accurate, or become so. Strive to be fair. Be accountable, especially when circumstances prevent a promise from being kept. To give offence is sometimes inevitable in journalism, but think how to minimise it. Work against harmful discrimination. Privacy is, like freedom of expression, a human right. Weigh them with care. Respect grief. Protect children. In the public interest, disclose, disclose, disclose. (The public will do the rest.) Many thanks, readers, for your thoughtful and lively engagement since June 2016. The next readers’ editor, Elisabeth Ribbans, will be with you soon. • Paul Chadwick is the Guardian’s readers’ editor