John Harris (The generation gap has made Britain a dysfunctional family, Journal, 13 January) highlights the damage and dangers of age segregation, and the small initiatives that are trying to buck the trends of housing, social lives and public services which keep the generations apart, or even in competition with each other for space and resources. Homeshare is growing quickly in the UK, with greater numbers of older and younger people living together – the older person enjoying company and a hand around their house, and the younger person finding an affordable home. It is easy to see initiatives like Homeshare as peripheral, but there’s no reason why they can’t be mainstream – especially when the need has never been greater. The global Homeshare movement shows that this approach can be brought to thousands of people, and is in many other countries. National and local government have a role, not least in removing current tax and benefits disincentives for homesharing in later life. We hear so much about services and society letting older people down that our fixation on the risks of acting is paralysing us, as the risks of inaction bring a rising tide of loneliness, housing shortages and societal breakdown. All of us need to challenge our assumptions and prejudices: recognising that both older and younger people have much to offer each other. We cannot force the generations together en masse. People bridge the generational divide, like any other, because they make a personal connection with an individual.Alex FoxCEO, Shared Lives Plus • John Harris highlighted the number of residential care homes disconnected from the local community in his piece on the growing age divide. By contrast, retirement communities are a distinct housing with care setting which effectively bridges between generations to tackle loneliness. Rather than being “well set back from the road”, many of the hundreds of new developments being built are on or near a high street, and act as hubs for the whole community by welcoming members of the public to use shared facilities. Take the Chocolate Quarter in Bristol, run by the St Monica Trust on the site of the old chocolate factory which previously served as the heart of the community. On top of 136 supported housing units and a 93-bed care home, the Quarter has office space, a swimming pool, pottery, dance studio, cinema, restaurant and bar – all accessible to local people and designed to appeal to all ages. The on-site GP centre refers patients to activity groups in the retirement community, building a sense of shared participation and mutual benefit. Instead of being islands of the elderly, innovative retirement communities create intergenerational connections to the benefit of us all.Michael VogesExecutive director, Arco (Associated Retirement Community Operators) • John Harris’s otherwise excellent piece omits one interesting point that age in Britain not only correlates with geography, economics and politics, but also with higher education, where there is a huge generational gap. In the 1960s, fewer than 10% of young people had access to university; now, nearly 50% do. Insofar as education enhances critical thinking and “broadens the mind”, this disparity would have some impact on political views. Tricia Cusack Greystones, County Wicklow, Ireland • John Harris refers to obvious generation gaps but chooses the wrong symbol – the residential care home. Over 50 years I have been associated with the management of several; and my son is in an excellent care home that opened 125 years ago. Where these are set back from roads, “apparently cut off”, it is because of the parking required by staff, residents and ambulances. My son’s care home is “set back from the road”, but nonetheless is part of the community. The residents walk around the small town and are greeted as they go to their work in the two shops the charity maintains. Of course, we desperately need to explore every option so that ending up in a care home is not a sentence of separation. But there are models of good practice to be copied.Michael BaronLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition