Harold Pinter spoke of Samuel Beckett as the most remorseless of writers. “The more he grinds my nose in the shit, the more I am grateful to him,” he said of Beckett’s dramatic ability to strip the human condition down to its bones. Trevor Nunn brings together three short Beckett plays under the unifying theme of old age and memory. All feature desolate men whose noses are ground into the messes of their pasts. Some are tormented by what they remember, others by their forgetting. Cumulatively, the plays do not quite have the visceral effect that Pinter so appreciated. But they do build an atmosphere and are perfectly paired to the small, subterranean theatre in which they are performed. It is where Nunn staged Beckett’s All That Fall in 2012 and its tight, dark intimacy is apt for throwing these men’s reduced lives into sharp relief. The works dramatise the act of listening, and Max Pappenheim’s sound design is central to the overall effect, heightening sound and silence so that each is vivid. James Hayes plays the failed writer in Krapp’s Last Tape who listens to his diary recordings from three decades earlier. The role was originally played by Patrick Magee, in 1958, with growly magnificence. Here, Hayes begins the mime of the opening scene by peeling a banana and slipping on its skin, but the clownish, music-hall comedy seems too poised. His recorded voice brings a gear change and Hayes’s performance gathers in mournful power as a moment of romantic passion is recalled. The voice is the dramatic – and poetic – force, but as he curls his arm delicately around his recording device, Hayes articulates silent regret and yearning that magnifies the potency of the scene. Eh Joe also has an emotionally eviscerating voice at its heart. Written for television, the original features the lone, wizened figure of Joe and the voice of his female tormentor speaking in accusing tones as a camera closes in on him over the course of her monologue. It is clear the voice is a perennial haunting in his head. This version shows Niall Buggy on a spotlit bed with a screen behind him that captures his expressions at ever closer focus. Even if this visual device aims for faithfulness to Beckett’s directions, it seems like a too literal TV-to-stage transposition. Joe’s moving close-up on screen is a distraction that simultaneously renders Buggy’s theatrical performance too static. Lisa Dwan speaks as the disembodied voice. Her expressiveness builds its own strangulating tension around Joe – which might alone have recreated the psychological effect of the TV screen closeup. Dwan is hypnotic; as she recalls a woman’s suicide and describes the beach shingle around her, her voice turns to a raspy whisper, as if filled with gravel. Dwan is the only woman in this triple bill and gives its most formidable performance, even in her invisibility. The Old Tune, adapted from Robert Pinget’s 1960 play La Manivelle, was first broadcast on radio and is rarely performed. Sound effects have a central role and these are realised well on stage, with tooting horns and organ music forming the aural backdrop to a conversation between two Dubliners meeting on a city bench. Much of the piece’s success comes from the comic timing and pathos built between David Threlfall, who plays the quietly melancholic Cream, and Buggy, who is the more gormless organ grinder, Gorman. Unlike Vladimir and Estragon, they are not waiting but simply wiling away time in a circular dialogue, in which their failing memories make them unreliable witnesses to their pasts. There is a ticklish satire to it all as they retreat from the modern world into their sentimentally misremembered pasts: “There is the moon,” says Cream as he draws a circle in the air and talks about scientific progress, “and there is cheese,” as he draws another circle. Unlike many of Beckett’s men locked in mutual isolation, these two have at least some warmth between them, it seems. And so The Old Tune gives a gentle, tragicomic end to this triple dose of Beckettian nihilism. • At Jermyn Street theatre, London, until 8 February.