It was effective, and there was even a pretty goal, as Newcastle put an end to a three-match losing streak by fighting for a deserved point at Molineux. Wolves had the better of the possession and of the attacking flair on show they had the lion’s share of that, too. But they could not find a winning goal and Nuno Espírito Santo used the occasion to reiterate his desire for attacking reinforcements to his multitalented squad. Miguel Almirón continued his transformation into a goal machine, scoring the opener in the seventh minute with a lofted shot at the end of a clever move. Leander Dendoncker struck back six minutes later with a neat finish from a corner. There were two strong saves from Martin Dubravka, while Sean Longstaff cleared a third effort off the line. But for a Newcastle side which was already depleted and lost three more players to injury, this was pretty much a moral victory. “We certainly scored a good goal, a really top, top goal,” said Steve Bruce, “but we didn’t carry the threat after that. All in all you thank your goalkeeper because he’s made two great saves but they ran a million miles out there and their resilience was there for all to see. We could do with a bit of quality at the top of the pitch but I couldn’t fault their effort.” Paul Dummett, Dwight Gayle and Joelinton are the new additions to an injury list that already includes five first-team starters. Dummett and Gayle have pulled hamstrings while the £40m Joelinton (who endured another quiet match) has a groin strain. “I will ask questions to try to work out what’s behind it,” Bruce said. “Are we unfortunate, or is it something else? I’ll tell you what I think, and that is that we’ve played so many games.” Newcastle now host Rochdale in an FA Cup replay on Tuesday. “I’ll have a look in the under-18s and see who’s available‚” said Bruce as a joke – probably. For Nuno there was a similar refrain about a need for reinforcements and attacking quality, which rang a little more hollow given the personnel Wolves already have at their disposal and with the big summer signing Patrick Cutrone already shipped back to Italy and Fiorentina. “The game was not so good but we tried, the character and the will was there‚” Nuno said during his three-minute press conference. “Newcastle came with a fantastic performance. They denied us space and we found some struggles there, but we created a couple of chances; clear ones. We are speaking about this area every time I sit down, but it’s obvious we should bring in players. We are working on that, I hope we can solve it.” Newcastle deserved their opener and it was cute play from Gayle, making only his second Premier League start of the season, that set it in motion. First a chest pass to the wing-back Jetro Willems, who then burst past a tumbling Dendoncker before returning the ball to Gayle, who had enough awareness to find Almirón with a back-heeled flick. The Paraguayan had time to lift his shot beyond Rui Patrício for his third goal in six matches (and of his entire Newcastle career). It was now six consecutive league matches in which Wolves had conceded the opening goal, something of a puzzle for a team so impressive in their defensive organisation. They soon had an equaliser, however, as João Moutinho’s flighted corner was anticipated excellently by Dendoncker, who put his earlier slip behind him to clip a right-foot shot into the Newcastle net.