Major highways were cut and residents flooded in as more than 300mm of torrential rain bucketed down on south-east Queensland overnight. Two people were stranded after trying to drive through floodwater on the Gold Coast, with police receiving more than 50 reports of flooded roads across the city on Saturday morning. The deluge hit the Gold Coast the hardest with 325mm of rain falling at Loders Creek and more than 200mm in the Gold Coast hinterland. Floodwater closed the M1 at Helensvale as emergency crews tried to pump water away. Heavy trucks were being allowed to pass through but cars continued to be diverted. There was flash flooding reported on the Gold Coast highway at Miami, as well as at Chelmer, Kenmore Hills and Birkdale. According to the weather bureau, triple the monthly rainfall has fallen on the Gold Coast in the past 12 hours. The SES said it had responded to more than 160 callouts on the Gold Coast, Brisbane and Sunshine Coast. ❌IF IT’S FLOODED, FORGET IT❌The @BOM_Qld has reported flash flooding in some parts of the state this morning due to heavy rainfall overnight. Fast-moving water can be extremely unpredictable and have devastating consequences. pic.twitter.com/dqqhXWOj9P Localised flooding is occurring across parts of SE Qld due to heavy rainfall & storm activity. Suburbs across the Sunshine Coast, Brisbane and Gold Coast areas are affected. For flood or storm-related help, call 132 500. If it's an emergency, call Triple Zero (000) immediately. pic.twitter.com/pJgFdl5sn0 ⚠️ ⛈️WARNING UPDATE: Dangerous and life threatening flash flooding is likely occurring with very dangerous thunderstorms impacting the Gold Coast. 145mm Recorded in 2 hours at Monterey Keys. Warnings: https://t.co/FBmpsInT9o pic.twitter.com/1M7PUW4h0N The Bureau of Meteorology said 95mm had fallen in the space of one hour at the Gold Coast suburb of Carrara and 145mm had fallen within two hours at Monterey Keys. The theme parks Warner Bros Movie World, Dreamworld and Whitewater World were closed to the public. “Please be aware that due to severe weather and flooding, Warner Bros Movie World will be closed today for the safety of our guests and team members,” Village Roadshow said in a social media post. Queensland Fire and Emergency Services advised the public to beware of fallen trees and power lines and not to attempt to drive, walk or ride through floodwaters. Parts of parts of drought-stricken NSW also received drenchings, with some regions recording 250mm of rain in 24 hours. “It’s sliding down into the north-east and Northern Rivers,” Bureau of Meteorology forecaster Abrar Shabren said. “The rainfall will continue for the next 24 hours and substantial rain is expected at those locations.” The Tweed and Northern Rivers regions had the state’s biggest falls, with Clothiers Creek receiving 250mm in the 24 hours to 9am on Saturday. Tumbulgum (243mm), Bilambil Heights (212mm), Tweed Heads (195mm), Kingscliff (189mm), Murwillumbah (173mm) also experienced heavy falls. On the mid north coast, Grafton had 155mm and Killabakh had 112mm. There are concerns that heavy rain could lead to flashflooding and landslips in parts of the NSW south-east and south coast as it moves down the state over the next 24 hours. “It could cause heavy blasts of rain as well which would come with gusty conditions,” Shabren said. “It could be damaging to areas that have had bushfires. Trees that have been damaged could be vulnerable. We could also have run-off of debris, soil and even rocks and that could lead to landslides.” A strong wind warning has been issued for the Byron, Illawarra and Batemans Coast regions, and flood warnings for the Orara and Bellinger rivers on the north coast.