The British economy shrank in November following a fall in consumer spending and a downturn in manufacturing before the election, raising pressure on the Bank of England for an interest rate cut. In a reflection of the political uncertainty hanging over families and businesses before last month’s vote, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said gross domestic product (GDP) had fallen by 0.3% in November from the previous month. Most major sectors of the economy except construction recorded a drop in output, including the country’s usually dominant services industry – which includes retail, hotels and finance. The latest snapshot comes as momentum towards an interest rate cut builds after three members of the Bank of England’s rate-setting committee signalled that weakness in the economy could warrant lower borrowing costs within months to support jobs and growth. The pound came under selling pressure on Monday, dropping by around 0.7% against the US dollar, to $1.2980, and the euro, to €1.1675, amid rising expectations that the Bank’s monetary policy committee (MPC) could cut rates as soon as its next meeting on 30 January. Economists at the consultancy Capital Economics said car production had dragged down manufacturing output in November because of car plant shutdowns imposed as a Brexit contingency following the Halloween deadline, before its extension until the end of January. Overall manufacturing output fell by 1.7% on the month, while the service sector – which accounts for about 80% of the economy – contracted by 0.3%. Andrew Wishart, UK economist at Capital Economics, said: “In normal times, the MPC would already have cut rates. But it held off to see if the general election produced a revival in sentiment. What really matters is what happens in the data for January. At the moment, we think the MPC may hold off from cutting rates, but it will be a close call.” Despite the fall in GDP on the month, government statisticians said the economy had grown slightly more strongly than first thought in September and October. UK GDP rose by 0.1% over the broader three months to November, beating expectations among City economists for a decline by the same amount. The ONS advises that the three-month figures can provide a more reliable indicator of economic strength than its monthly snapshot, which can be prone to revision as more data becomes available. However, statisticians warned that the long-term picture for the economy continued to be one of relative weakness, with growth compared with the same time last year the lowest since the spring of 2012. Frances O’Grady, the TUC general secretary, said the government had run out of excuses and needed a plan to boost growth and living standards across the country. “These figures are bleak news for the economy and working people with vital industries like manufacturing in the doldrums,” she added. There are hopes that the economy could recover in the coming months, easing the pressure on the Bank to cut interest rates, after Boris Johnson’s unexpectedly decisive election victory lifted some of the political uncertainty holding back household and business spending. John Hawksworth, chief economist at the accountancy firm PwC, said it was too early to say for sure if momentum would return at the start of 2020, but added: “Our latest survey of the financial services sector with the CBI does suggest some boost to optimism since the election.”