Quite apart from its gross offence to justice and basic humanity, the striking point about the Trump-Netanyahu plan is its complete lack of reality in relation to the situation in the Middle East (‘Occupation normalised’: Trump plan ticks every box on the Israeli wishlist, 29 January). Does the Israeli government believe for a moment that if the situation was reversed it would quietly accept Palestinian domination over its people’s lives? If Israeli citizens were constrained behind a wall, were forced to use separate roads, had land confiscated for Palestinian housing, had draconian rules on movement and had the Hebrew language treated as inferior, they would take every possible form of action against their oppressors, and they would be right to do so. Once again Israel makes the argument that these measures are for its security, but this is perverse: every action to constrain Palestinian life provokes increasing action against Israel. Israel will never be at peace with its neighbours while it represses them. If Trump really wants to help Israel’s security, there is one simple way: to end the almost £3bn paid annually by the US to Israel, mainly to support its military. This would force Israel’s government to come to the table and to discuss a genuinely fair and equitable settlement between the two neighbours.Michael MeadowcroftLeeds • Donald Trump’s plan is not a peace plan but a declaration of war. How else to describe a plan that gobbles up most of Palestine’s territory? At zero cost, Israel gets US approval to annex occupied territory – land that it seized through force and colonised. Palestinians are permitted to have areas under their autonomous control, demilitarised under overriding Israeli security, with all entry and exit controlled by Israel and with no right to have an airport or independent port. If Israel agrees, it might be called a Palestinian state, but it is a vassal entity at the mercy of the occupying power. The occupation that has lasted since 1967 will not be terminated but made permanent. What does this mean? Any power can take territory by force and keep it. International law no longer counts. It is the law of the jungle, and big beasts such as Russia and China will be looking at choice morsels to feast on. We are all less safe as a result. Chris DoyleDirector, Council for Arab-British Understanding • The irreversibility of (illegal) West Bank settlements, the absurdity of a fragmented Palestinian state connected by a corridor, and the likelihood of Israeli militarism towards any independent Palestinian authority means that the only solution to this intractable contest between Semitic cousins is a single state. Like the integrated genetic pool from which “Jews” and “Palestinians” draw, the history of the area west of the Jordan, east to the Euphrates, south to Yemen and as far north as the Caucasus has for the past 2,000 years been a site of mutual conversion, conviviality and the worship of overlapping deities and dogmas. It is a long way off, but history and demography will probably overwhelm the prejudice and greed that today insists upon separation. A one-state solution makes historical sense, but also modern economic sense, integrating two sophisticated, well-educated populations. Of course, Israel has momentarily outlawed such talk with its “nation state” law, invoking the illusion of genetic difference. Even so, it is hard to explain the deafening silence of this humanistic option from debate among more liberal democratic observers.Prof Saville KushnerLiverpool • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition