House Democrats have released a trove of documents obtained from Lev Parnas, a close associate of Donald Trump’s personal lawyer Rudy Giuliani, including a handwritten note that mentions asking Ukraine’s president to investigate “the Biden case.” The documents made public Tuesday come as Democrats prepare to send articles of impeachment to the Senate for Trump’s trial. They add new context to their charges that Trump pressured Ukraine to investigate Democrats as he withheld military aid to the country. The documents show Parnas was in constant communication with Giuliani and in contact with Ukrainian officials as he worked as an intermediary. Among the documents is a screenshot of a previously undisclosed letter from Giuliani to Ukrainian president Volodymir Zelenskiy dated 10 May 2019, which was before Zelenskiy took office. In the letter, Giuliani announces himself as Trump’s personal lawyer and requests a meeting with Zelenskiy “as personal counsel to President Trump and with his knowledge and consent”. Also among the documents is a handwritten note on stationery from the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Vienna that says “get Zalensky to Annonce that the Biden case will be Investigated.“ Trump asked Zelenskiy in a July call to investigate his political rival, Democrat Joe Biden, and his son Hunter. Hunter Biden served on the board of a gas company based in Ukraine. In a letter outlining the evidence, Democrats said that Parnas’s attorney confirmed that Parnas wrote the notes. The documents – including phone records, texts and flash drives turned over by Parnas – were sent to the House judiciary committee by three other House committees “to be included as part of the official record that will be transmitted to the Senate along with the articles of impeachment,” according to a statement. Some of the materials were made public while others were marked as sensitive. Parnas and his business partner, Igor Fruman, both US citizens who emigrated from the former Soviet bloc, were indicted last year on charges of conspiracy, making false statements and falsification of records. Prosecutors allege they made outsize campaign donations to Republican causes after receiving millions of dollars originating from Russia. Several of the documents show Parnas communicating with Giuliani and another attorney, Victoria Toensing, about the removal of Marie Yovanovitch, who was at the time the US ambassador to Ukraine. Her removal, pushed by Trump, was at the center of the Democrats’ inquiry. Yovanovitch testified in the House impeachment hearings that she was the victim of a “smear campaign.” Trump on a 25 July call had promised Zelenskiy that Yovanovitch was “going to go through some things.” Roughly two months earlier, she had been recalled from her diplomatic post. On 23 April, the day before Yovanovitch was directed to return to the United States, Giuliani texted Parnas, “He fired her again.“ Parnas texted back, “I pray it happens this time I’ll call you tomorrow my brother.“ Parnas also received messages from a man named Robert F. Hyde who appeared to be describing surveillance of Yovanovitch and referred to her as a “bitch”. Hyde is now running for a US House seat in Connecticut. After texting about the ambassador, Hyde gave Parnas location updates over the course of a week. In one text, Hyde wrote: “She’s talked to three people. Her phone is off. Her computer is off.” He said she was under heavy security and “we have a person inside.” Hyde at one point texted Parnas that ”they are willing to help if we/you would like a price,” and “guess you can do anything in Ukraine with money … is what I was told.” Parnas texted back: “Lol.” The text messages also show that Parnas consulted Giuliani in January 2019 after the US denied issuing a visa for former Ukrainian prosecutor general Viktor Shokin. Giuliani replied: “I can revive it.” In a follow-up conversation the following day, Giuliani told Parnas: “It’s going to work I have no 1 in it.” Giuliani then predicted “he will get one“ before giving Parnas the phone number for Jay Sekulow, the leader of the president’s personal legal team. Sekulow is expected to be part of Trump’s legal team during the impeachment trial.