Steamed pudding is one of those desserts that people tend to think of as a bit dated and boring. However, you can really go to town on the flavour combinations. Here, we’re talking white chocolate pudding with pockets of stem ginger and lemon, and served with a brown sugar custard. This is comfort food at its finest. Prep 20 minCook 2 hr 15 minServes 4-6 For the steamed pudding 175g unsalted butter, plus extra for greasing175g soft light brown sugar 3 large eggs 175g self-raising flourZest of 2 lemons½ tsp fine sea salt1 tsp vanilla extract2 tbsp milk 1 tsp ground ginger100g white chocolate, chopped 150g stem ginger, chopped For the custard250ml double cream650ml whole milk2 tsp vanilla bean paste4 large egg yolks3 tbsp cornflour200g light brown sugar To finishCandied lemon 4 tbsp crystallised ginger, chopped50g white chocolate, melted30g icing sugar, to dust Generously grease a 1.2-litre pudding basin with a knob of butter, then cut out a disc of baking parchment and stick it to the bottom. Using a stand mixer, beat the butter and sugar until light and fluffy. Add the eggs one at a time, mixing between each addition. Sieve in the self-raising flour, then add the lemon zest, salt, vanilla, milk and ground ginger, and beat until incorporated. Fold in the white chocolate and stem ginger. Tip into the basin, smoothing the surface so it’s level. Cover with a lid or secure a layer of greaseproof paper and foil over the top, pleating the centre to allow the pudding to expand, and securing with string. To cook, put a saucer on the bottom of a large saucepan. Put the pudding on top, then pour enough boiling water into the saucepan for it to reach halfway up the basin. Pop the lid on, bring the water to a boil, then turn down the heat to a rolling simmer – have some extra water ready, just in case you need to top up. It should take one and a half to two hours. Meanwhile, make the custard. Combine the double cream and milk in a pan. Add the vanilla, and bring to a boil. Meanwhile, mix the egg yolks, cornflour and sugar in a bowl. Once the cream and milk just reach boiling point, slowly add the yolk mix, stirring constantly. Cook on a low heat, stirring, until thickened. It’s ready when the custard reaches 82C on a food thermometer, or thickly coats the back of a spoon. To check if the pudding is ready, poke a skewer through the foil pleat: if it comes out clean, it’s ready. Lift the pudding from the saucepan and set aside for five minutes, then turn out on to a serving plate. To finish, sprinkle with candied lemon and crystalised ginger, add a squiggle of melted chocolate and a dusting of icing sugar, then pour the custard around the pudding, and serve.