“The novice hurdlers are our future,” Joe Tizzard said after the Tolworth Hurdle here on Saturday and quite a future it promises to be. Fiddlerontheroof, one of three top-notch novices in the Tizzard family’s stable in Dorset, was a thoroughly impressive winner of the first Grade One of 2020 as he shrugged off the heavy ground and pulled six lengths clear of Jeremys Flame, and the only issue now for his trainer and would-be backers is which race he is likely to turn up for at the Cheltenham Festival in March. For the punters who sent Fiddlerontheroof off the 5-4 favourite, the victory was as smooth as they come. The six-year-old needed three attempts to get off the mark over hurdles, over course and distance last month, but the first of those was a close second behind Thyme Hill, a Grade One winner since, and he continues to improve race-by-race. The ground here was deep and holding but Fiddlerontheroof went clear in a few strides between the final two flights and his price for the Supreme Novice Hurdle on 10 March was down from 33-1 to around 12-1 by the time he was unsaddled. “The further the race went, the happier I was,” said Robbie Power, the winning jockey. “He’s travelled stronger the more the race went on, but the most pleasing thing of the whole race was when I gave him a squeeze going to the second last, the turn of foot he showed there was quite impressive. He was able to quicken in that ground when others weren’t, so it was an impressive performance.” Fiddlerontheroof might well be a little shorter for the Supreme were it certain to be his destination in March, but the permutations in the Tizzard stable alone mean that the question will go unanswered for several weeks yet while the going at the Festival could also be crucial. “A lot will depend on the ground,” Tizzard said. “I’m sure he’ll have an entry in the [two-mile] Supreme and the two-and-a-half [Ballymore Novice Hurdle]. We’ve also got Master Debonair for the Supreme as well [as recent Newbury winner The Big Breakaway] so we’re spoilt for choice and that’s beautiful for our yard going forward, the novice hurdlers are our future. “They’re three very good horses and I can’t wait to jump a fence with him [Fiddlerontheroof] next year. We had Elixir [De Nutz] who won this race last year and he never made it to Cheltenham, so it’s a case of getting them all there and then it’s a lovely problem to have.” Rex Dingle produced the most adroit ride as Jepeck was forced to negotiate a tricky path to victory in the final of the Veterans’ Chase series. The 3-1 favourite was in front on the run to the last but with a loose horse on his outside, which then dived across towards the inside rail to go around the final fence. Dingle had a split-second to change course and avoid being carried out, a manoeuvre he executed deftly before clearing the fence and securing the £61,900 first prize. Palladium made short work of three opponents – or rather two, after the first-flight departure of Zarafshan – in the opening juvenile hurdle and is quoted at around 33-1 for the Triumph Hurdle, while Nicky Henderson, his trainer, also reports Altior could run at Kempton Park next Saturday for the first time since his 19-race winning streak ended with a defeat at Ascot in November. “If Kempton was a lot softer than it was the other day [at Christmas] we have to have a rethink, but what are the chances of Ascot being any better the following week?” Henderson said. “I’d be keen to go to Kempton if all goes well.”