There is anger and frustration across rugby league after the sport’s governing body, the Rugby Football League, sanctioned Catalans Dragons’ move for the controversial Australian Israel Folau on a one-year deal. The French club say they want to give Folau, who has not played either code of rugby since being sacked by Rugby Australia last year following homophobic comments on social media, a “new opportunity to shine”. Yet many across a sport which prides itself on inclusivity are furious that Folau has been allowed to return to rugby league. The RFL had no obligation to run the issue past clubs, but given the sensitive nature of Folau’s return to the sport, many are disappointed they were not at least briefed. The Guardian understands that Super League clubs were told about the news just minutes before Catalans’ official announcement. Wigan Warriors immediately responded by saying their game against Catalans on 22 March would be named Pride Day as the club look to support the LGBTQ+ community. Many clubs declined to comment, instead opting to take stock in the immediate aftermath of the news. However, Wakefield Trinity’s chief executive, Michael Carter, whose club will host Catalans when they play their first match in England, said: “Personally, I do not think his signing should have been entertained whatsoever. There are many moral arguments saying he should be banned from every other sport, and I worry if Super League is now becoming a catch-all safety net for people who aren’t welcome elsewhere. His views are abhorrent in a modern world. His registration should have been refused – that is our club’s position on it. We have no time for the views he shares.” This deep-rooted concern is echoed by many within rugby league, who fear the arrival of Folau could cause significant PR damage for the sport. Australia’s National Rugby League (NRL) made it abundantly clear in the wake of Folau’s dismissal by Rugby Australia that he would not be registered in their competition moving forward – but the RFL instead have opted not to block the signature. “This is a difficult decision, as the RFL places a high value on the sport’s reputation in prioritising Inclusion and Diversity – and deplores the player’s previous comments,” it said in a statement. “However, the moral responsibility for deciding whether to sign a player sits with individual clubs. The player has not been charged or found guilty of any criminal offence. However distasteful his previous comments, we don’t believe that, under our current regulatory framework, these can prevent his participation in the sport.” The Super League chief executive, Robert Elstone, insisted there was nothing the competition could do once the RFL had made its decision. “I have sought the opinion of informed voices connected to our game, and the majority share my disappointment that one of our clubs has chosen to sign him,” Elstone said. “There is a strong feeling that the decision to sign him lets down many people connected to our sport. I made Catalans Dragons aware of those views. However, Super League does not have the authority to veto the registration of players and is satisfied by the due diligence carried out by the RFL.” The Halifax prop, Keegan Hirst, who is the only current out gay rugby league player in Britain, wrote on Twitter: “I’m shocked and disappointed at the signing of @IzzyFolau. Our great game is tasked with fighting against homophobia and standing up for the values it puts such high stock in. It shows none of the bravery, cameraderie or integrity @rfl expects from its players, staff and fans.”