Senior adviser to Cambridge Econometrics and member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee 2006-11 As we approach the formal Brexit date of 31 January, some of the clouds of uncertainty surrounding the UK economy last year may be lifting. Recent surveys from the CBI and of purchasing managers are looking more positive. After three quarters when the UK economy has been stagnant, this could signal a return to modest growth in the first quarter of this year. Meanwhile, the latest labour market indicators point to broad stability in terms of employment trends. Wages are still increasing about 2% faster than inflation, which is a positive signal for consumer spending. The Bank of England monetary policy committee (MPC) has been rumoured to be considering a cut in interest rates but the MPC would be wise to hold off from policy action. With interest rates already so low, it is hard to see that a cut now would have much impact. We also have a government budget coming up in March. The likelihood is that the government will seek to inject some stimulus into the economy with spending increases and tax cuts. That is a further argument for a “wait-and-see” approach from the MPC. When we pass the formal Brexit date at the end of this month, attention will shift to the forthcoming trade negotiations with the 27 remaining EU members. The timescale for reaching a meaningful agreement by the end of this year is very tight – and in the view of many commentators, unachievable. That means that the easing of uncertainty suggested by recent surveys could be a temporary phase. So, even if economic growth does recover somewhat in the next couple of quarters, the progress of the UK economy is likely to remain sluggish in 2020. Professor of economics at Dartmouth College in the US and member of the Bank’s MPC 2006-09 Brexit it is then. But 31 January seems like much ado about nothing other than the issuing of a reminted 50p coin that is going to highlight the stark differences that exist between young remainers and old leavers. We are living in an increasingly digital age and the young mostly don’t use cash, preferring plastic. Big Ben is also not going to bong so there will be no ringing in Brexit. Not a good start methinks. GDP growth appears to be flat and imports have fallen after the stockpiling that took place on Brexit fears. Over the Christmas period retail sales failed to rise for a record fifth month in a row in a sign of just how weak the economy is. But PMI data released last week was slightly better than I had expected, while there was a marked rise in business confidence after the election. However, confidence is fragile and this may well be a temporary reprise before reality bites. The labour market appears to be slowing although many commentators have been confused by the way the ONS releases the data. The US has data available for December, as does every other country in the advanced world other than Greece but not the UK, where we have data for September to November. In the latest snapshot, unemployment rose by 25,000 while underemployment, measured as the percentage of people working part-time who want full-time work, rose by 32,000. Some commentators argue that we’re moving closer to full employment, but that doesn’t seem right when people aren’t getting as much work as they would like. Consistent with the idea that the labour market is loosening is the fact that wage growth continues to slow. Private sector average weekly earnings was 4% in June and has fallen every month since then to 3.1% in November. Exactly the same pattern has occurred in the US, where weekly pay growth for private sector production and non-supervisory workers, who form around 80% of the private sector workforce, has fallen from 4% at the start of 2019 to 2.4% at the end. The MPC, wrongly in my view, continues to expect wage growth to move up towards 4% rather than down to 3% and below – as it has in every forecast for years. The question this week is whether the MPC at its meeting this week will cut rates at Mark Carney’s last meeting, or if he might be outvoted. There is precedent. Mervyn King, his predecessor, was outvoted when demanding more quantitative easing in his final meetings as governor. However, Carney could be joined by several members of the MPC calling for a cut, as the mood music indicates. The markets have the odds of a cut at around 60%, down from around 70% before the PMI data was released. So, it would be a surprise if they didn’t move. I think the MPC should make a move, and I would be voting for a 25 basis-point cut, not least because inflation at 1.3%, down from 1.5% in November is well below the 2% target. If CPI was above the target by a similar amount, at 2.7% the MPC would almost surely raise rates. But the target is meant to be symmetric. Doing nothing is worse than doing something and there may well be lots of bad data ahead. It is hard to see how a cut could possibly hurt. It is always best to get your retaliation in first.