Ballet Shoes, Noel Streatfeild’s classic tale of three adopted girls hoping for – or dreading – a life on the stage, is to be reimagined for the modern era by writer and actor Carrie Hope Fletcher. Endorsed by Streatfeild’s estate, Fletcher’s novel will, like Ballet Shoes, follow three adopted children. But while Ballet Shoes’ Pauline, Petrova and Posy Fossil are brought together when they are adopted by the eccentric elderly palaeontologist they know as Great Uncle Matthew, Fletcher’s children are found by the eccentric pebble collector Great Aunt Maude. They live in a rickety old London theatre, rather than the home on the Cromwell Road inhabited by the Fossils, and Fletcher has also made one of them – the ballet dancer of the three – a boy. “By a leap of imagination, Carrie uses Ballet Shoes as the backdrop in this tale of the theatre and inspiration,” said the estate. Fletcher, who is currently starring as Fantine in a new production of Les Misérables, is the author of three novels for adults as well as a bestselling memoir. She is also a vlogger with more than a million subscribers. The yet-to-be-titled Ballet Shoes novel, which will be published in September, is her first book for children. “The thing that gets me right in the feels, right in the centre of my heart, is the fact it is endorsed by Noel Streatfeild’s estate,” Fletcher said. “There is a real simplicity to [Ballet Shoes’] warmth and its magic … It really resonated with me, the idea that you don’t have to be related to someone by blood in order to consider them your family. There’s so much more to family than what you’re born into.” The children in Streatfeild’s novel swear: “We three Fossils vow to try and put our names in history books because it’s our very own and nobody can say it’s because of our grandfathers.” Published in 1936, it was Streatfeild’s first book for children. The author had previously worked in a wartime munitions factory, before becoming an actor herself for 10 years, and writing for adults. She described Ballet Shoes as “really a fairy story with its feet halfway on the ground”, and it quickly became a bestseller, with long queues to meet her when she visited exhibitions held by publisher Puffin. Carmen McCullough, Fletcher’s editor, said the estate had wanted to ensure that any adaptation of the novel was sensitive to the original story. “The novel will be very ‘Ballet Shoes-y’, but she also wanted it to do something fresh. So it has a contemporary setting, but it’s a slightly alternative, slightly magical London.” Fletcher’s novel is being published to mark both the 125th anniversary of Streatfeild’s birth and the 80th anniversary of Puffin. “Part of the fun of writing this novel has been finding the balance between keeping the magic of the original while giving it a modern, updated feel,” said Fletcher. “I’m so excited about it. There is a certain limitlessness to children’s novels. You can be as fun and imaginative and creative as you want and your audience is going to believe it because they still have that huge imagination. Children don’t have to suspend disbelief like adults do … their brains can take in whatever crazy magical ideas you throw at them.” As a child, Fletcher said that reading had been her escape. “I didn’t have the best time at primary school so reading a book was my way of getting away from whatever was upsetting me,” she said. “It feels really important to write a book that could give another child that chance of escapism.” Puffin’s 80th anniversary will also be marked with projects including a contemporary take on A Christmas Carol by Cat Doyle, a new picture-book classic series, launching with The Secret Garden, and The Puffin Book of Big Dreams, a collection of stories and dreams with contributions from writers including Jacqueline Wilson, Jeff Kinney and Malorie Blackman.