The Bullring did not disappoint, despite the loss of the morning session to rain and an early exit for bad light. The ball whizzed through at pace; most batsmen felt the urge to respond aggressively. It paid to keep a close eye on proceedings. This venue may not be beautiful but it is a modern Colosseum of cricket, which requires bravery as well as skill among the combatants. After 54.2 overs of play England, having chosen to bat, despite all that early-morning moisture, were 192 for four. They may be satisfied by that, even though the openers posted a century partnership, but they must also be aware that the game can change rapidly here; the nicks carry, the adrenaline flows and the pendulum swings. Like the old Waca ground at Perth it is a place where any cricketer worth his salt wants to play, which may explain the obvious disappointment of Jofra Archer when he had to acknowledge that a recurrence of pain in his right elbow when bowling before the start precluded him from returning to the team. So the only change to the England side was that Chris Woakes replaced Dom Bess. Everyone loves the Bullring except the finger-spinner. Faf du Plessis lost his seventh toss in a row and Zak Crawley and Dominic Sibley soon set to work diligently. In fact Du Plessis might have welcomed losing this toss. He said he would have gambled on bowling, which goes against the grain here. After a wicketless session such a decision might have added to his cricketing woes, which appear to be mounting by the day. Crawley was fluent from the start, cover driving with remarkable grace for such a tall man. Soon Du Plessis began to shuffle his bowlers with increasing desperation. Like England he had dispensed with his specialist spinner so there was limited variety available, though the new cap, Beuran Hendricks, a mere 29, does propel the ball with his left arm. He tried his fastest bowler, Anrich Nortje, but 12 runs came from his first over. Full-pitched deliveries declined to swing and Crawley in particular kept disposing of them. Sibley had more alarms. On 10 he was given out caught down the leg side off Hendricks by umpire Joel Wilson; he reviewed immediately and successfully. On 12 he was caught in the gully off Philander but on this occasion Joel Wilson had been on the ball – by calling a no-ball. Otherwise there were few alarms. Vernon Philander was blander than usual and the recalled Dwaine Pretorius was blander than that. Before long Crawley had posted a career-best score in his fifth Test innings in succession; the last Englishman to do that was Ian Peebles in 1928. Nortje, though expensive at the start, worked up a head of steam in his second spell and one of his shorter deliveries hit Crawley on the helmet with the ball ricocheting out to cover. There was a long delay to check on Crawley’s wellbeing and to find him another helmet, which, when it finally arrived, did not fit him very well. On the stroke of tea the hundred was posted, ending the longest sequence, 69 innings, without one for England’s first pair. The last century partnership by England opening batsmen was in Chennai in 2016 when Alastair Cook and Keaton Jennings were together. So England were sitting pretty on a surface with sufficient pace to invite strokeplayers to display their wares; the bounce was generous but true. But after tea, while the runs kept coming at a good lick, the wickets started falling as well. Sibley was genuinely caught down the leg side for 44 to give Hendricks his first Test wicket; then Crawley, in two or possibly three minds (whether to pull, defend or leave) was caught at slip off Philander. Joe Denly naturally reached double figures – for the 22nd time in 25 innings – but his was an unusual innings by the standards he has set on this tour. He was positively skittish. A couple of glorious cover drives were interspersed with edges, inside and outside, that sped to the boundary and on 22 a hard chance was dropped by Pieter Malan at cover point off Dane Paterson. Then Denly propped forward in defence to Paterson and this time the edge found the gloves of Quinton de Kock. Now came the wicket that the South Africans really celebrated with glee. It has been noticeable how often Du Plessis has mentioned the excellence of Ben Stokes in this series, as an example for his players to follow: this pair were colleagues in the IPL back in 2017 and there is clearly mutual respect in abundance. His wicket is treasured perhaps as much as Joe Root’s. So, when Stokes miscued with an unusually ugly drive – he seemed to be aiming somewhere on the leg side – and the ball flew into the increasingly reliable hands of Rassie van der Dussen at slip, the South Africans were cock-a-hoop. Stokes, however, was not and a few choice words to a spectator as he departed may have lasting ramifications for the ICC cricketer of the year. Batting was far more taxing now and Root and Ollie Pope, both busily seizing any run-scoring chances, batted well as the light faded. They were tested along the way; there was an involuntary four over the slip cordon from Root as he sought to avoid a Nortje bouncer; Pope ended up on the floor as he took late, evasive action from a Hendricks bouncer. And they say the pitch quickens up on the second day.