Suddenly there is a changing of the guard. In the last Test there were two Doms and a Zak in the team, the first Zak ever to play for England. A year ago the idea that the Dominics, Sibley and Bess, and Zak Crawley would be in the same Test side was fanciful to the say the least. Now they have participated in a famous victory at Cape Town, where England had not prevailed since 1957. Sibley starred with the bat, Bess bowled more overs than anyone while the most memorable contributions of Crawley, catapulted into the team after the injury to Rory Burns, were actually in the field. On that gripping final day he took two vital catches in a manner that epitomised the excellence of England’s outcricket. He calmly plucked the ball out of the air when Quinton de Kock pulled a Joe Denly long hop in his direction. But it was the first-ball dismissal of Anrich Nortje that sticks most readily in the memory. Once Crawley had produced that brilliant reflex catch in the slip cordon it was clear that there was no denying England’s sprint to victory. He parried the ball with his right hand before gathering it as he lay on the grass in his left. Crawley happily recalls the moment. “Stokes was bowling so fast and we were so close to the wicket that it was just a matter of sticking my hand out and luckily I managed to make it go up in the air and to get my other hand on it. It was a great moment when I saw it come down. It lasted a lifetime as it seemed to hover in the air. Thankfully we got the final wicket and it wasn’t in vain.” Crawley would have been a spectator in Cape Town but for the freakish injury to Rory Burns. “It was a shame to lose Rory,” he said. “He’s been in great form. But you know it’s always good to play a Test match. I knew the night before Rory would be out for a number of weeks. So for me it was the usual nerves early in your Test cricket career. But actually I was a lot better than my debut in Hamilton so hopefully it’ll be easier next time as well.” He scored just four and 25 in the match, which at least suggests he is on the up since he managed only one run in his debut at Hamilton last month. He will surely retain his place in the third Test, which starts next Thursday. “I’m taking one game at a time. I’m putting all my focus on Port Elizabeth now. Hopefully I can get a score there like Dom [Sibley] has done in Cape Town and follow his footsteps and shore up my place in the side that way. But I’m not looking too far ahead.” He has the flavour for international cricket. “That’s the best feeling I’ve had on a cricket field,” he said. “It was unbelievable when that last wicket fell. The crowd singing all five days. It was something I’ll never forget. Brilliant.” His second innings in the match hinted at something special as he hit five uncomplicated boundaries before succumbing to Kagiso Rabada. “I loved it. It’s always great shaping up against one of the best bowlers in the world and seeing how you go. I thought I played him OK until an average shot to a pretty average ball actually. It was a half-volley [edged to the keeper].” So Crawley’s voyage of discovery has started and it should be entertaining watching him develop since his natural instinct is to put bat to ball. To succeed he has to trust those instincts. But already we know he can catch, which is always a good sign. Meanwhile the usually impeccable Jos Buttler has been caught transgressing for the first time in his Test career. He has been fined 15% of his match fee for breaching level one of the ICC code of conduct for “the use of an audible obscenity during an international match following an incident with South Africa all-rounder Vernon Philander on the fifth day in Cape Town”. How irresponsible to use such language when he is surrounded by so many pups under the age of 23.