Financial markets around the world have sold off sharply amid rising concerns over the coronavirus outbreak in China, with Beijing fighting to contain the spread of the disease while the death toll climbs. Stocks slid as fears intensified over the potential impact of the escalating emergency on the world economy, as Chinese authorities stepped up their response, with more than 2,700 cases and 81 deaths confirmed. The FTSE 100 fell by more than 2%, or 155 points, to 7,430 after steep losses overnight in Japan. Markets across Europe fell sharply and Wall Street was also expected to open lower later on Monday. Russ Mould, the investment director at the stockbroker AJ Bell, said: “The market is back in panic mode about China’s coronavirus. An extended lunar new year holiday is nothing to celebrate for China; instead, it represents an escalation of attempts to contain the deadly virus by restricting travel and locking down major cities.” Companies with significant sales in China and Asia plunged most, including luxury goods makers such as Burberry and LVMH that would typically stand to benefit from a rise in sales from the lunar new year celebrations last Saturday. Airlines and hotel groups, which could face losses because of travel bans being enforced to contain the spread of the virus, slipped under heavy selling pressure. Mining and natural resources firms that have benefited from China’s booming manufacturing sector in recent years also plunged. It is a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals, or possibly seafood. New and troubling viruses usually originate in animal hosts. Ebola and flu are examples. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars) and Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (Mers) are both caused by coronaviruses that came from animals. The virus causes pneumonia. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. In severe cases there can be organ failure. As this is viral pneumonia, antibiotics are of no use. The antiviral drugs we have against flu will not work. If people are admitted to hospital, they may get support for their lungs and other organs as well as fluids. Recovery will depend on the strength of their immune system. Many of those who have died are known to have been already in poor health. Human to human transmission has been confirmed by China’s national health commission. As of 27 January, the Chinese authorities had acknowledged more than 2,700 cases and 56 deaths. In the past week, the number of confirmed infections has more than tripled and cases have been found in 13 provinces, as well as the municipalities of Beijing, Shanghai, Chongqing and Tianjin. The virus has also been confirmed outside China, in Hong Kong, Macau, Japan, Nepal, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, the US, and Vietnam. There have not been any confirmed cases in the UK at present, with the 14 people tested for the virus all proving negative. The actual number to have contracted the virus could be far higher as people with mild symptoms may not have been detected. Modelling by WHO experts at Imperial College London suggests there could be as many as 100,000 cases, with uncertainty putting the margins between 30,000 and 200,000. There were fears that the coronavirus might spread more widely during the week-long lunar new year holidays, which start on 24 January, when millions of Chinese travel home to celebrate, but the festivities have largely been cancelled and Wuhan and other Chinese cities are in lockdown. Unless you have recently travelled to China or been in contact with someone infected with the virus, then you should treat any cough or cold symptoms as normal. The NHS advises that there is generally no need to visit a doctor for a cough unless it is persistent or you are having other symptoms such as chest pain, difficulty breathing or you feel very unwell. No. The spread of the virus outside China is worrying but not an unexpected development. It increases the likelihood that the World Health Organization will declare the outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern on Thursday evening. The key concerns are how transmissible this new coronavirus is between people and what proportion become severely ill and end up in hospital. Sarah Boseley Health editor and Hannah Devlin Anglo American and Glencore dropped in value, while the price of a barrel of oil fell by more than 3% to below $60 amid concerns that the outbreak could exacerbate an economic slowdown in China and the rest of the world. Joshua Mahony, a senior market analyst at the financial trading group IG, said: “The further this virus spreads, the worse it will be for Chinese economic output. It should come as no surprise to see the FTSE 100 hit hardest in Europe, with the highly internationalised nature of the index meaning it is more exposed than most. “We are also seeing commodity stocks slump, with the prospect of a decline in Chinese growth hurting expectations of demand in the sector.” Safe-haven assets such as gold and government bonds jumped. Chinese financial markets were closed for the lunar new year, while Bloomberg reported that stock markets in the country could remain closed until at least next Monday as Beijing grapples with the worsening virus crisis. Comparisons to the 2003 Sars outbreak have highlighted the potential for a long-winded process that could damage economic growth as the government imposes quarantine restrictions on communities at the centre of the flare-up. After the Sars outbreak, China’s annual GDP growth fell to 9.1% in the second quarter of 2003 from 11.1% in the previous three-month period, as the government imposed travel restrictions to contain the spread of the disease, which killed more than 700 people globally. However, GDP growth recovered to 10% in the second half of 2003. This time around, the Chinese economy is much larger and more connected to the global economy. However, analysts said the government response to the coronavirus outbreak appeared to be tougher and more transparent, which could help limit the impact to the world economy.