The number of mortgages approved by Britain’s high street banks jumped to the highest level for almost five years in December, in the latest sign of a revival in the housing market. Mortgage approvals for house purchases increased to 46,815 in December compared with 44,058 a month earlier, according to UK Finance – hitting the highest level since April 2015. The trade body that represents major high street banks across the country said the value of mortgage lending increased the most since March 2016, rising by a net £3.8bn. The figures come as the Bank of England weighs cutting interest rates on Thursday after the UK economy flatlined at the end of last year amid intense political uncertainty over Brexit and the snap general election. City economists believe a decision between holding borrowing costs steady and cutting the key rate from the current level of 0.75% rests on a knife edge before Mark Carney’s final meeting in charge of the monetary policy committee. The Bank’s governor will be replaced by Andrew Bailey, the head of the Financial Conduct Authority, in March. Retail sales unexpectedly plunged in December while inflation dropped in a reflection of weakness in the economy at the end of the year. However, a rise in mortgage borrowing and business confidence since Boris Johnson’s election victory could encourage the Bank to leave rates on hold. According to the property website Rightmove, house prices rose on the month in December at the fastest rate on record for the time of the year, as buyers and sellers felt more confident about the outlook for the housing market. Howard Archer, the chief economic adviser to the EY Item Club, said it was highly likely that mortgage approvals were significantly lifted by increased confidence and lower levels of uncertainty since the election. “Prior to November, mortgage approvals for house purchases had fallen back for three successive months to be at a seven-month low in October, indicating that activity was being pressurised by heightened uncertainties over the domestic political situation and Brexit,” he said. Andrew Montlake, the managing director of the mortgage broker Coreco, said the outlook for the housing market would depend on the next phase of the Brexit talks with Brussels, as the government attempts to strike a trade deal with the EU before the end of 2020. “It goes without saying that a huge amount is riding on the outcome of the trade negotiations and so there is still the potential for significant volatility,” he said.