Back from packing parcels at my local Trussell Trust warehouse, I saw Zoe Williams’ piece (The poor deserve more than rations, G2, 23 January). Here in Norwich we pack boxes with three-day “rations” for a single person, a couple or a family, and volunteer drivers take them to distribution centres around the city, where our clientele collect them. Yes, our basic package has to be fairly bland and non-perishable, but thanks to donors’ great generosity we usually have lots of extras and treats, which we pack into every spare space. The prescribed list represents best food value, but there’s always room for “empty calories”. I’m sure we aren’t the only branch that does this. As well as biscuits, we can usually include chocolate, jam or honey, and even cake. We can’t put in fresh fruit and vegetables or eggs, but these items regularly come to the warehouse and go out to the centres with our drivers. We also get day-old bread and pastries from a supermarket. When packing a box we have to think about our most likely recipients. We get some esoteric donations, and some that have obviously been hanging around a pantry for too long. But thanks to our donors we are able to provide parcels that are not just basic.Gale CarruthersNorwich • Zoe Williams misses the point. Trussell Trust food banks provide emergency food to people in crisis, people who cannot afford to feed themselves. There may be more such people now and their crises may be ongoing rather than short-lived, but common sense suggests that although they may enjoy a jar of olives, a bag of pasta is more useful. A standard list of non-perishable items ensures equity and that basic dietary needs are met. In Exeter we update our priority list weekly, encouraging supporters to donate items that are in short supply. Thanks to our sister charity, Exeter Food Action, we offer fruit and vegetables, bread, and sometimes cakes. Perhaps it would have been better to remind readers that people in crisis need not only food but also shower gel, deodorants, toothbrushes and washing powder, plus practical and emotional support. And they probably need these things more than they need sun-dried tomatoes.Jeff SkinnerExeter • At the food bank in Sidmouth where I volunteer we have always provided fresh milk, which we buy in, and bread that is kindly donated by a local baker. We are fortunate to get regular cash donations that are used to buy fresh fruit and vegetables from a local greengrocer. We also provide cheese and eggs.Molly LeeSidmouth, Devon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition