In his 20-plus years as Saracens chairman, Nigel Wray has presided over wins of more significance than this, but if the urgency of his charges’ performance is any gauge they paid handsome tribute to the man who made the club. The circumstances of his departure will continue to divide opinion. A 10-try demolition of Worcester, as eloquent as it was brutal, suggest his players, at least, feel strongly in favour of his legacy. The gap between Saracens and the rest of the Premiership remains at 18, but the odds are still in favour of them making it up, as the usual clutch of teams separated from each other by a handful of points squirm in discomfort above them. Worcester were squirming within only a few minutes of kick-off. One need not have been particularly steeped in the rhythms of the Premiership to identify this as a likely candidate for messy mismatch - at least as messy as the Premiership gets. Wray’s retirement in midweek, Saracens’ defeat to bitter rivals, Exeter, last weekend, Worcester’s pressure-relieving win - it all suggested a potential disparity in motivation levels. And then there is that yawning deficit Saracens must traverse just to survive in this league they have dominated for so long. Leicester’s full house against Bristol, registered just before kick-off, further heightened the sense of urgency. It should surprise no one that Saracens had their bonus point within half an hour. A half-time lead of 31-0 felt, if anything, on the lenient side for Worcester. What is more, the Warriors turned around down to 14 men, Anton Bresler seeing yellow for a careless clear-out on the stroke of half-time. Three more tries, numbers five, six and seven, were registered before he returned - 45-0 in almost as many minutes. The Warriors, one of six teams in mid-table who started the weekend on 17 or 18 points, played like men enjoying, for a while at least, an unusually comfy cushion. Not that any should feel that way with a team like the opposition behind them, however far adrift. Saracens’ first try was registered in the seventh minute, their second in the 11th. One of their latest problems is the form of those seemingly few among their number not in the England squad. Max Malins sat this one out with a knock to his foot, for which mercy Worcester might be only slightly grateful, but Ben Earl is another youngster likely to be on Eddie Jones’s radar. He was all over Worcester from the start, a barrelling menace with and without the ball. He barged over from close range for the first, after Elliot Daly, Alex Lozowski and the Vunipola brothers, in that order, announced themselves in fine form before England gather for the Six Nations at the end of the month. Rotimi Segun, whistled up on the day following Sean Maitland’s withdrawal, finished the second, put away by Daly after more ferocious approach work by, among others, Earl. Already, the prospects of a meaningful contest were bleak. Brad Barritt burrowed into an advancing maul for try number three, before Mako Vunipola crashed over for the bonus point after a chip-and-gather cameo from Owen Farrell. There was time for Segun to claim his second before half-time, following Bresler’s yellow card. It is not uncommon for games to even up in such circumstances, even to favour the vanquished, the victors having sated themselves. But Saracens were not sated. No need to describe every try - they were scored in a variety of ways. Special mention for Duncan Taylor’s score on the hour, after a sharp chip and gather by Segun. And for the game’s eighth, just a few minutes before it, because it was scored by Worcester. Ollie Lawrence, comfortably Worcester’s best player once introduced at half-time, set Ed Fidow away for a chip-and-gather adventure of his own. It was a lone highlight for the visitors. With or without their chairman of yore, Saracens remain hungry and on the hunt.