Christopher Tolkien, who has died aged 95, edited and published a huge body of writings left by his father, JRR Tolkien, extending the world of Middle-earth created in The Hobbit (1937) and The Lord of the Rings (1954-55), but also providing an unparallelled portrait of a creative life. Becoming literary executor upon his father’s death in 1973, Christopher took charge of 70 boxes of papers ranging from Oxford lectures to lexicons of invented Elvish. A collection of the primary legends of Middle-earth, The Silmarillion, eagerly anticipated by legions of fans, had been worked and reworked since 1917, with constant evolutions in style, names and plot. Successive drafts, mostly unfinished, had been left in disorder. Christopher began a scholarly edition with variants and notes, but then recruited an assistant – Guy Gavriel Kay, a young Canadian family friend who is now a fantasy novelist. They decided to publish a single narrative without commentary, eliminating discrepancies including any with The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings. On a banquet-sized table in the barn of his home in West Hanney, Vale of White Horse, Oxfordshire, they scrutinised drafts, made selections, and harmonised details before Christopher typed it all up on his father’s old machine. Though it contained “a great deal of my own personal literary judgment”, he said, editorial insertions were minimal, confined to links filling gaps in the sources. Published in 1977, The Silmarillion sold in millions. Though many reviewers and readers felt it too austere, and missed the down-to-earth hobbits, it quickly established itself as a devotees’ favourite and deeply enriches the Middle-earth canon. Yet regret over the extent of editorial intrusion spurred Christopher to publish further books detailing his father’s development of the stories, producing an unparallelled case study in literary creativity. Christopher was born in Leeds, the third son of Edith (nee Bratt) and John Ronald Reuel Tolkien, professor of English language at the university there. His father’s imagination struck such a chord with him that Christopher once said he grew up in Middle-earth and found the cities of The Silmarillion “more real than Babylon”. Even at four or five, listening to his father read The Hobbit in draft, he would point out continuity errors. A kinship of spirit, not shared by his brothers, John and Michael, or younger sister, Priscilla, made him “intensely lovable” in his father’s eyes. After his father became professor of Anglo-Saxon at Oxford, Christopher went to the Dragon school there, and later to the Oratory school in Caversham, Berkshire. Three years off with an irregular heartbeat from 1938 coincided with early work on a sequel to The Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings, which was written partly to entertain him. He encouraged his father’s tendency to hobbit whiimsy, only curbed at the urging of the Oxford don CS Lewis. After undertaking an abbreviated undergraduate course at Trinity College, Oxford, at 17, Christopher trained in 1944-45 with the RAF in South Africa. His father sent him the chapters of Frodo and Sam’s journey to Mordor as they were written, including passages that read like messages to soothe or stiffen his spirits. Christopher responded with detailed, constructive critiques. After the war he joined the Lewis–Tolkien circle, the Inklings, taking over readings of The Lord of the Rings in his crisp, sonorous tones. He completed an English degree at Trinity, then took a BLitt on the Old Norse saga of King Heidrek the Wise. A critical edition in 1960 shows, like his father’s work, an aptitude for medieval linguistic analysis and a fascination with the misty border between legend and history. Christopher lectured at Oxford on Old and Middle English and Old Norse from 1954, and produced editions of three Canterbury Tales with Nevill Coghill. But in 1975 he resigned as fellow of New College to focus on his father’s literary legacy, without regrets. “My father’s invented languages,” he said, “are of more interest than the rather well-tramped field of Anglo-Saxon.” But he never neglected the professor’s work on medieval language and literature, editing and publishing JRR’s translations of the Middle English Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl and Sir Orfeo (1975), a collection of his landmark lectures, The Monsters and the Critics (1983); and much later Beowulf: A Translation and Commentary (2014); plus two volumes of narrative poetry on The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún (2009) and The Fall of Arthur (2013). The Letters of JRR Tolkien (1981) was edited with his biographer Humphrey Carpenter. As for Middle-earth, Pictures by JRR Tolkien (1979) and the bluntly titled Unfinished Tales (1980) were followed by The History of Middle-earth, in 12 volumes (1983-96), tracing how his father wrote The Silmarillion, The Lord of the Rings and much else. Christopher’s personal insight was vital in extracting and ordering this from mostly undated manuscripts ranging from calligraphic to catastrophic. Fans include the author Neil Gaiman, who says: “It feels like Christopher lets us in to his father’s mind: lets us walk the road as JRRT walked it.” Much bigger successes commercially were The Children of Húrin (2007), woven from multiple texts, and two books following the evolution of a tale apiece, Beren and Lúthien (2017) and The Fall of Gondolin (2018). This, his 24th volume on his father’s work, was consciously his last. For outstanding contribution to literature, in 2016 Christopher received the Bodley medal. Richard Ovenden, Bodley’s librarian, said: “I can’t think of another example where father and son worked in such a way together and then the son carried on the baton.” Christopher remained effective custodian of his father’s papers after lodging them at the Bodleian Library in Oxford in 1979, overseeing access by other scholars, whose work he read closely before publication, offering detailed comments in fax messages that were often acerbic and funny but scrupulously polite. He loathed the computer and vowed never to use email unless it were made illegal not to. Controversies over the Peter Jackson Lord of the Rings and Hobbit movies were an unwelcome intrusion. “For him, his father’s works started and ended as books,” said David Brawn of his UK publisher, HarperCollins. Only after his retirement from the Tolkien Estate board in 2017 did it agree to work with HarperCollins and Amazon Prime on the upcoming Lord of the Rings prequel TV adaptation. Christopher married the sculptor Faith Faulconbridge in 1951. In 1967 they divorced and he married Baillie Knapheis, nee Klass, previously his father’s secretary. After moving to the south of France in 1975, the couple lived comfortably but modestly first in La Garde-Freinet and then near Aups, giving much of the income from “the Tolkien business” to charities humanitarian or cultural. He read copiously, mostly classics such as Walter Scott; wrote long and beautifully crafted letters; and enjoyed local wine, good food and convivial conversation with regular visitors from Britain. Terrifically funny, he was a gifted mimic of others’ eccentricities. Despite physical infirmity in his 90s, his prodigious memory remained intact, and he was still in touch with HarperCollins editors weeks before his death. He is survived by Baillie and their children, Adam and Rachel, and by Simon, the son of his first marriage. • Christopher Reuel Tolkien, editor and scholar, born 21 November 1924; died 16 January 2020