From throwing paper in a trash can, to playground horse games, to high school, college and professional games, you’re bound to hear someone shout ‘Kobe!’ Bryant’s cold and calculated playing style became the stuff of legend over a glittering 20-year career. Here are some memorable moments from his time on court. Matt Barnes was renowned as one of the league’s best defenders, with the reputation of being a tough guy to back it up. During a 2010 game, Barnes and Kobe were engaged in a physical and mental duel, but this moment stands out. Barnes tries the old playground trick of faking the ball at Bryant’s face during an inbounds play. But Bryant isn’t fazed; there’s some debate as to whether he even blinked. Though the Magic beat the Lakers in this game, Bryant is still the clear victor here. His adversary would join the Lakers the next season. There was no love lost between Kobe Bryant and Dwight Howard on the court. The embattled center departed from the Lakers after a turbulent season that saw Howard and Bryant publicly clash on numerous occasions. The following season, Kobe and Dwight met in an early matchup and got into it. Howard swung his elbows wildly, which drew a foul. He also drew the ire of Kobe, who, in his inimitable style, famously quoted the 2014 Dej Loaf hit: Try Me. Bryant was often at his best during the All-Star Game, when he pulled out his full offensive arsenal for the enjoyment of NBA fans. There are many moments to choose from, but this 2011 montage, where Bryant dunks on James, then hits a three-pointer, takes the cake. During the 2014 season, the Lakers were in the midst of a terrible downturn. When a practice was opened to the public that December, the media got a full display of how Kobe pushed his teammates. After Nick Young proclaimed no one in the world could guard him, Kobe dug into Young, Lou Williams and the rest of the Lakers for being “soft”. His expletive-ridden tirade even took aim at Mitch Kupchak, the team’s embattled general manager. You don’t become an NBA great by being nice. One thing that gets glossed over in Bryant’s career was his recognition of an opponent’s skill. In a game against the Minnesota Timberwolves, Andrew Wiggins pulled out Bryant’s patented post fadeaway jumper. Bryant was flattered by the imitation and chuckled when Wiggins said: “I got that from you.” There are only a handful of NBA players who were expected to hit the shot with the game on the line, and Bryant may have been at the top of that list. Though he caught heat for his airball in the Western Conference finals against the Jazz, Bryant was clutch in the waning seconds of NBA games. He made the impossible look easy – something that maybe only Michael Jordan, LeBron James and Steph Curry have done in the modern era.