Ricky Gervais should not host the Golden Globes this year. He has said as much himself, again and again and again. The first time he was apparently going to quit the job was after his second ceremony, in 2011, until he read some negative reviews of his performance, which caused him to reverse his decision purely to “annoy them”. But then he vowed that the next ceremony would also be his last – writing on his blog: “I’ve told my agent to never let me be persuaded to do it again” – only to return in 2016 for a fourth effort. Would he ever do a fifth? Unlikely. A Ricky Gervais Golden Globes performance in the age of cancel culture, he said, would be “the end of my career”. And yet here we are. On Sunday, Ricky Gervais will host the Golden Globes ceremony again. It won’t be a record-breaking turn; for most of the awards’ 76-year history, there were no “name” hosts, and it has been only in recent years that a celebrity has steered the event (and only a handful have had that honour). Gervais has had more goes than anyone else. Nor will it be particularly shocking, since Gervais’s self-consciously provocative ain’t-I-a-stinker shtick is now so well rehearsed that you could set your clock by it. Everyone knows how the ceremony will go. He will cross the line a couple of times, make a few headlines, tell everyone he doesn’t care and then go back to tweeting pictures of his face three times a day. Same as it ever was. So will this be his last Golden Globes? He seems to think so, shoehorning his now traditional statement that he will never do this again into the press release that announced his reappointment. Nobody believes him, of course. Gervais and the Golden Globes will never truly be free of one another. They are destined to do this dance until the end of days. And, perhaps, that is probably for the best. Gervais might not be the Golden Globes host we want – in an ideal world, it would be someone who takes about 70% less delight in how naughty they are being – but he is the one we deserve. It’s hard to remember but, not so long ago, the Golden Globes were an afterthought. Untelevised on a regular basis until the early 1980s and besieged by claims of internal corruption, the Globes existed primarily as an opportunity for the stars of the day to sit around and abuse the open bar together. Jack Nicholson became the show’s unofficial figurehead for exactly that reason. But, little by little, the show became another pitstop on the awards ceremony treadmill; one more place for the stars to wobble and genuflect on the road to the Oscars. It started to lose its identity amid a sea of lesser awards. Things came to a dreary head in 2008 when, thanks to the writers’ strike, the ceremony took the form of a 32-minute press conference. One way to regain some of its old reputation, the show figured, was to employ a host. Although technically not the first ever Golden Globes host – Janine Turner and John Larroquette did a perfunctory job in 1995 – Gervais’s initial appointment, in 2010, seemed a masterstroke at the time. After all, the Golden Globes are where he made his first footsteps on the international stage, stammering “I’m not from around these parts” during his acceptance speech when The Office surprised everyone by winning best comedy in 2004. There are traces of that Gervais – the blinking underdog – in his first turn as host. His monologue opened with an admission that the US doesn’t recognise him as the creator of The Office. “I’m not used to these sorts of viewing figures,” he gulped a moment later. There were jokes about how he looked like the victim of botched surgery and his tiny penis, and constant plugs for his films and TV shows, as if this was going to be his last chance to address the world. The performance veered on boorishness – this is the ceremony where he introduced one guest by saying: “I like a drink as much as the next man, unless the next man is Mel Gibson” – but at least it was grounded in something approaching restraint. The following year, that restraint began to erode. Slicker than his previous effort, and with his beer perched on the podium from the word go, Gervais dispensed with any hint of self-effacement and quickly launched into a monologue that trashed The Tourist, suggested that “some famous Scientologists” were gay, and said that the Lost finale ended with “the fat one” eating everyone else. “I warned them,” he giggled at one point, giddy on his own reputation. The obnoxiousness kept growing on his third effort. “Nervous?” he asked the stars in attendance before they had even stopped applauding him. “Don’t be, this isn’t about you,” which might be the most efficient way to lose a crowd ever. And then came his 2016 comeback, which felt like a logical endpoint. Opening with the deathless line, “Shut up, you disgusting, pill-popping, sexual-deviant scum,” his monologue went straight for Caitlyn Jenner, despite Jenner not really having anything to do with the Golden Globes. Gervais looked tired. The audience, openly talking among themselves by the end, looked tired. The whole thing was exhausting. And things have only got worse since. Gervais’s Twitter page is now an unbroken cliff face of taunts about how many people he offends and how little he cares about it; a subject so close to his heart that he devoted his most recent standup set to that subject alone. He is now an untamed id and, if the pattern holds, his Golden Globes monologue this weekend will consist of nothing but trans jokes and burping. It has the potential to be incredibly tedious. Gervais's Twitter page is full of taunts about how many people he offends and how little he cares about it But what is the alternative? In recent years, the Golden Globes has attempted to appoint professional hosts in the form of Jimmy Fallon, Seth Meyers and Andy Samberg. And while their shows were all slick and seamless, they could have been performed at any ceremony. Meanwhile, something about Gervais’s Worst Man in the Pub act seems to connect with the Golden Globes. He could never host the Oscars, which is glossy and reverent and voted for by thousands of industry insiders. But the Golden Globes are chosen by 90 mysterious Los Angeles-based journalists, whose only entry criterion is getting four bylines a year. And they are not always swayed by quality, either. Pia Zadora won a Golden Globe for the critically maligned incest drama Butterfly in 1982. She denied the rumours that her millionaire husband had bought the award for her. In 2011, The Tourist was nominated despite terrible reviews and disappointing box office returns; it turned out that Sony Pictures had paid for a lavish press junket, complete with an intimate Cher concert. For as much as they are touted as an Oscars bellwether, the Golden Globes are cheap and loose and trashy. Which makes them a perfect fit for Gervais. The show gives him a platform. He personifies its identity. It is a mutually beneficial set-up. This won’t be Gervais’s last stint at the Globes. Not by a long shot. We have got decades of this ahead of us. The relationship might not be pretty or particularly enjoyable, but at least they suit each other. • The 77th Golden Globes awards ceremony takes place on Sunday