No, the monarchy is not in crisis. No, the princes are not bullies. No, the Duke and Duchess of Sussex will not be destitute, merely stinking rich. No, they will not go unprotected. In a nutshell, the past few days’ events, inconceivable in any other democracy, really do not matter. Pull the other one. The nation is on tenterhooks, or at least its mass media is. The royal press corps is about to be deprived of its beloved stereotype; the tearaway young prince who goes to war, marries a beautiful woman and “shakes the monarchy to its foundations”. But stereotypes always fade. The British monarchy has handled worse than this. What has happened with Prince Harry and Meghan is what has happened to family firms down the ages. All goes along swimmingly until it does not, until some junior member upsets the rest and steps out of line. Because the firm’s essence rests on heredity and nothing else, that essence can seem under threat. Blood is thicker than water. In the circumstances, family firms respond exactly as the royal family responded in the Sandringham summit today. The wagons draw into a circle, the seniors go into a huddle and, usually, some terrible retribution and act of rejection is vented on the miscreant. It is not Game of Thrones. It is The Godfather. You cannot be half in “the family”, and when you are out, boy, are you out. What you certainly cannot do is get your PR consultants to fashion a new concept of a progressive, charitable but commercially financed royalty, bearing no relation to the existing one. Or at least you cannot do it on your own, and not expect a family explosion. That is why family firms seldom last beyond two generations. I am sure the Sussexes have a prosperous, if increasingly tacky, future ahead of them. It is one they should have planned from the moment their relationship shifted from lovebirds to matrimonial corporate strategy. They need have no worries. They are celebrities. Even if the gilt starts to wear thin in the suburbs of Toronto or on the beaches of Malibu, they will profit mightily. They will of course need protection, but in time they will pay for it, as do all celebrities. There are few lessons in this for the British monarchy. It remains about mystique, fashioned in the image of the monarch and not really susceptible to “progressivism” or some vague broad-church concept. It does clearly need to be slimmer. But if any characterisation is applicable to it, it is that it cannot have a “theme” or a particular “character” at all. The monarchy survives because it is not significant, not influential, not even definable. It is just there, the notional embodiment of the state in human form. Argue about its nature or ascribe to it any personality, and all is at risk. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist