‘This gives me goosebumps,” says playwright Juliet Gilkes Romero. We’re looking at a sign offering a two-guinea reward for Peter, a runaway “negro manservant”. Gilkes Romero marvels at this lost figure from the 19th century, whose plight is chronicled in the Museum of London Docklands. “Who was Peter?” she says. “Where did he go?” Gilkes Romero’s work pursues the history that falls through the cracks. After exploring the first world war’s Caribbean soldiers (At the Gates of Gaza) and Mexican disappearances (Day of the Living), her new play for the Royal Shakespeare Company excavates the messy alliances that produced Britain’s slavery abolition legislation in the early 19th century, in particular a bill compensating slave owners for their loss of human property. In 1833, they spent 40% of the country's budget to pay back slave owners for their lost property The Whip dramatises competing ideas about how to end an immoral trade. The title inevitably suggests slavery’s cruelties but it actually describes the protagonist, a government whip charged with keeping parliament onside, even as the compromises rankle with his own progressive principles. Alexander Boyd – like all the characters, an amalgam of various figures – is often wrongfooted, particularly by two firebrand women: his northern housekeeper, who lost a daughter to the cotton mills; and Mercy, a former slave and rousing public speaker. “In order to compromise, you lose bits of yourself,” says the playwright. “Boyd gets the job done, but at what cost?” Gilkes Romero was already researching this story when, in 2018, the Treasury tweeted – and quickly deleted – a startling fact. The loan taken out in 1833 to compensate British slave owners was only paid off in 2015. “That was when we – you and me, our tax money – that’s when we finished paying off what was originally a £20m loan. In today’s terms, it was around £20bn. That added urgency to what I was already seeing.” She hit the Commons library, burrowing into Victorian editions of Hansard and the select committee reports to follow history forming on the hoof. “I sometimes use the Brexit analogy – who knows what is on the other side? [In 1833], they spent 40% of the country’s budget to pay back slave owners for their lost property. That’s a huge debt which could have bankrupted the country – they mortgaged our futures.” “I have skin in this game,” she adds, soberly. Her ancestors were on the sharp end of this history. She recounts her own first encounter with this material, in her Suffolk village. “I was the only black girl in the school, and remember the history book showing a print of slaves in the hull of a ship. It was the moment I realised that I was a real political animal.” Her parents encouraged her curiosity, and also introduced her to theatre via Brecht’s daunting epic, Galileo. “They didn’t mess about,” she smiles. “That opened up my mind to what theatre can be and how important it is to debate.” The twists of individual choice at moments of cultural ferment inflect her own work, especially in The Whip. “I believe in being objective – but it’s personal. This is me looking at my history.” She had previously investigated the contemporary sugar trade as a BBC journalist. “I went to the Dominican Republic and Haiti, and filmed children as young as five or six cutting cane. I felt as if I’d been transported back 400 years. I’d never seen such miserable conditions. They lived in these concrete barracks, and the perimeter was patrolled by armed men. If anyone was abused there was no one to hold to account. That was when the penny dropped – this was what my forefathers had to do.” I went to the Dominican Republic and Haiti and saw five-year-olds cutting cane. I felt I'd been taken back 400 years Also in the mix are Victorian attempts to reform the political system and the fearsome cotton mills. “It’s not a single-issue play by any stretch of the imagination,” the playwright insists. Fear of violence at home and abroad focused British politicians’ minds. “They compromised, and it was flawed, especially with the apprenticeships” – this was a scheme mandating slaves to work without payment for six years after abolition, which she describes as “slavery by another name. But in the United States, they were unable to compromise and are still experiencing the fallout and bitterness from that: 600,000 people died in the civil war because the US was unable to be as pragmatic as the British. That needs consideration.” As we pace the galleries of the museum, Gilkes Romero’s warm concern brings history to life. She says that, last October, she was “tasked with cutting 30 pages out of the script. That was painful. The framework is historical, but I had to walk away from it, to create characters who could fight and love and punch each other.” She still smarts to recall the producer who compared an early draft of her Gaza play to a Panorama documentary, and exclaims: “I want to write challenging pieces on big stages. I don’t particularly try to be safe – what is the point?” Recently she caught up with the musical Hamilton, which swaggeringly reboots the founding fathers: “You could have heard my bottom jaw clang on the floor. If I wasn’t rehearsing in Stratford, I’d be there every night.” Particularly resonant was the refrain, “who lives, who dies, who tells your story”. “I’m in the business of unravelling what has been buried,” she argues. “But I’m not giving a history lesson. Journalism is very much about facts, but literature is also about truth – we have to have the courage to go there.” The Whip is at the Swan theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon, until 21 March.