Chelsea are more than happy to listen to offers for the full-back Marcos Alonso who is attracting interest from Internazionale, managed by his former boss Antonio Conte, who will know what the Spaniard can bring to a side. He could be joined at the club by Ashley Young. Another of Frank Lampard’s squad players who is being linked with a departure is Olivier Giroud who has received a tentative approach from Aston Villa for his heading abilities. Alternatively, Christian Benteke could return to Villa Park from Crystal Palace where he has failed to live up to expectations. The bad news for Palace is that Wilfried Zaha, with new agent Pini Zahavi in tow, is interesting Chelsea as a they look to add a touch more attacking flair to the ranks. Another ageing star on Dean Smith’s radar is the former Liverpool goalkeeper Pepe Reina, who could be the answer to Aston Villa’s goalkeeping problem after Tom Heaton was ruled out for the remainder of the season. The 37-year-old Spaniard is currently second choice at Milan and could be open to a return to England. Daniel Farke has decided one alice-band wearing midfielder is not enough for Norwich’s survival fight and has entered the race to sign the Chelsea midfielder Conor Gallagher on loan for the rest of the season. Burnley are also thought to be interested in the teenager who has impressed at Charlton in the opening half of the campaign. The former Liverpool winger Ryan Babel could be making another return to the Premier League as Newcastle are keen on the Dutchman who is not enjoying life at Galatasaray where he has struggled to make an impact in the first team. Neal Maupay has impressed since joining Brighton from Brentford in the summer, so much so that he is now a target for Napoli. The French striker has scored seven times, prompting the Seagulls to slap a £40m price tag on him. Another Brighton player repeatedly cropping up on scouting reports is Ben White, currently excelling on loan at Leeds. Liverpool, Chelsea and Tottenham are all considering where to make their move on the centre-back. The ex-Arsenal youngster Marcus McGuane is trying to return from Barcelona where he has achieved little of note since departing London. This season he’s been on loan in the Dutch second-tier with Telstar but now wants to cut that short and arrange a move to his homeland.