The Liverpool striker Rhian Brewster has joined Swansea on loan for the remainder of the season. The 19-year-old is highly regarded at Anfield but has found first-team opportunities hard to come by as Liverpool’s established attackers continue to shine. Brewster, who came through the youth ranks at Chelsea before moving north, made his first Liverpool appearance in the Carabao Cup third-round win at MK Dons earlier this season and then scored a penalty in the shootout victory against Arsenal in the following round. He most recently came on 11 minutes from the end of Sunday’s FA Cup win against Everton. The England Under-21 international holds a Champions League winners’ medal having been an unused substitute in the 2-0 win over Tottenham in last season’s final. He will now link up once again with Steve Cooper, the Swansea manager, who was in charge of the England side that won the 2017 Under-17s World Cup – a tournament in which Brewster won the golden boot for the top goalscorer. Swansea confirmed Brewster would be available for Sunday’s derby clash with Cardiff as he looks to help guide the club back into the Premier League. “I’ve come here to try and play a lot of games and score a lot of goals for Swansea,” Brewster told City’s website. “It’s a great club. I’ve been watching them for ages – particularly when they were in the Premier League. “Hopefully I can help them get back to where they belong. At this moment in time Swansea is the best team for me to join on loan. I want to help Swansea get promoted.” Elsewhere in the Championship Fulham have completed the permanent signing of the winger Ivan Cavaleiro from Wolves. Cavaleiro, 26, who joined Fulham on a season-long loan in July, has agreed a four-and-a-half-year contract. The Cottagers said on their official website: “The club is pleased to confirm that the permanent registration of Ivan Cavaleiro as a Fulham player has been completed. Cavaleiro will remain at Craven Cottage until the summer of 2024, with a club option to extend the deal by a further year.” The Portuguese has scored five goals and registered six assists in 23 Championship appearances for Scott Parker’s side this season. Cavaleiro joined Wolves from Monaco for £7m, then a club record, in 2016.