Harry Arter had not scored since November 2017 and nor, by any measure, had he been a roaring success since joining Fulham on loan from Bournemouth in August. The impression has been one of a career in decline and when he replaced Kevin McDonald in the 72nd minute for his first appearance since a shin injury in mid-October there was little expectation he might avert the outcome nobody wanted. Within 120 seconds Arter, receiving Stefan Johansen’s square pass 25 yards out, took a touch and beat Orjan Nyland with a scorching left-footer that may not be bettered all weekend. It ensured a goal of similar merit by Anthony Knockaert, cancelled out by Anwar El Ghazi, was not in vain and handed Fulham the minor scalp of Aston Villa in a tie that improved immeasurably after an awful opening period. These clubs know the ambiguous, unsettling status conferred by yo-yoing between the top two tiers. They last met in May 2018, when Fulham won the Championship play-off final and seemed well-favoured to eclipse a troubled Villa in the long term. In the blink of an eye their fortunes have reversed and it is perfectly feasible that they might switch places yet again in May. Villa are yet to prove they have not made the same mistake upon promotion that their hosts did last year, buying half a team but remaining a key stakeholder in the Premier League’s relegation argument, while Fulham are on course for a top-six finish even if a tilt at automatic promotion is yet to come about. That requirement to keep league seasons on track meant this cup tie resembled a hot potato at the outset. Accordingly, the ball did too, with two much-changed sides struggling for rhythm. It took 24 minutes for a chance of note to be fashioned, Jonathan Kodjia taking a neat pass from El Ghazi and blazing off target from an angle after Neil Taylor had stolen possession in Fulham’s half. Taylor and Marvelous Nakamba were Villa’s two survivors from the New Year’s Day win at Burnley. Their makeshift nature showed and until Kodjia’s opportunity it was Fulham – with a relatively modest six changes from their defeat to Reading – who moved the ball with more tempo. It was just as well for Fulham to keep the action away from their own goal given that the bright, low sun that beamed towards it through the open side occupied by the new Riverside Stand’s construction site was clearly troublesome for players and spectators alike. The tempo improved in the first half’s final 15 minutes although pickings remained achingly slim until the very last action. El Ghazi should have scored when found alone in the area by Kodjia, but opted to measure his finish and was thwarted by an admittedly fine one-handed save by Marek Rodak. Fulham might earlier have crafted a similar opportunity if Knockaert had passed to one of two open teammates, but ended the half without testing Nyland. It was Knockaert who almost put that right within 40 seconds of the restart, an incisive run inside from the right bringing cleanly struck shot that flew just wide of the far post. The hope was that this might be a marker of improvements to come and it was borne out spectacularly. El Ghazi had just squandered a decent situation for Villa when Knockaert, stationed on the flank since half-time, took possession midway inside their half. Nakamba’s presence required him to check inside and, moving away from goal slightly, seek a shooting angle a few yards outside the D. When it came, the effort was a peach: it beat Nyland all ends up and, with the sun now having set, the tie had been illuminated anew by a flash of brilliance. Joe Bryan could instantly have made it two, forcing Nyland to parry. Villa’s stomach to battle for a replay was in for a test but nobody would have dared to pass up on the gift they received in the 64th minute. Michael Hector, on his Fulham debut, should have cut out Jota’s clipped pass towards Kodjia but wafted a foot at the ball and missed. Kodjia could now beat Rodak to the ball and knocked it over him, before El Ghazi applied the finish close to the line. The pendulum now seemed to have swung and Jota saw a shot pushed away. But Arter was soon introduced in an effort to offer Fulham some of the drive they had lost and, as it turned out, instantly provided plenty more than that.