José Mourinho’s life in football can be measured out in vendettas. There are two clubs he reserves a special enmity for, and for much the same reason. Both Barcelona and Liverpool passed over his services, choosing instead to turn to Pep Guardiola and Rafa Benítez, by little consequence two managers he has most enjoyed getting the better of. Only recently arrived at Tottenham, his latest club are near powerless to stop Liverpool’s procession to the Premier League title, save for performing the unlikely act of ending the leaders’ unbeaten run. To do so would be one of the shocks of the season. Where Liverpool have suffered a fair share of injuries, with James Milner’s muscle injury adding to a shortfall in midfield, Tottenham are completely riven, with Moussa Sissoko out until April and Tanguy Ndombele succumbed to a hip injury that in the words of Mourinho offers “no continuity in his development”. And, crucially, there will be no Harry Kane, a huge loss for a manager with such a tactical reliance on centre-forwards, and no obvious replacement within a squad he already appears dissatisfied with. JB • Tottenham Hotspur v Liverpool (Saturday, 5.30pm, all times GMT) While several clubs deal with midwinter injury crises, Chris Wilder declared this week that at Sheffield United “everybody is fit and ready to go”, an achievement as remarkable as any in what has been an astonishingly successful reintroduction to the top flight. Bramall Lane should be the site of a managerial mutual appreciation society, with David Moyes praising Wilder’s path to the top (though mainly for being not dissimilar to his own) – “I quite enjoy seeing managers who have to earn their stripes, prove themselves in the lower leagues, and then they move up” – and Wilder doing likewise in return: “His record, from Preston to Everton, was incredible. For the vast majority of his career he’s been hugely successful and they’re definitely a different proposition with David Moyes in charge”. SB • Sheffield United v West Ham United (Friday, 8pm) The humiliating elimination from the FA Cup by Liverpool’s reserves proved to be the last straw for a posse of Everton fans, who turned up at the club’s training ground this week to give players and staff some forthright feedback. How will the players react to all that? And how will Carlo Ancelotti respond to the flop at Anfield, other than by scouring the transfer market even more frantically than before? Everton’s lineup and attitude will be revelatory on Saturday when they face Brighton, who are one point below them in the table, have spent far less than Everton and have a much clearer idea of what they are doing. PD • Everton v Brighton & Hove Albion (Saturday, 3pm) Having been thrashed 9-0 by Leicester at home in October, Southampton will be motivated by revenge but fearful of further failure. Still, there is hope: the Foxes may only have lost this season to Manchester United, Manchester City and Liverpool, but they did draw at home against Norwich last month and against a weakened, striker-less Aston Villa on Wednesday, when they kept possession well but were largely muted in the final third. Besides, as Ralph Hasenhüttl says, his team now “looks completely different” and “are in a different moment”. Wednesday’s match saw James Maddison and Jack Grealish come head to head in the battle of in-form English midfielders vying for Gareth Southgate’s affection; this one sees Jamie Vardy and Danny Ings meet in the battle of in-form English strikers. SB • Leicester City v Southampton (Saturday, 3pm) Aston Villa have had rotten luck with injuries but can also count blessings as they prepare to host Manchester City on Sunday. The goalkeeper Orjan Nyland again filled in well for the stricken Tom Heaton in Wednesday’s Carabao Cup draw at Leicester, where Tyrone Mings performed even better. Mings’s return to fitness has made Villa more solid, as has Dean Smith’s decision to switch to a back three, which has the added merit of freeing up Frédéric Guilbert to attack more down the right. “I like it, I think I’ve got what it takes physically to go up and down so the system suits me well,” said Guilbert after scoring at Leicester. “When we press [in this system] we’re quite high, so we can cause danger very quickly when we win the ball ... we’re trying to make the team more solid overall and we hope that will help us gain as many points as possible. Every game in the Premier League is tough but our next one more than most. But we will fight with the weapons we have. We’ll go to war.” PD • Aston Villa v Manchester City (Sunday, 4.30pm) Crystal Palace have conceded precisely one goal in each of their last six matches in all competitions, which might not be as bad as the spell in October and November when they conceded precisely two goals in five successive matches (the 2-2 draw at Arsenal one of them) but is still far from ideal, with only one of those games ending in victory. Nevertheless, they have the division’s fourth-best defensive record (combined with the second-worst attack). They also have something of an injury crisis, which coupled with Luka Milivojevic’s suspension leaves them short-handed for Arsenal’s visit. The Gunners will be pleased to avoid the Serb midfielder, who scored – from the penalty spot – both Palace’s goals in a 2-2 draw here last season and one at the Emirates last October, a game most memorable for Granit Xhaka’s angry reaction to being substituted. In other disciplinary news, this game features two of the three teams against whom Mikel Arteta, now Arsenal’s manager, was sent off in his playing career (for Everton against Arsenal in December 2007, and for Arsenal against Palace in October 2013; the other was against West Brom in 2010). SB • Crystal Palace v Arsenal (Saturday, 12.30pm) “I’m not in medieval times” was Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s kicker to his rebuke of Robin van Persie’s accusation that he might be too nice last weekend. “We are in 2020,” he said after last Saturday’s 0-0 FA Cup draw at Wolves. He was making the point that modern management is a much altered beast since Sir Alex Ferguson was launching hairdryers around The Cliff training ground, but that had the unfortunate byproduct of reminding us that the past continues to be a foreign country for Manchester United. It could never be 1999 forever but the new year has got off to a horrendous start, and just when there had been signs of revival during December. Tuesday’s Carabao Cup footballing lesson from Manchester City was chastening, and it appeared the last place a befuddled Solskjær wanted to be post-match was at Manchester United in 2020. A home defeat to Norwich in a 3pm kick-off, the type of fixture United gobbled up in the late 20th century, and terminal velocity for the Norwegian might soon be reached. JB • Manchester United v Norwich City (Saturday, 3pm) Chelsea’s away record this season is the same as Leicester’s and inferior only to Liverpool’s, but the 14 points they have won at home is the same as Aston Villa and only one more than Watford – and that’s with Arsenal, Tottenham, Manchester United and Manchester City to come. Bournemouth (after a run of five successive defeats) and West Ham (after five defeats in seven winless matches) are among the teams to have prevailed at Stamford Bridge. So there is reason for optimism for Burnley, who having lost six of their past eight league games and not having beaten a team currently in the top half of the table all season are precisely the kind of side Chelsea lose to. Chelsea were, however, dominant in the reverse fixture, winning 4-2 thanks to a Christian Pulisic hat-trick, a game which came in a six-game Premier League winning streak bookended by 2-1 defeats against Liverpool and Manchester City. SB • Chelsea v Burnley (Saturday, 3pm) The only good thing about Diogo Jota’s absence through injury is that it most likely means we will see a lot more of the hugely promising Pedro Neto. The teenager had barely played a senior match at his previous clubs (Braga and a loan spell at Lazio) before arriving at Wolves last summer but, having got up to speed with life at Molineux, he has started his team’s past two Premier League matches and made a big impact in both. Beyond scoring in each game (even if his strike at Liverpool was expunged by VAR at its most pernickety), the fast and tricky 19-year-old has been full of menace on the left wing. At Watford on New Year’s Day he was even more dangerous than Adama Traoré, Wolves’ wideman on the other side. Newcastle’s defence best be aware that they face serious threats on both flanks this weekend. PD • Wolverhampton Wanderers v Newcastle United (Saturday, 3pm) Worries about Bournemouth would deepen further if they were to lose to Watford, and be leapfrogged in the league table by resurgent Watford. In their fifth season in the Premier League, Bournemouth have never been as low after 21 games as the 18th place they will kick off Sunday’s match in. Eddie Howe’s teams have usually got most of the dirty work done by now, but Christmas was harrowing for them. “At the moment we don’t look like a team, which is the worrying thing,” said the defender Steve Cook after the 4-0 defeat on New Year’s Day at West Ham. Watford, revived by Nigel Pearson’s back-to-basics approach, are just the sort of opposition that Howe’s team have struggled against. That London Stadium loss continued an unfortunate habit of losing to the clubs they are competing with to avoid the drop; Newcastle, Burnley, Brighton have also taken three points from them. In the next month that sequence must be broken if Bournemouth are to survive; Norwich, Brighton and Aston Villa await them. JB • Bournemouth v Watford (Sunday, 2pm)