As fans of Succession will understand, the more money a family has, the harder it is to escape. And of course no family member nurtures the fantasy of tunnelling under the fence to independence more keenly than an indulged and redundant younger son. But at what price? In the HBO series that role is taken by the beautifully cast Kieran Culkin (brother of Macauley), whose billion-dollar prison is established in the opening scenes. After a short period of estrangement, he has returned to visit the penthouse offices of the global family media empire. He finds his older brother still enduring the humiliations of second-guessing their all-powerful parent in order to ensure his promised inheritance. Culkin’s character lasts five minutes in the boardroom before announcing, of all the absurd machinations that allow him to lead his charmed, hated, make-believe life: “What is this fucking bullshit?” You could detect a hint of that sentiment in the Sussex Royal website, launched by that other notable “spare” son and his wife Meghan on Wednesday. The website itself was, of course, immediately trashed by the professionally apoplectic bullies in the tabloids, and their footsoldiers on the internet, as “sleek” and “stage-managed” – and therefore yet another example of Markle’s perceived failure to understand that a “genuine” royal displays some inbred code of reticence and amateurism. There was, by any reasonable reading of the website, however, something almost poignant about the couple’s efforts to cry freedom – or, more precisely, to “take a step back” from their duties as “senior royals”. You could hear Harry’s anxious insistence on adding clauses to every sentence re-affirming his loyalty to his granny. He clearly had no wish to upend that odd family he was born into. He just wanted to find a way of protecting the different one he and his wife were trying to create. That ambition will no doubt prove more complex than it sounds. The initial two-line palace response to the Sussex website was cheered by some royal watchers for its emotional iciness, as if everyone had forgotten where that tone led the previous generation. Having tried and failed, it seems, to speak to his 93-year-old provider, prior to saying that he wished, at 35, to make a few decisions of his own, some demanded that the prince be disowned. “Who the fuck do they think they are?” asked Piers Morgan, a man with infinitely greater cause than most to answer that question. When I first saw the headlines about Megxit, the republican in me greeted them as a glimmer of good news in a sea of bad. A couple of the royals, I thought, had finally had the guts to criticise the grace and favour lifestyle, and all the perverse expectation and deference that went with it. How many seasons of The Crown – or Shakespeare plays – did anyone need to watch to understand that Britain’s hereditary principle was a blueprint for brutal family meltdown, played out for public entertainment? At last, I thought, a couple of them had called time. And if anyone was going to pursue Princess Diana’s campaign against the oldest “firm” around, then who better than her younger son and his free-spirited wife? Harry’s recent willingness to open up about his mental health has been brave and admirable. One of his better strategies to stay sane appeared to involve treating the institution with due irreverence. Which is to say, I liked that story that he had once bought the Queen a shower cap for Christmas bearing the legend “Ain’t life a bitch!”. It was not only a decent joke, but also a pointed reminder that you can’t wear your crown in the bathroom. I reported for this paper on Harry and Meghan’s wedding, and enjoyed some of the symbolic detail of it – including the fact that for the occasion, Meghan’s tormentors in the press (and me) were pointedly dispatched to a room high up in a windowless turret of Windsor castle to watch proceedings on a single television reliant on the kind of set-top aerial I hadn’t seen since the 1980s. It did not seem by chance that royal hacks, some of whose own predecessors Harry holds responsible for his mother’s death, were invited to see less of the ceremony than almost any of the other two billion viewers around the world. What I did catch appeared to emphasise that Harry was determined to be true to the best of his mother’s spirit. There was evangelical bishop Michael Curry, champion of same-sex marriage, demanding in his sermon that the royals brought to mind the first time they had felt the stirrings of love, a question that appeared to leave several flummoxed. And on the bride’s side of the aisle pointed reminders that she had arrived here, in contrast to her husband, entirely on her own merits. The only relation was her elegant social worker mother, Doria Ragland, who sat alongside those world champions of self-reliance Oprah Winfrey and Serena Williams. It seemed unlikely, watching the Duchess of Sussex leave the chapel, that she would have much interest in a life in which she was routinely told where to go and how to behave. Perhaps as a consequence, the “breath of fresh air” the “biracial princess” brought to the Windsors at her wedding was not allowed to last beyond the honeymoon. The charge list against her from the “know your place” Stasi of the Daily Mail only grew. She wore the wrong denier tights to some garden party, was a bit slow to present her newborn son to the cameras, was tricky at the All England Lawn Tennis Club. If Harry’s mother, daughter of an earl, experienced the culture shock of royal repression at 20, how must it all have seemed to Markle at 38? And so for a few of those reasons, I was inclined to cheer the headlines that suggested she and her husband wanted to give it up. On closer examination, inevitably, the cheer became a shrug. There were far too many caveats to what the Spectator calls the “pseudo-abdication”, far too many grounds to claim, in the spirit of our times, that the royal couple just want to have their cake and eat it. As in the rapid-fire table talk of Succession, the argument of their website moves seamlessly from the emotional high ground of independence and wellbeing to the bottom line of who gets what and how much. Quite rightly, in order to pursue their new status the royal couple are prepared to give up the estimated 5% of their income that comes directly from the public purse. But their case is damaged by special pleading. One ill-considered part of their website attempts to get deeper into the weeds of their funding and to pursue the most specious of all arguments about a hereditary monarchy: that it represents a real bargain for which we should all be grateful. The institution costs each British citizen about £1 a year, the duke and duchess argue. Leave aside the maths that shows the true figure (£89m divided by 65 million) is nearer £1.36, the implication is that the royals provide far better value for money than a Netflix subscription and arguably offer far greater entertainment. For all their talk of independence there is a tacit understanding in this – presumably principally from Harry – that their personal sovereignty will always be circumscribed by the monarch’s control of the purse strings. Royals are not allowed, this narrative goes, to make money, and therefore are not at liberty to make decisions about their lives. This is, of course, a rule that depends on the very British myth that to live off the sweated assets of inherited land is to be some kind of disinterested custodian, above the concerns of commerce. The Duchy of Cornwall, 135,000 acres granted to the Black Prince in 1337, brings in £192m annually. Ninety-five per cent of the money on which the duke and duchess of Sussex live is granted to them out of that generous pot, which in turn is granted to Prince Charles. It comes with obligations. The thought does not appear to have cropped up in Vancouver pillow talk that genuine independence might require them to give up that, too. The precise trigger – why now? – for the Windsor Two’s break for the Canadian border is the cause of much speculation. It became clear on their recent official trip to South Africa that their generally laudable efforts to educate the world about global injustice from the steps of private jets was always likely to have the charge of hypocrisy wired in. At least Bono can sing. The decision to pursue lawsuits against the tabloid press seemed in part a thin-skinned reaction to such cynicism about their “wokeness”, but no doubt they also felt the palace could be more supportive of their legal efforts to protect a vestige of their privacy. Enough had long been enough. Or perhaps it was simply being liberated from keeping up appearances at Sandringham for Christmas that made them determined to retreat. Markle could have been forgiven for running a mile from her in-laws from the moment when Princess Michael of Kent celebrated her arrival in the family by wearing an outsized blackamoor brooch. But given her #MeToo campaigning, she might understandably have felt that the prospect of pulling Christmas crackers with the sex offender-defending uncle was never going to work. Maybe they decided to jump before they were pushed. In the aftermath of Prince Andrew’s Newsnight interview, the heir to the throne has been expressing public determination for a “slimmed down” monarchy – one that concentrated only on the line of succession. It’s probably no more than coincidence that the second official portrait featuring just the Queen and her three primogeniture heirs was released last Monday to celebrate the “monarchy for a new decade”. I guess Harry has got used to it, but who really wants to be the emotional new dad informed that his son will never be quite as favoured as his brother’s? If the Sussexes genuinely want to do things on their own terms, however, it is clear that they will need to make more sacrifices than they have outlined. The palace believes that the new arrangement needs to be resolved quickly; the Queen wants a “workable solution” by Tuesday. The “crisis talks” that are under way this weekend between Prince Charles and his second son are therefore a rarified version of those that every parent has with their offspring at some point: do they continue to live off the bank of mum and dad, sleep in the spare room, be nagged about what time they are coming in, or are they prepared to take the financial hit in order to buy their freedom and get a place of their own? It is not as if the duke and duchess are strapped for cash. It is understood that Prince Harry has a personal fortune of £30m – two thirds of it inherited from his mother – and that Markle is personally worth £4m. Here’s a radical thought: why not simply tell dad and grandma that they have more than enough to live on for several lifetimes; that they don’t require Frogmore Cottage, and neither do they wish to exploit their “royal brand” by selling sweatshirts or patronage. If they really want to be the change they argue for, why not actually, amicably, hand back the titles and the trappings and model a life based on the principle of inclusivity they are keen to champion? Markle’s recent assertion that it is “not enough to survive, the point of life is to thrive” is a piece of wisdom she says she has repeated over and over to her husband. It carries the possibility of a whole other way of living than that represented by the monarchy. Now’s the moment to prove that wisdom. Taking a truly independent path would not only allow Harry Windsor to reach full maturity, it might even prove a first step in the nation thinking how to finally do so as well.