It’s got the shrimpy-vibe going - in a good way. The spice is lovely, the texture is nice and crunchy. I’d happily eat a big bowl of that. In fact, I’ve finished it all.★★★★★ This is lovely. Big, crunchy chunks. Loads of different veg in it. Really multilayered flavour. Also a good level of spice that doesn’t blow your head off.★★★★★ Oooh! This has nice texture and chunks - it’s not too spindly. There’s a spiky chilli in it. All-round good kimchi.★★★★ It’s too soft, too sweet, not spicy enough. Just tastes weird. Almost tastes like a jarred tomato sauce … Tastes canned? Not great.0 stars There’s a bit of sourness, but I think the texture is like cardboard. Might be a bit more tolerable when toasted?★ It looks like there has been some fermentation. The texture is horrible. I’m not detecting much sourness.★ Looks grey … I can see what looks like bits of undissolved flour in the crumb. Really flaccid crust. The flavour is nonexistent, I can’t taste any sourness.0 stars The texture is closed, it seems like no fermentation has taken place. The crust is strange – grey-like and tough. The flavour is horrendous.0 stars I really like the flavour, it’s sweeter. I would cook with it, with mushrooms and chestnuts in a dumpling filling but I could also just eat it. It’s too thinly cut - but I keep eating it.★★★★ I like that it’s really chunky and crunchy. There’s just a tiny bit too much salt. But I would serve it with some apples or a kraut slaw.★★★★ This one has a good crispy texture, but again it’s just a little too salty. It’s finely cut, but there’s a weird flavour in it, I can’t figure it out what it is.★★★ Oooh, weird. It’s really thinly sliced - like thin and short, the little shreds at the bottom of the jar. It’s a bit kombucha-y. The acidity is too much.★★ It has the most flavour out of all of them, it has a different dimension to it. Quite thick. The texture is the best thing about it. I definitely like the mouthfeel.★★★★ This tastes fresh - nice acidity. The texture is quite light, not overly creamy or thick. It’s fresh, a good breakfast yogurt.★★★ Quite high acidity. It’s nice and creamy … slightly grainy, but that doesn’t bother me. Flavour-wise, it’s neutral, inoffensive.★★★ Looks a bit thin. It has the most homemade taste - it’s like when I try to make yogurt. It would be good blitzed with something.★★ It has a very slight fizz which I love. This would be perfect for anyone with a hangover - just smash a bottle of that. I love it.★★★★★ It’s light and fresh and with a slight biting fizziness on my tongue – I like it. Quite thirst-quenching.★★★★★ This is nice and not too acidic. Missing that fizziness, it almost needs another day or so. But the milkiness is coming through in a pleasant way.★★★★ This one has a lovely sweet, almost rounded flavour. It’s also got a very light, slight fizz. It’s quite flavoursome, not too acidic.★★★★ This has got a nice golden colour … I wonder what tea they used for it? Good fizz. Nice acidity. It’s flavoursome. I like this one.★★★★ Smells nice and sweet. Not overly acidic. Fresh tasting but quite neutral - you can’t really taste the tea. Fermented well.★★★★ This is good. It has got high acidity but I don’t mind that. The fizz is nice and spiky … and I like the amount of fizz.★★★ This one tastes under-fermented to me. It’s not as fizzy as I’d like it to be, it’s a bit underwhelming.★★ All products are blind-tested