José Mourinho has cast doubt on whether Harry Kane will be available again this season or for Euro 2020, suggesting the Spurs and England striker may not return from hamstring surgery until the 2020-21 campaign has begun. Kane had surgery on Saturday to repair a ruptured tendon in his left hamstring, which he sustained in the defeat at Southampon on New Year’s Day. He posted a picture on social media in which he was watching his teammates play Liverpool from a hospital bed, writing: “Surgery went very well. First day of recovery starts now!” Spurs have expected Kane to return to full training in April but, asked if there was any update on the timeframe, Mourinho suggested the process may not be as quick as initially hoped. “We try the best we can,” he said. “News on Harry we don’t have, and if you ask me every time we come here the answer will be the same. We expect him to be out until mid-April, end of April, May, next season, I don’t know.” It is the first time any suggestion has been raised that Kane’s injury will end his season, and any absence significantly beyond April would put his readiness for England’s Euro 2020 campaign in serious doubt. Mourinho is desperate to strengthen a Tottenham squad that, as he stressed repeatedly during his press conference on Monday lunchtime, is short on numbers but would not confirm that an 18-month loan deal for the Benfica midfielder Gedson Fernandes has been agreed. Spurs look certain to pip West Ham to his signature but Mourinho offered no sign that he will have arrived before Tuesday’s FA Cup third-round replay at home to Middlesbrough. “I am waiting for news, but when I say I am waiting news can come or not,” he said. “I am more worried about Middlesbrough than the market. With the rules, even if we get the player you cannot play him in a replay so in this moment I am not interested in Gedson or any other players who could come. “I cannot answer [about his thoughts on Fernandes] because I don’t know if we are getting [him]. I don’t think the Benfica president and coach, both my friends, will be happy if I speak about one of their players.”