Estimates of the economic cost of a hard Brexit vary, but it is generally agreed that this form of Brexit will be much more economically damaging than one where the UK seeks close alignment with the EU, its biggest trading partner. How does Sajid Javid and the entire Johnson government justify the hard Brexit it so evidently embraces (Brexit: Javid comments on non-alignment with EU prompt warnings of price rises, 18 January)? How will a race to the bottom serve the common good, or benefit business? To which EU regulations does the government take exception, and why? Andrea Leadsom has reduced weekly contact with the UK’s five largest business groups to a monthly meeting with a wider group. This is how our government regards business. It is prepared to sacrifice jobs, and our common interests, on the altar of its ideology. It knows that certain business sectors will face an existential threat because of its policy, and it claims that they have had since 2016 to prepare for it. We need to know who will benefit from this government policy, and how. The government should be continually challenged to justify its approach. It isn’t enough for minsters to tell business there will be no alignment. It needs to say why. It needs to explain how Britain will prosper by turning its back on its major trading partner. It needs to explain how Britain can prosper as a single nation in a world of increasing protectionism. Every MP must act in the nation’s best interests. The government needs to justify the economic and human loss that its approach is bound to deliver. It has not done so, except in the vaguest of terms, and with slogans and soundbites. There are two words that strike terror in the heart of Johnson’s government: honesty and transparency. It’s time for both.Adrian BaskervilleSoberton, Hampshire • Sajid Javid is naive to claim that “we will not be a rule taker”. In a trade deal with the US, he must expect that it will dictate which standards apply. We should learn from the Canadians’ painful experience of trade deals with the US. Anyone who thinks EU regulations are an assault on the sovereignty of the UK should brace themselves for the “brave new world” of Johnson’s and Javid’s trade deal with the US.Peter SwannEmeritus professor of industrial economics, University of Nottingham • What will happen in so many areas of our lives after Brexit is anyone’s guess. A gentle transition so we all end up wondering what all the fuss was about, or chaos on the roads with trucks queuing for hours and indecision and panic in boardrooms across the land. My confusion was only confounded by the chancellor’s statement that we will no longer be aligned with EU regulations and standards after Brexit. A big question for many of us is what EU regulations are to be retained? Will we be inundated with US chlorine-soaked chicken? Will we have to search labels for the dreaded phrase “genetically modified”? Will we adhere to the EU regulations on climate change and workers’ rights? According to the House of Commons library, the EU Withdrawal Act means that “In practice the UK is retaining EU regulations, decisions and tertiary legislation and elements of the EEA agreement (as they existed on exit day).” My understanding is that parliament will, in due course, consider which of the EU regulations and laws should become UK domestic law. So it seems that we must wait to see the result of deliberations in parliament before we know the true implications of leaving the EU. Only time will tell.Eileen PeckBenfleet, Essex • Sajid Javid insists that there will be short-term problems but the UK will be in a better position in the long term if we exclude any alignment with the EU after Brexit. Sadly, people eat food and use medicines in the short term. When people lose their jobs, telling them the UK will be better off in the long term is not helpful when the ensuing poverty means they are no longer able to put food on the table. Where will the jobs come from if we cannot access the market that accounts for over 40% of our trade? How far away is the long term? How do we survive the short term while waiting to arrive at the long term? We are heading towards the economic buffers just as there is a real prospect of a worldwide recession. John CooksonBournemouth • There are those of us who remember the moment when Britain was allowed to join the common market, after several times being refused, and who have seen the many improvements to the poorer parts of the country that membership of the EU has made possible. While we now accept that it is generally believed the country’s future lies outside the EU, we can hardly see relations with the EU as a war, nor leaving it as a victory. The news that there were plans to celebrate the 31 January with the ringing of church bells (Vicars reject drive to toll bells for Brexit, 16 January), plus the minting of coins and fireworks – as though it were an event similar to the defeat of the Armada, Trafalgar or the end of the second world war – must forcibly lead us to the conclusion that the British people’s famous sense of humour is working overtime, or that the country is in need of psychiatric help.Edwin AppsLiez, France • Surely it is the passing bell that should be tolled in every parish on 31 January? In sorrow and grief at our departure.Penelope WoolfittLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition