A cartoon published years ago in Private Eye featured two men sitting at a desk, one sober-suited and academic-looking, the other a circus clown with a great red nose and a spinning bow-tie. The high-brow man was answering the phone, and the caption was him saying: “And to which of Clive James’s agents do you wish to speak?” Roger Scruton, who died on Sunday aged 75, was never merely clownish, but his long and immensely productive career as a public intellectual featured a distinction in roles that was not so dissimilar. On the one hand, he was a philosophical writer of tremendous lucidity and expository grace, whose introductions to Kant and Spinoza are exemplary, and whose studies – Sexual Desire (1986) and The Aesthetics of Music (1997) – seemed at once to be masterpieces. On the other, he was a brilliant polemicist, the unforgiving critic of what he took to be the charlatans of post-modernity, and a wholly self-conscious controversialist. His most provocative work in that mode was probably Thinkers of the New Left (1985), a collection of intemperate pieces from the Salisbury Review, later expanded under the characteristic title Fools, Frauds and Firebrands (2015), in which he took on almost every major thinker on the left, from Althusser to Žižek. The manner is not, as he put it, “word-mincing”. It is full of drolleries and iconoclastic knockabout, as when Scruton depicts a bewildered reader of the German philosopher Jürgen Habermas, waiting hopefully in the corridors of his arid prose “like a petitioner to whom truth has been promised, albeit only abstractly, on a document that is perhaps already out of date”. Scruton later considered the book a professional disaster, and the beginning of the end of his life within the academy. But it was an integral part of the Scruton mode to kick against the pricks: he would later claim that the only person he could engage in conversation at Birkbeck College, where he taught before becoming a freelance man of letters, was the tea-lady, who was the only other conservative in the place. A similarly vigorous and embattled spirit animated his first work of political philosophy, The Meaning of Conservatism (1980), which referred to “the contagion of democracy” among other shortcomings of the age. (His writings may have earned “the hatred of decent liberals everywhere”, he once said, but “it was worth it”.) Around this time, Scruton was a prominent figure in the Conservative Philosophy Group, but he wasn’t actually Thatcherism’s house philosopher. The political vision that emerges from his book, one he refined and reiterated in many later writings, certainly had no truck with social justice or equality of opportunity as political ends. He thought that the institutions of the nation could flourish only if government kept its hands off; but he was not truly a card-carrying libertarian, nor did he look to the market or free enterprise as the basis of a philosophy. His world view was inspired by something much more numinous: the Burkean paradox that finds somehow in human limitation and frailty a trans-generational wisdom that transcends mere individualism. His environmentalism, as articulated in Green Philosophy: How to Think Seriously About the Planet (2012), depended on this sense of human lives incorporated into one mighty community of the living, the dead and the as-yet unborn. But appeals to time-hallowed tradition, like Edmund Burke’s own, are usually made when things are already well and truly on the slide. Scruton had a good line in lamenting the way things were going to the dogs in works such as An Intelligent Person’s Guide to Modern Culture (1998), the message of which was that no intelligent person would want anything to do with modern culture. His writings increasingly evoked the sense of things being fractured and broken, not always in a tone of argumentative belligerence but sometimes with a rueful ironical poignancy, as in his memoir England: An Elegy (2000), in which the third Marquess of Salisbury is held up at one point as a political role model, “whose greatness consists precisely in the fact that nobody knows anything about him”. The influence Scruton had on the political life of his time would seem minimal, and he liked to represent himself as constituting a minority of one; but his statement of the conservative position is its most expressive modern enunciation. Even his ideological opponents are his beneficiaries, in the sense that, as Burke put it, “our antagonist is our helper”. As Matthew Arnold once said of Burke, so too Scruton: “He saturates politics with thought.”