They led twice but West Brom were denied a second win at the Valley in a week by their own man, Sam Johnstone putting past his own keeper to hand Charlton an equaliser with less than 15 minutes on the clock. Kenneth Zohore, who got the winner in the teams’ FA Cup tie last weekend, put the Baggies ahead just before the half hour mark but the hosts were level at the break thanks to Josh Davison. Hal Robson-Kanu struck almost straight from the restart but the visitors were unable to take advantage of Leeds’ slip up against Sheffield United thanks to Johnstone’s intervention. Those results were good news for Brentford who blitzed west London rivals QPR with three first-half goals to win 3-1. Strikes from the Bees’ ‘BMW’ combination of Said Benrahma, Bryan Mbeumo and Ollie Watkins were too much for the Hoops, who got a second half consolation from Nakhi Wells. Ivan Cavaleiro marked his first game since making a permanent move to Fulham by scoring the only goal of the game to earn three points at Hull. Nottingham Forest looked set for victory at Reading when Ben Watson volleyed home in the 96th-minute, but the Royals struck back immediately as Tobias Figueiredo turned the ball into his own net from Jordan Obita’s cross. Elsewhere in the chasing pack, Bristol City picked up a vital three points with a 2-0 at Wigan. Jamie Paterson scored one and set up Famara Diedhiou for the second to leave the Latics in the mire. Derby rescued a point at Middlesbrough, with Duane Holmes scoring a stoppage-time volley to secure a point after the Rams had twice trailedat the Riverside. A fine Lewis Wing strike gave the hosts an early lead before Jason Knight nabbed a fortunate equaliser in the second half. Paddy McNair restored Boro’s lead from the penalty after Patrick Roberts was felled by Matthew Clarke in the box but Holmes hit back late on. At the bottom end of the Championship, Barnsley got a vital three points with a 2-1 win over Huddersfield. Alex Mowatt got the first in a spell of early dominance for the hosts and Conor Chaplin doubled the Tykes’ advantage in the 65th minute. Lewis O’Brien instantly grabbed one back for the visitors but Barnsley held on. Luton were not able to take advantage of Harlee Dean’s late red card to grab a second equaliser against Birmingham. Lukas Jutkiewicz gave Blues an early lead but James Collins levelled from the spot just after the hour when Dean earned his first booking for a foul on Matty Pearson. Gary Gardner’s 69th minute strike proved decisive, although Birmingham had to hang on after Dean earned a second booking. Blackburn and Preston played out a 1-1 draw, with no goals in the fame between Stoke and Millwall. Brentford 3-1 QPR, Barnsley 2-1 Huddersfield, Blackburn 1-1 Preston, Charlton 2-2 West Brom, Hull 0-1 Fulham, Leeds 0-2 Sheff Wed, Luton 1-2 Birmingham, Middlesbrough 2-2 Derby, Reading 1-1 Nottm Forest, Stoke 0-0 Millwall, Wigan 0-2 Bristol City Sunderland fired their way back into the play-off places with a 4-0 win over high-flying Wycombe. Charlie Wyke, Denver Hume and Chris Maguire (twice) got the goals. That result meant Rotherham’s 3-1 win at Oxford saw the Millers go top. Two goals from Kyle Vassell and another just before the half from Richard Wood meant the U’s were buried at the break. Marcus Browne did grab a consolation for Oxford. Ipswich are back in striking distance of the top two after their 4-1 win over Accrington Stanley. Kayden Jackson, James Norwood, Alan Judge and Will Keane getting the goals for the Tractor Boys. Coventry’s Sam McCallum scored in the first minute against MK Dons but the Sky Blues had to settle for a draw after Carlton Morris grabbed an equaliser with 15 minutes left. Portsmouth also made up ground on the teams above them, with John Marquis scoring late on to earn a 2-1 win against AFC Wimbledon. Bristol Rovers 0-2 Doncaster, Burton 1-0 Fleetwood, Coventry 1-1 MK Dons, Ipswich 4-1 Accrington, Oxford 1-3 Rotherham, Peterborough 0-0 Gillingham, Portsmouth 2-1 Wimbledon, Rochdale 2-0 Bolton, Shrewsbury 1-1 Lincoln, Southend 0-0 Tranmere, Sunderland 4-0 Wycombe The game of the day in the third tier came at Field Mill, where Mansfield led Forest Green 2-0 after 45 minutes before Farrend Rawson pulled one back in the fifth minute of first-half added time. Rawson got the next goal too, allowing Carl Winchester to put Rovers ahead on the hour. Nicky Maynard must have thought he had salvaged a point for Town with a strike in added time but Aaron Collins had the final say with a last-gasp effort to take the points back to the New Lawn. Elsewhere, there was little change at the top of the table as Swindon, shorn of top scorer Eoin Doyle, who returned to Bradford this week, and Exeter both won. Cheltenham leapt above Crewe - who were beaten in Wiltshire – to go third. Plymouth’s long trip to Carlisle proved worthwhile as the Pilgrims won 3-0 to take advantage of Bradford’s 2-1 defeat Crawley. Carlisle 0-3 Plymouth, Cheltenham 3-1 Walsall, Crawley 2-1 Bradford, Exeter 2-0 Cambridge, Leyton Orient 1-1 Grimsby, Macclesfield 1-1 Oldham, Mansfield 3-4 Forest Green, Morecambe 1-1 Colchester, Salford 1-2 Northampton, Scunthorpe 1-2 Newport, Stevenage 0-1 Port Vale, Swindon 3-1 Crewe