Hillary Clinton has criticized Bernie Sanders, insisting “nobody likes” and “nobody wants to work with” him. Clinton, the 2016 Democratic presidential nominee, also refused to commit to endorsing Sanders should he win the primary this year. The Hollywood Reporter on Tuesday published the comments, which Clinton made in a four-part Hulu documentary, Hillary, which will premiere at the Sundance film festival in March. Clinton beat Sanders in a bitter 2016 primary, before losing the presidential election to Donald Trump. “He was in Congress for years [and] had one senator support him,” Clinton said, going on to call Sanders “a career politician” and to dismiss his claim to represent the everyday American worker as “just baloney”. “I feel so bad that people got sucked into it,” Clinton said. She also pointed to a “culture around” Sanders that she said perpetuated sexism, racism and misogyny within the senator’s campaign staff. “It’s his leadership team,” she said. “It’s his prominent supporters. It’s his online Bernie bros and their relentless attacks on lots of his competitors, particularly the women.” Over the weekend, in response to a Guardian editorial by the Fordham law professor Zephyr Teachout, groups of Sanders supporters successfully promoted the hashtag #BidenIsCorrupt. Sanders apologized, telling CBS News it is “absolutely not [his] view that Joe is corrupt in any way”. “I’m sorry that that op-ed appeared,” he said. Biden accepted the apology, tweeting: “These kinds of attacks have no place in this primary. Let’s all keep our focus on making Donald Trump a one-term president.” On Tuesday, Sanders issued a statement in response to Clinton’s comments. He did not address them head-on. “My focus today is on a monumental moment in American history: the impeachment trial of Donald Trump,” he said. “Together, we are going to go forward and defeat the most dangerous president in American history.” Sanders has attracted attacks as he has risen in the polls. With the Iowa caucuses two weeks away, he is racking up high-profile endorsements and leading in some polls of likely Iowa voters. Earlier in January, Elizabeth Warren, a competitor for the Democratic nomination, accused Sanders of telling her in a private meeting in 2018 a woman could not beat Trump at the polls. Sanders has strongly denied making the comment. Both held their ground when asked to clarify their remarks on the debate stage, leading to a confrontation after the debate had ended. CNN published audio, in which Warren accused Sanders of calling her “a liar on national TV”.