Great Britain have given themselves an excellent chance of reaching the quarter-finals of the inaugural ATP Cup when they beat Moldova 3-0 in their third and final round-robin tie on Tuesday – but they have now have to wait for results elsewhere to fall kindly for them. Tim Henman’s team need Belgium to beat Bulgaria 2-1 in the evening tie, which would put Great Britain top of Group C and confirm them for the elimination rounds, which start on Thursday. Otherwise, they will be left holding their breath along with contenders in three of the other five groups. Australia and Serbia have already qualified. If Bulgaria beat Belgium they go through, and Great Britain would then hope their statistics were strong enough to secure one of the two runner-up places in the 24-nation field. For that they have to see how teams perform on Wednesday. The Moldovans have not been on song since they were ushered into the tournament on day one by the Romanian national anthem. Still, they looked as if they enjoyed themselves. Unfortunately for them on Tuesday, the tight-knit British players had way more fun. Cameron Norrie – as he did on day one by beating the Bulgarian Dimitar Kuzmanov – got the show going with a solid 6-2, 6-2 win over Alexander Cozbinov, a fringe player whose only titles have come in doubles. Once Norrie found a rhythm, the get-it-back tennis of the world No 816 fell to pieces. He lacked the firepower with a heavy ball on a slow court to hurt his British opponent, who resides 674 places higher in the rankings. The difference in pedigree quickly became apparent as Norrie, stung by his poor performance in losing to 35-year-old Steve Darcis two days earlier, picked his spots under Henman’s watchful tutelage from the team zone box just yards away in one corner. “Take your time,” was the coach’s mantra, and Norrie stuck to the game plan. When he took a tumble early in the second set, Henman shouted to him, “Eight out of 10 for the roll.” Norrie reflected later it was worth, “more like eight-and-a-half” – and that would be a fair assessment of his improved showing. Dan Evans has a bigger locker of shots and uses them freely, as Moldova’s only top 100 player (by 815 places), Radu Albot, discovered in a match Britain had to win to stay in contention. Albot, who came to the rubber with a 1-2 career record against world No 42 Evans, is only four places adrift of him in the rankings but was not in the same postcode on Tuesday. Evans, who took a set off former world No 3 Grigor Dimitrov on Friday and beat world No 11 David Goffin on Sunday, kept his form and shape to win 6-2, 6-2. Jim Courier, returning to Australia as a TV commentator, observed of Evans: “He’s full of confidence and playing some of his best tennis here. Lost only one point on serve in the first set, a phenomenal effort.” He broke early in the second but had to save two break points for a 3-1 lead, and then stepped on the gas again, wrapping it up in an hour and 12 minutes. “Cam got us off to a great start, it made it a lot easier for me knowing we were still in it,” Evans said courtside. “A little bit more pressure than when I was playing Goffin, but I put it on the court today, for me and the team.” Evans has changed a lot about his career and his life, even experimenting with a vegan diet. It didn’t last, as he revealed courtside. “I did it for about four months, and then fell off, terribly,” he said. Later, Henman said of Evans’s performance: “The message is you control the controllables, and that is all about the next point. Certainly that’s what Dan has done exceptionally well in all three matches. Against Goffin, who is a world-class player, he did that brilliantly. My question to him today was, ‘Can you go out there and back it up?’ He’s done exactly that.” In the clinching doubles, Jamie Murray and Joe Salisbury, in just their third match together, sealed the tie by beating Albot and Cozbinov 6-2, 6-3. Elsewhere, the Alexander Zverev meltdown continued. It was tough to watch the world No 7 struggle in nearly ever facet of his game against his near rival, Denis Shapovalov, in Brisbane, as the Canadian (coming off his own tough loss to Australia’s Alex de Minaur) cruised to victory, 6-2, 6-2, to put Germany in danger of missing the quarter-finals. Zverev added seven double faults to the 24 he logged in his first two losses, and he will go to the Australian Open next week a troubled 22-year-old star.