Eddie Jones was in the stands to watch this frequently manic contest as he ponders his England Six Nations squad to be named in a fortnight’s time. Quite how much it informs his thinking will soon become clear but for the most part it was an afternoon that underlined just how difficult it is for players and coaches to achieve real consistency in a domestic season with five-and-a half months still to run. A week ago Exeter came close to rendering a full-strength Saracens scoreless; here they conceded 28 points, had two men sent to the sin-bin and were briefly in danger of wobbling. In the final analysis, though, they still scored six tries to four to kick off what they hope will be a momentous year with a thumping bonus-point victory that maintains their top spot on the Premiership ladder. On Saturday they are due in Glasgow for another must-win European pool game and will be tough to subdue at Scotstoun if they can reproduce their purple patch of form either side of half-time when they shattered Irish with four tries in the space of 10 minutes. The pick of the bunch was a spectacular 40-metre dash down the right touchline from the fit-again Ollie Devoto, potentially the kind of midfield wildcard who might just interest Jones in the absence of the recuperating Henry Slade, with his straight-running centre partner, Sam Hill, also collecting two tries. England’s head coach will also have noted the impressive energy of Sam Simmonds at No 8 and the continuing fine form of hooker Luke Cowan-Dickie, surely already certain of Six Nations selection. When the latter was replaced the Chiefs were 35-7 ahead and cruising; even without the suspended Harry Williams, the rested Jonny Hill and the injured Tomas Francis, Jack Yeandle and Sam Skinner, Chiefs still have no shortage of forward muscle to spare. In the circumstances 10th-placed Irish will not be entirely displeased with a try bonus point, given their injury problems and the poverty of their previous home display against Bath. That said, the first-half departure of their giant Australian lock Adam Coleman was another untimely blow and it would be pushing it to say the home crowd are currently acting as an all-important 16th man as the club seek to avoid an immediate return back to the Championship. At times in the first half it was almost eerily quiet, as if the Exiles’ supporters had already mentally decamped to next season’s new home in Brentford ahead of schedule. It was certainly a far cry from the highly-charged atmosphere at Sandy Park a week ago and, initially at least, the quality of the opposition facing the league leaders was also a notch or two down, with the Ireland internationals Paddy Jackson and Sean O’Brien still sidelined by injury and Waisake Naholo on paternity leave. The only pre-interval joy for the Exiles was a try for their new Samoa wing Belgium Tuatagaloa but they could have fielded an entire team of European all-stars and still struggled to contain the remorseless Exeter machine once the visitors had located their bearings. Four first-half tries, with skipper Dave Dennis and Cowan-Dickie also on the scoresheet, summed up a largely one-sided half and a seriously messy scoreline looked possible when Hill carved straight through a large hole past Stephen Myler to extend Exeter’s lead to 28 points. The odds on the next two tries being scored by men in green jerseys felt remote, only for the powerful Albert Tuisue to barge over from close range and Ollie Hassell-Collins to score a brilliant weaving individual try, leaving a string of would-be tacklers clutching the hyphen. Suddenly Irish were back within two scores, only for Stu Townsend, finally back from a serious knee injury, to finish off good approach work from the tireless Simmonds and Hill. It was just as well he did, with Olly Woodburn and Devoto despatched to the bin for deliberate knock-downs within two minutes of each other. Only when the 13-man Chiefs somehow won a penalty in front of Irish’s posts, allowing Gareth Steenson to add a relieving penalty to his perfect haul of six conversions was order finally restored.