Sergio Agüero is greedy for more goals after scoring a record-breaking 12th Premier League hat-trick that made him the most prolific overseas marksman in the competition’s history. The Argentinian’s three goals in the 6-1 win at Aston Villa on Sunday took him to two clear of Thierry Henry on 177 and eclipsed Alan Shearer’s record of 11 hat-tricks. Agüero is 31 and has previously stated he will leave City in summer 2021 and return to first club, Independiente, when his contract expires. Pep Guardiola is open to Agüero reconsidering though the manager is clear it will be the player’s decision. “After this, I want to keep going and keep scoring more goals, but the most important for me is that the team keeps winning and winning,” he said. “I don’t know what will happen from now until the end of the season, but it’s a moment to enjoy. “I’m very happy to be breaking records. It’s always nice to receive awards. I want to thank my teammates for helping me to score them in all these years. Also, I’m aware it’s not easy to score 12 hat-tricks in the Premier League, as it is such a difficult competition. I’m very proud and very happy for it. “Of course [I became a better player under Pep]. He helped me a lot. I’m very happy to play under his command, because he helps me all the time in the training sessions. We all know how good is Pep Guardiola tactically, with this style of play we create a lot of chances so I’m focused on scoring them.” As City have another 54 league matches before he is expected to depart it seems likely Agüero will score the 23 needed to become only the third player to register 200 goals in the Premier League. That would take him past Andy Cole, whose 187 strikes places him third in the chart. While Agüero has a chance of beating Wayne Rooney’s 207, the 31-year-old would have to extend his contract at City to have any chance of beating Shearer’s record return of 260. His teammate Riyad Mahrez said: “It’s unbelievable to have him in the team. He is a top striker, a world-class player. The numbers speak for themselves. We are very happy to have him in the squad. When he is on the pitch, we know he doesn’t need many chances to score a goal.”