The assassination of Qassem Suleimani may have dealt a devastating blow to hopes of keeping the Iran nuclear deal alive until the US elections next year, European diplomats fear. There is also concern that the Iraqi parliament will seek to expel the 5,000 US troops based in Iraq, with unpredictable consequences for the region, including the fight against Islamic State. These private concerns were voiced as European politicians publicly called for all sides to de-escalate the crisis, appeals that are unlikely to be heeded in Tehran, which is intent on some form of reprisal. In a statement that neither condemned nor condoned the killing of Suleimani, the UK foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, said: “We have always recognised the aggressive threat posed by the Iranian Quds force led by Qassem Suleimani. Following his death, we urge all parties to de-escalate. Further conflict is in none of our interests.” The clearest statement of support for Trump’s action came from the Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu. “Just as Israel has the right of self-defense, the United States has exactly the same right,” he said. “Qassem Soleimani is responsible for the death of American citizens and many other innocent people. He was planning more such attacks. President Trump deserves all the credit for acting swiftly, forcefully and decisively.” France’s European affairs minister, Amélie de Montchalin, also called for calm. Speaking on French radio, she said any military escalation was always dangerous. “At [the] European level, we have to work in collective multilateral frameworks and prevent the powers, one against the other, from playing their game in an unpredictable manner,” she said. “Our role is not to stand on one side or the other, it is to speak with everyone.” She said the French president, Emmanuel Macron, would be consulting widely on Friday. Berlin also called for prudence and de-escalation, but German politicians on the left condemned the attack ordered by Donald Trump, one of the least popular global leaders in Germany. In London, the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said: “The assassination of Qassem Suleimani is an extremely serious and dangerous escalation of conflict in the Middle East. The UK government should urge restraint on the part of Iran and the US, and stand up to the belligerent actions and rhetoric coming from the US.” Many European capitals will fear that likely Iranian reprisals would deal a near-fatal blow to their efforts to keep the nuclear deal, and wider European relations with Iran, on life support until the possible election of a new, more strategic US president willing to keep diplomatic lines open to Tehran. Qassem Suleimani, killed by a US drone strike in Baghdad, had become well known among Iranians and was sometimes discussed as a future president. Many considered Suleimani to have been the second most powerful person in Iran, behind supreme leader of Iran Ali Khamenei, but arguably ahead of President Hassan Rouhani. He was commander of the Quds Force, the elite, external wing of the Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, which the Trump administration designated as a terror organisation in April last year. He was born in Rabor, a city in eastern Iran, and forced to travel to a neighbouring city at age 13 and work to pay his father’s debts to the government of the Shah. By the time the monarch fell in 1979, Suleimani was committed to the clerical rule of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, and joined the Revolutionary Guards, the paramilitary force established to prevent a coup against the newly declared Islamic Republic. Within two years, he was sent to the front to fight in the war against the invading Iraqi army. He quickly distinguished himself, especially for daring reconnaissance missions behind Iraqi lines, and the war also gave him his first contact with foreign militias of the kind he would wield to devastating effect in the decades to come. By the the time the Iraq government fell in 2003, Suleimani was the head of the Quds force and blamed for sponsoring the Shia militias who killed thousands of civilian Iraqis and coalition troops. As fighting raged on Iraq’s streets, Suleimani fought a shadow war with the US for leverage over the new Iraqi leadership. Once described by American commander David Petraeus as ‘a truly evil figure’, Suleimani was instrumental in crushing street protests in Iran in 2009. In recent months outbreaks of popular dissent in Lebanon, Iraq and Iran were again putting pressure on the crescent of influence he had spent the past two decades building. Violent crackdowns on the protests in Baghdad were blamed on militias under his influence. Eighteen months before his death, Suleimani had issued Donald Trump a public warning, wagging his finger and dressed in olive fatigues. “You will start the war but we will end it.” Michael Safi In the short term, hardliners within Iran are likely to benefit politically from the US airstrike in parliamentary elections this spring. The killing also makes it certain Iran will take its fifth step away from the nuclear deal in the next few days. Tehran has been staging a phased withdrawal from the agreement in what it says is a response to US sanctions and the European failure to meet commitments to trade with Iran. Plans for the Iranian foreign minister, Javad Zarif, to travel to the US for a meeting of the UN security council in New York are also likely to be jettisoned. European leaders will be equally concerned that the drone strike might destabilise Iraq further and encourage the Iraqi parliament to go ahead with pre-existing plans to vote to eject all US forces. The prediction by the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, that the killing of Suleimani would lead to “dancing in the streets of Baghdad” is not universally shared. More predictably, the attacks were condemned by the Russian foreign ministry, a close ally of Iran in Syria, as “a reckless step that is likely to lead to an escalation of tensions in the region”. China criticised the use of violence in international relations, saying: “The People’s Republic calls on the countries involved – especially the United States – to remain calm and to avoid a further escalation of the situation.”