Rob Burrow has revealed he has been told he has “very early stage” motor neurone disease but is hopeful he can live for another decade. The former Leeds Rhinos and Great Britain half-back was diagnosed with the condition, for which there is no known cure, last month. Leeds host Bradford on Sunday in a sold-out pre-season game that will now be shown live on Sky Sports where the proceeds will be added to a fund that has raised more than £250,000. Burrow has been overwhelmed by the support he has received from people such as Wayne Rooney, before revealing he has been given a positive outlook following a visit to an MND research centre in Sheffield this week. “I saw a professor there on Tuesday, who was great,” Burrow said. “There’s trials going on over here and hopefully I can get on them. He did say yesterday that I’m in the very early stages of it, which is good. The average lifespan is three years, but that’s usually in older people. Rather than three years it’ll hopefully be nearer 10 and hopefully I’ll be on the drug trials too. He did confirm MND, but said some of the tests we did were borderline. He reckoned I could be alive for a few years yet.” Burrow said while news of his diagnosis came as a shock, he is now determined to show the same spirit in his fight against MND as the one which made him one of rugby league’s most respected players. “I’m not sure we’ll win the battle, but I want to be here for a long time. I want to watch my kids grow up, and my headspace is really positive.” Burrow hopes to meet Sam Burgess – whose father had MND before his death in 2007 – and Stephen Darby, the former Liverpool and Bradford footballer who was diagnosed with the condition in 2018, in the coming weeks. “But the amount of people who’ve been in touch, famous or not, is amazing,” he said. “I want people to know that I’ve read all their messages. For Wayne Rooney to get in touch was humbling. I messaged him back thanking him for his support, and he said he’d followed my career for years. That’s very overwhelming.” Burrow retired in 2017, but will return to the field on Sunday alongside former teammates Kevin Sinfield, Jamie Peacock, Danny McGuire and Kylie Leuluai in the final minutes of the game against Bradford. “My little son is one now, so he gets to walk out on the pitch with me like my girls have before,” he said. “All the guys like Kevin and Jamie have been there for me in the last few weeks. It’ll be an emotional day. I can’t thank people enough for what they’ve done for me. I hope they know I’d do it for them too.”