Government hopes of an economic boost from an easing of Brexit uncertainty have been boosted by a poll showing that the UK is increasingly attractive to global businesses searching for growth and investment opportunities. The poll of almost 1,600 chief executives, by the consultancy and accounting firm PwC, found that at a time of growing nervousness the UK’s reputation for stability made it the fourth most important target for companies looking for markets. PWC said the rebound in the UK’s attractiveness had been particularly marked among German, French and Italian chief executives and had returned to levels last seen in 2015, the year before the EU referendum. Overall, the UK was the joint fourth most important growth target for CEOs after the US, China and Germany. The interest in the UK came at a time when more than half the respondents to the survey – conducted last autumn – said they believed the rate of global growth would decline. Many cited trade conflicts as a reason for caution. Kevin Ellis, the chairman of PwC UK, said: “The findings provide timely perspective on the UK’s standing as a place to invest and do business. Viewed against the turbulent global backdrop, the UK is a beacon of relative stability. “You can’t replicate natural advantages like our timezone and location between the US, Asia and the rest of Europe, but more than that the UK is a fair and trusted place to do business.” PWC said CEOs globally had become gloomier after a year marked by slower growth and increasing protectionism. Only 27% said they were “very confident” in their own organisation’s growth over the next 12 months – the lowest level since 2009 and down from 35% last year. In the UK the figures were 26% and 37% respectively. The availability of key skills was the number one business concern for CEOs globally, surpassing even trade and climate change. Ellis said: “CEOs consistently highlight the lack of available skills, and the problem is only going to get worse unless businesses find ways to upskill their own workers. New technology is driving the urgency and is also part of the solution, allowing reskilling at scale through virtual and flexible training. By focusing on skills, businesses will be better placed to tackle other key challenges such as cyber threats and climate change.” The survey found that climate change had become a far greater concern for UK CEOs – rising 20 percentage points from 44% in 2018 to 64% in 2019. In 2016 only 8% of UK CEOs said they were extremely concerned about global heating, but this had now risen to 25%. More than half (51%) of UK CEOs thought finding solutions to the climate crisis presented a significant business opportunity.