Greggs has partnered up with Just Eat to offer home delivery across the UK after a successful trial last year. The bakery firm said it would begin making deliveries in Bristol and Birmingham this week and continue its expansion in London, Newcastle and Glasgow, where there were trials with a variety of delivery firms, including Deliveroo and Uber Eats as well as Just Eat. Deliveries are expected to kick off in Manchester, Leeds, Sheffield and Nottingham in the spring, with a plan to achieve national coverage by the end of the year. Greggs and Just Eat will choose future destinations for expansion depending on customer demand. Customers can vote for their local area to receive delivery and the rollout plans will be reviewed every few months based on the poll. However, deliveries are unlikely to be available in Saltash, Cornwall, in the near future after Greggs announced it was closing its only site in the county after a customers shunned its pasties for more local options. Greggs has confirmed the site at Saltash service station will close after a “thorough review” but said it will continue to look for sites in the south-west of England. The company plans to open 100 new stores across the UK in the year ahead after a sales boom partly prompted by the successful launch of its vegan sausage roll. Employees at Greggs will this month receive up to £300 each as a special bonus after the boost in sales and profits. Andrew Kenny, the managing director of Just Eat UK, said: “Greggs has proved extremely popular with our customers, especially during breakfast, demonstrating that as a nation we love the convenience of getting our favourite food delivered.” Greggs first became available for delivery on Just Eat last year, with the first order placed from Byker in Newcastle on 18 June. Top-selling delivery items include the sausage roll, vegan sausage roll, steak bake and a breakfast deal that includes a hot drink, water or orange juice. There is no minimum spend but those wanting to dine at home must pay a £1.50 delivery fee, slightly more than the £1.20 cost of a sausage roll or vegan sausage roll. Greggs’ chief executive, Roger Whiteside, said the service worked despite the delivery charges because customers typically spent three times as much as someone visiting one of the bakery firm’s shops.