Crisp pastry, plus a tiny bit of jam and sweet and nutty frangipane, topped with a swirl of whipped cream; all the elements of a delectable dessert in miniature mug form. Makes: 24 mini-tarts (or about 12 larger tarts)For the pastry225g plain flour155g salted butter, at room temperature 40g caster sugar 1 medium eggFor the frangipane 100g salted butter100g caster sugar1 medium egg3/4 tsp almond extract100g ground almonds For the whipped cream topping 130g double cream20g icing sugar1/2 tsp vanilla bean pastePlus Strawberry jam 24 frozen blueberriesIcing sugar and waterHard pretzels Cocoa powder Put the flour in a mixing bowl; chop and add the butter. Rub the butter into the flour until it resembles fine breadcrumbs. Don’t overwork. Stir in the sugar. Beat the egg in a separate small bowl, then add 2 tbsp to the mixing bowl and beat with a fork, gradually combining it with the rest of the mixture (use more egg if needed). Use your hands to form the pastry into a ball. Roll out pastry to 3mm/1⁄8in thick on a generously floured surface. Grease a 24-hole mini cake tin. Cut out circles of pastry and press into each hole to line. Prick the base of each twice with a fork. Place in the fridge to chill for at least 20 minutes. Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/400F/gas mark 6. Line the chilled pastry cups with mini paper cupcake liners (or baking paper), then fill with baking beads/lentils/rice. Blind bake for 10 minutes, remove the paper and beads and bake for 3-5 minutes. Remove from the oven and leave to cool. Meanwhile, make the frangipane. Put the butter and sugar in a stand mixer bowl, then cream together on high speed until light and fluffy. Add the egg and almond extract, and mix until just combined. Fold in the ground almonds. Spoon 1⁄3 tsp of the jam into each pastry cases, then spoon in the frangipane – about three-quarters of the way to the top. Press two frozen blueberries into each. Bake again for 15-20 minutes, or until the frangipane is golden and set. Leave to cool completely. Once cool, mix a little icing sugar and water to make a paste and use this to stick pieces of pretzel to the side, like handles. Whip the double cream with the icing sugar and vanilla bean paste until you have soft peaks. Transfer to a piping bag with an open star-shaped nozzle (or similar) and pipe a little swirl on top of each tart. Sift over cocoa powder.