Britain’s jobs market staged a stronger than expected recovery in the three months to November, according to official figures, easing pressure on Bank of England policymakers to cut interest rates at their meeting next week. The number of people in employment jumped by 208,000 over the period to a joint record high of 32.9 million, nearly double the 110,000 increase forecast by economists. A surge in the number of younger women joining the labour market accounted for much of the rise. In the previous year more than 85,000 women between 25 and 34 years old found employment, representing about a quarter of the annual increase. The figures from the Office for National Statistics appeared to show a slowdown in job creation over recent months had turned a corner. Signs of weakness in the jobs market prompted two of the nine-member committee of Bank of England interest-rate setters to vote for a cut to borrowing costs at the end of last year. Three others including the governor, Mark Carney, have said a further deterioration in the economy could persuade them to vote for a rate cut from 0.75% currently. The Bank is due to announce its decision on 30 January. Wages growth stagnated at 3.2%, unchanged from the previous period and down from 3.9% in May to July, which was the highest since the 2008 crisis. Pay including bonuses dropped to 3.4% from 3.5%, the ONS said. Unemployment remained at a 45-year low of 3.8%. A reliance on self-employment to bolster jobs growth also waned. However, an increase in the number of self-employed workers over the previous year of 145,000 took the total to a record 5 million people and 15.2% of the workforce. Vacancies also fell, down 11,000 to 805,000 and more than 49,000 fewer than a year ago. A statistician at the ONS, David Freeman, said: “While pay growth has eased since last summer, with inflation remaining subdued, earnings are continuing to increase in real terms.” Karen Ward, an economist at JP Morgan Asset Management, said the employment gains should be enough to deter the Bank of England from raising rates. She said the “sizeable fiscal stimulus in the pipeline meant the jobs market would come under increasing pressure from rising wages again”. However, the TUC general secretary said weaker wages growth in recent months meant the Treasury should focus on ways to improve living standards in the March budget. “The long-promised return to healthy pay growth still hasn’t happened and working families are being forced into the red to get by,” Frances O’Grady said. “No more excuses: the government needs a plan to boost workers’ pay and living standards.” The official data represented a snapshot of the economy before the election on 12 December. John Philpott, a labour market analyst and the director of the Jobs Economist, said the latest figures represented a surprising jobs surge that exceeded expectations. “However, the jobs surge has made no difference to wage pressure. This combination of employment and pay figures presents Bank of England interest-rate setters with a dilemma,” he said. “Hawks will see the jobs surge as a signal to be cautious about a possible rate cut, whereas doves will point to slower wage growth as evidence that the economy needs a cut. “All, however, may be concerned by the hidden message in these figures: a jobs surge in a stagnant economy means even weaker labour productivity, highlighting a threat to long-term sustainable growth.” Gerwyn Davies, a senior labour market analyst at the HR body the CIPD, said the rise in 25- to 34-year-old women was probably a result of changes to childcare subsidies and the demand for workers attracting people previously considered economically inactive. “The big winners to emerge have been women aged between 25 and 34. This suggests the government’s enhanced childcare offering may be working in tandem with the tightening labour market, which is nudging more employers to offer flexible working arrangements,” he said.