A Nottingham chippy has been crowned the best in the UK, beating nine other finalists in the industry’s biggest annual awards. Despite the logistical challenges of its inland location in the Midlands, The Cod’s Scallops in Wollaton is unusual in typically offering more than 20 species of fish daily, beyond the staple cod and haddock – all cooked fresh to order. Depending on the season and the catch, customers can expect to find underused fish such as gurnard, hake and mackerel on the menu, along with shellfish including crab, lobster and oysters. Fish is served battered or baked in garlic, lemon and herbs for a gluten-free, healthy alternative. Owned and run by husband-and-wife team John and Helen Molnar, The Cod’s Scallops fought off competition from an estimated 10,500 shops to be voted the UK’s best fish and chip shop. The top accolade in the awards – now in their 32nd year and run by the trade body overseeing the £10bn industry, Seafish – has led to previous champions doubling their turnover in the 12 months following the announcement. Entrants faced a rigorous judging process over eight months, including unannounced visits from judges and a final presentation to industry experts. The judges – who worked their way through numerous names with predictably fishy puns – said Cod’s Scallops “consistently excelled” in all areas under scrutiny. These include sustainability, menu innovation, provision for special dietary requirements, customer service and marketing activity. In addition to the top gong, the 15 separate awards this year showcase a range of categories, from traditional takeaways to mobile operators to healthy eating and responsible sourcing. John Molnar, who opened the business in 2011, said: “We’re absolutely thrilled to be crowned the UK’s best fish and chip shop. It’s an honour to take home such a prestigious title, especially being up against the country’s top establishments. Our experience in the National Fish and Chip awards has been an incredible journey and we’ve loved every minute of it. It’s a brilliant achievement for the team at The Cod’s Scallops and we are so proud of everyone for their efforts.” The national award is the latest honour for the chippy, which was a finalist in the 2018 awards and featured in the top 10 of Fry magazine’s best restaurants in 2017. The Cod’s Scallops has three outlets in the Nottingham area and one in Market Harborough. “We’d like to offer huge congratulations to The Cod’s Scallops for taking home the crown of fish and chip shop of the year,” said Marcus Coleman, the chief executive of Seafish. “As well as serving up outstanding fish and chips, they demonstrated real passion and enthusiasm for the industry every step of the way.” The best fish and chip restaurant award went to Trenchers restaurant in the newly renovated Spanish City seafront building in the north-east England seaside town of Whitley Bay. In 2011, Seafish introduced a “best newcomer” gong to acknowledge a growing network of new independents, who – often young fryers – are taking on the traditional chippies. This year it went to Lewis’s Fish and Grill in Maidstone, Kent.