You might take the view that the end of the decade is actually a year away, but at least it’s 10 years since I last did something like this. I’ve limited myself to Britain this time, because that brings the number of races to consider down to a manageable 100,000 or so. The main criterion is which races still live clearly in my memory, so it’s a very personal list with which you are almost certain to disagree, in which case please add your own list in the comments. Cue Card’s epic career fits snugly into the decade, as he made his first appearance in a Fontwell bumper on 25 January 2010 and his last in the Ryanair of 2018. Few horses offered such a guarantee of drama; there were two Festival wins but also two falls in the Gold Cup, including one when he really might have won it. But the race to remember him for was at Kempton, when he ran down a non-staying Vautour in the final strides. Silviniaco Conti, Don Cossack, Smad Place and Al Ferof provided a fine supporting cast. Tipsters love predictable horses and Sole Power was that for sure. Give him five furlongs on fast ground and you’d see something electric. I’ve picked his second win in the King’s Stand Stakes at Royal Ascot, in 2014, but there were a few days when he ran very similar races, being held up for an irresistible late surge that was thrilling to watch, whether you were for him or against. It feels important to include one of the many wins achieved by Richard Hughes, who looked better on a hold-up horse than any other jockey in my memory, folded up like one of those Jacob’s Ladder toys, suggesting there was any amount left in the tank. Some risk of recency bias here, since this King George (Ascot version) was just over five months ago, but it featured a record-setting champion prevailing after a prolonged tussle, with several Group One winners behind her. Maybe I should have this higher on the list? He didn’t win but Crystal Ocean came out best at the weights and this race will be the best memorial for a splendidly game horse who seems sure to be under-appreciated by history. One of the most astonishing performances ever seen on a racecourse anywhere, as the combustible Frankel was allowed to stride on from the start. He was soon clear and stayed there, the crowd applauding from more than a furlong out. You can use the placed horses to pull down the value of the form but we know that Frankel was one of the greats. This win, with its unorthodox tactics, was the reassurance that he wasn’t just going to be remembered as a flashy two-year-old. We spent so many years building up the Gold Cup as a clash between Kauto Star and Denman but the battle we were hoping for didn’t really come off. Kauto Star seemed off his game in 2008, then Denman had the heart problem that undermined his career. By the time of the 2011 race, they were both 11 and still hugely talented but surely past their best. And yet there they both were, duking for the lead over the third-last and into the straight, before youth swept past in the figure of Long Run, just six and so full of promise. That admirable pair Imperial Commander and Tidal Bay were also in the line-up. And the memory is sweetened by the knowledge that this wasn’t even Kauto Star’s last hurrah, as he had a Betfair Chase and a King George to win later that year. It was one of the most purely enjoyable races I can remember. Brian Hughes might improve his chance of a first jockeys’ title at Ayr, despite the presence of the reigning champ, Richard Johnson. Hughes replaces a 7lb claimer aboard Teescomponentstrig (1.00), who was a strong-finishing second on his handicap debut last month. The 9-4 is fair. Portrush Ted is the big name on the card but it’s not clear that he’s got in lightly on this handicap debut, even if he is at his best, which must be in doubt after such a long absence and with the yard in modest form. Eternally Yours (2.40) could be a better bet at 4-1, as she surely needed her reappearance run at Carlisle in November. At Lingfield, Deadly Accurate (3.30) could be worth a look at 7-1 on his first start for Ian Williams. He was rated 20lb higher at the end of 2018 and Joe Fanning is an encouraging booking for a potential front-runner. Lingfield 11.45 Embrace The Moment 12.15 Puerto Banus 12.45 Depose 1.15 Gold Brocade 1.50 Dreaming Away 2.25 Roundabout Magic  2.55 Skerryvore 3.30 Deadly Accurate Ayr 12.30 Marown 1.00 Teescomponentstrig (nap) 1.35 Endlessly 2.10 Un Guet Apens 2.40 Eternally Yours (nb) 3.10 Walkin In The Rain 3.45 Miraculous Getaway Chelmsford 4.00 Odds On Oli 4.30 Agent Of Fortune 5.00 Revolutionise 5.30 Street Parade 6.00 In Demand 6.30 Strawberry Jack 7.00 Yulong Gold Temple 7.30 Line Of Enquiry