Leinster are already guaranteed to finish top of the pool and their focus is on securing a home draw in the quarter-finals with two points separating the five pool leaders going into the fifth round. Last season’s beaten finalists have picked close to their strongest available side for Sunday’s home match against Lyon, a game that will kick off at the same time as Northampton’s tussle with Treviso. The Saints have made nine changes for a match they need to win to have a chance of going through as one of the best three runners-up with Harry Mallinder starting on the wing. Leinster v Lyon Sunday 1pm Northampton v Treviso Sunday 1pm Exeter need a point to secure first place in the pool and have Stuart Hogg at full-back to face his former club. The Chiefs have lost on their two previous Champions Cup visits to Glasgow, including two years ago when they missed out on a place in the quarter-finals on the final weekend, but at stake this time is a home draw in the last eight. The Scotland second row Jonny Gray, who is joining Exeter next season, is in the home side’s pack while the Chiefs are without their boilerhouse regulars this tournament, Dave Dennis and Jonny Hill. La Rochelle’s clash with Sale on Friday night is little more than a mathematical curiosity. La Rochelle v Sale Friday 7.45pm  Glasgow v Exeter Saturday 3.15pm The top two in the pool meet in Montferrand with Ulster going into the match one point ahead of Clermont Auvergne. Both should qualify for the quarter-finals and it is about securing home advantage. Clermont have scored 105 points in their two home matches in Europe this season and put 38 on Ulster two years ago. Morgan Parra leads the side on his 250th appearance and Nick Abendanon returns at full-back while Jordi Murphy and Marcell Coetzee return for Ulster who are defending a 100% record. Bath v Harlequins Friday 7.45pm  Clermont v Ulster Saturday 1pm It is the most tightly fought group with three teams having a chance of finishing top, although Racing 92 will secure that position if they defeat Munster on Sunday. Racing, whose home form in the Top 14 has been inconsistent, are close to full strength while Munster, who would face missing out on the quarter-finals if they lose and Saracens win at Ospreys, have recalled eight players who were rested for last week’s match against Ulster. Sarries have rested most of their England contingent for the trip to Swansea to face a side that has only won once this season. George Kruis starts in the second row while Alun Wyn Jones returns for the home side who have picked George North in the centre. Ospreys v Saracens Saturday 1pm Racing v Munster Sunday 3.15pm Toulouse need two points to top the pool but will be wary of Connacht in Galway, where they lost three seasons ago. The Top 14 champions have six of their eight players who were this week named in France’s squad for the Six Nations in their 23 while World Cup final try scorer Cheslin Kolbe is on the wing. Jack Carty and Bundee Aki return for third-placed Connacht, who are battling for the runner-up position with Gloucester. The Premiership side face weakened Montpellier at Kingsholm. Louis Rees-Zammit returns on the wing while there are six changes at forward from the side which beat Bath last weekend, including a new front row. Connacht v Toulouse Saturday 3.15pm Gloucester v Montpellier Saturday 5.30pm