When Winnie Madikizela-Mandela died in 2018, she was seen both as the “mother of the nation” and a flawed, fallen woman. Obituaries spoke of her extraordinary political activism in apartheid-era South Africa but also the controversy and division she inspired. Dear Winnie takes this complicated legacy as its starting point, presenting a pained musical homage that encompasses key moments in Madikizela-Mandela’s life, from her imprisonment and solitary confinement to charges of fraud, adultery and murder, as well as Desmond Tutu’s plea for her to “say sorry” at the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. The production’s director, Junior Mthombeni, a former activist for the African National Congress whose father knew Madikizela-Mandela, acknowledges that she may not have been blameless but strives to show the price she paid as a black female activist in a leadership role, and the abuse, humiliation and misogyny she came up against. Denise Jannah, as an elderly Madikizela-Mandela, is the first to emerge on stage and remains ever present, singing and narrating in a voice that has a remarkably mutable quality. She is accompanied by eight magnificent female performers from the African diaspora, including the rapper Gloria Boateng, of Ghanaian heritage; the South African dancer and choreographer Alesandra Seutin; and Belgian Congolese singer and actress Mahina Ngandu. They form a dancing, singing chorus that is profoundly tortured at times, and bring a physicality to their performances. Scenes are not merely spoken or sung, but acted out much more elementally so that they keen in pain, crumple down to hands and knees, and in one instance become the scuttling group of squeaking mice that Madikizela-Mandela is said to have befriended out of loneliness in solitary confinement. At other times, they ventriloquise words spoken against Madikizela-Mandela (“Winnie is a bitch”) to disturbing effect. In one scene, a performer assumes the role of a daughter and speaks of her abandonment by Madikizela-Mandela, whose activism rendered her an often absent mother. In another scene of savage satire, the performers circle around an almost naked white Afrikaner man who is jeered at as if in a circus; it is an inverted allusion to the tragic figure of Saartjie Baartman, nicknamed the “Hottentot Venus”, who was taken from Africa to Europe in the 18th century and paraded naked at “freak shows”. Fikry El Azzouzi’s musical consists of intense, non-linear sequences and this non-chronological narrative feels like a deliberate resistance to traditional storytelling. The result is fearlessly imaginative theatre that is large-scale in vision and experimental in form, filled with exciting risks, challenging esotericism and some thrilling effects. Performers morph from humans to animals in scenes infused with magical realism. A scene of mass mourning switches to revelry and then rage; the same props take on different meanings; colourful cloths that hang across one side of the stage set are blown to the ground to resemble piles of dead bodies at a street protest. In a subsequent scene they become celebratory rags at a party. Cesar Janssens’ music is variously sinister and upbeat with sounds of jazz, rap, rock and African song. Drums, guitars and ukuleles are cast alongside African instruments including the balafon, djembe and bougarabou. Beneath the story is the broader theme of the othering of black and African women. Madikizela-Mandela’s predicament, to some degree, becomes that of each of the contemporary black women on stage who demonstrate the ways in which they are diminished in everyday life. Dear Winnie is a radical and rousing musical that rehabilitates Madikizela-Mandela as the remarkable woman that she was: the fiercest of love letters to South Africa’s fierce mother. At KVS, Brussels, until 1 February.