Leeds climbed back to the top of the Championship after fighting back from 2-0 down at Elland Road to beat Millwall 3-2. Marcelo Bielsa’s side appeared to be heading for a fourth straight defeat in all competitions but turned it round after the break as Patrick Bamford’s double sandwiched Pablo Hernández’s effort. Shaun Hutchinson’s header had given Millwall a fourth-minute lead and Jed Wallace’s penalty made it 2-0 after Ezgjan Alioski’s challenge on Jon Dadi Bodvarsson. Leeds leapfrogged West Bromwich Albion into pole position after Slaven Bilic’s side slipped to a 2-1 defeat at Cardiff. Callum Paterson broke the deadlock for Cardiff at the start of the second half before Charlie Austin fired West Brom level from the penalty spot after Jazz Richards had fouled Filip Krovinovic. But Lee Tomlin’s free-kick put Cardiff back in front and extended West Brom’s winless league run to seven matches. Nottingham Forest closed the gap on West Brom to two points as Joe Lolley’s solitary first-half goal was enough to clinch them a 1-0 win at Brentford, who remain fifth. Forest extended their unbeaten league run to seven matches, while Bristol City made it three straight wins thanks to Jamie Paterson’s second-half goal in a 1-0 win at Reading. Wayne Rooney scored his first goal for Derby, but his side slipped to a 3-2 defeat at bottom club Luton. Rooney fired Derby ahead in the 63rd minute before Luton hit back through Pelly-Ruddock Mpanzu and Donervon Daniels. Chris Martin headed Derby level, but a minute later Jayden Bogle’s own goal sealed Luton’s first win since 7 December. Derby defender Max Lowe was shown a straight red card in the closing stages for foul and abusive language. Jamal Lowe’s last-minute header clinched Wigan a 2-1 home win against Sheffield Wednesday. Blackburn made it back-to-back wins to keep up the pressure on the play-off chasers by defeating QPR 2-1. Jordan Hugill cancelled out Adam Armstrong’s opener for Blackburn before Darragh Lenihan’s header restored the home side’s lead before half-time. Steve Mounié’s stoppage-time header secured Huddersfield a 2-1 win at Hull. Richard Stearman’s own goal cancelled out Karlan Grant’s first-half opener for Huddersfield in a game that was delayed for 10 minutes in the second period due to an injury to visiting goalkeeper Kamil Grabara. Grabara was carried off on a stretcher in the 82nd minute after colliding with team-mate Christopher Schindler. Rotherham return to top Rotherham returned to the summit of League One with a 1-0 win over Ipswich in the top-of-the-table clash, as Wycombe climbed to second. Richard Wood’s first-half header was enough for Paul Warne’s side to re-take pole position in the table. Wycombe managed to hold on for a 2-1 win over Blackpool after two early goals in a game delayed to 8.50pm after a spectator was taken ill. Nick Freeman and Alex Samuel struck in the first 10 minutes and Wanderers managed to hold on for all three points despite Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall’s 86th-minute goal on his Blackpool debut. Peterborough edged closer to securing a place in the play-offs following a 2-0 win at struggling Accrington, who have yet to win in 2020. Bristol City loanee Sammie Szmodics scored early on, with Joe Ward tapping home in the second half as the visitors secured their third consecutive victory. Portsmouth moved back into the play-off places after making it seven straight wins in all competitions with a 2-0 success at Lincoln. Ronan Curtis’s first-half free-kick and a late spot-kick from John Marquis ensured the visitors moved up the table with all three points. Colchester beat leaders Swindon In League Two, Colchester striker Theo Robinson scored two late goals for a 3-1 home win against leaders Swindon. The visitors went ahead early in the second half through Diallang Jaiyesimi, but Luke Norris headed Colchester level and Robinson struck twice in the final six minutes. Richie Wellens’s side stay top as Exeter let slip a half-time lead to lose by the same score at Port Vale. Nicky Ajose headed Exeter in front, but the hosts hit back after the break through Richie Bennett’s penalty, Leon Legge and Bennett’s header. Crewe climbed into the third automatic promotion place after beating Leyton Orient 2-0 at Gresty Road, thanks to goals from Charlie Kirk and Daniel Powell. Morecambe put more daylight between themselves and bottom club Stevenage thanks to a 2-0 win at Walsall after second-half goals from Steven Old and Carlos Mendes Gomes. Wesley McDonald had earlier missed a penalty. Grimsby’s 3-1 win over Stevenage means they are now four points from safety.