Most promoted sides, paired away with last season’s runners-up in their opening match in the top flight, would not be particularly upset by a 1-0 defeat. But that was not how Casey Stoney saw Manchester United’s loss at Manchester City in September: “It is a strange feeling because you’re gutted you have just lost 1-0 to one of the best teams in the country but it’s because you competed so well and knew you could get more out of the game.” Her side have certainly not been treading water since in their first season in the Women’s Super League. United sit fourth in the table, level on points with Everton, one ahead of Reading, two clear of Tottenham. They are leading the best of the rest. On Sunday they launch themselves into the second half of the campaign against Bristol City. But with an eight-point gap between themselves and third-placed Chelsea there is still a jump to be made before they are competing at the top. That their aim is a top-half finish shows just how impressive United’s maiden top-flight season has been so far. “If we were looking at our position in the table and comparing it with where we’d have wanted to be we are maybe slightly exceeding what people would have expected for our first year,” reflects United’s head coach. There have been five wins and four defeats, but the detail paints a prettier picture. Three of those losses have been to title-chasing Manchester City, Arsenal and Chelsea, tight 1-0 games all, with the newcomers acquitting themselves well. Their only other league defeat, a 3-2 loss to West Ham, having led twice, hurt. “It was the performance more than anything; it was really disappointing from us,” says Stoney. “Even the game at the Etihad, we walked away from that really, really disappointed. We had lost 1-0 to a fantastic goal and created good chances ourselves. Now it’s about finding consistency in performances and finding a way to win when maybe you’re not at your best. But at the same time you always learn so much more when you lose.” The West Ham defeat stung more because it coloured their strong defensive record. After their opening two defeats in September, United went on a run of five clean sheets, but then conceded in all but one of their next six games in all competitions. Stoney, a former England defender, says her ”strength is in the defensive side of the game” and she is not worried about their form at the back waning a little. “I remind the team constantly, if you can keep a clean sheet you’ve always got a chance of winning the game. In the league none of those have come from open play, so we’re doing a lot of work on our defensive responsibilities at set pieces, making sure that we win first contact, making sure that we clear our lines when we need to.” Her strength in putting together a strong back line meant a penchant for attacking football surprised her when she went into management with United. “I’d like to think that when people come and watch us we play attacking football. We’ve got players in our dressing room that can hurt the opposition. But if your attackers are going to attack they need to know that the back door is shut. People will take more risks if they know that is happening behind them.” A highlight has been the way players have responded to the leap up from the Championship. “Kirsty Hanson wins WSL player of the month [and] she’s never played WSL football before,” says Stoney. “Around 40% of our squad has never played WSL football before.” Lauren James, who has eight goals across all competitions, is beginning to mature into the player glimpses of her talent suggested she could be. There was an unusual barrier to her progress, says Stoney. “It might sound silly but I think turning 18 helped because for the whole year and a half before that she was in a separate changing room to everyone else, which is difficult. The minute she crossed over she became more a part of the team, has more cohesion now with the girls and she’s suddenly just grown up.” The 2-0 win at home to Manchester City in the Continental Cup also provided a crucial moment in United’s upward trajectory. “That was a very strong Man City team. It was an accomplished performance and it gave the players the belief that they can beat the top teams, that they can play at the top table and that they belong there.” But perhaps the most rewarding aspect of the season so far has been the liberation of Leah Galton. “When I first met Leah to talk to her about coming to the club she had completely fallen out of love with the game,” Stoney says. “My main job was to just get a smile back on her face and get her playing and enjoying it. I actually think Leah is one of our proudest achievements, because she’s playing. For me she is the best left-winger in the country because she’s naturally left-footed, can go inside and outside, she’s powerful, she’s quick, and she’s enjoying her football. I don’t think there’s many full-backs in the country that can cope with her.”