Australia remain on track to finish off their perfect summer, going to stumps on day three of the third Test 40-0 and leading New Zealand by 243 runs. That advantage owes much to Nathan Lyon who claimed his 17th five-wicket haul to help dismiss New Zealand for 251 in their first innings, in reply to Australia’s 454. Lyon finished with 5-68, by far his best figures on his home wicket, one that threatens to offer even more spin in the final innings. He dismissed Tom Blundell before the New Zealand opener could add to his overnight score of 34, with a shorter ball that spun between his legs and ricocheted onto the stumps via his pad. The out-of-sorts Jeet Raval was then trapped lbw for 31, wasting a review on the way as his poor summer continued. The 32-year-old Lyon later returned to mop up the tail, bowling Will Somerville and Neil Wagner for ducks in quick succession. His last wicket came in bizarre fashion, with Tim Paine using only one glove to stump Matt Henry after the tailender blocked a ball but still dragged a foot out of his crease. Lyon could have had six but he twice dropped debutant Glenn Phillips off his own bowling. Pat Cummins eventually bowled the rookie with an in-swinger on 52, after Phillips had also survived another life when he was caught on the boundary off a James Pattinson no-ball. Cummins (3-44) also claimed the scalps of Ross Taylor and stand-in captain Tom Latham, with the latter caught at mid-on for 49. Mitchell Starc took one wicket, removing BJ Watling for nine when he played the ball onto his stumps. But Colin de Grandhomme’s run out dismissal would have frustrated the Black Caps the most. The allrounder perished trying to take on the arm of Matthew Wade as he attempted to return for a second run on 20, falling centimetres short. It summed up New Zealand’s afternoon, as a 63-run opening stand couldn’t stop them being bowled out for less than 260 for the fifth-consecutive time on the tour. It meant Australia took at least a 200-run first-innings lead for the fifth-straight time, since the opening win in Brisbane against Pakistan. Should victory in Sydney arrive, it will mark just the 10th time they have whitewashed a home Test summer, with the three-match trans-Tasman series already wrapped up.