What were you hoping for?At worst, a funny story. At best, maybe I’d find love. First impressions?I’ll be honest, my heart didn’t skip a beat – he wasn’t my typical type, but I’m open-minded. What did you talk about?We’d both spent some time in New York and live not too far from one another now, so local haunts. Any awkward moments?I nearly choked on a mussel at one point but I think – hope – I managed to conceal that all right. Good table manners?No complaints. Best thing about Josh?He seemed driven and comfortable within himself. Plus he was able to sustain a conversation with a stranger for a couple of hours. Would you introduce him to your friends?I’m having a hard time envisioning Josh caring much for my friends. Describe Josh in three wordsPotential secret Tory, not for me, or a little dry. What do you think he made of you?I have a feeling he thought I was a hipster. Did you go on somewhere?He headed off in a cab and I sneaked in a pint with a colleague up the road to debrief. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?It would have been nice to meet someone I wanted to flirt with. Marks out of 10?5. Would you meet again?I’d be very surprised if our paths crossed again. What were you hoping for?Easy conversation, good food, maybe the prospect of a second date. First impressions?Jessica is not someone I ever would have seen myself striking up a conversation with organically. What did you talk about?It was very hairdresser-level chat. Any awkward moments?When she excused herself after six minutes, presumably to text her friends. Good table manners?No complaints. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com Best thing about Jess?We agreed about which restaurants are good in south London and had both lived in New York. Would you introduce her to your friends?I don’t think she’d like them very much. Describe Jess in three wordsPolite, quirky, articulate. What do you think she made of you?I wouldn’t be surprised if she thought I was basic and lame. She probably thought of me the way I think about people who live in Clapham. Did you go on somewhere?I went home. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Just one? That’s not a fair question. To paraphrase Winston Churchill, never in the course of human events has so much conversation had so little substance. Marks out of 10?5.5. Would you meet again?We live pretty near each other so maybe I’ll bump into her, but not intentionally. • Jess and Josh ate at Bistro Union, London SW4. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone likeminded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com