Chris Webster (Letters, 4 January) is correct to question Dominic Cummings’ desire for a new breed of civil servant. In particular, Mr Cummings doesn’t seem to have noticed that this government already employs individuals precisely matching his job specification. They are called “spads” (special advisers) – straight out of university, brimming with “out of the box” thinking, and easy to hire and fire. As a civil servant, my ever-dwindling colleagues and I spent much of our time and energy trying to contain these individuals’ more unworkable, impractical or illegal ideas. This was somewhere between trying to control a group of hyperactive toddlers and herding cats. I was once pressed by advisers to clear a public information campaign strapline popular with the government of the time, despite repeatedly explaining it was not appropriate. Eventually, the minister waded in, questioning why I was undermining his people. Exhausted by their refusal to listen to reason, I was forced to state bluntly that the reason for vetoing their preferred script was because it was a lie. No doubt Mr Cummings would have had me frogmarched out of the department at gunpoint. Luckily, all I had to contend with was a shouty, sweary minister, a salvaged public communications campaign and a clear conscience. This is what all civil servants are paid to do – speak truth to power, however difficult and inconvenient that truth might be. We dismiss their firefighting contribution at our cost.Sue Thompson(Ex-civil servant), Teddington, London • Dominic Cummings’ calls for “weirdos and misfits with odd skills” to apply for new jobs in No 10 (Report, 3 January). He seeks to attract experts in maths, economics, data science, machine learning and software development who are interested in “authoring tools for arguing from evidence”. Employing oddballs is not a new idea – Tom Peters suggested organisations employ “curious people … off-the-wall types … weirdos” in 1994. Neither is it a good idea. It is one of many ill-thought-out ideas put forward by Peters, an author criticised for his methodology and better at predicting organisational failure than success (see Phil Rozenzweig, The Halo Effect, 2004). If the government does want to employ people who can carry out evidence-based research, they should be recruiting individuals with relevant expertise. Cummings’ target population is too narrow and ignores the most appropriate group, experts from across the behavioural and social sciences, particularly those with a track record of carrying out evidence-based research and a high rate of implementation success. Cummings should employ an evidence-based approach to recruitment. Regrettably, he seems to have no grasp of the relevant evidence. Recruiting in your own image is no substitute.Tony ManningSelkirk, Scottish Borders • Three cheers for Hannah Fry and her polite reminder that data isn’t all about numbers (Wanted: maths geniuses with a bit of empathy, Journal, 6 January). As William Bruce Cameron is reputed to have said: “Not everything that counts can be counted, and not everything that can be counted counts.” If Messrs Johnson and Cummings are going to get things done that will really count in the lives of many, they will need more than a little empathy and understanding. Not all of that will come from reading numbers. Among those whom Cummings might seek to recruit are psychologists who can read both numbers and feelings.Dr Simon GibbsReader in educational psychology, Newcastle University • Cummings’ fascination with unleashing mathematics graduates in Whitehall reminds me of the fascination of bank bosses starting in the 1980s with unleashing quants kids on the financial sector. The bosses knew no maths, and the kids had no idea of the subtleties of human interaction and “animal spirits” impacting on investment decisions. We all paid the price in 2008, and still continue to pay, in bank rescue and austerity.SP ChakravartyEmeritus professor of economics, Bangor Business School • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition