Joe Burrow threw five touchdown passes, ran for another score and capped one of the greatest seasons in college football history by leading No 1 LSU to a 42-25 victory against No 3 Clemson on Monday night to win the national championship. The small-town Ohio kid turned Louisiana legend delivered the Tigers (15-0) their first national title since 2007 and fourth overall, breaking a few more records along the way in what was already a historic season. The five TD passes and 463 yards passing are the most for a BCS or College Football Playoff title game as are his six total touchdowns. He became the first major college quarterback to throw 60 touchdown passes in a season as LSU snapped defending national champion Clemson’s 29-game winning streak. For the first time in his college career, Clemson star quarterback Trevor Lawrence was on the losing team. The Tigers (14-1) had won his first 25 starts. But on this night, Lawrence (18 for 37 for 234 yards) was no match for Burrow – the Ohio State transferred who threw all of 16 TD passes last season with LSU. His ascent has been dizzying and unprecedented. Running a version of the New Orleans Saints’ offense that was brought to LSU by 30-year-old assistant coach Joe Brady, Burrow and an array of talented receivers transformed these Tigers into one of the most prolific offenses college football has ever seen. It was coach Ed Orgeron’s vision for LSU when he was promoted from interim coach in 2016. There was plenty of skepticism when LSU tabbed the Cajun who had failed in his first crack as a head coach with Mississippi. Orgeron has proven to be the perfect fit for LSU. Just like Burrow. After tossing his fifth touchdown pass of the night, a perfectly placed jumped ball to Terrace Marshall Jr from 24 yards out to make it 42-25 with 12:08 left in the fourth, Burrow signaled TD and strolled to the sideline. The Superdome is LSU’s dome away from home, about 80 miles from the Tigers’ Baton Rouge campus, and it was rocking. The LSU band broke out its unofficial anthem, Neck, and as the Tigers bounced and waved towels on the sideline, Burrow just sat on the bench, bobbing his head and waving one arm. Joe Cool. Just doing his thing. Next stop: The NFL draft, where he will likely be the first pick in April. The final score was lopsided, but it was far from easy for LSU and Burrow. Clemson pushed LSU into the deepest hole it has had to climb out of this season in the first half. Two weeks after Lawrence ran for a career-best 107 yards against Ohio State, he opened the scoring with a one-yard jaunt around right end in the first quarter. After BT Potter kicked a career-long 52-yard field goal for Clemson to make it 10-7, the Tigers sprung receiver Tee Higgins on a reverse and he raced 36 yards through tacklers for a score to make it 17-7. It took LSU 5:19 to wipe that out and take the lead, with Burrow and his favorite receiver, Ja’Marr Chase doing most of the damage. The Heisman winner hit the Biletnikoff Award winner with a long ball to set up a quarterback draw from 3 yards out to make it 17-14. Burrow and Chase hooked up for a 14-yard touchdown with 5:19 left in the second quarter and LSU fans erupted as their Tigers took the lead for the first time, 21-17. They never looked back. Chase finished with nine catches for 221 yards. The SEC Tigers weren’t done. Burrow led LSU on a 95-yard drive, taking a hard shot on a long run before finding Thaddeus Moss, son of former NFL star receiver Randy Moss, standing alone in the end zone to make it 28-17 with 10 seconds left in the half. After Clemson’s defense flummoxed LSU for most of the first quarter, with tight coverage and hard-to-decipher blitzes, Burrow, Chase and co put up 269 yards in the second quarter.