These aren’t like any Trotters you’ve seen on TV before. Gone are the market stalls – the focus here is 26-year-old Judd, who runs Trotters Jewellers in Bethnal Green in London, a neighbourhood stalwart that has been owned by his family for more than 30 years. Now, though, he and his two friends Kallum and Alex have plans to take the family business international, so they take a jaunt to New York to meet celeb jeweller Richie Rich, and sell a £9,000 watch to a bricklayer. Lovely jubbly. Ammar Kalia It’s January – and that means diet season is well and truly under way. Drs Xand van Tulleken and Helen Lawal are challenging members of the public, such as cafe cook Stacie Stewart and newlyweds Steven and Eamonn, to lose weight responsibly, as well as testing out whether we can burn calories while sitting or knitting. AK The blue-light documentary tours Northampton’s “night-time economy”, ie the pubs and takeaways that are the high street’s only remaining money-spinners but which generate a bleak carnival of violence and stupidity. Look out for one officer’s surprising deployment of a muslin bag. Jack Seale A boy has been murdered, and the evidence against local little-league coach Terry Maitland (Jason Bateman) is mounting – but then so is the exculpatory evidence. Even when Detective Anderson and his investigation are waylaid by tragedy, the mystery remains: how can one man be in two places at once? Ellen E Jones Kevin Costner dons a Stetson and trots on horseback in this melodramatic western about the owner of the largest ranch in the US. Patriarch John Dutton (Costner) has to see off the threats of land developers and native American tribes in this action-packed opener. Not without its touch of Maga pride. AK Words are weapons in insult comedy – but should you go sledgehammer or stiletto? That’s the dilemma facing standups Laura Lexx and Tom Livingstone as the sanctioned slanging match returns for a fourth season, with regular refs Jimmy Carr and Katherine Ryan joined by guest judge Noel Fielding. Graeme Virtue Silver Linings Playbook (David O Russell, 2012) 1.15am, Film4The laughs are painfully revealing in David O Russell’s cranky romcom. Bradley Cooper is Patrick Solitano, returning to live with his parents after a spell in a mental institution, and meeting up with another awkward soul in young widow Tiffany (Jennifer Lawrence). Paul Howlett Big Bash Cricket: Sydney Sixers v Melbourne Stars 7.30am, BT Sport 1. The latest action from Sydney Cricket Ground. Bowls: World Championships 1pm, BBC Two. Pairs finals and first-round singles matches. Championship Football: West Bromwich Albion v Stoke City 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Live from the Hawthorns.