The literature of Los Angeles is inextricable from the tradition of noir – from Raymond Chandler to Walter Mosley and Michael Connelly, the writers of this city have gravitated towards grit and darkness, turmoil and crime. I was born and raised in LA, and I am fiercely loyal to my home town. I love its depth and its sprawl, the neighbourhoods and communities that give it its diverse, uncontainable character. But it’s not all sunshine and harmony – LA is home to almost four million people, and inevitably people clash. I was six years old during the 1992 Los Angeles Uprising, when the city exploded after four white police officers were acquitted of wrongdoing in the beating of black motorist Rodney King. This was a defining moment in LA history, one that revealed the entrenched divides in our society by filling them with gas and setting them on fire. One of these divides was between the black and Korean communities. As a child of Korean immigrants with a strong interest in social justice, I was interested in exploring these particular racial tensions and the way they connect with the concerns of the US today. This was one of the major goals of my new book, Your House Will Pay, a social crime novel about Los Angeles with deep roots in the 90s. If you’re interested in learning about the troubles of contemporary Los Angeles, here are a few books to get you started. Some of them helped me craft my own novel, and all of them are excellent reads. 1. City of Quartz: Excavating the Future in Los Angeles by Mike Davis (1990)This social history is as biting and relevant today as it was when it was first published almost three decades ago, a year before the beating of Rodney King. In a series of seminal critical essays, Davis lays bare the workings of money and power in Los Angeles – seen in the hostility of the built environment, development and urban decay. He describes the city as a place defined by both sunshine and noir, depending on who’s telling, and who’s asking. 2. Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992 by Anna Deavere Smith (1994)Not to be confused with the vampire romance, this one-woman play features a multitude of voices, a series of monologues taken from interviews with real people associated with the uprising. I haven’t seen the play performed, but I found the reading experience pretty eye-opening. It’s grounded in the experiences and personalities of a broad cast, their words offering a window into this moment of history. 3. The White Boy Shuffle by Paul Beatty (1996)Almost 20 years before his Booker Prize-winning novel The Sellout, Beatty wrote this mordant masterpiece. It’s a coming-of-age satire about a boy who moves from Santa Monica – where he was “the only cool black guy at Mestizo Mulatto Mongrel Elementary, Santa Monica’s all-white multicultural school” – to the mostly black fictional neighbourhood of Hillside and eventually becomes an accidental demagogue who causes a national wave of poetic suicides. It’s zany and brilliant, and also includes an episode of theft during the LA riots, orchestrated by a boy named Psycho Loco. 4. Official Negligence: How Rodney King and the Riots Changed Los Angeles and the LAPD by Lou Cannon (1998)This book is a commitment – more than 600 pages of dense, detailed reporting, weighing in at about three pounds in paperback. It’s also one of the most illuminating books I’ve ever read, a comprehensive account of the King case and its aftermath, as well as the fraught history of the LAPD. I’ve lived in Los Angeles most of my life, and I felt like I understood my city’s history twice as well after finishing reading it. 5. Southland by Nina Revoyr (2003)When I started working on Your House Will Pay, I hoped to write something that was half as smart and affecting as Southland. Revoyr’s novel takes place in the Crenshaw district of Los Angeles, following two families – one black, one Japanese – over several decades. It’s a character-driven saga with the engine of a crime novel, unravelling a horrific multiple murder that took place in the chaotic days of the Watts Rebellion in 1965. 6. The Madonnas of Echo Park by Brando Skyhorse (2010)A lyrical collection of linked short stories about the lives of Mexican-American residents of the Echo Park neighbourhood. The stories are connected by a drive-by shooting, a senseless crime that reverberates through the community. Skyhorse is a fantastic writer who brings Echo Park to life with vivid characterisations and remarkable prose. 7. The Contested Murder of Latasha Harlins: Justice, Gender, and the Origins of the LA Riots by Brenda Stevenson (2013)Your House Will Pay is based on the murder of Latasha Harlins, a 15-year-old black girl who was shot by a Korean shopkeeper less than two weeks after the Rodney King beating. The killer was convicted of voluntary manslaughter but received no jail sentence. In The Contested Murder of Latasha Harlins, UCLA professor Brenda Stevenson details this tragic case and its role in the riots. An indispensable book. 8. Land of Shadows by Rachel Howzell Hall (2014)The first book in the Lou Norton series, about a black female LAPD homicide detective who grew up in Baldwin Village, a neighbourhood of South Los Angeles also known as “the Jungle”, where her sister disappeared 25 years earlier. When a black teenage girl is found dead in an unfinished condominium, past and present collide in a riveting police procedural that brings together race, class, gender, and gentrification. 9. All Involved by Ryan Gattis (2015)Told by 17 different first-person narrators, All Involved races through the six days of theriots, setting fires and settling scores along the way. When the city erupts, distracting the LAPD, the gangsters of Lynwood seize on this window of lawlessness, setting off a propulsive, far-reaching chain of violence and revenge. A thrilling panorama of life and death in Los Angeles. 10. Ghettoside: A True Story of Murder in America by Jill Leovy (2015)This is a sensitive, devastating true crime book by former Los Angeles Times reporter. It tells the story of a young black man shot and killed in South Los Angeles, and examines the murder’s local and national context. This is a book about the way crime and justice work in the US. It’s not very flattering, but it is essential reading. • Your House Will Pay by Steph Cha is published by Faber & Faber. To order a copy, go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on orders over £15. 