Q: Can you recommend books to help us through tough times – books about how to persevere under difficult circumstances?Angela Robertson, 50, Edinburgh A: Novelist and women’s rights activist Elif Shafak, whose latest book, 10 Minutes 38 Seconds in This Strange World, was shortlisted for the Booker prize, writes:These are tough times, infused with anger, anxiety and ambiguity. Where to turn, whom to trust? How to find the energy, let alone the will, to become engaged, active citizens of the world when we are constantly being pushed into cultural tribes and mental ghettos? Now we need books more than ever, and we must keep our reading lists diverse, including fiction and nonfiction. Robert Macfarlane’s Underland is a wonderful book, full of wisdom and hope. Beautifully written, it is a journey into the fascinating, but mostly unknown world underneath our feet. A lyrical exploration of time, nature, memory, literature and landscape, it took Macfarlane 10 years to complete, but it will take you longer to forget it. George Monbiot’s Heat: How We Can Stop the Planet Burning is a solidly researched, well-presented answer to climate deniers everywhere. For anyone who cares about the survival of our biosphere, anyone trying to find the right balance between preserving lifestyle and cutting carbon emissions, it is the perfect guidance. For a brilliant perspective on the nature of human beings, what better than Isaiah Berlin’s The Hedgehog and the Fox? Written as an essay on Tolstoy’s view of history, it is so much more than that and strangely relevant to our times. Berlin claimed it was just an intellectual game, but recall the line by the Greek poet Archilochus: “The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows one big thing.” Berlin’s writing helps us to find out which approach is better for our conflicted, polarised world. Ta-Nehisi Coates’s first novel, The Water Dancer, is a remarkable story about inequality, slavery, memory, freedom and dignity. I found it important and universally relevant. Read Etgar Keret’s short stories in Fly Already, not only for their brilliant language and imagination, but the depth of Keret’s craft. Jeanette Winterson’s Courage Calls to Courage Everywhere is a slim volume with a big heart. It will provide us with the energy we need as we walk the long road ahead to attain true gender equality. Submit your question for book clinic below or email bookclinic@observer.co.uk