The woodburner just over his right shoulder is warming the room nicely but, even these days, nothing burns more intensely than Sam Warburton’s competitive instincts. “I want to be king of the jungle,” he says at one point, taking aim at the “defeatist attitude” he feels still exists in too many Welsh minds before the Six Nations. “I want pressure. I want to be top of the food chain, I want people to be chasing our tails. I want us to be the standard-bearers, the ones people are aspiring to be.” It is barely 10am, deep in the sodden Devon countryside just outside Honiton, but three things are already abundantly clear. The first is that Warburton is buzzing with excitement about his new role as Wales’ breakdown coach, the first specialist appointment of its kind. The second is that he has lost none of the clear-eyed intelligence that made him such an outstanding Lions captain. And the third? Anyone who thinks great players never make great coaches may shortly have to reconsider. In fact, here is a prediction. If the 31-year-old can dovetail it with his young family, who remain his number one priority, Warburton could break the mould of top-level coaching. Not only does he ooze leadership quality – two Lions tours as captain says it all – but his knowledge, empathy and passion make the average assistant coach sound like a speak-your-weight machine. “I hear people in Wales saying: ‘We don’t like being favourites, we’re better off being the underdogs.’ To me, that couldn’t be further from the truth. That’s somebody who doesn’t want pressure because they don’t thrive off it. I want to have the tag of defending grand slam champions. Anyone who has been successful would probably think that way.” There is plenty more. According to some, the departure of Warren Gatland, Shaun Edwards and Rob Howley will destabilise Wales until Wayne Pivac and his reshuffled coaching staff, which also includes new defence coach Byron Hayward, find their feet. No one appears to have told Warburton, who cannot wait. “As soon as Christmas Day was over I remember Shaun Edwards used to say: ‘Right, Six Nations.’ I used to think: ‘You’re mad.’ Going into an international campaign my dominant emotion used to be nerves and anxiety. Now, having been out of it, I almost feel more privileged to be a coach than when I was a player. Just to be on the grass again, even for the warm-up.” Warburton, who retired 18 months ago, also firmly believes he can help Wales steal a march on the opposition. There can be 200 breakdowns per game yet most teams still prioritise scrums and lineouts, both declining in number at the top level. “For me it’s so obvious that no one’s thought about it,” says Warburton. “Loads of people coach line-speed, spacing and the back field. I’m thinking: ‘That’s only half of defence. The other half is breakdown defence. You could have over 100 defensive breakdowns.’” I asked my school coach for a law book because I wanted to know how to break them And so the former flanker, a Land Rover ambassador, is on a mission to change how his players think. “The big thing I want to teach is efficiency. You’ve got to be physical but rather than flying into 30 breakdowns I’d rather you be effective in 15. In 2014 I dislocated my shoulder in the 79th minute of a game against Scotland which we’d already won. I went flying in to finish them off, because it was just the way I was. I ended up being out for six months. As Shaun said: ‘Sometimes, mate, you need to look at the scoreboard and keep a cool head.’” It is that kind of hard-earned experience that Pivac hopes will accelerate the improvement of Wales’ younger forwards, some of whom Warburton believes have stellar futures. “I’m very optimistic about Wales. I think they’ve got a brilliant chance of doing really well at the next World Cup. I’ve been looking at some of the 20-year-olds I’ve been coaching and thinking: ‘Wow.’ There’s a couple who I think can be Lions Test players in a couple of years. I won’t put extra pressure on them by naming them but a lot of English fans probably don’t know about them.” Warburton, in fairness, is equally glowing about England’s Tom Curry and Sam Underhill – “I rate them both very highly: I’d have identified them at least a couple of years ago as British Lions” – but acknowledges their trade grows ever more punishing. For that reason he is not a fan of ‘bone on bone’ midweek training beastings – “I’m really conscious about not overloading the players physically” – and believes less is often more. “The older you get the more you realise rest is as important as training. Guys like the Curry twins don’t need to be smoking people in the week.” If anyone is qualified to discuss the pain versus gain equation it is Warburton. His 74 Welsh caps have left him with so many surgical bolts and plates he virtually clanks to the bathroom. “Every morning when I sit down on the toilet my knees hurt. You have those little reminders every day. Even when I sit down for a cup of coffee you can hear my knees clicking and grinding.” Going one step beyond on a rugby field, though, has long been an obsession. “From the age of 14 I would have a pen and paper and be studying Richie McCaw. I asked my school coach for a law book because I wanted to know how to break them! I’ve always been a student of the game.” So why then are the Welsh regions not performing better in Europe? Ospreys face Saracens on Saturday but even the patriotic Warburton is not optimistic. “I don’t know what’s happening at the regions. I look at the players and there are British Lions and internationals there who I would rely on in a Welsh shirt without hesitation. Maybe it is a financial thing; it is a sad fact of professional sport that money is very influential. But you also need smart, efficient recruitment across the board. Along with a good financial situation and a healthy culture, that’s what gets you places. Maybe English clubs have got that better than us. I don’t know why else there would be a difference?” Come the Six Nations, though, all that will be parked. Warburton’s mind is already turning towards the championship, specifically how it could be enhanced if referees police the breakdown more strictly. “I just think players are getting away with too much: not rolling away fast enough, falling on the wrong side, getting told to take their hands off the ball twice and still getting away with it. If you know you’re allowed to compete for three seconds, for me the damage is already done.” And if Wales flourish might he fancy becoming a future head coach, or even a potentially key lieutenant to Gatland on the 2021 Lions tour? “I guess the answer is never say never. But right now I’ve got next to zero credibility as a coach. I also have no idea where I’m going to be in two or three years’ time. It might be the WRU will think [hiring me] hasn’t worked.” Who is he kidding? Wales were lucky to have Warburton as a player and nothing has changed. Sam Warburton is a Land Rover ambassador. Land Rover has been helping rugby fans discover the sport for over 20 years.