Welcome back and happy new year. The turn of a decade is always a great time for taking stock, for predictions and forecasts about the new era to come. In case you missed it, the Upside published its review of the super-trends of 2010s over the Christmas period – and asked readers what they thought the dominating tendencies of the 2020s would be. There were some thought-provoking responses. John Simke predicted that the 2020s would mark the end of seven decades of overenthusiastic consumerism: By 2030, buying consumer goods will not only be looked down on, increasingly it will not be done, particularly in the “rich” world. This will go far beyond “conscious consumption” to complete cessation of consumption. This will be led by the younger generation but will be picked up by everyone. Our economy will shift from being consumption led to being savings and investment led, as we spend trillions of dollars on a new energy system and climate change adaptation. Obviously this will be driven by the need to mitigate climate change. Kevin Fisher in Los Angeles forecast a series of ‘ends’. The end of work as we know it, the end of human contact, the end of disease: I think even in the next decade we will see more and more diseases eradicated completely and as we start to treat illness with in-body genetic engineering we will see hereditary conditions also disappear. Robbie Morrison in Berlin is buoyant about prospects for a more open society: I predict “open” will become a super‑trend: more specifically, open civil society organizations … and open analysis in pursuit of solutions to our existential crisis of sustainability. It was the open‑source world that bequeathed the ethos, the community norms, the decision processes, the copyleft and permissive open licensing models, the versioning and issues tracking tools, the concept of predominantly online collaboration, and the web platforms in support. So I see this fledgling super‑trend in the raft of new self‑organizing civil society communities confronting climate change, including Extinction Rebellion, GermanZero, Fridays for Future, and Scientists for Future. To this end, I’ve embarked on trying to build a community to analyze future zero‑carbon energy systems thus, with some background here. And finally, Tom Forster ran through an exotic list of predictions including skyrocketing pet ownership, drug liberalisation, the return of the city state, anti-fashion, nationalist art – and my own favourite, ocean travel: I think ocean/rail liners will start targeting #generationeasyjet, diversifying their onboard services to subcontract for millennial appetites such as rage rooms, food/beer markets, vegan cuisine, axe throwing, escape games, gin tastings, etc. As for me, I predict a giddy torrent of optimistic journalism. Already in the last week or so, we have published: How Bangladesh is leading the way in adapting to the climate emergency. Three-minute read How lab-grown food can save the planet. Three-minute amuse bouche The house that Verdi built – and the 60 retired opera singers who live there. Two-minute aria The wave pool for disabled surfers. Two-minute read Fukushima’s plan to replace nuclear with renewable energy hub. One-minute read US greenhouse gas emissions fell 2% in 2019, according to preliminary estimates, as cheaper natural gas supplanted coal at a prodigious rate. Also falling in the US is the cancer death rate, by 2.2% in the latest year on record – the biggest ever reported decline. And it was a good week for auto workers in the US and bakers in the UK. Automakers GM and Ford made more than 1,500 temporary workers permanent members of staff under a new union deal. British baker Greggs gave its 25,000 staff a bonus of up to £300 each, as the company continued to thrive. Vogue Italia’s startling decision to publish its January edition without any photos. Also, various media reports detailing Australian generosity to raise money to battle the bushfires. But most of all, we loved this NPR piece about the ‘scary moms’ and crowdfunded activists pressuring the Pakistani government to do something about apocalyptic air pollution. We had plenty of further suggestions for ‘Upside Legends’, following our article just before new year highlighting the unsung heroes who really deserve public acclamation. Inka Wienbarg wrote: Salma Zulfiqar started the Migration Project in 2016, she has been producing artwork and delivering her ARTconnects workshops to change perceptions in communities and promote cultural understanding and empower women, in particular vulnerable young women. Her passion and drive to create peaceful communities and have a positive impact has meant that hundreds of people have engaged in her ARTconnects workshops in the Midlands, Manchester, London, Norwich, Greece, the UAE, France and Italy – that have all have benefited from her work at a critical time when racism and hate crimes are increasing. Nicholas Hale nominated his sister, Rachel Bramwell: Rachel is a reception and special needs teacher at Thatto Heath Community Primary School in St. Helens, Merseyside. It’s quite a deprived area and my sister has taught at the Thatto Heath since she qualified as a teacher, 26 years ago. Come rain, shine or freezing snow, my sister is there for her class - day after day, week after week, year after year. I can’t even begin to imagine how many children’s lives she’s changed for the better. My sister and I have always shared a love of literature. In her masterpiece, Middlemarch, the great novelist George Eliot writes: “The growing good of the world is partly dependent on unhistoric acts; and that things are not so ill with you and me as they might have been, is half owing to the number who lived faithfully a hidden life.” In the British royal household, where the Duke and Duchess of Sussex showed the way towards a more streamlined monarchy.