Readers of this column are among the smartest, most brilliant and most knowledgeable sports fans in the country. But here is a question that may fox some of you: name a sports star who has been banned recently in Britain for doping? Go on, have a think. And no, Tyson Fury doesn’t count given his ended in 2017. Does London City Royals’ US-born basketball guard AJ Roberts, who received a two-year punishment for cannabis, ring a bell? Or Henry Hadfield, a League 2 North rugby union player who also got two years for a prohibited stimulant he insists was in a pre-workout drink? No? Me neither. There are no big fish on the list of currently banned athletes on UK Anti-Doping’s website. Or even medium ones. In fact, most are tiddlers. Yet when a former Wada president says he believes 10% of elite athletes are doping but only around 1% of tests globally come up positive, it is entirely reasonable to suspect that British stars are slipping through the net. That, I suspect, is why many athletes and anti-doping activists were so furious at reports last week that the Ukad chief executive, Nicole Sapstead, was apparently reluctant to hand over Mo Farah’s blood and urine samples to the World Anti-Doping Agency without “credible evidence” of banned substances. Their concern wasn’t just that Ukad is losing the war on doping, but that it wasn’t even fully engaged in the battle. Jessica Judd, who competed for Britain over 5,000m at the recent world athletics championships, was blunter than most. After admitting that she was “embarrassed” by Ukad’s stance, she then warned that athletics “is dying a drug-fuelled death”. Others flagged up the fact that Ukad refused to hand over Farah’s samples when the US Anti-Doping Agency began investigating the Nike Oregon Project in 2015, where the Briton was training at the time. And nor did it speak to the German journalist Hajo Seppelt when he claimed that an unnamed British athlete had taken EPO in Kenya. Ukad’s response – that it worked closely with Usada and conducted its own 14-month investigation into Seppelt’s claims – was met with scepticism. Ukad was even trolled by Russia, which warned that its stance was “creating a wall of mistrust in the country’s anti-doping system and, accordingly, its athletes”. You might raise an eyebrow. But imagine if the Russian Anti-Doping Agency withheld samples from athletes who worked with a banned coach. Wouldn’t Ukad be sceptical too? Yet all this negative publicity was easily avoidable. It all started 10 days ago when I asked Sapstead about Farah’s samples and the Wada investigation into the Nike Oregon Project. I expected a factual but formulaic response. Something like: “We haven’t been asked yet, but if they come knocking of course we would help.” Instead she performed the PR equivalent of bicycle kicking an innocuous cross into her own net. Only days later did Ukad release a statement saying that Wada hadn’t actually asked for the samples. It also might have made sense to point out that a new, more sophisticated drugs test, which is said to allow blood doping to be identified several months after banned performance-enhancing drugs such as EPO are used, is being developed. That is potentially very significant. As things stand, if someone microdoses EPO it can be undetectable to testers within hours. Sapstead’s comments came at the launch of a detailed and impressive Ukad report on the rise of steroids in British gyms. During her presentation she also highlighted Ukad’s education programme, which for some athletes starts as young as 10. No one doubts this is needed, but it is hardly a core function. Anti-doping chiefs should wake up desperate to stop cheats, eat their three square meals thinking of ways to catch cheats, and sleep uneasily if they fail. If not, they are not doing it right. Towards the end of Sapstead’s presentation I asked her how confident she was that all British Olympians heading to Tokyo could be trusted. “I am never going to pin my colours to the mast and say all athletes are clean,” she replied. “We have seen time and again that sophisticated cheats can beat the system. To prove that someone is clean you would literally have to be testing them every single day.” I don’t disagree. Sapstead did promise that Ukad would “move into the 21st century a bit more” by using more data profiling to catch cheats, but admitted that would take time, effort and money. How much is unclear. Ukad’s budget is £11m a year but its three investigators are stretched as it is. It also has far fewer powers than its equivalents in Austria, Italy and Germany, where it is a criminal offence not only to traffic and supply performance enhancing drugs but also to dope and elite athletes can be punished financially for sporting fraud. Increasingly I am persuaded that Britain should follow suit. “The constant discussion we have in the organisation is about this chicken and egg,” Sapstead admitted. “Do we not get the findings because we think we are doing a good job with education, and the athletes are generally clean? Or is it because the athletes are sophisticated, or we are not doing the testing in the right places?” The quiet tragedy is that a decade after Ukad was founded, we are still no nearer to knowing the answer.