Carlo Ancelotti clasped his hands in utter disbelief. He was not alone. The Everton manager has inherited a team with a reputation for throwing points away but this was a spectacular implosion by even their standards. Two goals up in injury time, completely in control against a Newcastle team who had shown no attacking intent in the second half whatsoever, and yet they were held to a draw thanks to two goals in the fourth minute of stoppage time from the substitute Florian Lejeune. Steve Bruce cavorted on to the pitch in celebration of a most unexpected heist. Until the final seconds Everton were cruising towards a third win in three home Premier League games under their new manager. Moise Kean had opened the scoring with his first goal in Everton’s colours, on his 22nd appearance for the club, and Dominic Calvert-Lewin had added a merited second as the hosts dominated the second half. But then everything changed when Bruce replaced Joelinton with an extra defender, Fabian Schar, and Lejeune brought added complications to the Everton defence. Ancelotti’s team could not handle their physical presence. Lejeune scored what should have been only an impressive consolation with an overhead kick at close range but Everton failed to defend a long ball launched into their box seconds later and the substitute was on hand once again to scramble in an equaliser despite the desperate efforts of Jordan Pickford to intervene. One of Ancelotti’s many considerable tasks as Everton manager is to nurture the raw talent that prompted the club to pay up to £29m for Kean’s services in the summer. He continued that process by handing his young compatriot only the fifth start of a difficult debut Premier League season and the Italy international repaid that faith with a fully committed display. The first goal of his Everton career was a merited reward. Goodison was firmly behind the 19-year-old in his bid to break the duck, as were his team-mates who seemed intent on trying to find the striker inside the penalty area at every opportunity, and his industry did not go unrecognised. The former Juventus forward earned rousing support for a determined run through a crowded Newcastle midfield, for forcing a decent save from Martin Dubravka with a low drive from 20 yards and even for winning a towering header when defending a corner. The drought finally ended on the half hour mark. The breakthrough for Kean and Everton owed plenty to the ingenuity of Bernard. The Brazilian took possession midway in the Newcastle half after Dominic Calvert-Lewin had flicked on Djibril Sidibe’s searching ball. He released Kean with a deft lob over the visiting defence and, though the striker’s first touch gave Isaac Hayden chance to intervene, a sharp finish with his second touch beat both the wing-back and the Newcastle goalkeeper. Kean understandably erupted in joy, sliding on his knees in front of the Gwladys Street, while Ancelotti responded with a thumbs-up to the goalscorer. Everton’s first-half lead was deserved on the balance of play if not the quality. The game was open and surprisingly entertaining from the off, although both teams’ carelessness in possession was a contributing factor. Ancelotti had called for more bravery on the ball from Everton’s players, having quickly identified their tendency to pass backwards and sideways rather than go for the kill, and his body language was becoming increasingly irate before Kean’s goal as the instruction was followed only occasionally. Sidibe forced the first save of the game from Dubravka with a snap shot from the corner of the Newcastle area while Yerry Mina was close to connecting with a dangerous cross from Bernard. At the other end Bruce’s team threatened only in flashes, Joelinton closest with a glancing header just over Jordan Pickford’s crossbar, with Miguel Almirón squandered two excellent chances to carve open Everton’s defence on the counter attack. Kean, his confidence no doubt lifted, almost engineered a second goal shortly after the restart. The striker’s impudent back-heel released Walcott into space and the winger found Bernard unmarked inside the penalty area. His chip sailed over Dubravka but also over the bar. It fell to the in-form Calvert-Lewin to provide Everton with the cushion of a two-goal lead from their next attack. Captain for the night Lucas Digne created the striker’s 12th goal of the season with an inch-perfect pass threaded into the heart of the Newcastle area. Jamaal Lascelles was unable to intercept at full stretch and the Everton centre-forward, his England credentials extolled by Ancelotti on the eve of the game, swept a fine finish inside the far post. Everton messed up a succession of chances for a third with Calvert-Lewin, Mina and Mason Holgate all going close. A foul by Calvert-Lewin on substitute Emil Krafth appeared to result in a mobile phone being thrown on to the pitch but that was the least of Everton’s problems when Lejeune suddenly, inexplicably, transformed the game in the dying seconds.