Fresh from publishing his guide to weight loss, Downsizing, the former deputy leader of the Labour party, Tom Watson, is set to write a political thriller set in “a world where virtue is seen as a rare commodity”. Watson, who quit his position in November because of the “brutality and hostility” within Labour ranks, will co-write The House with historical novelist Imogen Robertson. Watson said it would “explore the themes that lubricate our political system: ambition and failure, trust and betrayal”, and introduce its readers to “heroes and villains engaged in a struggle for fame, power and revenge”. Watson is not the first politician to turn to thriller writing as a lucrative second career. Jeffrey Archer resigned from parliament in 1974 when he was declared bankrupt, wrote several crime novels including Not a Penny More, Not a Penny Less and Kane and Abel, then notoriously returned to politics until he was found guilty of perjury and sent to prison. The disgraced peer continues to enjoy a successful career as an author, as does Conservative peer and House of Cards author Michael Dobbs – unlike the current prime minister, Boris Johnson, whose “comic political novel” Seventy-Two Virgins failed to make much of a stir. Johnson’s tale follows Roger Barlow, a bicycling Tory known for his tousled hair who becomes a hero by taking on a group of “Islamofascist” suicide bombers. The Nobel prize for literature that went to Johnson’s idol Winston Churchill, isn’t quite on the cards for him just yet. As well as his history books, Churchill found time to write a novel, Savrola, although as John Sutherland has pointed out: “Few in 1900 read Savrola and none thereafter.” Other thriller-writing politicians include Labour MP Chris Mullin – whose books include A Very British Coup (1982), about a radical Labour prime minister being taken down by the banking and media elite – and Tory Douglas Hurd (whose standout novel is Scotch on the Rocks, about a paramilitary wing of the SNP taking over Fort William). Meanwhile Ann Widdecombe’s effort, The Clematis Tree was judged by her former Conservative colleague Edwina Currie to be “the product of a perceptive but warped mind”. Currie herself has written six novels, most recently 2001’s tale of “sex, spin and political skulduggery”, This Honourable House. And of course there’s Iain Duncan Smith, whose The Devil’s Tune is ostensibly “an ingenious fast-paced thriller with an intriguing cast of characters reaching the highest level of office”, including “a powerful, evil man seeking revenge for incidents reaching back to the second world war”. No word on who that was based on. Just 18 copies sold in its first week, with reviewers marvelling that “his prose ranges from lumpen to berserkly lush”. Widdecombe was more complimentary. “There is much in print that is a great deal worse,” she mused. Out this autumn from Sphere, The House will doubtless be picked over to discern Watson’s true feelings about his time in politics. Vince Cable’s “explosive thriller” Open Arms featured a glamorous housewife-turned-MP sent on a trade mission to India and the billionaire head of an Indian arms technology company who is “magnetically drawn to her”. But it is best remembered for the party-political digs slipped in by the Liberal Democrat. “Bloody coalition government,” a Tory minister says at one point. “Bloody liberals. They brought in this anti-corruption crusade, crippling our businesses. Politically correct nonsense.”