Three British Airways cabin crew members killed on New Year’s Eve in a collision with a lorry have been named in tributes by friends and colleagues. Dominic Fell, 23, Joe Finnis, 25, and Rachel Clark, 20, died at the scene of the crash close to Heathrow airport shortly before midnight. A 25-year-old who was travelling in the same car was taken to hospital in a serious condition. The off-duty crew were in a Toyota Yaris when it was involved in an accident with a Mercedes HGV at the junction of Bedfont Road and Long Lane in Stanwell, Surrey, at 11.39pm on 31 December. The lorry left the road and ended up in Longford River. The driver was taken to hospital as a precaution. A fundraising page named BA Angels was set up by fellow cabin crew member Stephen Paul Crook and has raised nearly £45,000 so far. Malgorzata Kubik posted on the page: “Joe was my coach and he always made sure we were OK. I hope he is in a better place now and I would like to send big hugs to his friends and family I am with you in this painful and difficult time especially of that time a year.” Laura Stewart said: “Dom and Joe were truly special men and I hope that their families take some comfort in knowing that they were so loved by everyone they have flown with! I’ll miss you.” Posting on Facebook, Bailey Faulkner said: “I couldn’t thank you both for the endless trips together all across the world which each time was full of boozing and laughter, not forgetting the days spent sat in the pub! Gutted you’ve gone but you’ll never be forgotten! Keep flying high.” Hanushe Lala described Clark as “a kind, beautiful and intelligent person who only ever brightened up everyone’s day”. “You will always have a special place in my heart, forever and always,” she said. It is understood two of the four crew members had finished work at about 6pm, and the other two had the day off. A BA spokesman said: “We’re deeply saddened to learn of the death of our colleagues involved in a road traffic collision last night. Our thoughts are with their family and friends, who we are supporting at this distressing time.”