The Duchess of Sussex did not take part in the Queen’s historic Sandringham summit to decide future roles that she and Prince Harry will carve out, it has been revealed. Before Monday’s crisis meeting, sources had said Meghan was “likely” to be personally involved in the discussions via a conference-call from Canada, where she had returned on Thursday following the couple’s bombshell announcement they were to “step back” as senior royals. However, she and Harry are said to have decided it was not crucial for her to participate directly in the meeting, hosted by the Queen, and attended by the Prince of Wales, the Duke of Cambridge and his brother, according to aides. A source said: “In the end, the Sussexes decided that it wasn’t necessary for the duchess to join.” The clarification seeks to end any speculation Meghan was banned from the meeting. There were also, reportedly, concerns that any phone conversations would be vulnerable to eavesdroppers. Aides were understood to have been uneasy about the idea of her calling in for fear of who else might be listening in to this highly confidential family discussion. So Harry was left to argue the couple’s case without his wife during the roundtable discussions, which were led by Prince Charles and was the first face-to-face meeting of senior royals since the crisis broke on Wednesday. Buckingham Palace has not revealed exactly what was discussed. The only details made public so far are that the couple have been given the go-ahead for a period of transition, living partly in the UK and partly in Canada, and that it is accepted they will no longer be full-time working members of the royal family. The Queen’s very personal statement, released immediately following the 90-minute meeting on the Norfolk estate, made clear that this was against the wishes of the rest of the family. The 93-year-old monarch gave her reluctant blessing , saying: “Although we would have preferred them to remain full-time working members of the royal family, we respect and understand their wish to live a more independent life as a family while remaining a valued part of my family.” She also reiterated the couple’s desire to no longer be reliant on public funds. However, as yet, no indications have been given as to how the couple might earn an income unfettered from royal constraints, as is their wish. At present, 5% of their expenses come directly from the sovereign grant, the funding mechanism by which the state supports the monarchy. Taxpayers also pay for security and the cost of official overseas travel. The remainder is met by Prince Charles from his income from the Duchy of Cornwall. The Queen has stressed there were “complex matters” still to resolve, and that she wants a final decision to be reached in the coming days. Boris Johnson said he was “absolutely confident” the royal family could resolve the crisis. He told BBC Breakfast: “My view on this is very straightforward: I am a massive fan, like most of our viewers, of the Queen and the royal family as a fantastic asset for our country. “I’m absolutely confident that they are going to sort this out. But they are going to sort it out much more easily without a running commentary from politicians.” The move to Canada raises questions, unanswered so far, about the cost of security for the couple, likely to spiral once their lives span both the UK and North America. At present, the Metropolitan police provides round-the-clock armed protection. Canada is a realm, with the Queen as head of state, raising the prospect of Canadian taxpayers having to foot security costs while the couple are in the country. The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, told Canada’s Global News on Monday: “That is part of the reflection that needs to be had and there are discussions going on. “We’re not entirely sure what the final decisions will be, what the dispositions are and those are decisions for them. I think most Canadians are very supportive of having the royals be here, but how that looks and what kind of costs are involved, there are still lots of discussions to have.” It is not known if Prince Charles, who is understood to fund the couple out of his private investments as well as from his Duchy of Cornwall trust, will offer to pay their security costs. Trudeau said the federal Canadian government had not been party “up until this point” in what the couple’s move to the country would involve. “There are still a lot of decisions to be taken by the royal family, by the Sussexes themselves, as to what level of engagement they choose to have. “We are obviously supportive of their reflections but have responsibilities in that as well,” he said. Meghan, a former actor, lived and worked in Toronto during her time filming for the popular US drama Suits, and lived there for seven years before moving to Britain full-time following her marriage to Harry 20 months ago.