Controversial proposals for India to host the 2022 Commonwealth Games shooting and archery events four months before the main competition gets under way in Birmingham are likely to receive a warm welcome from the British government. The Guardian understands that the sports minister, Nigel Adams, is encouraged by the proposals, which would involve India paying around £20m to host the events in March 2022, and he looks forward to hearing more as the final details are developed. The Games are due to take place from 27 July-7 August 2022. Last year the Indian Olympic Association (IOA), which won 16 shooting medals at the 2018 Commonwealth Games on the Gold Coast, had threatened to boycott Birmingham 2022 after it was confirmed that shooting would not be included for the first time since 1970. That caused deep apprehension within the UK government, which is hoping the £788m Games – the largest and most expensive event to be staged in the country since the 2012 Olympics – will be an advert for post‑Brexit Britain and help to secure trade deals. Those worries led to Adams spending several months working behind the scenes to urge the Commonwealth Games Federation to find a solution and avert the risk of India not turning up in Birmingham, both for sporting and economic reasons. Adams said recently: “I totally understand how passionate people are about shooting across the Commonwealth. We want India to be here, no question. I have already written to the Commonwealth Games Federation to see if we can accommodate shooting in some form.” The threat of a boycott was averted when the IOA voted last week to compete at Birmingham 2022 but now Commonwealth Games India (CGI) has gone further still by offering to hold shooting and potentially an archery competition in the country. If the proposal is accepted it is understood the events will take place in either New Delhi or Chandigarh on Commonwealth Day, which in 2022 would fall on Monday 14 March – with medals counting towards the official table. David Grevemberg, the CGF chief executive, said the CGI proposal would be reviewed and considered this month and next by the CGF and discussed with the Birmingham 2022 delivery partners before being decided upon. “The proposal is supported by the National Rifle Association of India, the Government of India, the International Shooting Sport Federation and World Archery,” he said. “Key aspects of this assessment will be to ensure that the proposal conforms with our rules and regulations, is operationally deliverable, sets manageable precedents for the Commonwealth Games and ultimately adds value to athletes and the Commonwealth Sports Movement.” Birmingham 2022 organisers confirmed they had been told of the news on Monday but said they would await further developments before commenting.