Northamptonshire chief constable Nick Adderley has demanded an urgent meeting with the commander of the military base where the American woman wanted over the death of Harry Dunn was stationed. The move came after dramatic footage of another vehicle on the wrong side of the road near RAF Croughton emerged and police revealed details of a separate incident in which a police vehicle was struck by a car being driven on the wrong side of the road in October. The video, reported to Northamptonshire police on Saturday, shows a blue BMW having to brake sharply on a country road near the base, which is used by the US military. In a statement, the chief constable said: “I do not underestimate how much of a concerning incident this was and how much worse it could have been, especially considering the circumstances in which 19-year-old Harry Dunn tragically died. “This is compounded by the fact that yesterday, myself and police, fire and crime commissioner Stephen Mold were made aware of another incident in Northampton in which a police vehicle was struck in early October by a vehicle also driving on the wrong side of the road. Thankfully there were no injuries. “I want to be absolutely clear on the fact that these incidents just cannot keep happening. We know all too well in the case of young Harry just how devastating they can be. Therefore the PFCC and I have requested an urgent meeting with the base commander at RAF Croughton to discuss safety on the roads around the base and I expect this meeting to take place next week.” RAF Croughton became the focus of an international controversy after Dunn was killed nearby in a head-on collision with a car on 27 August last year. Anne Sacoolas, the wife of a US intelligence official, claimed diplomatic immunity after the collision and was able to return to her home country. The US Department of State said a UK extradition request for Sacoolas was highly inappropriate and would be an abuse. Before reports of the latest incident surfaced, Andrea Leadsom, the constituency MP for Dunn’s family, wrote to the commander of the base to ask for an invitation to visit. Dunn’s parents, Charlotte Charles and Tim Dunn, are looking for assurances that safety measures are in place to make sure there are no similar incidents in the future. Dunn family spokesman Radd Seiger said: “Seeing this footage has sent shivers down my spine and made me feel sick. No harm done on this occasion, fortunately, but that is not the point. “I have been urging everyone in authority to take the matter seriously, not only in terms of safety and how we can improve it in relation to helping American drivers adjust to the different side of the road, but also ensuring that no one who breaks the law coming off the base is allowed to hop on the next plane home and evade justice as Anne Sacoolas did. “Enough is enough. This near-miss brings both issues sharply into focus and I now call on the UK government to take immediate action to ensure the safety of their citizens living in and around these bases but also to make sure that never again will a so-called ‘diplomat’ be allowed to evade justice.” He added that the family wanted “more than anything else, for this to never happen to a family again, and I look forward to entering into talks with the authorities, on both sides of the Atlantic, to make it never does”.