The coronavirus outbreak in China appears to have cost the nation’s women’s football team two of their stars for next week’s Olympic qualifiers in Sydney. Experienced midfielder Wang Shuang and 22-year-old Yao Wei are reportedly among a group of players who did not travel with the team to next week’s rescheduled qualifiers in Australia. Titan Sports Plus, a Chinese sports media group, tweeted the pair are among several players from Wuhan who did not travel having returned to the city for the country’s spring festival. Wuhan is a city in lockdown with flights and trains cancelled. It is the epicentre of the virus outbreak which has killed dozens and left thousands ill, and was also the original venue for the six matches for Group B in the final stage of qualifying for Tokyo 2020. The matches were originally moved to Nanjing before being rescheduled to Sydney after China withdrew as hosts on Sunday. Football Federation Australia said it was a matter for the Chinese FA to select players as they see fit. “The players are subject to the same screening as for all others arriving from China,” an FFA spokesperson said. “We are confident that the Chinese FA would be taking every precaution to assess and look after the welfare of their players and staff.” FFA confirmed the Chinese team have already arrived in Australia with matches to be played on 3, 6 and 9 February. The spokesperson added FFA had not asked for any additional measures to be taken, “but we remain in constant dialogue with the federal government about the movement of the tournament and the three teams that will need to travel at short notice as a result”. Wang has played over 100 matches for the China national team, scoring 28 goals, while Yao was a member of the Steel Roses’ World Cup squad last year and has scored three goals in her 18 national team appearances. Xinhua News Agency reported on Monday the team’s pre-qualifying camp, which also had to be moved from Wuhan to Suzhou, was held in complete isolation. The agency says players were asked by coaching staff to wear masks and avoid contact with others on their way to camp, which started on Sunday. It is also understood the camp was completely closed to outsiders to avoid the risk of infection. The venues for next week’s qualifiers have been confirmed with the final stage of qualification kicking off on Monday at Campbelltown Stadium where Australia take on Taiwan and China face Thailand. A second double-header at the venue on Thursday, 6 February will pit the Matildas against the Thais while Taiwan tackle China. The group wraps up on Sunday, 9 February at Bankwest Stadium when Australia face China and Thailand meet Taiwan. The top two teams from Group B will play the top two from Group A in two-leg home and away playoffs for the two available Asian spots at this year’s Olympic tournament in Japan.