At 7am on Thursday, seven teenagers, myself included, “hacked” the most widely distributed newspapers in London, replacing them with 5,000 copies of our own creation. The reason is simple. We want everyone to learn about the British empire and its history in the land we call home. We are a group of sixth-form students, who came together on The Advocacy Academy’s social justice fellowship programme, working to ensure that each young person in the UK will have the opportunity to be taught a history that reflects our country’s diversity. We would like to dismantle the institutional racism within our education system and curriculum one step at a time. For more than 10 years, I’ve learned close to nothing about British colonial history in school; nothing about how millions were murdered, how children were packed into concentration camps, how nations were arbitrarily divided. I learned nothing about the tools my country used to extradite my grandmother from the Guyanese town she called home. And my experiences are common. Currently, schoolchildren can go through their entire formal education without learning anything about the atrocities committed under the union jack. Every German student has to learn about the Holocaust... so, too, should we face our role in slavery I realise a lot of my white peers might not appreciate that their school system has avoided teaching a defining feature of Britain’s history from the past 300 years. No, not the Industrial Revolution or the world wars, but the fact that by 1913, Great Britain had complete or partial control of more than 23% of the globe. Yet each of us involved in the Fill in the Blanks project has heritage from British colonies and we understand the frustration of having your history eradicated. Just as every student in Germany has to learn about the Holocaust, so, too, should every British student understand and face Britain’s role in colonialism and slavery. Five months ago, we decided our anger could be brought into the public sphere, but we needed a plan of action, something that would make people look twice. We resolved to take the news into our own hands and show the public what the world could look like if our government brought our histories into our classrooms. We created our own papers – Metru and New Standard (geddit?) – and spread them around the London underground for half-asleep commuters to stumble across. Every aspect of our false covers captured a Britain we’d like to see. Our celebrities such as Blac Chyna no longer endorses her skin-lightening products which reinforce the inherently colonial practice of “colourism” – the discrimination against individuals with a dark skin tone. We show black women revered at the top of their fields, with Mary Seacole’s portrait on the new £50 note. Some of this work is already being done by the Museum of British Colonialism, which we have also advertised on the front cover of our paper. So on the morning of 9 January, the Fill in the Blanks crew, armed with Metru, went into the underground to disperse our message. Within an hour, thousands of papers had been distributed across London and we slipped away into the crowds with the news “Boris backs empire education” left for commuters to digest. In the early afternoon, our machine started up again, with advocates running from college to our meeting point, sweeping up New Standard papers and hitting the underground once again. On the way home, sitting on the tube, I dreamed of seven south London teenagers sparking a national conversation about how our educational curriculum shapes the lives of those it teaches. British students have lost an integral part of their history. It’s time we are taught the downsides of our past in order to stop mistakes being repeated. How can we learn about what we are not taught? We should not have to find out about colonialism and slavery for ourselves. We urge those who set the national curriculum to teach our histories and Fill in the Blanks. • Matilda Marcus attends a school in south London and is a graduate of the Advocacy Academy • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.