If Saracens could distil the spirit they have shown for the past decade that helps them turn adversity into gain, and then bottle it, they would have no need for handouts – as long as the cap fitted. There they were at Ospreys last Saturday, one man down after four minutes, when the Welsh prop Rhys Carré, on his first return to Wales since joining the Premiership and European champions from Cardiff Blues, was sent off for a high tackle. But they were leading by the 34th-minute when Calum Clark was sent to the sin-bin for handling the ball on the floor. Even Saracens could not hold out two men down, conceding two tries in the 10 minutes Clark was occupying the seat of shame to fall behind, but back they came. They were not playing one of the stronger sides in the tournament, although Ospreys were fortified by the return of Alun Wyn Jones: the Wales captain was making his first appearance since the World Cup and not only looked as if he were match-hardened but had had a blood infusion to make him 10 years younger, roaming the field to telling effect and showing off a technique of climbing into a challenge and then offloading one-handed. Saracens have donned sackcloth and ashes since being fined more than £5m and docked 35 Premiership points for breaking salary cap regulations in two of the three seasons before the current one. The club initially contested the ruling but even though the written judgment has not been made public and neither side has gone into detail, they seem guilty of trying to exploit a loophole without checking, failing to recognise the spirit of the times had changed. For most clubs, the loss of 35 points would be a relegation sentence but Saracens are not among the favourites to go down. They are still in contention for a place in the quarter-finals of the European Champions Cup despite resting the vast majority of their internationals for their three away matches in the group, at Racing 92, Munster and Ospreys. They were well beaten in Paris, but secured a bonus point in Limerick and left Swansea with a victory their director of rugby, Mark McCall, not one given to hyperbole, described as remarkable. And it was. A side without Maro Itoje, the Vunipola brothers, Jamie George, Owen Farrell, Elliot Daly, Brad Barritt, Liam Williams, Ben Spencer and Duncan Taylor found a way to win. It was a performance that fitted the wet and windy conditions, pragmatic and disciplined, and owed much to players such as Clark who may become, through no fault of their own, victims of Saracens’ need to cuts costs in the coming months to ensure they are not over the cap this season. McCall did not quibble about Carré’s dismissal even though the insistence of the referee, Alexandre Ruiz, that the prop had made contact with the head of the Ospreys’ full-back Dan Evans was not backed up by one camera angle. The disciplinary committee that gave the prop a three-week ban backed the official. That Carré went high, in a double challenge with Nick Isiekwe, was not in doubt and the prevailing trend is for referees to send off offenders rather than send them to the sin-bin and leave it to the citing officer to decide whether an incident merits greater punishment. That will change under a World Rugby law experiment that will be trialled in Super Rugby and the Top 14 in France from the beginning of next month. Referees will issue players with warnings for high tackles during this year’s Super Rugby competition. When two high-risk tackle technique warnings have been issued, a player will automatically receive a one-match suspension. Under it, Carré would probably have remained on the field at the Liberty Stadium. The crackdown on high tackles has been prompted by a determination to lower concussion rates: during the last Under-20 Championship, when the two-warning system was reduced, head injuries fell by more than 50%. If the trial at senior level works, a more drastic innovation, outlawing tackles above waist level, may not be included in the law book: it is being trialled at youth level and in women’s competitions and effectively eradicates doubt while reducing the risk of offloading. Another attempt to reduce the number of collisions is the 50:22 kick, which is being tested in America’s rugby championship, South Africa’s Varsity Cup and Italy’s Top 12. If a player kicks the ball from his own half and it bounces into touch in the opposition’s 22, his side get the throw-in. The aim is to tempt teams to go for touch rather than keep the ball in play and cut the chance of concussion by lowering the tackle count. Another amendment being looked at is the introduction of an infringement limit for teams, measured in penalties and free-kicks. Once a team have reached the number allowed, a yellow card is automatically shown to the next offender. Someone will have to keep count and does an offence considered to merit an immediate yellow (or red) card reduce the tally to zero? It could take a team 75 minutes or more to reach the tally but does that mean that if they give away three penalties in quick succession defending their line that there is no yellow card? A referee is the best judge of the mood of a match but their discretion continues to be eroded. • This is an extract from our weekly rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.