There is precocious composure and there is Coco Gauff. It is difficult to recall a teenager thrown into the klieg lights of global sporting celebrity so comfortable with praise yet unfailingly polite and brimming with such self-belief. Anyone who moves into her ambit would think the same: is she too good to be true? Certainly, she was too good for Naomi Osaka here on Friday night. In an hour and seven minutes she destroyed the defending champion for the loss of seven games. No mountain is safe. Ask Venus Williams, who won four of her seven slams before Gauff was born, but could not take a set off her in two matches in slams, most recently here this week. “She clearly wants it, works very hard, is extremely mature for her age,” the elder Wllliams sister said. “I think the sky’s the limit for her.” Ask Chris Evert, who won 18 slams and could not stop drooling over her compatriot on ESPN: “What a moment. We talked about it at Wimbledon [where she first beat Venus], the Cinderella story and a star is born. She has arrived, she is here and she has a good chance to win this title. She has got charisma. This is a much-needed shot in the arm for women’s tennis right now. We need some new blood in the women’s game because we still want people to watch us.” Watch they will. And listen. Still doing high school lessons in hotel rooms around the world [literature is her favoured subject], while earning her first half-million dollars on the Tour, she speaks about herself and her rivals, as well as her sport, with respect, intelligence and maturity so far beyond her 15 years it is mildly disturbing. And maybe ask Serena Williams. It is hard not to wonder about a power shift in the sport when a 38-year-old legend loses on the same day a 15-year-old newcomer becomes the youngest woman to beat a top-five opponent at this level since Jennifer Capriati did it against world No 3 Gabriela Sabatini in the quarter-finals of the 1991 US Open. “She’s definitely impressive all around, from her personality to the way she plays,” Williams said earlier in the week. “I think it’s just all super impressive. I was nowhere near her level at 15 – either on the court or off the court, not even close. I know kids are growing up different nowadays, so I’m not sure. But I was nowhere near as, like, smart and eloquent as she is. It’s nice to see.” Osaka, still only 22, is genius cut from different cloth. Although similarly empathetic and hugely thoughtful, she has a habit of thinking sideways. She wonders if she is, “champion material”, yet – even though she has won two slams. When asked in the tender moments after losing what her own expectations were at Gauff’s age, she did not seem to make the prodigy connection, or see its relevance. “My expectations when I was 15? Like, what do you mean? Same thing as I am right now. I thought I’d be here sooner, though.” Osaka was only a few years older than Gauff is now when she won the first of her slams, that boiling New York night in 2018 when Williams self-combusted in defeat. And then she arrived here a year ago and won her second slam in a row, rising to No 1 in the world – before saying goodbye to the coach who had helped her get there. It would seem the sport will be entertained and perplexed for years to come by these two unique and very different individuals, polar opposites in personality but sharing the same ambitions – and no doubt, the same courts from Melbourne to New York to Paris to Wimbledon. It is a comforting thought at the end of one era and the beginning of the next. Records will tumble for both of them the way they have done for Serena Williams. Already Gauff has us reaching for statistics every time she moves like a cat through the draw. She arrived this week ranked 67 in the world; a year ago, she was at 684. Who is to say she will not be in the top 10 when she returns – or sooner? Gauff’s tennis is so good, so simply smart and effective, her athleticism so easy and her balance such a fit for her sport, that it is tempting to take it for granted as the points fall her way – like we came to do with Williams. Against Osaka, she bided her time to perfection in the first set, finally opening her shoulders to send a thumping message that she was in for a much rougher ride than when they last met. After half an hour, the kid was a set up and flying. When she broke the other kid twice in the second after an early trade, she was poised for the kill. Gauff’s game was as solid as a rock, her mind clear. Osaka, serving to stay in the conversation, was mentally spent. In a deadly finish, Gauff completed a run of 13 unanswered service points in a row, and finished the job when Osaka shoved her closing forehand into the middle of the net. “I don’t know where that came from – maybe the crowd?” Gauff said courtside, to wild cheering.”What is my life like? Two years ago, I lost here first round in juniors, and now I’m here on Rod Laver Arena. This is crazy. I can’t believe this. I walked past him a couple of times in the corridor but I never stopped and talked. I need a selfie for Instagram. Probably I’ll do more homework tomorrow, but I want to sleep tonight. My teachers are giving me some time, under the circumstances.” What circumstances they are.