Children sit with colouring books, parents stand in groups along the main exit road from Bendalong. Cars are laden with boats, surfboards, camping gear and caravans, the icons of an Australian summer. But this holiday has taken a dramatic turn for most of these holiday makers at Bendalong and Manyana, two isolated hamlets 200km south of Sydney. They are part of a major evacuation exercise before the extreme weather forecast for Saturday. The NSW police and Rural Fire Service asked people to prepare to leave, but the one road out, already ravaged by the fire that decimated Lake Conjola on New Year’s Eve made it hazardous to do so. People spent 24 hours in their cars in the hope of being allowed to leave with police escorts in groups of 20 to 50. The evacuation had to be stopped for an hour and a half in mid-afternoon on Friday after the fire flared and trees fell across the road. By Friday, Bendalong and Manyana were some of very few coastal towns, along with Sussex Inlet in the Shoalhaven, that still had unburned bush. Loved for their forests stretching down to the beach, the villages were ringed by fire, in some places burning just 200m from houses. No one is confident about what will happen on Saturday. The forecast is for catastrophic fire danger, high temperatures and strong winds. If it reaches the crowns of the towering gums, it will burn all the way to the beach. With 700 people in the caravan park and another 4,000 in houses – all without electricity for four days – the Rural Fire Service made it clear they wanted everyone to leave. Sheridan O’Donnell, from Newcastle, and Louie Racht, from Sydney, had been staying with their families in Bendalong. They were fourth in the line to exit, early on Friday afternoon, and had been been there for 24 hours. Luckily their house was so close they could sleep there, but had spent hours waiting in the line of nearly 400 vehicles. They had a fallback plan but were hoping to leave. “The beach is really close so we can evacuate there. We might run out of food, because we threw it out because we thought we were leaving,” O’Donnell said. “We might need to make damper in the BBQ if we have to stay another night,” said Leah, 10. O’Donnell had nothing but praise for Peter Jackson from the Austinmer Rural Fire Service, who took charge of the evacuation plan, providing the daily briefings and managing the flow of cars. “He was just here on holidays like us. Now he’s our kids’ new hero,” she said. “He’s the sort of leader we need. Peter Jackson for PM.” Verity Magdalino, her husband Tim and her two children, Luke, 7, and Finn, 11, had been holidaying at North Bendalong, an even more isolated hamlet. “We came here for the first time to discover the south coast,” Magdalino said. “With the kindness of strangers we have been very well looked after. We only had enough food for a week, but when we ran out our neighbours invited us round and brought us food. There is always some good that comes out of interesting situations.” Petra Holmes, from Wollongong, was staying in the caravan park with Chanel, 7, and Talia, 12, and two children of friends. They were also waiting with their car packed to go. Holmes’s husband was meant to come down on New Year’s Eve and swap with her so she could go back to work, but he was unable to get through. “We have had the van here since I was a kid – it was my parents’ – so I have been through bushfires before,” Holmes said. “A couple of times we slept on the beach. I can remember one time when I was five or six. “But this feels a bit different: not having power and trying to get this volume of people out.” They packed up on Thursday with plans to leave the following day. But only a few got out before the road was declared too dangerous. “So we’ve been waiting since this morning … It’s really the kids. They are a bit over it and all the talk that tomorrow [Saturday] is going to be really horrendous.” Holmes knows lots of the permanent van owners, and the community looked out for her, she said. “We are OK, and everyone has been so lovely,” she said. By late afternoon on Friday, only a few people remained, determined to defend their homes and prepared to seek shelter on the beach or even, with lifejackets at the ready, in the water.