Until 1 FebruarySimon David’s autobiographical solo show opens with quite the musical showstopper. In flared sequin suit, fishnet tank top and beret, he belts out I’m Gay (“That’s literally all I have to say!”), a rhyme-studded dazzler about how you won’t find his sperm swimmin’ anywhere near wimmin. Then comes a neat routine, delivered with mock horror, about realising a man’s decision to “renege on our date” was a brush-off rather than “a gay thing involving Renée Zellweger”. Next, he’s quizzing an audience member about masturbation. All of which is a hoot. This, David says, is the show he wanted to make. But when his dad was given a terminal cancer diagnosis, camp cabaret seemed inconsequential. David has fun imagining alternative serious or sentimental shows he could have made as a tribute to his father, and there’s some knockabout meta satire before the stakes are raised when it turns out that Dad is planning his own one-man show, leaving David fuming. A fuzzy video recording of that elegiac performance is interwoven into David’s show. This is an affecting hour, fully aware of the “dead dad” fringe show cliche, balancing poignancy with soul-searching humour. CW Until 2 February“To sprog or not to sprog?” That is the question, says Tamsin Hurtado Clarke, in a one-woman show about how pregnancy signals an end of one lifestyle, as well as a new beginning. In a performance as dynamic as its title suggests, she hops through trimesters as imagined by an expectant mother, with a nervy energy that captures the headlong rush of new parenthood. There is low-key but appealing audience interaction and an engaging, expressive performance. The show is punctuated with extended dance routines that are curiously emotionless – a mix of nightclubbing and exercise class rather than choreography that enhances the story. A bit of physical theatre capturing the drudgery of caring for a baby, eerily scored with a dripping water tap, works better. More could be made from a section about the baby-kit industry that manufactures a pram as if it’s a 4x4. But this is a show that captures the blizzard of feelings parents have for their as-yet-unborn children. Some are remarkably prescient: it wasn’t until after my own were born that I considered the value of a mute button for toddlers. CW Until 2 FebruaryNathaniel Hall is a Mancunian writer and performer in his early 30s with an easy wit and charm. The story he’s telling, however, couldn’t be heavier: aged 17, he was infected with HIV by an older boyfriend the first time he had sex. Hall tells the story of how he struggled out from under the stigma still imposed on people with HIV, and gives a gentle – and funny – sex education lesson on the way. Told without self-pity, his story packs a real emotional punch that resonates even after you’ve left the theatre. AN Until 1 FebruaryThis buoyant solo show reimagines Moby-Dick as a young woman’s nocturnal journey from Hounslow to the South Bank. Told in part with animal figurines, it isn’t as twee as it sounds – even if Ahab has become a three-legged ginger cat. The story’s actual quest is not for the great white whale, but for joy and calm in a chaotic world. The Wild Unfeeling World comes with a full-hearted performance by our host – call her not Ishmael but Casey Jay Andrews. It will sweep you away. CW Sofie Hagen: The Bumswing (28-30 Jan) – “a tricksy trip into a slippery comic mind” James McNicholas: The Boxer (30-31 Jan) – “a knockout comedy” George Fouracres: Gentlemon (1-2 Feb) – “sketches of childhood by a poetic pen-portraitist” Since U Been Gone (4-9 Feb) – “a life-affirming study of grief, gender and friendship” Anna and Helen: Stuck in a Rat (5-7 Feb) – “self-care klutzes conjure comedic bliss” Alex Edelman: Just for Us (11-16 Feb) – “a Jewish comic walks into a Nazi meeting …” Sexy Lamp (16 Feb) – “actor shines stark light on the misogyny of her industry” Beach Body Ready (17-22 Mar) – “laughing and loving beyond body shame”