Rupert Everett, actor, director, author and staunch Remainer, has described the tensions of sharing a home with his 85-year-old Brexiter mother. Appearing as the guest on BBC Radio 4’s Desert Island Discs on Sunday he confesses that both of them are set in their ways, and that this causes “a certain amount of friction”. The 60-year-old also reveals that, despite now living quietly like a “kind of country blob”, with his mother, partner and dog, he suspects he will never give up acting. “It is very difficult to let go,” he admits. Everett found fame aged 22 in Another Country, the Julian Mitchell play based on the life of spy Guy Burgess, also made into a film co-starring Colin Firth. He went on to enjoy “flash in the pan” Hollywood status, co-starring in films with Miranda Richardson, Julia Roberts, Madonna and even an orangutan (in Dunston Checks In), before his career foundered. “Success has come to me both too early and too late,” he tells host Lauren Laverne. “I would have preferred it to have come in the middle, in a more normal way, but anyway, it comes when it comes.” The “incredible ambience” created during rehearsals for a play, for Everett, remains an old-fashioned pleasure. “Rehearsing is rather like post offices, or something,” he says. “It is a form of communication that has more or less disappeared.” The actor is currently rehearsing in New York for a new Broadway production of Edward Albee’s Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?. Choosing musical tracks that range from Wagner to Stormzy, via the work of his own “household gods”, Pet Shop Boys, Everett rejects Laverne’s standard offer of a copy of the bible for his island castaway experience and selects Graham Greene’s Travels With My Aunt as his preferred reading matter. His choice of luxury is a selection of “decent vegetables” to eat. The actor tells Laverne he inevitably grew up to have a “generally frosty,” slightly distant personality after the “heartbreaking experience” of being sent to boarding school at the age of seven. “It cauterises some emotional thing,” he says. “I think these schools were made for empire because they calcified the hearts of the empire rulers. They would never be as hurt again as they were hurt by the abandonment of their parents.” As a child he had wanted to be a girl, he says, and adored his mother, his aunt and his grandmother. “I didn’t trust men. All the men in my family went sailing or they played golf – two things I found unutterably grim. I loved necklaces and bras and nestling up to my mum.” He embraced homosexuality after leaving school at 16 to move to London and learn to act. Coming out as gay, he says, helped him overcome his family’s “regimented, militaristic” background. “Every shag, I felt at the time, was knocking that down and destroying it. I felt I had lost myself from my own previous life.” He regards himself lucky not to have contracted HIV and says that losing friends to the illness meant that he became difficult to work with. “I was on a short fuse. I was a very jaggedy, strange freak.” Oscar Wilde, always a favourite writer for Everett, brought him renewed success in 2018 when he directed and starred in The Happy Prince, his own screenplay about the playwright’s later life, The mystery is, Everett suggests to Laverne, why it took him so long to take up writing professionally.