A 26-year-old man has been charged with the murder of a woman at a horse-breeding farm in Devon. Luigi Palmas, of no fixed abode, is accused of killing Katherine Bevan, 53. Palmas has also been charged with a further count of assault occasioning actual bodily harm in connection with an incident in Exeter on 20 January. He is due to appear before Exeter magistrates court on Wednesday. Bevan’s body was discovered at Combe Farm in the village of Gittisham, near Honiton, Devon, on 3 January. Police did not initially treat the death as suspicious but after a postmortem last weekend they launched a murder inquiry. Combe Farm Arabian Stud breeds show and endurance horses. Speaking before Palmas was charged, Michael Harris, the owner of the farm, said: “Katherine was a very, very dear friend and a wonderful person. She was the most amazing person and we miss her so very much.” Harris added: “Kate has been a friend and helping up here for the last five years. She started living here about a year ago. She was part of our family and she sat with us for dinner every night. “She was amazing and gentle. It is utterly awful. She helped with one bull and the cattle and the horses. She had a passion for cattle.” Bevan, who was known as Kate, was found in a bull pen at the farm and initially it was thought she might have died in an accident involving one of the animals. Last month she published a book called Knowing Daisy, which centred on her work with cattle, and in particular a calf called Daisy, at Combe Farm. Bevan wrote: “I could have no idea of what lay ahead and how this tiny brown calf staring back at me would change my life for ever. I have been so blessed to be given the opportunity to go on this journey, one which has not only changed my life but changed me.” She revealed she was drawn to the farm by the horses but stayed after falling in love with a herd of cattle. Bevan described the farm “the most perfect location I have ever found. A stunning landscape, amazing views and a charm all its own”. She said: “Looking after young Daisy in those early days, I very quickly realised I could not imagine my life without her. I also began to learn just how affectionate and loving these little creatures are.” In addition to her work on the farm, Bevan also worked at a veterinary group purchasing and managing medicines. Her last post on Facebook was on New Year’s Eve when she posted pictures of two of the farm’s horses and wrote: “Matisse and Elderberry enjoying some time in Turkey Field on Saturday. They had a great time running and bucking and then rolling in the mud!”