Pat Cummins expects Australia to stick with their first-choice bowling attack for the series decider against India as they try to counteract Bangalore’s flat wicket. The Aussies have travelled to the state of Karnataka for Sunday’s decider knowing they will likely face another tough prospect for their bowlers. India’s big first-innings total of 340 in Friday’s win in Rakjot was considered close to a par score, and Bangalore isn’t expected to be any different. It’s left Australia attempting to figure out how to best strangle India’s batsmen. The Australians had seriously considered inserting Josh Hazlewood in Rajkot in a bid to rest Cummins or Mitchell Starc, with Kane Richardson the mainstay. But with the series on the line, Cummins said he and Starc had recovered well and weren’t anticipating any selection changes. “I think everyone is full strength, so we’ve got a series to win,” Cummins said. “It’s series on the line, so you just pick your best XI. I spoke to Starcy quickly, but he doesn’t seem to have any niggles or anything. We’ve said we’ll get over to Bangalore and we’ll assess those things.” Conditions in India are not made for quicks in one-day cricket. The average run rate at Bangalore over the past 12 years is been 6.28, and that includes low-scoring innings from Kenya and Canada in the 2011 World Cup. Australia also chased down 190 in 19.3 overs to beat India at the ground last year, courtesy of a Glenn Maxwell century. “It feels like the ball goes further in the air, it sort of travels, you see lots of sixes generally there,” Steve Smith said. “It’s quite a fast outfield from memory, and it’s usually a nice-paced wicket.” Cummins has routinely been the best Australian quick in the tough conditions. He was the only pace bowler to go at less than a run a ball in Rajkot with 0-53, while he took 2-44 in Australia’s series-opening win in Mumbai. He bowls largely without the distinct variations of T20 specialists, who are accustomed to playing on such wickets. But regardless, his economy rate of 4.69 in India is the best of any pace bowler from the past decade who has played more than 10 matches there. “I just think about run rates and try and build as many dots as you can,” Cummins said. “You see a few of the wickets that have come about is just after five or 10 dot balls I don’t feel like there are heaps of options. There’s no sideways movement. You can bowl slower balls to try and upset the rhythm, but it’s still not that big of a wicket ball. I still use the bouncer, I feel like that is a wicket-taking ball. But it’s just about trying to keep it really simple.”