London, WednesdayIt would be absurd to suggest that London women have been rushing for bargains at the winter sales, which began in some of the largest shops and in many of the smaller ones to-day. One’s experience is that the day of the “Haste to the sales” spirit has been over for some years, if indeed it ever existed to the extent that some people believe. And such excitement as there may be certainly does not reach its height until all the sales are in full swing. The reason probably is that women nowadays have such a great variety of materials and designs and colourings to select from that they have become fastidious. Most of them know exactly what they want, and all of them know what they do not want, and half the fun of the sale consists in searching for things they dream of. They will not hurry to buy something approaching their desire on December 31 if by waiting till January 5 they will get the very thing. They like to inspect and compare, and to take time over it. So the women at the early doors this morning were those who had studied the promise of the windows, and they went there to make sure of getting it. But there were probably not many who took the trouble. It is, of course, to the advantage of the shopkeepers that women should be educated shoppers. It means a steady and satisfied purchasing spread over a longer period, instead of an impulsive and reckless buying with subsequent disappointment. One thing noticed to-day was that most of the people were inside the shops, and not, as is usually the case, passing from window to window, often without going in. In fact, in one of the busiest parts of Oxford Street this morning a man standing on the pavement found plenty of room to swing his umbrella by the ferrule and demonstrate to a friend what happened with one of his golf strokes. So much for the “sales rush.” Dress materials are offered at varying reductions. Women can get woollen and cotton materials, silks and satins for a satisfactorily low price, and they are not neglecting the opportunity. It was especially interesting to see that the figured dress materials, which were the vogue during last summer, but owing to the bad weather had no chance of being properly displayed, are not generally so much reduced in price as the good old stand-by plain materials. This seems to show that the drapers expect the vogue to remain, and the consequent suggestion is that the slim silhouette for which those patterned materials were especially designed will also remain with us. The energy which women are putting into the attainment or preservation of that silhouette is not to be wasted. This is merely a suggestion, but it may prove to have been prophetic. Gloves of all descriptions are cheap, so are shoes, and the silk stocking bargain counter is a feature of the sales. Remembering the desire of the silk industry to affix the name “rayon” to artificial silk material and hosiery, it was interesting to note that rayon by the yard and rayon stockings are now being offered and brought at bargain prices. This is an edited article