Cristiano Ronaldo continued his superb scoring form as Juventus won 2-1 away to Roma and moved two points clear at the top of Serie A.Merih Demiral put the Italian champions ahead early on before Ronaldo fired home a penalty to double their advantage with just 10 minutes played. It was Ronaldo’s 14th league goal of the season and his ninth in the last six Serie A appearances.Things got worse for Roma towards the end of the first half when winger Nicolo Zaniolo was taken off in tears on a stretcher with a leg injury, but the hosts pulled one back on 68 minutes through a Diego Perotti penalty. The result leaves Juventus on 48 points at the top of the table at the midway stage of the season, two ahead of Inter Milan, while Roma are fifth on 35 points.Earlier, Hellas Verona came from behind to beat Genoa 2-1 and rise to eighth in the standings on 25 points, leaving the relegation battling visitors stranded in 18th place with 14 points. Sampdoria came from behind to record their biggest win of the season and move five points clear of the relegation zone with a resounding 5-1 victory over Brescia in Serie A on Sunday.Jhon Chancellor headed the visitors in front after just 12 minutes, but Claudio Ranieri’s side responded through strikes from Karol Linetty and Jakub Jankto before the break. Fabio Quagliarella extended the home side’s advantage from the penalty spot with 21 minutes remaining, before substitute Gianluca Caprari headed in a fourth and Quagliarella’s injury time lob completed the rout.Giuseppe Iachini earned his first win as Fiorentina coach in his second game in charge after a late German Pezzella header clinched a 1-0 win over bottom club SPAL to lift the 14th-placed hosts up to 21 points. Alex Berenguer’s early strike was enough to give Torino a 1-0 win at home to Bologna and take Walter Mazzari’s side above AC Milan, Napoli and Parma into seventh place on 27 points. In the early kick-off, Udinese recorded a third consecutive win with a 3-0 victory over Sassuolo, thanks to goals from Stefano Okaka, Ken Sema and Rodrigo De Paul. Paris St Germain’s defensive shortcomings were exposed as Monaco snapped the champions’ Ligue 1 winning streak in a thrilling 3-3 draw at the Parc des Princes on Sunday.Neymar opened the scoring for the leaders, but Monaco, who were playing their first Ligue 1 game under new coach Robert Moreno, hit back with goals from Gelson Martins and Wissam Ben Yedder.PSG levelled with an own goal from Fode Ballo-Toure and Neymar netted his second to put them ahead, before substitute Islam Slimani grabbed a point for the visitors. Neymar opened the scoring for the leaders, but Monaco, who were playing their first Ligue 1 game under new coach Robert Moreno, hit back with goals from Gelson Martins and Wissam Ben Yedder.PSG levelled with an own goal from Fode Ballo-Toure and Neymar netted his second to put them ahead, before substitute Islam Slimani grabbed a point for the visitors.The result left PSG on 46 points from 19 games, five ahead of second-placed Olympique de Marseille, who have played a game more. Monaco are eighth on 29 points having also played 19 games.