Name: Romantic “arrangements”. Age: As old as romance itself. Appearance: George Orwell’s wife letting him get off with his ex-girlfriend. That’s grim. What is? The idea of a sexually aroused Orwell? Yes! Look, just because you happen to equate Orwell with damp, mould and misery doesn’t mean he didn’t enjoy getting his leg over sometimes. Oh God. Stop! I can’t stop, because Orwell’s sex life is in the news, which makes it relevant. For heaven’s sake, why? Because romantic letters that Orwell wrote to women outside of his marriage to Eileen O’Shaughnessy have been unearthed. One of them was written the day after their wedding. Another suggests that he should have sex with the recipient on a biannual basis, with the approval of his wife. Really? It says of O’Shaughnessy: “She wished I could sleep with you about twice a year, just to keep me happy.” And did he sleep with her? It doesn’t seem likely. Another letter whines: “You thought you would finally take a lover, and if so I don’t see why it shouldn’t be me.” Not Orwell, too. Pardon? They make him sound … what’s the word? Creepy. Yes, Orwell sounds creepy. Ah, but there was so much more to these letters than that. They are being hailed as transformational in our understanding of Orwell the man. He wasn’t just pestering women for sex, you see, he was using them as a sounding board for his book ideas. And then pestering them for sex. Yes, but the book ideas. To think, without these letters there might not be a Nineteen Eighty-Four. Oh, I thought Nineteen Eighty-Four existed because Orwell took inspiration from his wife’s poem End of the Century, 1984. O’Shaughnessy wrote that? She sounds great, doesn’t she? Indeed. Anyway, thank goodness these sort of arrangements are behind us now. Don’t speak too soon. Why? You know what the hot horticultural trend is? Pampas grass. Is it? Apparently so. Millennials see it as an environmentally conscious alternative to cut flowers. Stacey Dooley is reportedly a big fan. But doesn’t planting pampas grass in your front garden mean … That you are into swinging? That is correct. It is why no one has grown pampas grass for the past 40 years. But it is back. Does that mean that all millennials are swingers? No. If only Orwell were around to write us a horny letter explaining as much. Do say: “He was one of Britain’s finest writers.” Don’t say: “Unfortunately, he is cancelled.”