My oldest son and I are sitting at the kitchen table when my wife walks in, looks out of the window and sighs. It is the middle of a long, dark afternoon. Rain drops begin to hit the skylight. “Today I found the dog barking at the hose caddy,” my wife says. “The what?” I say, looking up from the newspaper. “The hose caddy,” she says. “Hose caddy?” I say. I cannot, for the moment, imagine these two words being linked together for any reasonable purpose. “Why does no one listen to me?” my wife says. “What’s this?” says the oldest one, looking up from his laptop. “The hose caddy!” my wife shouts. “The plastic thing with the crank that the hose winds up into!” I stare into space for a moment. “Oh yeah, OK,” I say. “Please start your story again.” “So I went out there and I said, ‘Why are you barking at a hose caddy, you moron?’” Yes, good,” I say. “And then I kicked the hose caddy and a rat jumped out of it and ran up the wall,” my wife says. “A rat lives in our hose caddy?” I say. “Yes,” my wife says, slumping into the chair across from mine. “And do you know why?” I stare into the middle distance again. This conversation is like an exam, I think. Then something dawns on me. “Is it all the bird seed?” I say. “Correct,” my wife says. “I tried to do something nice for the birds, and I have attracted only vermin: pigeons, squirrels, parakeets and now rats.” The oldest one looks up again. “I mean, it’s all wildlife, right?” he says. “Exactly,” I say. “You can’t just pick and choose.” “If a rat had jumped out at you, you would have screamed,” my wife says. “I’m in tune with nature,” I say. But I think: it’s gonna be a long time before I use that hose for anything. “My hobby is ruined,” she says. Two days later, I am sitting in my office shed, communing with vermin. On the other side of the glass, a parakeet is hanging from one of the feeders, patiently enlarging the tiny parakeet-proof holes with the point of its beak as I watch. On the ground beneath, a fat pigeon is hoovering up any spilled seed. Just outside the door, a squirrel is trying to work out how to get under the netting that is stretched over a large pot containing tulip bulbs. He gives me a sharp look and carries on. My presence has long ceased to provide any kind of deterrent to their operations, but I’ve stopped minding. We’re all just out here, I think, scavenging away. It’s almost harmonious. I finish my morning’s work, and break for a late lunch. When I open my office door, the squirrel retreats a few feet and waits for me to pass. The parakeet pauses in its work as I walk under the feeder and the pigeon reluctantly steps out of my way. My wife is not home, and there is no food. I pull on my coat and trudge down to the shops. By the time I have returned and eaten, it’s nearly 3pm. I make coffee. Rain batters the skylight in earnest. Darkness begins to collect in the corners of the room. My phone pings with a work query. To answer it I need my diary, which is sitting on my desk across the garden. I open the back door, hunch my shoulders and run, eyes on my feet. My approach inadvertently startles the parakeet on the feeder, and he takes off. In his hurry, he flies directly into my office window. I look up when I hear the thud, and find myself closing in on a panicky green blur. With nowhere else to go, the parakeet turns and flies directly at me. For a horrible moment, he is flapping his wings in my face. “Jesus Christ!” I scream, staggering backwards. Safely behind my office door, I pretend to consult my diary, ignoring the pounding of my heart, but I’m not even looking at the right page. The parakeet, I notice, is sitting in the bare branches of the cherry tree, looking down at me and panting. I turn back to my diary, feeling like a caged thing.