Jess Phillips is due to announce she will stand as a candidate in the Labour leadership contest, it is understood. The Birmingham Yardley MP will join Emily Thornberry and Clive Lewis as confirmed candidates. Others including Rebecca Long Bailey, Keir Starmer and Lisa Nandy are expected to join the race formally in the coming days. Phillips was first elected to parliament in 2015. She has achieved prominence with her campaigning on equality issues and tackling violence against women and has at times been a fierce critic of the party’s direction. Jeremy Corbyn announced in the aftermath of last month’s election defeat that he would stay on for a “period of reflection”. The party’s ruling national executive committee (NEC) will meet on Monday to set the timetable for the contest, which is expected to be completed by the end of March. Phillips had long been regarded by colleagues as likely to make a bid to lead Labour. She tweeted on Wednesday that she had “woken up with an absolute cob on about the people who get to make decisions about our lives”. Happy New Year everyone I've woken up with an absolute cob on about the people who get to make decisions about our lives. 2020 starts with fire in my belly and I promise that won't change #howbloodydarethey pic.twitter.com/uDftva9SP2 Phillips’s campaign will present her as a strong personality who can take on Boris Johnson in the House of Commons. She is expected to urge Labour to acknowledge the scale of its general election defeat, and in particular the loss of working-class voters. The leadership race is widely regarded as a battle for the future of Labour, after the scale of last month’s defeat took many at the top of the party by surprise. The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, sought to shoulder the blame for Labour’s performance, saying a few days afterwards: “It’s on me. Let’s take it on the chin. I own this disaster. I apologise to all those wonderful Labour MPs who’ve lost their seats who’ve worked so hard … If anyone’s to blame, it is me. Full stop.” His intervention was widely seen as a bid to clear the way for a leftwing successor, most likely Long Bailey – although Ian Lavery has also not ruled himself out. Corbyn has insisted Labour “won the arguments” on key issues from austerity to the climate crisis and lay much of the blame for the defeat on Brexit. The final decision on who will succeed Corbyn will be made by Labour members. But in order to get onto the ballot paper, candidates are expected to have to win the backing of 21 Labour MPs – 10% of the diminished parliamentary party – as well as either 5% of constituency parties or 5% of trade unions and other affiliated societies. However, the NEC have considerable power to vary the rules.