When four years ago I interviewed Paul Merton about his work as a panellist on Just a Minute, he told me the reason he’d remained on the Radio 4 show for 28 years was because host Nicholas Parsons – who has died at the age of 96 – was such a “generous, sweet man”. At the time, Merton was poised to become the show’s longest-serving panellist, overtaking Kenneth Williams. But he would never overtake Parsons, who served as host since the show’s inception in 1967, deviating only once from his manifest destiny by missing an episode in 2018 through illness. Generosity and sweetness. These virtues sound like curiosities in 2020. What Parsons had in abundance now sound like liabilities in Brexit-broken Britain. Yet Parsons was, throughout much of his career, a man out of time – and not just because he often favoured a cravat. (Is it possible that, just as Gareth Southgate caused a sales bump for waistcoats after he wore them on the World Cup touchlines, so the death of Nicholas Parsons might provoke a spike in neckwear sales? Probably not). Even on Just a Minute, Parsons’ sweetness was his weakness. “Sometimes there would be recordings where the four regulars would gang up on Nicholas,” recalled Merton. “On one show, they talked about his first wife being more attractive than his second.” Compare such digs with Parsons’ appreciation of the loves of his life. “I have had two wives and I loved them both very much,” he said in 2015, “and Ann [his third wife] is still putting up with me.” Sweet! While Williams often snarlingly put down Parsons and threw needy mock-tantrums, the host remained unruffled, or at least appeared so. This double act worked as comedy but was often painful to hear. It has found an echo today in Geoffrey Boycott’s narcissistic rudery to kindly posh boy Jonathan Agnew during BBC cricket coverage. Indeed, Parsons’ persona on radio – the posh straight man, the nice but somewhat dim public schoolboy (Parsons attended St Paul’s School) – was once commonplace in British broadcasting. Think Brian Johnston on Radio 4’s Down Your Way, Derek Nimmo on BBC TV’s All Gas and Gaiters, Henry Blofeld on Test Match Special. When I was a boy, I used to confuse them all. Now I’m a man I can appreciate their grace. All seemed to have stumbled from the pages of PG Wodehouse and arrived bewildered in modern Britain. Their natural home would be playing indoor cricket at the Drones while other members shouted complaints from the bar. But their proper task was to function as an antidote to a coarsening Britain. In losing Parsons at the age of 96, we lose another stalwart in that struggle. When Williams died in 1988, the axe loomed over Just a Minute. The show seemed unthinkable without his trademark elongation of words to thwart the charge of hesitation and his clamorous waspishness. But it proved to be bigger than his personality, and Parsons’ stewardship saw it into a new era. Soon – incredible to relate – women and other hitherto unthinkable demographics were being tasked with speaking for a minute on a subject suggested by Parsons, without repetition, hesitation or deviation. Julian Clary, Graham Norton, Jenny Eclair, Sue Perkins, Ross Noble, Shappi Khorsandi and Gyles Brandreth all helped give Just a Minute a new lease of life. It gave Parsons a new lease too: he became the kindly posh uncle with the gentle moral code from another era. He was once asked what made him unhappy. “Unkindness and insensitivity towards children,” was his answer. For some readers, Parsons may be even better remembered as the host of another game show. “And now, from Norwich, it’s the quiz of the week,” were the words that from 1971 to 1983 heralded his weekly appearance dispensing cash to contestants on Sale of the Century. The rules and provincial locale sound down the years to us from a more austere age. Three contestants started off with £10 each and had to answer questions of varying difficulty, valued between £1 and £5. If a contestant ran out of money, they were eliminated. The winning contestant would be given the opportunity to spend their cash total on top prizes which almost always included a new car, albeit sometimes one made by British Leyland. Was it just a dream or was one winner understandably furious when Parsons unveiled the top prize of a boat on stage? And yet, in the middle of this consumerist frenzy, Parsons kept his smiling composure without sneering at the idiocy or covetousness of his contestants – unlike Bruce Forsyth on the near-contemporaneous The Generation Game. Such was his generosity: Parsons didn’t laugh at, but with. As he lived on, Parsons became even more of a rebuke to the modern age. Sartorially, he was out of temper with athleisure wear and other abominations, observing: “The open-necked shirt is really rather ugly. I have seen people with beautifully tailored jackets on, with an open shirt, with an awful Adam’s apple there.” He realised that swearing wasn’t as cool as its protagonists supposed: “A lot of the young comedians think it is clever to use foul language and they think it is funny. It isn’t.” And he dedicated himself to the best of pleasures. What was the best kiss of your life, the Guardian once asked him? “Too many to remember.” Which is the right answer. He once revealed that one of the worst times of his life was when he tried to become an engineer in Clydebank, though now it sounds like a superb premise for a sitcom: Bertie Wooster as Billy Connolly’s shipbuilding apprentice. Engineering was not his metier. He wanted to be an actor from an early age. In the end, despite many goofball roles as posh foils to funnymen of dubious stamp (he was in The Benny Hill Show), Parsons became what, perhaps, he didn’t expect to be, a lovable host. If it wasn’t maybe the destiny he sought, it was one that gave him and us a great deal of blameless pleasure. And that pleasure was born of the suffering of those of his generation. “People ask how I’ve survived so long. Well, I was in the blitz and there was stoicism in adversity. And humour. Humour has sustained me.”