The beach at Malua Bay is shadowed at both ends by headlands. As bushfire spread to the precipice of the cliffs on Tuesday, more than 1,000 people stood on the beach, hemmed in by a ring of fire and the Pacific Ocean. “Everyone was on the beach, just covered in ash and smoke,” Al Baxter, the former Wallaby, told Guardian Australia. “The winds got stronger and stronger and then about 10am you could hear what sounded like a big waterfall. The smoke got very heavy and to the northwest we started seeing spot fires appearing. “Suddenly we turned around and the headland to the south burst into flame as well and it was a very large fire that had started there. To the south you could see the fires raging through. There were these hot, hot swirling winds, heavy ash, heavy smoke. This bizarre red-orange glow.” @sybilsibyl just posted via fb this pic of Malua Bay an hour ago pic.twitter.com/1PWOuo7sE5 Thank you.. yes my brother evac'd from Malua Bay beach this morning to Batemans Bay and no word since. My mum in Lakes Entrance near Bairnsdale but safe..lots of friends have lost property in the Gippsland area. pic.twitter.com/MLA5rcTcJq Emerging accounts from Malua Bay – where people huddled on the beach for almost 24 hours – are as remarkable as those in other places on the Australian coast, where the waterfront became a fallback line; the only place anyone was safe. Phone reception and power were cut from the area early on Tuesday morning, as the fire came through. Local Facebook pages show repeated panicked messages attempting to find out about Malua Bay and its surrounding communities, as they could not contact loved ones. Anyone in #BatemansBay have info on what is happening in Malua Bay? The phones are down and haven’t heard from our parents since 9am. They are in Tallawang Avenue. #AustralianFires Emergency warnings first came through about 6am. Residents and holidaymakers in the coastal communities immediately south of Batemans Bay – Surf Beach, Lilli Pilli, Malua Bay, Rosedale and Guerilla Bay – were shepherded to the Batemans Bay Surf Life Saving Club at Malua Bay Beach. By 10am, a decision was made that the surf club building was unsafe, and to send people onto the beach. Fire on #maluabay main beach #southcoast #fire pic.twitter.com/aCx7MAUR7y “There were spot fires pretty much at the side of the road and everyone got sent out of the surf club,” Baxter said. “There were a couple of horses on the beach, dogs, cats, budgies, prize chooks, and a whole menagerie of animals. “There was a strange calmness. People were as close to the water’s edge as they could [be]. People were literally just lying on the beach trying to keep out of the smoke and ash. My brother just sent me this video from yesterday at #MaluaBay where him and the rest of my family were stranded. #AustraliaFires #bushfirecrisis #Southcoastfires #AustraliaBurns #BatemasBay #RFS #NSWbushfires pic.twitter.com/LmZvZxWwrk “We started seeing houses on the ridge catching alight, we’d hear a pop every so often of gas bottles. It was pretty hectic until about two or three in the afternoon when the winds calmed down. The RFS said to stay put for the night, the safest spot was here and there was nowhere to go anyway [because roads were closed].”Every half hour, the surf lifesavers sounded the shark alarm and gave people on the beach what little information they could. As night fell, a group found a way into a building site near the beach, where the concrete shell of a future apartment complex provided shelter enough for about 100 people who slept there. Others stayed on the beach. Baxter had been holidaying at Rosewood with a group of about 12 people, his wife, three kids and other friends and family members. They stayed on the floor of a holiday apartment near the beach. By morning enough local roads were open to direct people back to Batemans Bay. The aftermath revealed significant damage to Malua Bay and surrounds. The town’s bowling club was destroyed and at least a dozen homes burned down. Malua Bay yesterday @illawarramerc pic.twitter.com/TWIXiGWBhW It is unclear when roads leading out of the New South Wales south coast will be open; many are desperate to leave before the weekend, when extreme weather is forecast to return. Baxter said he was trying to get to a friend’s place at Mollymook by Tuesday night, and to return to Sydney as soon as possible. And here's what remains of pretty point at Malua #maluabay #BatemansBay pic.twitter.com/NVuuLAAwUY The nature and scale of this bushfire season in Australia is unprecedented. Scientists have cited the lack of moisture in the landscape – following years of drought – as a key reason the fires have been so severe. Intense heat, dry conditions and strong winds have created conditions where the fire risk is considered extreme or catastrophic. While increasing greenhouse gas emissions do not directly cause bushfires, evidence shows they play a role in increasing average and extreme temperatures, which in turn contribute to the extraordinarily dry conditions.