What a difference a year makes. At the end of 2018 I had just won an MP of the Year award – by New Year’s Eve 2019, I had lost a job that I loved. A week to pack up the parliamentary office, up to two months to wind up the constituency office, and then the absolute worst part: making my amazing staff redundant. You can’t get away from the instability of politics. Democracy rightly gives us the ability to remove politicians from positions of power. In a marginal seat such as mine – Crewe and Nantwich – the situation was always going to be more precarious. There is a common misconception that all MPs have bags of money and receive huge payoffs if they lose their seat. Like many colleagues who lost their seats, I don’t have a family fortune or lots of friends in high places. When I attended an appointment at my local jobcentre last week, a few people were shocked to see me there. One even took a photograph on their phone. I am working-class. When the work stops, the money stops, and a new source of income must be found. I’m not embarrassed to be in my situation – I have two kids and two pensioners who live with me and I have a responsibility to provide for them. It’s not easy being out of work so suddenly but I don’t regret anything. I have been incredibly lucky to have had the opportunity to be an MP, something I will always be grateful to the people of Crewe and Nantwich for. When I first ran for parliament, in 2017, I was very much the underdog. Described at the time in a somewhat misogynistic way as a “shrill local critic” of the sitting Conservative MP, I was actually just a strong and outspoken representative of my community. I was a working mother, a local school cuts campaigner and an ex-teacher with an axe to grind about the impact austerity was having on my community. I was fed up with politicians being so detached from reality. Some friends were being made redundant, while others were scraping by to pay for childcare to enable them to work. A colleague who was a teaching assistant confided in me that she was having to use the food bank. I was angry – and frankly still am. I had also come to the conclusion that politics isn’t some faraway thing that other people do, but a thing that affects everything about our lives – and so the only way to change the fortunes of my people was to get involved. That’s why I stood for election. Parliament needed more voices like mine. When I was elected, one of the things that made me so overjoyed was that now all these people had someone like them to fight for what they needed. I would be their voice in Westminster. My experience would also be proof that if I could do it, others like me could as well. I refused to let the snobbery in parliament bother me and I spoke up for what I believed in. Any feeling of impostor syndrome I might have had was pushed to the back of my mind. If we truly want our political system to work and people to be more engaged, then it is vital that we have more representatives who understand the daily existence of the average person. Even now I’m out of office I won’t stop fighting for my area and the people that I love. I would encourage anyone with a burning desire for change to now throw themselves into the fight. If my two years in parliament has taught me anything, it’s that we can’t let the privileged few determine our future. • Laura Smith is the former Labour MP for Crewe and Nantwich