Boris Johnson rolled over in bed and groaned. It was hard to know which was worse. The sunburn or the jet lag. He closed his eyes, willing himself back to the paradise idyll of his £20,000 per week beach hut in Mustique. That was his happy place. The place where he could forget that a prime minister was supposed to give a toss about the outbreak of war in the Middle East and chill out with a couple of long margaritas, and pretend he was 30 all over again. “Get up,” barked Dominic Cummings, pulling down his trousers to expose one arse cheek as he drew the curtains open. He was the mavericks’ maverick. The misfits’ misfit. The exhibitionists’ exhibitionist. “You’ve been back three days now and you haven’t yet made it downstairs. Parliament has returned and you’re going to have to say something about the US wet job on Qassem Suleimani and the Australian bushfires.” “What bushfires?” Boris moaned, tugging at his hair. Classic Dom sighed. The prime minister was in even worse shape than he had imagined. Best to keep things simple. In his current state, Boris could not be trusted not to screw things up by making a Commons statement that didn’t either end up condoning the American hit job or screw up any chance of a post-Brexit trade deal with the US. What was needed was someone who was too dim to realise he had been thrown under a bus by being forced to defend the indefensible while simultaneously trying to maintain an air of feigned detachment. Under ordinary circumstances Dominic Raab would have been the ideal choice, but now was not the time to send out an angry psychopath who would have happily volunteered to fire the drone himself. It would have to be the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, then. The cabinet’s very own Captain Darling. A man of so many limitations, he has yet to register double figures on any IQ scale. A man with the virtue of mindless loyalty who would regard being used as collateral damage as the highest honour that could be bestowed on him. Darling Darling. So just after 3.30pm, Wallace found himself on his feet reading out a statement that would have amounted to his own death warrant in the previous parliament, but now barely raised an eyebrow. With an 80-seat majority, the Tories have licence to pretty much do what they want. We are in a brave new world where the idiots have full licence to be idiots. The People’s Idiots. Darling Darling does have the ideal voice for such a suicide mission. A dull, entitled monotone that makes every listener forget the beginning of a sentence long before it has been brought to a close. Suleimani had been a bad man, so he’d probably had it coming. And the Americans had said he was going to do more bad things and he saw no reason not to disbelieve them even though they hadn’t been able to offer any evidence to that effect. So when you came to think about it, the US had actually displayed superhuman self-restraint by not whacking him sooner. But the UK was keen that the killing should not escalate into a third world war, and the prime minister had done his best to operate cocktail diplomacy from Mustique once the US had supplied him with the Sky News footage of the aftermath of the drone strike. In fact, Boris had gone the extra mile by WhatsApping a few world leaders to find out what the fuck was going on and he was now urging the Iranians to avert a crisis by acting with more restraint than the US. So sweet. Darling Darling didn’t even realise he’d effectively called the US a rogue state. The Labour benches were almost empty for Jeremy Corbyn’s reply. It was sod’s law that the one time the Labour leader had a decent case to make, both about the dangers posed by President Trump and the UK’s dependence on him, it had come when he was a political irrelevance. He briefly stated the obvious – that going around assassinating world leaders was a dangerous precedent – before sitting down to near silence. Apart from a few jeers from Tories who appeared keen on the idea of mobile death squads taking out anyone they fancied. Jeremy Hunt was also fully deranged. He’s clearly bitterly regretting once having had enough principle to refuse a job in Boris’s cabinet and is now desperate to get reinstated. He had always loved the Donald and was fed up with people maligning him. All that had happened was that the president had got a little bit narked that some Nato countries were not pulling their weight and had wanted to teach them a lesson about what might happen if they didn’t get their act together. Now was the time to remind countries of their financial obligations to Nato rather than giving the US a hard time about one little killing. Darling Darling trundled on obliviously. Everyone could be forgiven one extrajudicial murder. It just mustn’t be allowed to become a habit. And though the killing might not have been legal under UK law, the US were noticeably much more relaxed about homicide and we should respect their traditions. Each to their own and all that. On the whole he would draw the line at the UK condoning war crimes, but each case would have to be considered on its own merits. On the plus side it was only 7 January and Wallace knew his year couldn’t get any worse. Over in Downing Street, Boris was fairly certain that his year had already peaked. Running the People’s government was a piece of piss when all you had to do was remain resolutely out of sight.