The broadcaster Clare Balding, who fronted an emergency appeal for victims of the Yemen crisis, has pulled out of speaking at an arms industry annual dinner attended by many of the companies whose weapons are fuelling the country’s civil war. She was due to host the ADS Group dinner at an undisclosed location in London. Tickets for the event – whose previous speakers have included the broadcaster Jeremy Vine and the Labour former cabinet minister Alan Johnson – cost up to £470 each. ADS represents BAE Systems, who supply parts for the Typhoon and Tornado jets that are playing a role in the Saudi-led coalition bombing of Houthi insurgents in Yemen, and Raytheon, whose UK-made Paveway IV bombs have been linked by Human Rights Watch to attacks on civilian infrastructure. Other members include MBDA, a missile company part-owned by BAE whose Brimstone and Storm Shadow missiles are being used by Saudi forces, and Lockheed Martin, the largest arms company in the world, whose bombs were used by Saudi forces in the destruction of a school bus in which dozens of children were killed. Campaign Against the Arms Trade (CAAT) approached Balding’s representatives urging her to rethink her decision, pointing out that in 2016 she hosted the Disasters Emergency Committee appeal to help the people of Yemen. In an email, the campaign group said: “It is clear why these companies want to be associated with positive causes, and why they want to work with respected personalities and role models. “We respect and admire all of the excellent advocacy work that you do, which is why we are asking you to reconsider your attendance and cancel your speech.” After being told that the Observer intended to write a story about Balding’s appearance at the dinner, a spokesman for her representatives, YMU Group, said: “I can confirm that Clare is in fact no longer attending the event due to various reasons and to clarify, this decision was made before we were made aware of the article.” The ADS website continued to promote Balding’s attendance. It carries a quote from her saying: “I’m looking forward to meeting the ADS members and sharing a great evening together.” Sarah Waldron, of CAAT, said: “We are glad that Clare Balding has withdrawn her support for the ADS dinner and encourage any other public figures that are approached to do the same. This dinner is a major networking opportunity for the arms companies, and the deals being discussed and furthered over dinner could have devastating consequences for years to come.”