England will contest their Six Nations opener against France without Joe Launchbury after the Wasps captain was ruled out by a knee problem. Launchbury sustained the injury in Wasps’ 27-0 Challenge Cup defeat by Bordeaux Bègles a week ago and will sit out the trip to Paris on 2 February. He is receiving treatment at the squad’s Algarve training base and it is hoped he will recover in time for the Calcutta Cup clash with Scotland on 8 February. The 28-year-old was a member of Eddie Jones’ World Cup squad last autumn but made only one appearance, in the pool game against the United States. Even if fit, the 62-cap second row was unlikely to be involved in the matchday 23 against France. His experience was a useful option for Eddie Jones in a squad with several uncapped players. The trip to Paris will be Simon Amor’s first match as England’s new attack coach following seven years as Twickenham’s sevens supremo, a reign that includes masterminding Team GB’s silver medal at the 2016 Olympics. Amor, whose only prior fifteens coaching experience came at London Scottish, takes over from Scott Wisemantel having overseen sessions in the buildup to the World Cup. “Eddie [Jones] and I had some conversations before Japan. It was wonderful to get the opportunity to work in that environment and we finalised things afterwards,” Amor said. “I feel very lucky. This is a tremendous opportunity to work with a brilliant group of players and a master coach. Forwards Luke Cowan-Dickie (Exeter Chiefs, 21 caps), Tom Curry (Sale Sharks, 19 caps) Tom Dunn (Exeter Chiefs, uncapped), Ben Earl (Saracens, uncapped), Charlie Ewels (Bath Rugby, 12 caps), Ellis Genge (Leicester Tigers, 14 caps) Jamie George (Saracens, 45 caps), Ted Hill (Worcester Warriors, 1 cap), Maro Itoje (Saracens, 34 caps), George Kruis (Saracens, 41 caps), Joe Launchbury (Wasps, 62 caps) Courtney Lawes (Northampton Saints, 81 caps), Lewis Ludlam (Northampton Saints, 6 caps), Joe Marler (Harlequins, 68 caps), Alex Moon (Northampton Saints, uncapped), Kyle Sinckler (Harlequins, 31 caps), Will Stuart (Bath Rugby, uncapped), Sam Underhill (Bath Rugby, 15 caps), Mako Vunipola (Saracens, 58 caps), Harry Williams (Exeter Chiefs, 18 caps). Backs Elliot Daly (Saracens, 39 caps), Ollie Devoto (Exeter Chiefs, 1 cap), Fraser Dingwall (Northampton Saints, uncapped), Owen Farrell (Saracens, 79 caps), George Ford (Leicester Tigers, 65 caps), George Furbank (Northampton Saints, uncapped), Willi Heinz (Gloucester Rugby, 9 caps), Jonathan Joseph (Bath Rugby, 47 caps), Jonny May (Leicester Tigers, 52 caps), Ollie Thorley (Gloucester Rugby, uncapped), Manu Tuilagi (Leicester Tigers, 40 caps), Jacob Umaga (Wasps, uncapped), Anthony Watson (Bath Rugby, 42 caps), Ben Youngs (Leicester Tigers, 95 caps) “It’s really important for me to recognise the huge growth this team has made in attack since Scott came on board,” Amor added. “As someone who has been doing sevens for the last seven years, watching how England have evolved was great. “Where can I add value to the team? Sevens is all about space and time … if you get things wrong in sevens you concede tries. So how do you put people under pressure and challenge them? That’s where I feel we can make some great progress. “Working in sevens gives you a different perspective and adds to the blend of the team, which is really important in any coaching team.”