It pays to keep an eye on England batsmen who make their debut at the age of 22 or younger. The chances are they will become very substantial players. True class becomes apparent at an early age and selectors of just about every era have recognised that. England have two batsmen in this category who are about to play in the Test in Port Elizabeth: Zak Crawley and Ollie Pope. Their presence in the side at such a tender age does not guarantee them long and fruitful careers but the evidence suggests they have a better chance than most of success as Test batsmen. The list of batsmen making their debut at a young age contains most of England’s greats. In the 1930s Denis Compton graduated to the Test team aged just 19, while Len Hutton first appeared as a 21-year-old; other debutants aged 21 were Peter May and Colin Cowdrey in the 50s and David Gower and Graham Gooch in the 70s (though the latter had a hiatus of three years after two disappointing Tests in 1975). Mike Atherton and Nasser Hussain were both 21 when they first played just over a decade later. In the first decade of this century Ian Bell was 22 at the start of his Test career; in the second Joe Root was 21. Of course there are disappointments as well though inevitably they are not so easy to remember. John Dewes was picked as a 21-year-old in 1948 but played only five Tests; for very different reasons it never worked out for Matthew Maynard (22 upon selection) or Mark Lathwell (21) and even though he played in 52 Tests the international career of Mark Ramprakash, another 21-year-old debutant, was ultimately disappointing. Meanwhile England’s youngest Test cricketer, Brian Close, managed only 22 caps in a career spanning 27 years. We still wonder what will become of Haseeb Hameed, now of Nottinghamshire, who first played for England as a 19‑year‑old. Of the current duo Pope has made the steadier start than Crawley. He does not look daunted by the occasion, as Lathwell seemed to be – and he looks calmer than Maynard, who was one of the most devastating county batsmen of his era. Pope is self-assured without being brash. He almost speaks like a veteran (this is his third tour and he now has five Tests under his belt). “The first time I was picked [against India in August 2018, aged 20] I felt like it was almost a bit of a lottery and thinking hopefully I’ll get a score but if I miss out then so be it. Now I feel like I’m in a good place in my game and I know I’ve got the technique and mindset to go out and do it.” He looks compact, yet forceful at the crease. Just about everyone has highlighted a resemblance with Ian Bell, which is based on more than hair colour. However, Pope explains that this resemblance is not intentional. “When I went on the North v South series it was Andrew Strauss who said: ‘Who’s your favourite player growing up?’, and he expected me to say Belly. I think he’s an amazing player and I used to love watching him bat but it’s not been anything that I’ve tried to emulate. It’s a big compliment because he is a pretty class player to watch.” In fact he says his childhood heroes tended to be wicketkeeper/batsmen such as Adam Gilchrist – before remembering to mention his boss at Surrey, Alec Stewart, who is actually too old for the boyhood-hero slot. If Pope has a career even remotely resembling those of Bell, Stewart or Gilchrist, everyone will be extremely satisfied. Having been given a cap at such a young age hints that this is a distinct possibility.