Richie Porte lost the battle but won the Tour Down Under war. The King of Willunga was dethroned on his pet stage by British upstart Matt Holmes on Sunday. However, he did enough to overhaul defending champion Daryl Impey and claim the ochre jersey for the second time. “Of course it would’ve been nice to have won the stage, but to win the race again is a fantastic feeling,” Porte said. “It was a hard day for our team. “There were times there where I thought the GC (general classification) was over and done with because it was a big group up the road. But credit to the guys, they pretty much single-handedly brought that all back and it’s a great feeling to finish their work off this week.” Porte had Danish world champion Mads Pedersen and his other Trek-Segafredo teammates to thank for doing a truckload of work for him throughout the week. It was Porte’s first overall Tour Down Under win since 2017 and continues a remarkable run that has seen him finish in the top two in each of the last six years. Twelve months ago, after finishing runner-up to Impey for the second straight year and fourth time overall, Porte conceded he would struggle to win the Tour Down Under again unless the week-long event added a second stage with a summit finish. It did this year, with Porte winning at Paracombe on Thursday before flying up Willunga to seal the overall title and almost pinch the stage win from behind. Impey (Mitchelton-Scott) had taken a two-second lead into the sixth and final stage but was unable to go with Porte up the hill. “I wasn’t on a great day today,” Impey said. “I struggled a bit there, the bottom of the slopes, and I was probably paying for quite a busy week. That being said, we gave it our all and I’m still happy with the performance, but obviously disappointed. We would’ve liked more, but that’s how it goes.” Holmes, a Lotto Soudal teammate of Australian sprint star Caleb Ewan, ended Porte’s six-year domination of the Willunga Hill stage and secured his first World Tour win in the process. “You know everyone’s on the limit, so I just rode hard and sensible,” Holmes said. “I just had to go with Richie when he came past. He had obviously gone a hell of a lot quicker than me up (the climb) so he had no sprint left.”