At last, one of the Labour leadership candidates has recognised that the main reason for Brexit, SNP success and Labour’s huge defeat, is the massive lack of democracy in Britain. Keir Starmer’s suggestion that Britain should become a federal country (Report, 27 January) must be developed quickly, so it offers a clear alternative to the new Conservative government. A federal Britain can resolve the anomalous status of Northern Ireland and reduce the pressure for Scotland to break away, a move that will make Brexit look like a walk in the park. It can also address the vast differences in wealth, investment and culture across England. With four powerful federal assemblies undertaking much of the government, a federal Britain can reduce the size of the Commons and replace the House of Lords with a senate-type chamber, with new powers and elected by the regions on a PR basis. The federal structure must be accompanied by a massive devolution from Westminster, both to the federal assemblies and local government, bringing services like education, the NHS and transport, properly under local control. Brexit will change Britain significantly, and a federal Britain will offer an appealing example of “taking back control” that will give Labour a new vision around which to rebuild.Christopher RaingerYork • Keir Starmer’s call for federation composed of Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and England does not go far enough. Their approximate populations are 5, 3, 2 and 56 million respectively. A true federation would divide England into the north, Midlands, south-west and south-east, with the capital territory of London serving the UK instead of dominating it. Then we really would see a northern powerhouse. Peter J DiggleLancaster University • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition