Willie Mullins has his focus squarely on the Dublin Racing Festival at Leopardstown on 1 and 2 February, described on Monday as “a huge weekend” by Patrick Mullins, the trainer’s son and assistant. “It’s very important to us with regard to the trainers’ championship,” added Mullins Jr, who spoke at length about the stable’s team for the Leopardstown races, including established stars, leading novices and the veteran Faugheen, now a novice chaser. He’s so easy to ride, you could ride him with your baby toe and baby finger. It was such a pity that he got such a bad fall in the shadows at the last hurdle [at Leopardstown in 2017], it took him about six months to get over it. He lost his form and had a few very average runs, but he has improved since winning the Galway Hurdle [in 2018]. I was disappointed with him in the Morgiana Hurdle, but a lot of our horses have needed their first run. I think he probably wants soft ground to be a two-mile champion hurdle horse. His best form was in the Supreme [at Cheltenham] on soft ground and I think he’ll be very dangerous when he gets soft ground over two miles. He made a mistake at Leopardstown and he did something very similar at the first in the Morgiana, he looks like a horse that’s going a half-stride faster than he’s comfortable. If it comes up soft you’d have to take him very seriously. I think he still has huge potential. I thought he jumped fantastic at Leopardstown at Christmas, he was spectacular, but perhaps we were a bit forward on him. Rachael [Blackmore] probably got the run of the race [on A Plus Tard] and I thought he just blew up, like a lot of our horses that have needed their first run. I was disappointed to get beaten but I wouldn’t say his bubble has burst just yet – but he’ll have to go and win here to live up to his reputation. I think we’ll see a huge improvement from Christmas. I think he got the run of the race in the John Durkan Chase [in December] but he made a few mistakes, which was unusual. I think he won despite not being at his best. He’s been very fragile, and used to be very keen, which was his downfall. He’s settling down much better now. He’s had to learn very quickly and if he goes for the Champion Chase it will be off four runs [over fences]. He’s a horse that we’re just not quite sure how good he is. I was disappointed with his overall performance at Christmas, but I liked the way he battled to win after making a mistake at the last. I’m not sure he’s a sharp enough jumper for two miles; you might see improvement when he goes up to two-and-a-half. He’s in the Flogas [Novice Chase] as well, so we’ll have to see where he runs. For me, he jumps like a horse that wants further. He’s another that improved significantly from his first to his second run. I know Ruby Walsh is very sweet on him and he’s a horse that reminds me a lot of [2018 Arkle Trophy winner] Footpad. He’s a bit like Un De Sceaux, he likes to get on with things. He jumps very well and at Naas this month, Danny [Mullins, his jockey] couldn’t pull him after the line, so he’d obviously got an awful lot left in the tank. I think two-mile chasing is his job. He’s a huge horse, but he makes great use of himself. Ruby rode him during the week and got off with a big smile on his face. Soft ground is going to suit him. He might go for a maiden hurdle rather than turn up here but he’s definitely a Grade One horse for the future. I think he just blew up in the Savills Chase at Leopardstown, and I expect him to improve considerably from that run. He’s come out of it perfectly. As a novice, he was good but not a real Grade One horse, but he’s just improved and improved. It was magic at Limerick at Christmas. There’s a certain responsibility on a horse like that, and to be honest, I didn’t think we’d beat Samcro, but he jumped great. The race took place from the third-last and it was a case of who was going to get slower, not quickening up. The roar when he landed at the back of the last was phenomenal. There were caps in the air and papers flying around. It was very special. I’m not sure we’ve seen him at his best since coming back [from 18 months off] but he’s still won three Grade Ones. This race is the obvious place to go, and I’d imagine that Paul [Townend] will probably want to get back on him. GW The team behind last month’s Market Rasen success with Little Rory Mac has broken up. Owner Adam McCormack says he has sold the horse, who is now registered as in training with Dr Richard Newland, and has moved six other horses, who carry the colours of The Vacuum Pouch Company Limited, from Henry Oliver’s stable to that of Philip Kirby. It is an abrupt end to a partnership that yielded what, from McCormack’s social media output, appeared to be a happy and profitable day when Little Rory Mac scored in a handicap hurdle. “I’ve not had any fall-out with Henry whatsoever,” McCormack told me, “and I wish him the best going forward. He’s a top bloke and trainer.” He said that Kirby’s North Yorkshire base was closer for him to visit the horses more often. Kirby confirmed he had received six horses, four of which are currently in training, including Louis’ Vac Pouch, who had some useful form in his days with Philip Hobbs. Oliver did not return a request for comment. CC Alas, poor Leicester, where the card scheduled for Tuesday has been lost to frost. The track has lost several other racedays since autumn because of waterlogging. Exeter hopes to be able to race but was frozen in places and must pass a 10am inspection. So thank goodness for the all-weather at Newcastle, where Ken’s Sam’s (7.15) is an especially interesting runner at 9-4. From the Ado McGuinness yard that is 6/31 with its British all-weather runners in recent years, the mare has Ben Curtis aboard and is 5lb lower than when beaten a nose at this track last January. She was a “nearest finish” fifth at Dundalk 11 days ago. The well-related Sunshine Fantasy (4.40) should improve for the switch to handicaps at 6-1 or so, while The Right Choice (5.15) is likeable at 11-4 after a near miss at Southwell. CC Exeter 1.00 Kilconny Bridge 1.30 Golden Whisky 2.00 Fanfaron Dino 2.30 Demopolis 3.00 Flagrant Delitiep 3.30 Arqalina 4.00 Prime Venture 4.30 Boulting For GloryLeicester 1.15 Do It For Thy Sen 1.45 Rouge Vif 2.15 Whitehotchillifili 2.45 Big Difference 3.15 Rootless Tree 3.45 Rizzardo 4.15 Kapga De Lily (nb)Newcastle 4.05 Lopes Dancer 4.40 Sunshine Fantasy 5.15 The Right Choice 5.45 Majestic Sands 6.15 Fortamour 6.45 N Over J 7.15 Ken's Sam's (nap)