At his Sydney restaurants Automata and A1 Canteen, Clayton Wells is known for his innovative use of ferments, and flavourful east-meets-west ingredient combinations. Here’s a dinner party menu to recreate the taste at home. Prep three days in advance4x 100g burrata cheese400g heirloom tomatoes2 medium-sized peaches (ripe but firm)10g purple shiso leaves (available at Asian grocers)Extra virgin olive oilSea saltGround pepper To ferment the peachThis recipe requires a vacuum sealer and will need to be prepared three days before it is to be used, if one is not available, fresh peach is just as good! Run a knife around the peaches and then twist to remove the seed from the centre. Cut the peaches into halves then quarters. In a bowl, weigh the peach quarters. For every 100g of peach, add 2.5g of salt. Mix the peach until it is thoroughly coated in salt and let it sit for 20 minutes. Transfer into a vacuum bag and remove all of the air inside. Leave out on a bench for three days at room temperature, or until the bag starts to puff up. Transfer to the refrigerator until required. To serveCut the tomatoes into large slices and season with some sea salt and olive oil. Then let the olives sit in a bowl for 15 minutes before serving. Remove the peaches from the vacuum bag and slice each quarter into thirds. Keep the fermented peach liquid and add a little to the salad. Mix the peach slices in with the tomatoes. Take the four burrata and split between two bowls. Add the tomato and peach salad to the side and garnish with shiso leaves. Finish the burrata with olive oil and ground black pepper. 1kg diamond shell clams1x 47g tin Ortiz anchovies200ml vegetable stock20ml light soy sauce150g unsalted butter, cubed25ml lemon juice1x small preserved lemon zest, pith removed and sliced thin¼ bunch flat leaf parsley To make the anchovy butter sauceIn a small saucepan, bring the vegetable stock, light soy and lemon juice to a simmer and slowly whisk in butter. Add 2/3 of the tin of anchovies and blend with a stick blender until emulsified. Keep aside until required. For the clamsHeat a heavy-based saucepan until very hot, add the clams, place a glass lid over the pot immediately and allow the clams to steam open. Once the clams have opened, remove from the saucepan and drain. Transfer to a serving bowl. Heat the anchovy sauce but don’t bring to the boil, as it could split the sauce. Dress the clams with the sauce, the remaining anchovies, flat leaf parsley leaves and sliced preserved lemon. Makes 6 Requires 6x 80mm round cylinder moulds. For the cheesecake500g strawberries80g caster sugar500g cream cheese125g sour cream7.5g gelatine powder100g fresh cream, warmed150g fresh cream, whipped100g sugar15g vanilla paste For the base200g digestive biscuits, crushed80g butter, melted For the topping5g freeze dried strawberry powder (available at health food and specialty cookery stores)1 bunch lemon myrtle (dehydrated and powdered) To make the baseLine the moulds individually with greaseproof paper. Crush the digestive biscuits into small crumbs and then in a mixing bowl add the melted butter. Place a large spoonful of base mix into each mould and press down into an even layer, approximately 8mm thick. To make the strawberry fillingIn a small saucepan combine strawberries and caster sugar. Cook down until the mixture starts to resemble a loose jam. Cool down and then place a spoonful of mix into the middle of each cylinder mould. To make the cream cheese mixSoak the gelatine and mix with the warmed cream and sugar until dissolved. In a mixer, soften the cream cheese using the paddle attachment. Add in the sour cream and vanilla paste until combined. Fold in the whipped cream and then add the warm cream, gelatine and sugar mix. Once combined, remove from the mixer and fill the moulds to the top. Use a large spatula to clean off the top of the mould before refrigerating for at least four hours. To serveCarefully slide the mould up and remove the paper lining. Dust half of the cheesecake with strawberry powder and the other with lemon myrtle powder.