Limping but inspired, Nick Kyrgios defeated Russia’s 16th seed Karen Khachanov 6-2, 7-6 (5), 6-7 (6), 6-7 (7), 7-6 (10-8) at Melbourne Arena, advancing to the fourth round of the Australian Open. The Australian suffered a left buttock injury in the first set, but was a far bigger pain in the backsides of Khachanov and the umpire, raging his way to a highly anticipated clash with Rafael Nadal. Not for the first time, Kyrgios turned a straight sets breeze into an unhinged psychodrama. This one even came with an omen. The first Saturday of the tournament being the time when Melburnians pour through the gates in pursuit of fun and invariably find it in the bars that now outnumber courts, and the weather being as hot as the tournament has seen so far, a brawl broke out in the arena before play even commenced. Those who weren’t evicted were treated to a more interesting fight – between techniques, temperaments, and in Kyrgios’s case, layers of internal turmoil. He would later dub it one of his greatest wins. The first set wasn’t the mere formality the scoreline suggests. As in the first two rounds, Kyrgios came out in a hurry: his second service game was a 46-second blur. In the sixth game Kyrgios broke somewhat luckily, floating his worst drop shot of the tournament into Khachanov’s path and then smirking as the Russian blasted his cross-court backhand wide. It was a preview of the unexplainable turns the contest would take over four hours and 26 minutes. Moments after Khachanov’s miss, panicked whispers spread through the arena as Kyrgios grimaced and clutched his left buttock. With limited movement, the Australian somehow managed to hold serve, but seconds later headed straight into the bowels of the stadium with the trainer. Like a pantomime villain, he returned and immediately broke Khachanov for a second time, taking the set in 34 disjointed minutes. When Khachanov first emerged on the scene, his height and firepower prompted references to Russia’s men’s star of a generation ago, Marat Safin, who was in the crowd tonight. The comparison was flawed. Khachanov’s training days are regimented, often lasting more than 10 hours, and he likens the routine to an office job. Tonight, his adherence to the fundamentals stood in stark contrast to the methods of tennis’s Happy Gilmore. The second set started with another love service game by Kyrgios but it wasn’t all brute power, and at that point you got the sense that he might start toying with his opponent. But Khachanov dug in. The tie-break rested on a knife edge until Kyrgios won a 24-shot rally to create the only set point he needed: a punishing serve down the middle sealed it in 59 minutes. Whereas the locals in attendance for Australian John Millman’s heart-stopping loss a night earlier were chided for their unpatriotic support of Roger Federer, Kyrgios’s fans could only be relied upon for total silence when Khachanov hit winners. All of this amounted to a pretty bleak outlook for the Russian in the third set, and he wasn’t helped by more unruly crowd behaviour at Melbourne Arena. After both players were distracted by hollering fans, Khachanov conceded a particularly dispiriting break in his third service game and the result seemed foregone. It wasn’t. Never one to make things easy on himself, Kyrgios promptly conceded a break of his own. In the resultant tie-break, Kyrgios took the same kamikaze approach of astonishing winners and total brain-fades as in earlier contests, and let Khachanov stretch it beyond three sets. In the early stages of the fourth, Kyrgios seemed to be proving his mettle. He was also a little reckless, flinging himself around like a wicketkeeper, risking and then acquiring further injury. Bleeding from the hand, he received a time violation for sparing the ball kid the job of dispatching his bloodied towel. “Are you stupid? Can you not see?” Kyrgios screamed at the chair umpire, suddenly apoplectic. “Do your job!” In this instance at least, he did have a point. But in the tiebreak, Kyrgios couldn’t quite do his own job, surrendering a match point and then curling a cross-court forehand wide. Five sets it was. After moving past Gilles Simon in the second round, Kyrgios had made a promise. “My behaviour towards my box tonight was not acceptable,” he said. “In my next match, I don’t want to do that.” He was as good as his word until the third game of the fifth set tonight, screaming in the direction of his entourage. Moments later there was an underarm serve. It was all a bit ragged. Still Kyrgios pressed, and again it took him into a tie-break. What else? To describe the closing moments as tense is selling it short. Kyrgios won the first three points in a canter and then dropped four just as quickly, slipping back into his familiar monologue of self-recriminations. But a backhand winner down the line to make it 8-8 had him flashing the one expression he hadn’t tried all night: a smile. After an unforced error from his opponent, the smile became a jubilant laugh when Khachanov battered a backhand wide and Kyrgios dropped to the court in a state of sheer relief. His self-inflicted ordeal over, it was time to slump into the chair and suck in some deep breaths. “I don’t even know what to say right now,” Kyrgios said afterwards. “It was insane.” He was right again. Kyrgios has never been one to dwell on historical events, but there certainly was history here. His only previous meeting with Khachanov had been a doozy, even by his standards; for smashing two rackets and calling the umpire a “tool” in that meeting at the Cincinnati Masters last August, he was fined heavily and received a suspended 16-week ban. The period of physical, emotional and reputational rehabilitation that followed, and has culminated in a fascinating run this week. It will surely reach its zenith in the upcoming appointment with Nadal, the world No 1 and another player with whom he shares a colourful history. Earlier in the tournament, Kyrgios parodied Nadal’s fidgety pre-serve routine and the comedic turn was a hit. To progress further than this, he’ll have to show the world he can play the straight man too.