The new year kicks off with sequels from two of the biggest names in young adult fiction. Nigerian-American Tomi Adeyemi is rumoured to have earned a seven-figure advance for her 2018 fantasy epic Children of Blood and Bone; a film deal with Fox and a New York Times No 1 swiftly followed. In Children of Virtue and Vengeance (Pan Macmillan), the ritual that succeeded in returning magic to the land of Orisha has proved stronger than imagined, reigniting the powers of not only the maji, but of their enemies too. The series will be a trilogy, and if, at times, that middle book feeling weighs down events, Adeyemi’s consummate world-building remains a star turn, while the political shifts and prejudices reflect contemporary struggles. Given that her high-school-based murder mysteries read like bingeworthy Netflix dramas, it’s easy to see why queen of teen crime Karen McManus is a bestseller on both sides of the Atlantic. In One of Us Is Next (Penguin) she returns to Bayview High, the scene of the crime in her debut, One of Us Is Lying. This time a deadly game of truth or dare is the hook, fuelled by anonymous text messages that threaten to reveal closely guarded secrets. Multiple narrators and compelling family dramas add depth to the addictive storytelling. Alongside the big names are three debuts to look out for. Vincent Ralph’s Are You Watching? (Penguin) is a crime thriller taking a shrewd look at our relationship with social media. Ten years ago, Jess’s mother was the first victim of serial killer the Magpie Man. Now Jess is the star of a YouTube reality series and, in a neat variation on the vlogger fame narrative, plans to use her platform to ensnare the killer. This is a twisty whodunnit, underpinned by the emotive portrait of a family devastated by loss. Oozing atmosphere, this is a deliciously chilling Elizabethan tale with a twist of horror In Trudi Tweedie’s The Pure Heart (Chicken House), Hebridean island girl Iseabail has been employed by a wealthy merchant to be his daughter’s companion. Transported from her modest home to a grand estate in the Scottish borderlands, she is disconcerted by her precocious young charge and a house heavy with secrets. Oozing atmosphere, this reads like a teenage version of recent gothic fantasies like The Binding or The Familiars: a deliciously chilling Elizabethan tale with an injection of horror. Finally, Rory Power combines the challenges of dystopian survival with the dynamics of boarding school life in the wholly original and compelling Wilder Girls (Pan Macmillan). It is 18 months since Raxter school for girls was quarantined following the outbreak of a deadly virus that kills adults and turns girls’ bodies strange and foreign. Both their remote island setting and the girls themselves become ever more wild and dangerous as they await the promised cure. Power’s dark, lyrical tale challenges expectations at every turn; a paean to the power of female friendships. • To order any of these books for a special price click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15