What’s going for it? It’s that time of the year when I fantasise about an escape plan, especially in the current geopolitical climate. Maybe I could move to Hokkaido and train in kintsugi. No, too clumsy of hand and, you know, kind of far. OK, maybe I could move to Brittany and open a B&B. Remember your former “career” in hospitality, Tom, pulling disastrous pints at the local? Best forgotten, eh? Or maybe I could move to the north Pembrokeshire coast and, well, do anything, really. I’d be happy as Larry employed in whatever you threw at me anywhere from St David’s Head to Cemaes Head, so long as I had a brisk walk and a pint in the Golden Lion to look forward to. It’s an illustrious stretch of coastline: a little less visited than the southern coast, but just as alluring, as if purpose-built for gannet-spotting, rugged strolls along knobbly cliffs and discovering sandy coves untouched by human toes. It’s a prime spot for escaping the ills of the universe. Personally, on my days off, I’d roam the Preseli hilltops and study the Neolithic dolmen scattered hereabouts. Who knows, one day I might open that B&B, with a kintsugi school attached. The case against Getting around may be problematic. Jobs are often seasonal. Hotspots, such as Newport, are crowded in summer. Well connected? You’re not here for convenience. That said, thanks to the ferry port to Rosslare in Ireland (handy for other kinds of escapes), there is a station with trains to Carmarthen (50 min), and Cardiff (2hr 30 min). Driving: half an hour to Haverfordwest and St David’s; an hour to Carmarthen; 90 min to Swansea. Buses to Haverfordwest, Cardigan and St Davids and between Newport and Fishguard. Schools Primaries: Gymunedol Croesgoch, Bro Ingli (Newport), Gynradd Sirol Wdig (Goodwick) and, in Fishguard, Glannau Gwaun and Holy Name (Catholic)are all “adequate” in most categories, says Estyn, the Welsh inspectorate. Secondaries: Bro Gwaun in Fishguard is “good”. Hang out at The Shed in Porthgain: pretty much perfect. The Golden Lion in Newport does the trick, too. Top-notch pizzas and burgers at The Canteen in Newport. Where to buy There are plenty of farms and smallholdings with outhouses, plots on which to build, converted chapels and other oddities, plus beautiful cottages and townhouses and your usual Victorians and postwar suburbs. The trick is finding your spot: Fishguard or the delightful Newport, as close as you get to urban around here? Somewhere smaller with a cove, such as Porthgain? Village life? Or remoter still? Large detacheds and townhouses, £350,000-£1m. Detacheds and smaller townhouses, £200,000-£350,000. Semis, £375,000. Terraces and cottages, £70,000-£325,000. Flats, £100,000-£250,000. Rentals: none to speak of. Bargain of the week Former chapel outside Fishguard, grade II listed, in need of conversion (planning permission granted), £129,950 with jjmorris.com. Tom Learmonth “The Shed, Porthgain, does the best fish and chips, and hangs local art.” Jim Wells “Full of artists, art classes, galleries and societies.” •Live on the north Pembrokeshire coast? Join the debate below. Do you live in Forest Row, East Sussex? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by Tuesday 4 February..