Years ago, on my allotment, a tiny weed appeared among my beans. Out of intrigue, empathy – whatever the reason, I left it to see what it would become. A year later I had forgotten about it, buried beneath other weeds. Then, one dusk, there it was, a glowing white spire with the sun setting behind it: Digitalis purpurea subsp. albiflora, the less common form of Europe’s native foxglove. It ignited a weedy epiphany: what if these plants, seen as problems to be evicted, are a source of easy beauty in our gardens? Since childhood I’ve felt a connection with weeds. Behind our family’s cottage garden in Buckinghamshire, I used to run through forests of giant hogweed (Heracleum mantegazzianum), understanding its sap was dangerous. I swung from vines of wild Clematis alba and stomped over ivy (Hedera helix). I fed dandelions with fertiliser to grow bigger flowers. From buttercups to daisies, weeds are probably the first flowers most of us know. Somewhere there’s an unspoken scale that ranks plants from “weed” to “wildflower” through to “ornamental”. At one end sits Japanese knotweed (Fallopia japonica) and, at the other, native bluebells (Hyacinthoides non-scripta); dog rose (Rosa canina) sits in the middle, feeling confused. But a plant is a plant, and if you like it, you should grow it no matter what label it’s been given. “Weed” is merely a broad and usually negative term applied to any plant that pops up where you weren’t expecting it. While many people get frustrated with weeds in gardens, I’ve grown increasingly fond of them. They’re beautiful, and they’re part of the natural world, attracting bees, butterflies and hoverflies. Part of me likes them because they’re so familiar, and come with an emotional connection. A more rebellious part of me likes weeds purely because other people tell me not to. You should avoid weeds that put up too much of a fight, such as couch grass, and those that are invasive in the wild, like Japanese knotweed and Himalayan balsam. But who would be without nutritious stinging nettles, great for soup, insects and homemade fertiliser? These days, as a professional garden designer and horticulturist, I’ve actively incorporated weeds into gardens for clients: ivy-leaved toadflax (Cymbalaria muralis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), common knapweed (Centaurea nigra), yarrow (Achillea millefolium) and red valerian (Centranthus ruber). I’m not the only one: many gardens at the Chelsea flower show now include them; Sarah Price’s Mediterranean garden from 2018 featured wild carrot, red valerian, and common fennel (Foeniculum vulgare). Think twice before you pull them up; they can provide food and shelter for wildlife over winter. Seed heads not only look beautiful at this time of year, but you can scatter their seeds for next summer. Designing with weeds is no different from any other plant. Cow parsley (Anthriscus sylvestris) and wild carrot suit modern and traditional borders; common fumitory (Fumaria officinalis) works well in tropical raised beds alongside banana plants; and common daisies (Bellis perennis) look great in window boxes. Here are a few to get you started – and the ones to avoid. Wild carrotIts lifecycle is filled with beauty, from ferny foliage to flat white flowers. Common knapweedA slender meadow weed that brings height with its colourful flowers; an excellent source of nectar. Red valerianA non-native loved by butterflies and the hummingbird hawk moth. Caper spurge (Euphorbia lathyris)Structural, and perfect in part-shade. Has biennial growth, so you can make the most of its low foliage one year, its tall, standout flowers the next. Common fumitoryPart of the poppy family, it has clusters of tiny pink flowers each with a dark tip that fades to almost white. Hedge bindweed (Calystegia sepium)Its pure white trumpet flowers look pretty, but it spreads like wildfire. Couch grassOften in gardens and allotments. Extract as much as you can, then repeat regularly. Green alkanet, (Pentaglottis sempervirens)Owner of a deep and stubborn taproot. Dig it out, making sure you get all of the root. Horsetail (Equisetum arvense)Will spread rapidly and aggressively. Weed-suppressant matting will kill it, but it takes two years to do the job. Himalayan balsam (Impatiens glandulifera)Beautiful, sweetly scented pink flowers, but invasive in damp soils. • Wild About Weeds by Jack Wallington is published by Laurence King, £19.99. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.