The award-winning drama Killing Eve will return for a fourth season, BBC America has revealed. This announcement came as the corporation released the trailer for its 2020 slate in the UK, which includes a sixth series of police drama Line of Duty, the next instalment of Philip Pullman’s His Dark Materials saga, and the return of Last Tango in Halifax, last seen in 2016. The third series of Killing Eve will be screened this spring, but BBC America – which commissioned the Bafta-winning show – said it was “thrilled” to share the news of the fourth-season renewal, although it did not announce when it will air. The series, which follows the relationship between an MI5 agent and the assassin she is hunting, prides itself on having had a female lead writer each season, beginning with Fleabag’s Phoebe Waller-Bridge. Producers have confirmed that this will continue, but are yet to announce the name of the “incredible talent” behind series four. Waller-Bridge will continue to be involved in the show as executive producer, alongside star Sandra Oh. The show has also been praised for its female-led cast and production team, and for challenging stereotypes around female characters. The latest season of Killing Eve enjoyed the largest growth rate of any returning TV drama since Breaking Bad after doubling its season one audience, making it the highest growing show on American television for six years. Executive producer Sally Woodward Gentle said she was “beyond thrilled” to continue with the show, which has been nominated for a Golden Globe and an Emmy. “It is testament to everyone involved that we have been picked up so early – the magnificent actors, writers, directors and production team,” she said. “We are extremely lucky to work with such fierce and dedicated people.” Alongside Killing Eve, based on the Codename Villanelle novellas by Luke Jennings, the BBC is set to air a number of high-profile adaptations this year. Dramatisations of Agatha Christie’s The Pale Horse and Rumer Godden’s 1939 novel Black Narcissus (developed into an Oscar-winning film in 1947) will debut in 2020, whilst His Dark Materials will return for a second series after receiving rave reviews from critics last year. The line-up also boasts an adaptation of Malorie Blackman’s multiple award-winning teen book series, Noughts and Crosses, which will star the rapper Stormzy as newspaper editor Kolawale – a role created for the show. The story is set in a world where black people (“Crosses”) rule, and white people (“Noughts”) are subordinated, and follows a love story between Sephy, a Cross, and Callum, a Nought. Call the Midwife and Doctor Who will also return, alongside a new talent show presented by the band Little Mix.