The day after the EU referendum result, on Saturday 25 June 2016, the Daily Mail’s front page featured a photograph of jubilant Brexit supporters in Peterborough, under the headline “Take a bow Britain”. The paper celebrated “the day the quiet people of Britain rose up against an arrogant, out-of-touch political class and a contemptuous Brussels elite”. Speaking to the Guardian a week after the vote, some of those in the photograph criticised David Cameron for his decision to quit as prime minister, expressed concern at racist attacks in the wake of the poll, and wondered whether anyone actually had a plan. On the eve of the UK’s departure from the EU three and a half years later, we asked for their reflections on one of the most turbulent periods in British political history. 1. Wayne Fitzgerald, deputy leader of Peterborough city council We certainly had a good night that night, in terms of celebrating. I even think one of my friends was in tears following that picture, but, of course, what’s happened since then has been somewhat tortuous … Since then it has just been a constant battle to enact the will of the people. I’m relieved that we have certainty now. Boris Johnson has unified the party and in many respects invigorated the country. The results of the election speak for themselves, really. We basically had a second referendum on 12 December. 2. Hani Mustafa, student and Conservative activist I have been quite frustrated by my own side because, while we won the battle, we didn’t continue to make the arguments for leaving the EU and at various points it looked possible that we might not leave at all. I’ve also been frustrated with those that sought to frustrate the process and simply couldn’t accept what had happened. They pulled every trick in the book to try and stop it, all under the disguise of democracy. This first part of the process has taken a long time so it’s nice to see that something is finally happening. I wouldn’t expect this next part to be straightforward, but we’re getting there. 3. John Peach, former leader of Peterborough city council It’s such an iconic picture. I got it framed and put it up in my cloakroom … I’ll admit I thought things would be easier [after the vote]. I think the problem was that Theresa May was presided upon to call an election because everyone thought she was walking on water and couldn’t possibly lose it, and then she almost did. Of course, when you don’t have a majority you are in the S.H.I.T and everybody took advantage of that. I’ll be going down to London to celebrate in Parliament Square [on 31 January]. There will be a few of us going down. I’ll be relieved and excited. 4. Emily Fisher, Conservative activist Since the last election I just feel relieved. I was always of the opinion that people hadn’t changed their minds about Brexit and did know what they were voting for. When that result came through in the early hours of a Friday morning, it was the silent majority again saying: “No, we did know what we wanted. We still know what we want. Now deliver it.” Of course there’s loads to do. The relationship we have with Europe is deep and complicated. It’s going to take a long time to untangle and there are going to be complications along the way. I for one never thought it would be done at the drop of the hat. 5. Adam Collins, Conservative activist I’ll do a big sigh of relief on the 31st, to be honest. It will all be over and done and dusted. Then it will be about making sure there’s a smooth transition. I think there are likely to be a few speed bumps along the road. Obviously, the Northern Irish border and backstop, that’s a bit of a sticking point at the moment, and the US and UK trade deal will need to be finalised as well. But I’m excited for the future. Our country survived on its own before we joined the EU and I don’t see why it wouldn’t survive after. 7. Jay Beecher, secretary and deputy chair of Ukip in Peterborough I was surprised by the result only because of the huge odds that had been stacked against us - by government and EU-peddled propaganda, by fatcat Europhile business owners, and by the likes of woke out-of-touch celebrities and high-profile types like Richard Branson with far too much money and time on their hands. I thought we’d have begun the process to leave far, far sooner than we did, but that was impossible with a minority government headed by a remainer. The delay itself is what caused such toxicity in British politics – not the result itself. For remain voters who were unwilling to accept democracy and the decision of the majority, delay turned into hope, hope into motivation, and motivation into becoming a movement of patronising democracy-deniers who thought they could bully their way to a rematch. Despite always admiring Boris, I held a few reservations, but I now trust him 110%. He’s doing a fantastic job. My main hopes for Brexit are for it to act as the catalyst for a gradual restoration of our national pride and identity. I’ve got no fears about Brexit and never have. 10. John Whitby, former Ukip councillor I don’t look ecstatic in the picture, because too much triumphalism does not help. I’m a sports coach and I try to teach people to gracefully accept winning and losing. The division after the referendum would have healed by now if remainer politicians in government had accepted the result. But instead they allow divisions to fester. I stood in the Peterborough byelection for Ukip in June. I was supposed to be standing in the general election in Peterborough for Ukip, but I felt that would not have been a good move. I ended up voting Conservative in the election, because we needed a strong parliament that would get Brexit delivered. I’m not a Tory and I have some views that would be strongly aligned with Labour, such as on executive pay and low wages, but voting Tory was the least worst option. Boris Johnson has been making all the right sort of noises, but I will reserve judgment until the end of the year. I want the UK to become a self-governing independent nation with good trade deal with our closest trading partners. I want the UK to be highly competitive, highly successful with a huge tax take from businesses, which allows it to deliver social programmes which are the envy of the world. My fear is that we are not going to get that.