The helicopter carrying Kobe Bryant didn’t have a recommended warning system to alert the pilot he was too close to the ground but it is unclear it would have averted the crash that killed the former NBA star and eight others on Sunday, federal regulators and experts said. Pilot Ara Zobayan had been climbing out of the clouds when the aircraft banked left and began a sudden 1,200-foot descent into a hillside that lasted nearly a minute. Local conditions on the day of the crash were foggy. “This is a pretty steep descent at high speed,” Jennifer Homendy of the National Transportation Safety Board said on Tuesday. “We know that this was a high-energy impact crash.” The aircraft was intact when it hit the ground, but the impact spread debris over more than 500 feet. Determining what caused the crash will take months, but investigators may again recommend that helicopters carrying six or more passenger seats are equipped with a Terrain Awareness and Warning System (TAWS) that sounds an alarm if an aircraft is in danger of crashing. The agency made that recommendation after a similar helicopter, a Sikorsky S-76A carrying workers to an offshore drilling ship, crashed in the Gulf of Mexico in 2004, killing all 10 people on board. The NTSB concluded if TAWS had been installed in the 2004 crash, pilots would have been warned in time to prevent the aircraft hitting the water. The board recommended that the Federal Aviation Administration make the warning systems mandatory. Ten years later, the FAA required such systems on air ambulances, but not other helicopters. FAA officials had questioned whether the technology would work on helicopters, which fly lower and could trigger too many false alarms that might detract from safety. The NTSB said the FAA’s response was unacceptable, but dropped the matter. “Certainly, TAWS could have helped to provide information to the pilot on what terrain the pilot was flying in,” Homendy said of the helicopter that was carrying Bryant. Helicopter pilot and aviation lawyer Brian Alexander said any collision warning system on aircraft going over mountainous terrain is welcome but the FAA recognizes they can sometimes do more harm if they go off regularly and distract the pilot. Alexander added that it’s not clear that one would have helped Bryant’s pilot. A warning system “wouldn’t necessarily have prevented the crash if this was a combination of a deteriorating weather situation and the pilot experiencing spatial disorientation,” said Alexander. Friends and colleagues have described Zobayan as skilled, cool and collected. He was flying Bryant to a youth basketball basketball tournament in which his daughter Gianna was playing. Two of her teammates were also on the helicopter. NTSB investigators have said Zobayan asked for and received permission from air traffic controllers to proceed in the fog, which Homendy said was “very common.” In his last radio transmission before the helicopter went down, Zobayan reported that he was climbing to avoid a cloud layer. Investigators have not faulted Zobayan’s decision, or determined why he made it. The FAA warns helicopter pilots that it is their job to decide whether to cancel a flight because of bad weather or other risks, and to have a backup plan in case weather worsens during the flight. Ryan Deetz, who had flown Bryant in his helicopter in the past, did not remember the Lakers star or his assistants pressing him to fly in bad weather. “There was never any pressure Kobe put on any pilot to get somewhere never, never,” Deetz said. Deetz said that he flew with Zobayan several times and that he was familiar with the airspace and terrain around Los Angeles and knew “the back doors” – alternative routes in case of trouble, such as weather changes. Others who knew Zobayan praised him as unflappable and skilled at the controls. “Helicopters are scary machines, but he really knew what he was doing,” said Gary Johnson, who had flown with Zobayan about 30 times. “I wouldn’t do it unless he was the pilot.” Recovery of the remains of the victims was completed on Tuesday. Fingerprints were used to confirm the identity of Bryant, Zobayan, John Altobelli, 56; and Sarah Chester, 45. While the the coroner has not identified five other victims, relatives and acquaintances have identified them as Bryant’s 13-year-old daughter, Gianna; Sarah Chester’s 13-year-old daughter, Payton; Altobelli’s wife, Keri, and daughter, Alyssa; and Christina Mauser, who helped Bryant coach his daughter’s team.