The pressure mounts on Detective William Wisting in this penultimate double bill of the snow-laden Norwegian thriller. After last week’s revelation of tampering in one of Wisting’s cases 17 years ago, he is suspended from the current investigation and his previous findings are placed under doubt. Meanwhile, his journalist daughter Line is chasing the story of another missing persons case, leading her further into the path of a killer who might just be the same man. Loose ends abound for what is sure to be a nailbiting finale. Ammar Kalia The elaborate dance studio set – complete with sliding mirror wall – arrives in Birmingham as auditions for the boogie battle royale reach the halfway stage. Hopefuls serve up everything from ballet to tap – but can anything outshine judge Matthew Morrison’s Magnum moustache? Graeme Virtue The furry horror continues as presenter Joel Dommett and judges Jonathan Ross, Davina McCall, Rita Ora and Ken Jeong try to guess which celebs are buried within the octopus, tree, fox and daisy outfits this week. After the revelation of the Darkness’s Justin Hawkins as Chameleon, which former star will now follow suit? AK Paleobiologist Tori Herridge and her team are in Leeds this week on the search for buried human remains that will give us a glimpse into our past. They find a set of children’s skeletons, exposing the brutal labouring conditions of the Industrial Revolution. AK Robinson continues his entertaining people’s history of Britain with a focus on the Georgian era. Scouring the records, he narrates the criminal life of highwayman Jack Rann, poacher Charles Smith and gin-maker Elizabeth Bowman. There’s also a gruesome look at Georgian surgery. AK One of Casualty’s most heart-wrenching storylines ramps up this week as Charlie (Derek Thompson) struggles to cope with Duffy’s (Cathy Shipton) dementia and calls on her ex-fling for help. Elsewhere, newcomer Faith brings her and paramedic Lev’s son into hospital and the couple receive devastating news. Hannah Verdier Birdman, 11pm, BBC Two Michael Keaton’s fading Hollywood veteran is ditching his starry role as superhero Birdman to produce a labour of love: a Broadway drama that may reconnect him with his daughter (Emma Stone). Alejandro González Inárritu’s labyrinthine tracking shot is inventive, funny and moving. Paul Howlett Snooker: The Masters 1.15pm, BBC One. The opening semi-final from Alexandra Palace, north London. Champions Cup Rugby Union: Harlequins v Clermont Auvergne 2.40pm, Channel 4. The final Pool Three fixture. Premier League Football: Newcastle United v Chelsea 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. A top-flight clash from St James’ Park.