Every morning at seven when we exit our bed my cat enters it, padding in a tight circle for some time before lowering herself into what appears to be the most wonderful sleep. She remains there, shifting occasionally to reveal the fields of her white underbelly, or to press a paw over her eyes insulted by the sun, until evening, whereupon she will briefly rise to eat and hunt and scratch an overloving child before returning to sleep. I’m not the jealous type, but it has occurred to me more than once that I might enjoy an accidental body-swap fiasco – the cat and I eat each other’s fortune cookies, perhaps, or put a coin into a broken carnival machine – where I could inhabit this life of meat and sleep with no repercussions, and nobody judging, just a paw over my eyes and the long deep breath of rest. The most inspiring novel of recent years was Ottessa Moshfegh’s My Year of Rest and Relaxation, the story of a young woman who puts herself into chemical hibernation in order to continue living, but not entirely. I read it while overdosing on gummy vitamins in the shape of teddy bears – they tasted like Fanta, and contained 16 micronutrients and Omega-3 but absolutely no gluten. The narrator lists the drugs she uses to sleep, some invented: “Neuroproxin, Maxiphenphen, Valdignore, Silencior, Seconol, Nembutal, Valium, Librium, Placydil, Noctec, Miltown,” combining them like a Michelin chef to add texture to her dreamlessness. Though there’s horror to the story, it’s not entirely located in her extreme misanthropy, instead in the fraudulent, saccharine optimism of the world outside her apartment. It makes sense. It makes perfect sense. Which is why I propose a hibernation option for 2020. Yes, sure, keep your three-month marathon trainings and dry Januaries, your chaste slices of year set aside for change, your no-meat Mondays and that bit where you wear a moustache for charity/something to talk about to women, but let me have this. Let me add this to our new regime. A month of sleep. A time in which we might stop trying. In which we might simply stop. Stop pretending to be ourselves or someone better, or that everything is fine. Stop making conversation at the checkout, stop asking how people are, how their Christmases were, what their plans are for the summer. Stop monitoring the news with one eye on a screen and the other flickering off to a miraged future where we watch today’s revelations play out in some kind of war or party. Stop attempting to see the other’s side of the argument, stop listening with faux-empathy to dicks at parties, stop breathing through the internet as we click mute, block delete. Stop wanting! Stop wanting new pans and new pets and more hair and less flesh, and a more aspirational pillow and your old legs. Stop needing cigarettes and hand cream, and to always be right. And start merely drifting, a small boat on a calm sea, away from such constructs as hope and brunch, and can-I-borrow-you-for-a-minute’s, and banking passwords, and the nagging suspicion there’s something you’ve forgotten. A key, or to have kids. There will be some ritual involved, the details of which are open to discussion. Should this, for example, be a solo pursuit, or may couples and families lie down together at the allotted time, synchronising their breathing and leaving the bed only when the weather changes? What costume should we wear? I favour a cotton pyjama, but perhaps that doesn’t distinguish the hibernation enough from regular sleep. In which case shall we talk about a uniform, something with a nod to sportswear? Temperature is important – a cool room, a warm duvet - as is intention. Lie down as if for a “nap” and the game is lost. Drugs are optional, but must be taken as if a green juice or date energy ball – a medicine offered by the wellness industry to induce a relatable state of absence, of nothingness. A happy blank. Freedom from the everyday anxiety of brushing up against other people’s problems, from the dirtiness of everyday life, with its sugars and aches. The aim will be to gently sink downwards, below the chaos, to a state beyond bliss, beyond relaxation, a place of transformative nothingness. For a month we will regenerate, plugged in like airpods, our charging lights pulsing, and rise in spring, excited once more for life. Just now I went to check on the cat, whose circling and sleep has created a site-specific piece of asthmatic land art in our Habitat duvet cover. I lay down beside her quietly, and tried to match her breathing. A bird assaulted her in a dream, and she ran miles through dark streets before soaring up into its tree. I placed a hand on her back, and calmed, she rolled over and her purrs grew deafening. I was learning how to lean into the moment, and then dismiss it, and then float away. As I curled into a ball beside her, she opened a single eye disdainfully. Her pity was palpable, her superiority clear. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWiseman