After taking Monday off, Stephen Colbert reflected on the death of Kobe Bryant on Tuesday night’s Late Show. The NBA legend died at 41 in a helicopter crash with his 13-year-old daughter and seven friends on Sunday, and though Colbert never met him, he said he felt “a strange connection” to this particular type of tragedy: when he was 10, Colbert’s father and two older brothers died in a plane crash that was also in heavy fog. “One of the terrible things about that shock, and the heartbreaking … unreality … nightmare quality of someone huge in your life who just disappears is not knowing what happened,” he said. Unlike a plane, Colbert continued, helicopters don’t have on-board flight recorders – so-called “black boxes” – which can aid investigations. The plane carrying his father and brothers had a flight recorder, “and because investigators knew what happened in that cockpit, new rules were created to save other people’s lives”. Colbert referenced his friend, a helicopter pilot who flew him on vacation in New Zealand and whose father also died in a plane crash at the same age. Her son also died in a helicopter crash, and explained to Colbert that because the they don’t carry black boxes “when a helicopter goes down, we don’t know how to improve the helicopter. We don’t know how to improve the flying of the pilots so this doesn’t happen again in the future.” While nothing will take away the pain for the families in the Bryant crash, Colbert said he hopes that “perhaps someone can take action to make sure that there are some ways to record what is happening in these helicopters so that it doesn’t happen as often”. “To do nothing after helicopters go down like this, or we lose greats like this, or we lose any person whose family is now in agony and in ignorance of what happened to their loved one, I think, is unconscionable,” Colbert concluded. “I hope the NTSB [National Transportation Safety Board] will do something to improve the conditions for helicopter pilots and the information they can get if a tragedy like this happens.” These families are now in misery, Colbert said. “Why compound their misery with mystery about what happened to their loved ones? It’s better to know than not to know. Because if we know, we can possibly stop this from happening to someone else in the future.” On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah addressed the plight of former national security advisor and “broke-ass Monopoly Man” John Bolton, whose reputation on Fox News has taken a hit. “Not too long ago, John Bolton was clearly part of the Fox family,” Noah said before rolling clips of Bolton given a hero’s welcome to Fox and messing around on flipboards with the Fox and Friends team. “He’s like the goofy uncle who just wants to have fun and wipe Iran off the planet.” Now that John Bolton has made allegations that could hurt President Trump, he’s no longer invited to the Fox News family cookout. pic.twitter.com/tTPG8on1A6 But now that Bolton’s forthcoming book alleges that Trump personally told him to withhold aid to Ukraine pending their commitment to investigate his political rivals, Noah said, “Fox News has made it very clear that he is no longer invited to the family cookout.” The mood on Bolton has soured — Lou Dobbs, who once praised Bolton on-air as “a great American,” now linked him to a conspiracy theory. “Damn, one minute, John Bolton is a great American,” said Noah, “and the next, he’s a tool for the deep state. I haven’t seen a flip like that since bread.” “Think about it,” he explained, “for all of human history, we were like ‘bread is the life force that sustains human civilization for thousands of years.’ Then all of a sudden five years ago we were like fuck you bread! I eat sandwiches on lettuce now.’” Bread metaphor aside, it’s clear that “Fox News has put out a clear message to every single one of Trump’s supporters: it doesn’t matter how much they liked you before,” Noah concluded. “If you talk smack, they will turn on you faster than John Bolton on a flipboard.” The White House is “reeling” from the Bolton revelations, said Jimmy Kimmel, and McConnell may not have the votes to block witnesses anymore. The de facto chief of defecting Republicans, Sen. Mitt Romney, told reporters on Tuesday that “it’s increasingly likely that other Republicans will join those of us who think we should hear from John Bolton.” “That’s right, the mitt is about to hit the tan,” said Kimmel. “Who would’ve ever thought that the most rebellious Senator would be Mitt Romney?” Kimmel then addressed Romney directly: “The defendant in the trial gets to withhold evidence if he wants to, and that obviously is insane. But you, Senator Romney, are not insane.” He seems like a guy who wants to do the right thing, “and the right thing is to insist on having a fair trial.” Kimmel promised that if Romney could convince other Republicans to allow witnesses to testify, Kimmel would send him his own dairy cow (which appeared on stage) and a lifetime supply of Twinkies. “The future of our democracy is in your soft, creamy hands,” said Kimmel. “I know you want to do this.”