The rehabbing facilities available to jockeys in Britain have been hailed as the best in the world by Gérald Mossé, who speaks with authority after more than three decades of riding in many different countries around the globe. Mossé, who has ridden winners of the Arc and the Melbourne Cup, is spending this week at Oaksey House, the Injured Jockeys Fund’s facility in Lambourn, with the aim of getting back in the saddle in mid-February after sustaining what he describes as a minor injury in Bahrain at the end of last year. “I’ve been lucky in my career, never to be injured too much,” said Mossé between treatment sessions on Wednesday, “but what I will say is, it is amazing. This place really provides the jockey with everything needed to be able to get the best treatment, helping you to go back as quick as possible.” Mossé, who has a home in Newmarket and has based himself in Britain in recent seasons after spending much of his career in France and Hong Kong, went first for assistance to the IJF’s Peter O’Sullevan House and was referred on to Oaksey, which has an anti-gravity treadmill that ought to be particularly helpful in speeding his recovery.” It is the best place we can find to get me back to business as soon as possible. “It is a wonderful set-up. They don’t have it [in France]. You have to go see physio here, chiropractor there, machinery somewhere else, gym room, whatever. Here it’s all in one and I think it’s very special. I was impressed. “It’s extremely well organised and planned, everything is taken care of. You’re doing exercise, getting treatment, seeing a nutritionist. We are absolutely taken care of, 100%. A foundation like this, for the rehabilitation of jockeys, I guess is number one in the world. This is only from what I know. “We have a nice apartment with kitchen, TV, fireplace. You feel like you’re at home. There’s a room to be with other jockeys here, watching racing, TV programmes, with newspapers and fruit, drinks … what else do you need? I’m very pleased to be here.” Mossé sustained his injury in a pre-race fall from the sprinter Evergate, formerly trained by Robert Cowell but now based in Bahrain and described by the jockey as being “a gentleman” most of the time. “But he just lost his mind and become uncontrollable, I lost control and he went maximum speed through the fence.” The jockey hopes to return to action in mid-February, so as to be race-fit in time for the Saudi Cup at the end of that month. Perhaps surprisingly, he bears Evergate no ill will. “I can’t wait to go back and ride him and win again.” Nor has he even the smallest idea of retiring, smiling as he responds to the question with: “You wanna upset me? I’m absolutely not thinking to be retired because it’s not my job, it’s my hobby. What I do is what I like. I always wanted to be a jockey and even if I’ve not been the best, I’ve been able to do what I like and this is the most important to me.” It’s Thyestes day at Gowran and I was half tempted to give another chance to Borice, who is surely better than he showed in the Ladbrokes Trophy. But he might need a better surface and could possibly be sharper next time, wherever that happens to be. So I’ll go with Chef Des Obeaux (3.00), who ran a big race at Leopardstown over Christmas and would have gone closer, but for diving through the third-last. With Robbie Power up for the first time and having only his third start for Willie Mullins, he is open to further progress at 6-1. The nap is at Fakenham, where Little Light (1.25) has come down to 13-8 for a four-runner novice handicap chase. She responded well to wind surgery to put up a dominant performance at Leicester last time, though she tired on the run-in and prevailed by only a head. This sharper track should suit her better. At Wetherby, Starplex looks an opposable favourite and Adelphi Prince (1.35) could be the answer at 4-1. There was some encouragement in his handicap debut, in a race for conditionals and amateurs, and he can show more on this step up in trip with Tommy Dowson aboard. Phil Kirby’s horses continue in fine form. Fakenham 12.25 Robin De Broome 12.55 Massini’s Dream 1.25 Little Light (nap) 2.00 Grand Roi 2.35 Eceparti 3.10 Miss Heritage 3.45 Young Offender Southwell 12.40 Six Til Twelve 1.15 Sweet Talked 1.45 Little India 2.20 Merryweather 2.55 Blowing Dixie 3.30 National Anthem 4.05 Grandscape Wetherby 1.05 Dark Lochnagar 1.35 Adelphi Prince (nb) 2.10 Virnon 2.45 Jobsonfire 3.20 Storm Control 3.55 Eden Du Houx Newcastle 4.30 Blazing Dreams 5.00 Proceeding 5.30 Arbiter 6.00 Louis Treize 6.30 St Just 7.00 Billy Wedge 7.30 Rebel Redemption 8.00 Qaaraat