Ole Gunnar Solskjær has offered no guarantee that Marcus Rashford will play again this season and be ready for Euro 2020. Manchester United’s manager said on Tuesday the 22-year-old striker would be out for “a few months” with a double stress fracture to his back but would not require surgery. Solskjær said on Sunday such an injury usually required six weeks to heal, followed by rehabilitation. When it was put to him on Tuesday there was concern Rashford could be out until next season, he provided no assurances on a timescale. “Marcus is going to get as long as he needs to get fit,” Solskjær said. “I have got the best medical staff in the country and I am sure when Marcus comes back he will be 100%.” Solskjær admitted the challenge was to prevent Rashford’s absence from derailing United’s season. “That’s the million-dollar question for us because Marcus has been fantastic,” he said. “Someone’s got to step up. If we find something in the transfer market, that might be one solution. We are looking at different scenarios. We know Marcus is out for a few months but the best solution is players stepping up.” Rashford has 19 goals, with 14 in the league, six more than Anthony Martial, United’s second-highest scorer. It was also put to Solskjær that when Romelu Lukaku, United’s top scorer of the past two seasons, left in the summer he should have been replaced in case of an eventuality such as Rashford’s injury. “Of course but we are planning all the time,” he said. “We knew we were a forward light when Romelu went and Alexis Sánchez went but you’ll not see Anthony, Marcus and Mason Greenwood do as well as they’ve done unless you give them the chance. Harry Hindsight – he’s quite clever.” Solskjær also defended his handling of Rashford, who was injured after coming on against Wolves in the FA Cup, in the wake of criticism by Ian Wright. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/01/20-56782-gnl.fw.20200120.jf.fingertips.mp3 “I never put myself before the team,” he said. “With Marcus, he’s had minor discomfort in his back since the Burnley game [on 28 December]. We’ve had scans, we’ve monitored him. There’s not been any injury there. “He’s had complaints, yes. I had a discussion and conversation with him the day before or two days before [Wolves last week]. I said: ‘FA Cup, I’m going to rest you.’ He felt fine. He was very adamant that if needed he could do half an hour because we want to go through in the Cup because it’s a big tournament for us. “ That shows you Marcus’s attitude. That was the second day after we played Norwich. He had an extra day of treatment and recovery because we wanted to give him all the chance to be ready for the coming games. He had no complaints training the day before the game. He looked very free and when I asked him if it was OK to be on the bench, [the response was] no problem.” When Rashford came on against Wolves he suffered the fracture but Solskjær said: “You know we monitor and take risks – not risks, we have to manage players every single day, loads of things that Ian Wright or anyone doesn’t know about. The medical staff here are very good.” Solskjær denied Rashford had a single stress fracture before Wolves, then elaborated on a device called Melmak Rashford uses for his back. “I don’t think he’s used it a lot,” Solskjær said. “I don’t know – I cannot micro-manage every player. Marcus is a player who wants to make sure he tries absolutely everything to maximise his career. It’s probably something he’s initiated with the medical staff, as well. He’s had issues before with his back and he’s always played with them. He’s never complained really.” United lost 2-0 at Liverpool on Sunday in Rashford’s absence but Solskjær was positive. “For me we lost to Liverpool, a team that you all say are fantastic, and we’ve been in the game until the last kick,” he said. “And, for me, that’s strides forward. We’re disappointed losing the game, we don’t want to be behind them but there were signs we are on the right track.”