Brian Barry-Murphy called this a surreal day for Rochdale even before the manager’s inspired substitutions that brought on Aaron Wilbraham and Luke Matheson who combined for the former’s memorable equaliser. It came on 79 minutes and stunned a Newcastle side who were unable to handle a raucous home crowd, who responded to a second‑half resurgence that ended with their League One team in the hat for the fourth round. There were 8,593 crammed into Spotland to witness a tie that had a classic dash of Cup romance in the form of Wilbraham, who is 40, and scored his first career goal when 19 in Stockport’s 4-1 loss to Manchester City in April 1998. On at the break, he joined the 17-year-old Matheson, who entered early in the opening period as a tactical replacement and was 16 when registering at Manchester United in Dale’s Carabao Cup shootout defeat in September. Matheson’s burst along his flank presaged a sharp cross that found Wilbraham, who smashed home to equalise. Miguel Almirón’s first-half opener had come from a neat one-two with Christian Atsu, finished with a rising shot past Robert Sánchez. A team that sit four points above the drop zone of the third tier came close to the perfect day with seconds remaining when the excellent Oliver Rathbone had a golden chance but he put it wide. This meant no ultimate glory for the midfielder and Dale but they are already anticipating a trip to St James’ Park for the replay. Barry-Murphy said: “We relish the Cup and we’re ecstatic for this to continue. It’s huge for the club and can only help us going forward. “It’s a relief, really. The first half was a tough watch for us and our supporters, but we fully expressed ourselves in the second, it was hugely satisfying. “We were overrun in the first and the lads showed great courage to put that right. I was frustrated that I hadn’t made the lads [more] aware of Newcastle. I thought we would win it at the end.” Of Matheson, who was equally as impressive at Old Trafford, Barry‑Murphy said: “Luke is a very dynamic, unpredictable player. I keep going to him as get-out-of-trouble player and he just keeps producing. He’s had a huge run of games and I’m always looking to rest him, that’s why he didn’t start. The way he plays the game – at speed – is in tune with the players of the Premier League.” A relieved Steve Bruce said: “Credit to Aaron Wilbraham – he’s been around longer then I have. We don’t score enough goals. The number of chances we had, we should’ve taken them. It gave Rochdale encouragement and they made it a cup tie in the second half.” Bruce has two more players to add to an injury list that was already at 10. “The loss of [Christian] Muto and Almíron early in the second half was big. Muto looks a little bit serious. He was in distress in the dressing room. Muto has a hip, Almirón a groin. When you’re playing people [who are] fatigued, this can happen. “We’re still in the hat and that’s the important thing. Ollie Rathbone had that chance at the end and we could’ve been out, so it’s a positive we are still in with a shout.” Newcastle have now won once in six outings. “The frailties are obvious, that we don’t score enough,” Bruce said. “The chances we created should be taken and the Cup tie should be put to bed. They brought on the big boy and caused us a few problems.” The manager was correct regarding Abraham and how he needed his own leader of the attack, Joelinton, to take one of the many chances created for him. But he could not and so the Brazilian was unable to double a paltry return that now stands at one goal from his 22 appearances since his £40m move last summer. Bruce said: “He had a disappointing time [today] but he has got to stick at it. Up until two weeks ago, Almirón had not scored.” Bruce is trying to bring in a forward in the transfer window. “We have had a couple of knock backs already,” he said. “We will keep working away. It is very difficult to get something at that end of the pitch that will make you better.”