It has the air of a dish that’s been warming up Alpine winters for centuries, but this take on the potato gratin was, in fact, created by the reblochon marketing team in the 1980s as a way to sell more of their delicious cheese. I hope they got a pay rise, because this is the most comforting carb-fest imaginable: don’t even think of making it unless there’s a nip in the air. Prep 40 minCook 15 minServes 6 1.3kg waxy potatoes2 tbsp butter1 onion200g smoked bacon, preferably lardons (optional)150ml dry white wine200ml whipping cream1 garlic clove 1 reblochon cheese (see step 7) Start by bringing a large pan of generously salted water to a boil. Wash the potatoes, but don’t bother to peel them – leave them whole if they’re roughly the same size; if not, cut any large ones to about the same dimensions as the smallest. (Note: you can use an all-round variety such as maris piper instead of a waxy one, but they’ll break up more during cooking.) Cook the potatoes in the boiling water until they’re just tender to the point of a knife, but not cooked right the way through (ie, treat them as if you were parboiling them for roast potatoes). Drain well, leave them to steam dry in the hot pan for a couple of minutes, then set aside until cool enough to handle. Meanwhile, peel and thinly slice the onion and, if using rashers rather than lardons, cut the bacon into short strips. Melt a tablespoon of butter in a large frying pan over a medium heat, then add the onion and bacon, and fry until the onions are soft and both are just starting to brown. Pour the wine into the pan, turn up the heat so it comes up to a simmer, then leave to bubble away until the liquid has reduced to almost nothing. Take the pan off the heat, add the cream and stir it in so it isn’t tempted to split in the hot pan. Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Peel the garlic, then cut it in half and rub it cut side down all around the inside of a wide, ovenproof dish or casserole. Once the potatoes are cool enough to interact with without sacrificing your fingertips, cut them into cubes of about 1cm in size; don’t worry if some of the skins fall off while you’re doing this. Heat the second tablespoon of butter in a clean frying pan (or decant the sauce and wipe down the first one) over a medium-high heat, then fry the potatoes, tossing or stirring them regularly, until the cubes are golden brown all over. Take care not to break them up too much, though. Cut the cheese in half horizontally. Reblochon is a mild, washed-rind cow’s milk cheese, and is quite widely available in supermarkets, as well as cheesemongers, but if you can’t lay your hands on any, a small round of creamy camembert or a slab of brie (about 250g) is probably the best, most widely available alternative. Cover the base of the casserole with half the cubed potatoes, spoon over half the onion and bacon mixture, and season very well. Top with one half of the cheese, placing the disc in the centre of the dish. Repeat the layers, finishing with the second reblochon half, rind uppermost and again positioning it in the centre. Bake for 15 minutes, or until browned and bubbling – if you feel the cheese could do with a bit more help, or if you prefer your potatoes really crisp, stick it under a hot grill for five minutes to finish. Serve hot, preferably with a plain green salad and some well-chilled white wine from the Savoie.