Mario Balotelli criticised Lazio fans after offensive chants towards the striker caused play to be briefly stopped on Sunday. Balotelli gave Brescia the lead after 18 minutes but the game was held up while an announcement was made that reportedly warned against further discriminatory chanting. After the 2-1 defeat Balotelli posted on Instagram: “It’s a loss that hurt but we will come back stronger and we are on the right way! Lazio fans that were today at the stadium SHAME ON YOU! saynotoracism.” Lazio released a statement that said: “As always Lazio dissociates in the most taxing way from the discriminatory behaviour carried out by a very small minority of fans during the match against Brescia. “The club once again reiterates its condemnation of such unjustified misconduct and confirms its intent to prosecute those who in fact betray their sporting passion, causing serious damage to the image of the club.” Ciro Immobile’s stoppage-time winner secured Lazio a ninth straight league win. He equalised from the spot after Andrea Cistana was sent off before half-time and then scored the winner in the first minute of added time. Lazio are four points clear of Roma after they were beaten 2-0 by Torino. Andrea Belotti scored in first-half stoppage time before he completed the scoring from the spot with four minutes left. Genoa secured a first league win since October as Goran Pandev’s late winner saw off Sassuolo 2-1. Domenico Criscito’s 29th-minute penalty was cancelled out by Pedro Obiang. But Pandev earned a rare home win for his relegation-battling team when his initial effort was saved but the ball bounced back off the forward’s face and into the net. In Spain Real Sociedad failed to put pressure on La Liga’s top four as they slipped to a 2-1 home defeat by Villarreal. Willian José gave the hosts a 22nd-minute lead but Manu Trigueros’s 58th-minute penalty levelled the game before Santi Cazorla scored the winner with 18 minutes left. Villarreal’s third consecutive league win moved them up to ninth, three points behind their opponents.