The new year got off to a bad start for millions of Lloyds, Halifax and Bank of Scotland customers, who were unable to gain access to their accounts through the websites and mobile apps because of an outage. The three brands, which are part of Lloyds Banking Group, put out the same statement on Twitter on Wednesday morning after the problem started at about 4am. “We know our customers are having issues with internet and mobile banking. We’re sorry about this and we’re working to have it back to normal soon.” By lunchtime the three brands tweeted that internet and mobile banking were back to normal. “We’re sorry for the issues with it this morning. Thanks for your messages.” The company said its IT team had fixed the problem, which affected the login via the web and the mobile app. Telephone banking and ATM transactions were not affected. The bank said it was an internal problem, not a cybersecurity one. With 22 million current account customers, Lloyds Banking Group is the UK’s largest provider and also offers the most “basic” bank accounts. It has 13 million active online customers, of which more than 9 million are mobile users. All of them were potentially affected. A spokeswoman was unable to say whether customers would receive any compensation but added that anyone who had incurred charges as a result of the outage should get in touch with their bank. Customers took to social media to complain about the situation. Many reported that they could not access banking services from their computers or smartphones. Nice New Years start @LloydsBank .. Internet banking and mobile banking, not working. And don’t say, “we are trying to fix it”. Can I do my job now? No. That’s enough for me to change a bank. This MUST NEVER happen. Ever. #Lloyds pic.twitter.com/2aIhVdG15M Trying to pay rent but my lloyds bank app is down. What the bloody hell...@LloydsBank A number of banks have experienced outages in recent months. NatWest’s online and mobile phone app crashed on Black Friday, one of the busiest shopping days of the year. By far the worst meltdown was at TSB last year, caused by the change to a new IT platform before it had been fully tested. It resulted in almost 1.9 million customers being locked out of their accounts and the problems took months to fully resolve. Back in October, MPs warned that IT failures in the banking sector were running at an unacceptable rate. The Treasury committee said customers were being left “cashless and cut off” after problems at several financial groups, adding: “The current level and frequency of disruption and consumer harm is unacceptable.”