Born in Leeds, Whelan, 38,began her career in comedy in 2010, and won the Funny Women Variety Award the same year. In 2017, she gained critical acclaim for her portrayal of Karen Matthews in The Moorside. From 2012 to 2019, she played Yara Greyjoy in Game Of Thrones. She appears in the new ITV drama White House Farm. She is married to the comedian Gerry Howell and lives in London. When were you happiest?When I was 15, I went to a rugby match at Twickenham with my dad and we went back to his friend Hugh’s house and Hugh made me a perfect cup of tea. I just remember feeling really happy because it was such a brilliant day and I loved being with my dad. What is your greatest fear?It is unutterable. What was your most embarrassing moment?On one of my first dates with my husband we went to the British Museum and I was giddy and nervous. I leapt into a Japanese tea house, not realising it was an ancient relic. All the alarms went off and I still didn’t realise. I was sitting in there thinking, “Look how kooky I am.” And then a security guard came over. What would your super power be?An anxiety collector. What is your most unappealing habit?I huff and puff to draw attention to the fact that I am not very happy rather than just saying, “Could you pick your socks up off the floor?” What is your favourite smell?Roses or hot cross buns. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?A teacher at my musical theatre school said I was charmless. What is your guiltiest pleasure?I don’t feel guilty about doing anything that’s pleasurable. To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why?To my husband for all the huffing and puffing. Which living person do you most despise, and why?Donald Trump. He’s an appalling man doing appalling things with his horrendous megalomaniac ego. Which words or phrases do you most overuse?Bungle, careful and no. What has been your biggest disappointment?The fans’ reaction at the end of Game Of Thrones because I think it was brilliant. How often do you have sex?As I am sure new parents will relate, we are at it all the time. What is the closest you’ve come to death?I was very ill with anorexia when I was a teenager. I went into hospital voluntarily, otherwise they were going to section me. What do you consider your greatest achievement?Recovering from anorexia. What has been your closest brush with the law?I have been stopped a couple of times for running red lights on my bicycle. What song would you like played at your funeral?I want people to really, really cry so The Lark Ascending by Vaughan Williams. How would you like to be remembered?It would be lovely if people thought I was kind. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?Let go.