Phoebe Waller-Bridge has been named most outstanding female actor in a comedy at the Screen Actors Guild awards on Sunday. The creator and star of Fleabag took home yet another prize for her work on the acclaimed comedy’s second season, adding to her Golden Globes, Critics’ Choice awards and Emmy wins. British actors also triumphed when The Crown won outstanding performance by an ensemble in a drama series, beating Game Of Thrones, Big Little Lies, The Handmaid’s Tale and Stranger Things. In the film categories, Joaquin Phoenix boosted his Oscars credentials with a best actor win for his portrayal of a troubled loner in Joker, and Renee Zellweger did likewise by winning best actress for Judy. The top prize of the night, outstanding cast in a motion picture, went to the South Korean dark comedy Parasite, which is a firm contender for best picture at the Academy awards. It was a surprise winner, beating the well-fancied heavyweights including Once Upon A Time ... In Hollywood, The Irishman and Bombshell. The SAGs, which celebrates both TV and film, is voted for by actors and is one of the final major ceremonies before the Academy awards. Waller-Bridge won for outstanding female actor in a comedy series gong for Fleabag. “At some point, it will all hit me and I will have a good old cry about it,” she said. “Tonight as a Fleabag gang we will soak this up ... in a room I never imagined I would be in. “This whole thing really has been a dream and if I wake up tomorrow and discover it has been just that then thank you, it has been the most beautiful dream.” Fleabag missed out on best comedy series to its Amazon stablemate The Marvellous Mrs Maisel. Brad Pitt continued his awards season hot streak with best supporting actor for his portrayal of an ageing stuntman in Quentin Tarantino’s Once Upon A Time ... In Hollywood. He joked it was time to update his online dating profile: “I’ve got to add this to my Tinder profile. “Let’s be honest, it was a difficult part. A guy who gets high, takes his shirt off and doesn’t get on with his wife. It was a big stretch.” The audience laughed and clapped, including Jennifer Aniston, his former wife. Aniston won the female actor in a drama series prize for The Morning Show, her first SAG since she starred in Friends. “What? Oh my gosh, this is so unbelievable, what a room,” she said, after beating British trio Helena Bonham Carter, Olivia Colman and Jodie Comer. Aniston paid tribute to her co-star Reese Witherspoon, saying: “It took 20 years but we did it, finally.” The Irishman’s Robert De Niro, 76, was recognised with the lifetime achievement award. The two-time Oscar winner said: “As actors, we don’t take victory laps, we are too worried about what our next job will be, so it makes me very happy to know my next job is working with you and Marty [Scorsese]. At least I know I’ve got another year of health insurance.” The high-profile critic of Donald Trump, also referred to “such a dire” political situation that was “so deeply concerning to me and others that I have to say something”. “There’s right and there’s wrong. And there’s common sense and there’s abuse of power. As a citizen, I have as much right as anybody an actor, an athlete, anybody else to voice my opinion. “And if I have a bigger voice because of my situation, I’m going to use it whenever I see a blatant abuse of power.” Peter Dinklage won outstanding performance by a male actor in a drama series for his Game of Thrones swan song. Dinklage played Tyrion Lannister in HBO’s sprawling fantasy epic, which ended last year after eight award-winning seasons. Male actor in a comedy series - Tony Shalhoub (The Marvellous Mrs Maisel) Female actor in a comedy series - Phoebe Waller-Bridge (Fleabag) Ensemble in a comedy series - The Marvellous Mrs Maisel Female actor in a supporting role - Laura Dern (Marriage Story) Male actor in a supporting role - Brad Pitt (Once Upon A Time... In Hollywood) Female actor in a television movie or limited series - Michelle Williams (Fosse/Verdon) Female actor in a drama series - Jennifer Aniston (The Morning Show) Male actor in a drama series - Peter Dinklage (Game Of Thrones) Ensemble in a drama series - The Crown Male actor in a television movie or drama series - Sam Rockwell (Fosse/Verdon) Male actor in a leading role - Joaquin Phoenix (Joker) Female actor in a leading role - Renee Zellweger (Judy) Cast in a motion picture - Parasite Outstanding action performance by a stunt ensemble in a motion picture - Avengers: Endgame Outstanding action performance by a stunt ensemble in a comedy or drama series - Game Of Thrones