Frank Lampard does not want to make kneejerk decisions in the transfer market and admitted that Chelsea may not sign anyone this month. Chelsea are struggling to land their main targets during the January window and have gambled in this situation in the past, bringing in fading forwards like Radamel Falcao, Gonzalo Higuaín and Alexandre Pato on short-term deals. Yet Lampard, who is free to spend after the club’s transfer ban was lifted, does not want to buy for the sake of it. “I don’t want to comment on those deals because I think it’s easy with hindsight,” Chelsea’s manager said. “The players you mentioned there were top players. I think the idea of January being a time to buy players, it’s difficult for everybody: for players coming in – especially if they’re coming from a different league – for the club and for the settlement of the group. I think that’s why we have to think ultra-carefully. “I don’t want to make some kneejerk reaction to say: ‘Here’s my first big signing’ because we couldn’t sign anyone in the summer. No, I want to do the right thing for the club. That’s why if I do it I’ll try to consider all things. Hopefully it’s the best thing for us. Whether that’s more of a short-term option or a long-term option, we’ll also have to consider.” Lampard is prepared for Chelsea, who have no intention of loaning Ross Barkley to West Ham, not buying anyone. “I think I should be because that’s where we’re at,” he said. “If it feels right for us then we’ll do it.” Chelsea have become the first sports team in the world to sign up to the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance’s working definition of antisemitism. “I think football does a lot of good things,” Lampard said. “Some of them go slightly unnoticed. I think it’s quite a strong statement from the club. Hopefully this is something that will be followed by other clubs.” West Ham joined Chelsea in signing up to the IHRA definition. It is hoped that more clubs will sign up before Holocaust Memorial Day on 27 January.