Others may have grabbed most attention on the first three days here, notably Ollie Pope and Dom Bess, but the performance of Mark Wood in his first Test for 11 months has given England cause for real excitement for next week’s series finale in Johannesburg. Coming into this match, the Durham fast bowler had not played competitive cricket since England’s World Cup final win against New Zealand at Lord’s in July. Despite having to battle back from a combination of knee and side injuries, Wood appears to have lost none of his pace. In his last Test appearance, against West Indies at St Lucia last February, the 30-year-old sent down one of the quickest spells seen by an England bowler as he claimed his maiden Test five-wicket haul. Although he did not quite reach the 95mph he clocked in that match, Wood was back bowling consistently above 90mph here and it has only been through luck rather than the judgment of South Africa’s batsmen he has not yet taken a wicket. Wood has come back from injury numerous times, most seriously from three career-saving operations on his left ankle early in his international career. So it is remarkable he has not only retained his hunger to succeed at the highest level but also his pace. Many have likened Wood’s skiddy style to that of Darren Gough, arguably England’s best bowler of the 1990s who took 229 wickets in 58 Tests. There is probably no better judge of where Wood is right now then than the Yorkshireman, who worked as a bowling consultant for England on their tour of New Zealand before Christmas. “I believe when Mark Wood gets it right he’s England’s quickest bowler,” he said. “I’m a huge fan of him, he’s very similar to what I was – he’s quicker than I was, but very similar. His spell in St Lucia last year was just devastating and you’ve seen him bowl here at 91-92mph and it looked like 98mph. When he gets it right and he’s fit and fresh he’s unbelievable to watch. “I’ve come to accept now he will get injured but he’s come into this tour slimmer than I’ve ever seen him. I don’t know whether that’s a good thing or a bad thing. Short-term it might be great. But he’s had to work hard to get back to his full fitness.” The Wanderers, the venue for the final Test of this series that starts on Friday, has a reputation as one of the quickest pitches in the world. England may be tempted to field an all-seam attack there and if Jofra Archer is recovered from the elbow injury that has ruled him out of the past two Tests, the prospect of him teaming up with Wood is a tantalising one. Before play started on this third day, Archer was on the outfield bowling quicker than he has at any point since sustaining his injury during training on New Year’s Day in Cape Town. The prospects then for England to field two men who can comfortably exceed 90mph in Johannesburg are hopeful, although the real aim for Joe Root will be making sure both men are fit and firing when the next Ashes series start in Australia next year. “I am excited about Jo’burg,” says Gough. “If Wood gets through this game I’d love to see him and Archer there. But the dream would be to see them two together during the Ashes. I’d love to see that and I’d want to be at that game to see it as well.” Archer has found Test cricket far harder this winter than he did during his debut summer in England, when he took 22 Australian wickets at 20.27 apiece. Gough, who worked with the 24-year-old in New Zealand, says: “Every Test you’re learning and Jofra has found it difficult this winter. A lot of his cricket the last two years has been 50-over and 20-over. I think it got in his mind early on in New Zealand that the pitches were slow and flat and he never got over that. “I still believe that’s a massive learning curve for him. He’s still young, we expect a lot out of him but you have got to remember he’s learning on the job. I still think he’s an amazing talent. He has got a massive part to play for England for many, many years.” Hopefully alongside Wood.