While the world has been spinning Edinson Cavani has been quietly getting old in Paris. The once-galloping Uruguayan striker will be 33 in February! How did that happen? Cavani has been struggling with injury this season. Not that Manchester United seem to care. They would love to increase the average age of their squad by bringing the PSG forward to Old Trafford, particularly now that Ashley Young has downed tools to force a move to Inter. But there’s a snag. The brass-necked Parisians value Cavani – whose contract expires in the summer – at £30m! That’s a lot of a lolly. Spurs are interested too now that Harry Kane looks set for an extended spell in the treatment room. One player who could pop up at Old Trafford this January is Bruno Fernandes, who seems to have been linked with a move to Manchester United from Sporting since the pre-internet days. It says here that he’ll be in the stands at Anfield on Sunday to watch his potential new team take on Liverpool. They might want to force him to put pen to paper on his £50m move before that one kicks off. Brendan Rodgers is keeping tabs on Southampton’s Ryan Bertrand. Why, you ask? Because they fully expect Ben Chilwell to walk the well worn path between the Leicester and Chelsea in the summer. Another full-back who could be on the move is João Cancelo. The right-back has struggled to elbow Kyle Walker out of the Manchester City team since joining from Juventus for £60m last summer and the word in Spain is that José Mourinho has “personally” spoken to the Portugal defender about a potential £51m switch to Tottenham. Chelsea are leading the race to sign Rumour Mill stalwart Timo Werner from Leipzig after the striker, who has 23 goals in 25 games, said he believes the Premier League was the “most interesting” in Europe. Clearly Werner has not been watching Poland’s Ekstraklasa, where a four-way race for the title is shaping up. Serie A shambles Milan are dispatching scouts to new and interesting places as they try to bag a bargain. The confused-looking Italian chap walking up Wallgate in Wigan is looking for the Latics’ left-back Antonee Robinson while he’ll also have to find his way up to Edinburgh to see if he thinks Hearts’ 17-year-old left-back Aaron Hickey is the second coming of Paolo Maldini. And Hull have told Aston Villa to stump up 20 million big ones if they want to make off with their goal-guzzling forward Jarrod Bowen this January.