The decision to allow Saracens to complete the Premiership season having accepted relegation to the Championship has been strongly criticised by the Bristol owner, Steve Lansdown, who believes the club need to “repent for the sin they committed” in breaching salary cap regulations. Lansdown believes Saracens should not be allowed to play the remainder of the season with a squad who are unable to comply with the salary cap. “I find it very strange they can continue their league programme with the same players. I find that unhelpful,” he told TalkSport. “At the end of the day they cheated and they have to accept their punishment. Anything they have achieved over the last couple of years is going to be tainted. It will stick for a while because everyone is going to be cognisant of the fact that it happened. “They are making a lot of noises at Saracens. They have apologised, which is the first thing, and now we need to see what they are going to do to put things right. They committed a sin and they have to repent for it. They need to go through a period of rehabilitation back into the world of rugby. “They have brought the game into disrepute. There are 13 clubs [the 12 Premiership clubs and Newcastle] who have all signed up to the salary cap and they have decided to put two fingers up to it and do their own thing. They feel almost aggrieved we are upset about it.” Lansdown also believes Saracens should have been relegated sooner. “It should have happened quicker and sharper,” he said, but accepts the club now face a period of deep uncertainty. “The players have got some very difficult decisions to make, the management have got some very difficult decisions to make. They probably haven’t woken up to the reality of what is in store for them.” Saracens will not face a formal disrepute charge from the Rugby Football Union despite breaching the cap for the past four seasons. Bill Sweeney, the RFU’s chief executive, said there are no plans to issue further sanctions against the club but concedes the image of the game has suffered. “It’s not really our remit to investigate a club,” he said. “We felt the independent inquiry did a good job and we feel they’ve now been significantly penalised. We’re not thinking about a disrepute charge at this stage. There are no winners out of this.It’s about making sure we recover well.”