Last season 5th Coach Daryl Powell Captain Michael Shenton They do not have the strongest starting 17 in the competition, but Castleford can know more than most how Super League is so often a squad game. That mindset looks to have been integrated into their recruitment, with a number of new signings bolstering their ranks. Among them is the St Helens half‑back Danny Richardson, who could form an exciting all-English pairing in the halves with Jake Trueman. Castleford’s squad depth could take them a long way when injuries bite most sides mid-season. Key player Jake Trueman Prediction 4th Last season 7th Coach Steve McNamara Captain Rémi Casty Off-season recruitment has always dominated the agenda at Catalans leading into every Super League season, but never quite like this. The news of Israel Folau’s controversial arrival in the south of France will be a talking point long into the new campaign, and long before he makes his debut for the Dragons. When that will happen is unclear, but Folau is not the only big name arriving in Perpignan this year. State of Origin star James Maloney has the potential to light up the competition, and in any other year, would be Catalans’ headline arrival. Folau’s move has put paid to that, though. Key player James Maloney Prediction 7th Last season 10th Coach Simon Woolford Captain Aidan Sezer Much like Catalans, Huddersfield’s hopes of success in 2020 seem to revolve around the performances of one big-name arrival. Aidan Sezer has been a fine performer for Canberra in recent seasons, and his move to West Yorkshire will raise hopes of a long-awaited challenge for the play-offs for the Giants. For that to happen, however, Simon Woolford will have to squeeze every drop out of a squad who look more likely to be fighting for survival. Key player Aidan Sezer Prediction 10th Last season 6th Coach Lee Radford Captain Danny Houghton After a disappointing end to 2019, Hull FC have rolled the dice in the transfer market for 2020. The Black and Whites have refreshed an ageing pack with new recruits such as the Great Britain international Josh Jones and the blockbuster NRL forward Manu Ma’u. The return of Mahe Fonua gives Hull an extra edge in the three-quarters too and, if Lee Radford can settle on a regular half‑back pairing, they could challenge. Start slowly, however, and Radford will be under early pressure. Key player Jake Connor Prediction 5th Last season 11th Coach Tony Smith Captain Weller Hauraki The problems are already mounting for Hull KR before a ball has been kicked. The tragic spinal injury that has ended Mose Masoe’s career has robbed Tony Smith of one of his biggest and most important forwards, though Masoe’s health is clearly the priority. With other injuries troubling them already, Rovers are many people’s tip to be relegated. The veteran NRL three‑quarter Shaun Kenny-Dowall is a good recruit, but they will need more than him to defy the critics this year. Key player Mitch Garbutt Prediction 12th Last season 8th Coach Richard Agar Captain Stevie Ward Hopes are cautiously high at Leeds after a turbulent few years for Super League’s most successful club. Luke Gale could be the answer to their problems in the halves after his transfer from Castleford, while the Rhinos look to have much more strength in depth than in previous years. However, this young squad may need another formative season in 2020 before they can genuinely think about dining at Super League’s top table again – though they do seem capable of a surprise or two. Key player Luke Gale Prediction 6th Last season 3rd and Grand Final runners-up Coach Ian Watson Captain Lee Mossop Salford produced Super League’s most incredible fairytale last season when they battled their way to the Grand Final against all the odds. With a number of their key players – including the Man of Steel, Jackson Hastings – now gone, repeating that success in 2020 would be an even bigger story. Salford, who have recruited shrewdly in the wake of some big departures, will be too good to go down, but another tilt at the play-offs feels unlikely with everyone around them strengthening. Key player Niall Evalds Prediction 9th Last season 1st and Grand Final winners Coach Kristian Woolf Captain James Roby St Helens’ dominance throughout the 2019 season was rewarded with a first Super League title in five years. It was a fitting way to round off Justin Holbrook’s time in charge at the club – and his replacement, Kristian Woolf, has a near-unchanged squad at his disposal as the Saints aim for back-to-back titles. A squad so settled and so talented was never in need of fresh blood and, with that continuity in mind, Saints look well placed for another tilt at Old Trafford. Key player Jonny Lomax Prediction 1st Last season 1st in Championship, won Million Pound Game Coach Brian McDermott Captain Josh McCrone Toronto’s arrival into Super League is the biggest moment in the competition’s history, but – despite the glitz, glamour and transatlantic appeal they bring with them to the top table in 2020 – the Wolfpack will have a battle on their hands to avoid relegation. A squad of 23 first-team players is desperately light and will almost certainly need strengthening at some point. Sonny Bill Williams’s return to rugby league is the headline act, but he will have no time to ease himself back in with so few players at Toronto’s disposal. Key player Sonny Bill Williams Prediction 11th Last season 9th Coach Chris Chester Captain Jacob Miller Having only secured Super League survival on the final day of last season, Wakefield have acted accordingly and refreshed their squad for 2020. The highly rated London full‑back Alex Walker is a notable arrival, as is the former England international Joe Westerman. Much like Salford, Wakefield will likely be too good to be in the relegation mix this season. If they keep their key players such as Jacob Miller and Westerman fit, they could quietly influence the play-off race, too. Key player Alex Walker Prediction 8th Last season 4th and Challenge Cup winners Coach Steve Price Captain Chris Hill Winning the Challenge Cup would constitute a successful season for most rugby league clubs, but the manner in which Warrington’s pursuit of a double fell apart after Wembley last season left many feeling they had underperformed. Yet again the free-spending Wolves have acted boldly in the transfer market, with the Great Britain half-back Gareth Widdop returning from the NRL to form a big-money blockbuster pairing with Blake Austin. Their form will be key to the Wolves’ hopes of a first title since 1955. Key player Gareth Widdop Prediction 3rd Last season 2nd Coach Adrian Lam Captain Sean O’Loughlin Wigan should have been kicking off the season with Shaun Edwards in the dugout this week, but his U‑turn afforded Adrian Lam the opportunity to continue in the role in which he impressed last season. Wigan ultimately fell just short of the Grand Final in 2019, but they have arguably done the best business in the off-season. The Man of Steel Jackson Hastings is the headline signing but George Burgess is another who could propel Wigan towards a genuine title push in 2020. Key player Jackson Hastings Prediction 2nd and Grand Final winners