Alisson A watching brief for much of the first half, busier but never truly troubled in the second. 6 Trent Alexander-Arnold Prevented from getting forward as often as he does, usually by United’s split-striker tactics. 6 Joe Gomez Another solid performance as the junior but now regular central defensive partner to Van Dijk. 7 Virgil van Dijk Headed in an opener against the early run of play, and marshalled the backline in style. 7 Andy Robertson His usual influence was muted in the first half before normal service resumed after the break. 6 Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain Something of a passenger in first half, his substitution was little surprise. 5 Jordan Henderson His energy kept his team driving forward, hit the post early in the second half. 8 Georginio Wijnaldum Had a goal disallowed for offside and his darts from deep wreaked havoc on United. 7 Mohamed Salah Missed a golden chance in the 48th minute then broke United duck in added time. Booked. 7 Roberto Firmino Had a goal disallowed by VAR, and he is still yet to score a goal at Anfield this season. 7 Sadio Mané His best chance, just before half-time, was well saved by De Gea. Otherwise unusually quiet. 6 Subs Adam Lallana (for Oxlade-Chamberlain, 66) 6, Divock Origi (for Mané, 83) NA, Fabinho (for Firmino, 83) NA David de Gea Had a VAR-assisted escape from a duel with Van Dijk, and a couple of decent saves. Booked. 6 Victor Lindelöf Amid the chaos of much of United’s defending, he actually showed a modicum of composure. 6 Harry Maguire Beaten to the punch as Van Dijk scored, and struggled to get United’s defence organised. 5 Luke Shaw Took time to get used to being the left-sided member of a defensive trio but steadily improved. Booked. 6 Aaron Wan-Bissaka The pick of United’s defenders in the first half, somewhat ragged from the start of the second. 6 Fred Charged around energetically and by far United’s best performer. Needs better midfielders around him. 7 Nemanja Matic Booked early for a high kick on Wijnaldum, became a bystander once the pace increased. Booked. 5 Brandon Williams Asked to cover both his teammate Shaw and the runs of Alexander‑Arnold, he struggled. 5 Andreas Pereira Work rate typically high and was within inches of equalising from Wan‑Bissaka’s cross. 6 Daniel James Found space in the early stages but a first goal since August never looked likely. 5 Anthony Martial Close to an equaliser in the 59th minute but the finish was wild. Struggled to hold the ball up. 6 Subs Mason Greenwood (for Williams, 74) 5, Juan Mata (for Pereira, 74) NA, Diogo Dalot (for Shaw, 87) NA