I wouldn’t describe myself as a people-pleaser, but I do have a problem with saying no. Many of you will be reading this and thinking: “We’re fully aware of that, Romesh – have you ever heard of overexposure?” but I don’t mean my many appearances on the Christmas schedules. No, my problem occurs when something comes up that I think is good, or comes from a good place, but I know there is no way I can do it. My preferred strategy is to say yes, with the full intention of devising an excuse later down the line. Inevitably, I don’t then have the guts to pull the trigger on the excuse, letting time slip on until eventually I cancel at the very last minute and the person hates me for ever. Someone might invite me out to dinner and I’ll think to myself: “There’s no way that can happen in the next six months, as I’m on tour.” That would be an easy thing to say, except for some reason I think that it’s wanky, so look in my diary for dates. I have one day off in a few weeks. I know that I will want to spend that with my family. Again, an easy thing to say. Except I don’t. I offer that date, knowing that I am going to cancel nearer the time. I cannot explain why I do this. I think it’s because rejection stings in all its forms. So I let time pass, wondering when I am going to cancel, formulating different reasons that would mean I will not hurt this person’s feelings. The problem is, the closer you get to the event, the more extreme the excuse has to be. If it’s a couple of weeks ahead, you might have a work issue; if it’s the day before, you might have a work emergency; if it’s the same day, your children might be ill; and if it’s the hour before, you pretend to be your wife texting to say that you have died in an accident. I recently decided to be more honest, which has been incredibly easy, because for weeks I haven’t been invited anywhere. The paranoia has set in. Have I been blacklisted by everyone who would have possibly socialised with me? Are my friends thinking: “Well, I’m not sitting in a Zizzi for an hour waiting for that prick to put a fire out, or whatever’s happened to him this time.” Perhaps I need to do the inviting. Maybe I should offer them what I wish someone would offer me: “Listen, if you can’t or don’t want to do that, I am offering you a guilt-free get-out-of-socialising card.” Anyway, eventually, someone suggested going for lunch. I knew it wasn’t going to happen, so I said: “That sounds great, but I’m working on this thing that means it won’t happen for a while. But I’m definitely up for lunch at some point.” It was so easy to say – it felt great. Until I looked at their face and saw a pained expression. They were definitely hurt. Long story short, I am texting them later today to say I have laryngitis.