During the past couple of years of writing (and talking to people) about alcohol-free drinks for my new book, How To Drink Without Drinking, the observation has come up again and again that it’s so much easier to go teetotal now than it once was. It’s no longer just about sweet fizzy drinks such as Fanta and Coke (but if they’re your thing, by all means carry on drinking them happily), and these days there are any number of alco-free drinks you can enjoy – except, that is, wine. As a wine lover, I’ve yet to find a convincing, alcohol-free substitute, but they are improving. Majestic has collaborated with the Torres-owned brand Sangre de Toro, though I admit my tasting note of “a touch sweet but not disgusting” (on its muscat-based white) is not exactly a ringing endorsement. The rosé (“at least slightly winey”) and the red (see today’s picks) are OK, however – especially if you’re not drinking for any significant period of time. I was also quite impressed by the luscious, red berry-based Nine Elms No 18, which is a like a cross between red wine and vermouth. Like the new breed of alcohol-free “spirits”, however, this stuff is not cheap, which seems bizarre given that the makers don’t have to pay the same tax on their products as those who make alcoholic drinks. The producers would argue that there are a lot of hi-tech processes involved in extracting the botanicals, some of which include alcohol, which then has to be removed, but still. If Lidl can sell CeroCero, a gin substitute, for £9.99, you do wonder why certain other brands cost well over double the price. That said, if you’re trying to cut down and don’t want to fall off the wagon from sheer boredom, there are a number of appealing options, among them Atopia, Aecorn Dry and Everleaf, all of which I’ve recommended in the past, to which we can now add the new-to-the-market Pentire, a herby gin-alike from Cornwall that I actually prefer drinking neat, rather than with tonic, as its makers recommend. (Incidentally, I’ve found you don’t want to dilute your AF spirits too much: more like 1:1, or even with just a splash of tonic or soda.) The alcohol-free category that does go from strength to strength, though, is beer – unsurprisingly, perhaps, when you think it still gets to keep its two main flavouring ingredients, hops and malt. My latest find, Harviestoun’s Wheesht (the name means “be quiet”), would be impressive even at 5%. At 0%, it’s a small miracle. Sangre de Toro 0% Red £4.99 (mix-six) Majestic. Rioja it ain’t, but this garnacha- and syrah-based red is a lot better than most AF wines. Nine Elms No 18 £19.95 Master of Malt. A rich, spicy, red wine substitute. Pricey, but one of the few stand-ins you could drink with a steak. Pentire Botanical Non-Alcoholic Spirit £24.95 The Whisky Exchange. Bracingly saline and herbal, like taking a cliff walk on a cold winter’s day. Would be great with oysters. Wheesht Dark Ruby Ale £1.15 (330ml) Harvistoun Brewery, 0%. Far from being bland, this alcohol-free has deep roasted coffee and bitter chocolate flavours in spades – perfect for this time of year. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.