Unlike Ben Stokes or Kevin Pietersen, Dominic Sibley is a player who fills bars rather than empties them. At times watching him bat can be mind-numbingly dull. So imagine what it must have been like for South Africa’s bowlers as he ground his way to a maiden Test half-century in Cape Town. Sibley will not win many points for artistic merit. But if he can kick on from this breakthrough innings – which could yet become a century after he finished the day unbeaten on 85 – he might win plenty of Test matches for England. In 2004 his father, Mark, left the England & Wales Cricket Board after a year as their commercial director. If this performance is a sign of things to come, Sibley junior will surely stay in the employ of the ECB for far longer than that. Whatever your stylistic critique on the 24-year-old, after years of top-order instability Sibley, who we should remember is playing only his fourth Test, is exactly what England need. Indeed, his innings on day three at Newlands went a long way to helping Joe Root’s team take complete control of this second Test. A first-innings lead of 46 was significant. But only if the batsmen could back up the hard work of the bowlers. Even though he was glacially slow, Sibley scoring just three off his first 30 deliveries and taking 50 overs to reach his half-century, he provided the platform for others to play around him. It is exactly the kind of approach that this team, who for so long have seemingly struggled to get out of white-ball mode in Test cricket, have been craving. Less style, more substance and an ability to do the dirty work that wins matches. By the close, with England 218 for four and leading by 264, only one result appears possible here – a first overseas Test victory in 11 months for Root’s team. That would not only be significant for England but also for Sibley, a player who has reinvented himself since moving from Surrey to Warwickshire late in the summer of 2017. His call-up for the tour of New Zealand earlier this winter followed a summer when he was the leading run-scorer in Division One of the County Championship, scoring five centuries along the way, including two doubles. Tellingly, it was not just the volume of runs Sibley amassed but the way he got them – facing 1,009 more balls than any other batsmen in the top tier of the Championship. A strike-rate of 41.6 in first-class cricket – by comparison Alastair Cook’s is 50.7 – has raised concerns about whether Sibley has the game to truly prosper at Test level. Yet his second innings in this match has shown he certainly has the mental fortitude. Speaking before his Test debut against New Zealand at Mount Maunganui in November, Sibley spoke about his approach, saying: “Opening the batting is tough at the start so you’ve got to face balls for it to get easier. It’s something that I sort of try to build my game round – to play to my strengths, get through the new ball and cash in when it gets easier for that.” That’s something Sibley did here as he upped his scoring rate in the final session, with one shot – punching Kagiso Rabada through the covers for four to move on to 48 – particularly eye-catching. Such shots would not have been possible for Sibley during the end of his time at Surrey, when his form fell off a cliff. But work with the freelance batting coach Gary Palmer, who has also helped Cook and Ian Bell, led him to remodel his technique and the runs have since flowed. A more open stance, to prevent him from falling towards the off-side, and hitting straighter has helped unlock the potential that was evident in 2013 when Sibley, aged 18 and 21 days, become the second-youngest English player, behind only WG Grace, to hit a first-class double hundred. That high point against Yorkshire was followed by a trough, as so often happens with young players. Yet Sibley’s time at Surrey was hugely beneficial given that as a teenager he shared a dressing room with Ricky Ponting and Graeme Smith, now South Africa’s acting director of cricket. Both were generous with their time and knowledge to the young Sibley and allied to that reworking of his technique in recent years, he is reaping the benefits on the biggest stage of all.