Stoke pulled away from the relegation places as Sam Clucas scored against his former club en route to a 2-0 win over Swansea. Clucas powered home 10 minutes into the second half before James McLean sealed the points when he took advantage of some poor defending. Defeat for the visitors saw them miss a chance to rise into the play-off spots. Stoke 2-0 Swansea Rotherham’s defeat at Peterborough was notable for more than ending the visitor’s five-match winning run as the game had to be stopped during the second half while a qualified referee was sourced from the crowd after one of the linesman pulled up with an injury. One emergency fourth official was rejected and the man selected had to signal for eight minutes of added time but Posh completed a 2-1 win courtesy of first-half goals from from Ivan Toney and Sammie Szmodics. Michael Ihiekwe did cut the deficit before the break but the Millers were unable to make further inroads. The fact I couldn't walk over a small wall probably was why they didn't trust me in the end. https://t.co/hPcdLcKtXg With all the drama at London Road, Ipswich only needed a Luke Woolfenden goal to beat Lincoln at Portman Road to go top of League One. Jordan Roberts’ double earned Gillingham a point with a 2-2 draw at Rochdale. The home side took the lead after Rhys Norrington-Davies was fouled in the box and Ian Henderson converted the spot-kick. Roberts got his first to level, heading home Olly Lee’s corner before putting the Gills ahead after the break. Stephen Dooley earned a share of the spoils when he fired in from Aaron Wilbraham’s knock down. Bristol Rovers remain the only club in England’s top four tiers without a goal in 2020 after Jonson Clarke-Harris saw his late penalty saved on to the crossbar by Fleetwood keeper Alex Cairns. At least the 0-0 draw keeps Rovers safely in mid-table. The division’s only other game, Accrington’s visit to Burton, ended 1-1. Bristol Rovers 0-0 Fleetwood, Burton 1-1 Accrington, Ipswich 1-0 Lincoln City, Peterborough 2-1 Rotherham, Rochdale 2-2 Gillingham Swindon extended their lead at the top of table thanks to a routine 3-0 win over Port Vale. Starting the day ahead of Exeter on goal difference, a 20 minute blitz of goals from Leon Legge, Hallam Hope and Michael Doughty either side of the break puts them two points clear at the top of League Two. Crewe Alexandra, who were held to a 2-2 draw at Scunthorpe, are seven points off the leaders in fourth place. Second-place Exeter were held to a scoreless draw at home against Colchester, allowing Plymouth to close the gap in third. The Pilgrims’ 2-1 win over Stevenage – delayed by floodlight failure in the second half at the Lamex – consigned the home side back to the foot of the table. Morecambe, who started the day bottom, drew with Cambridge to leapfrog Stevenage. Adam Phillips put the Shrimps ahead in the first half but Harvey Knibbs levelled with 22 minutes left on the clock. Macclesfield pulled themselves away from danger despite going down to 10 men against play-off hopefuls Forest Green Rovers. Carl Winchester’s 18th-minute effort had the away side ahead until the 75th minute when Joe Ironside levelled. Corey O’Keeffe saw red for Town five minutes later for hacking down Josh March but Arthur Gnahoua looped in a superb strike to give the hosts an unlikely win. Crawley and Grimsby split five goals at the People’s Pension Stadium, as the visitors left empty-handed. Both sides led in the first half but goals from Ollie Palmer, his second, and Ashley Nadesan in the last 20 minutes were enough to earn all three points. Strikes from Danny Rose, Nicky Maynard and Andy Cook saw Mansfield brush aside Bradford 3-0 at Field Mill. Leyton Orient ended a six game winless run as all the goals in their 2-1 victory over Newport County came in the last 15 minutes. Ryan Haynes put in his own net from James Brophy’s corner with nine minutes remaining before Ruel Sotiriou sealed victory shortly after. Jamile Matt headed home a stoppage time consolation for the Exiles. Carlisle 2-1 Walsall, Crawley 3-2 Grimsby, Exeter 0-0 Colchester, Leyton Orient 2-1 Newport, Macclesfield 2-1 Forest Green, Mansfield 3-0 Bradford, Morecambe 1-1 Cambridge, Salford 1-1 Oldham, Scunthorpe 2-2 Crewe, Stevenage 1-2 Plymouth, Swindon 3-0 Port Vale