“There are a number of occasions in my life when I have felt very broken,” Eimear McBride says. Her blistering first novel A Girl Is a Half-Formed Thing, published in 2013, was steeped in what McBride has called “the much feared ‘Irish’ themes of sex, death, family, guilt and religion”, and written in the much imitated “Irish” style of James Joyce. It led to her being hailed as “a genius” by Anne Enright, and it went on to win many awards, from the Goldsmith prize for experimental writing to the more mainstream (then Baileys) Women’s prize for fiction. Her 2017 follow up, The Lesser Bohemians, a darkly passionate love story between a young drama student and a much older actor, returned to the subject of childhood abuse. But while her debut was “about trauma right there in your face”, she says “Lesser Bohemians is about the life after, how it affects you, where you go.” And now her third novel, Strange Hotel, obsessively examines the scars of heartbreak, “but from much further on”. We are hunkered over coffee in our coats, the only customers in sharp winter sunshine outside a cafe in St Pancras station, our conversation interrupted by echoey announcements and the whoosh of the train from Paris. This proves a fitting setting to discuss Strange Hotel, which follows an unnamed woman as she checks into a series of hotels around the world: she unpacks, smokes, orders room service and maybe has sex with someone she meets. And she thinks. Or tries not to think. Written “in the gaps” of a year-long Beckett creative fellowship at Reading University, it is inevitably “infused” with the spirit of Beckett, “the idea of the mind devouring itself, which is a lot of Beckett”. And a lot of Eimear McBride. “Apparently so.” McBride is warm and spikily witty. “It’s funny how often people say to me: ‘Oh I thought you’d be a heroin addict’. They seem quite disappointed,” she says with a big laugh. But she is also furious. “Women are really angry. I am. And it’s not that I spend my life charging round in a rage, but I do feel a really deep, burning sense of injustice at the way women are treated in our world and the way that I’ve been treated in the world and I want to write about that. Guilt was the only thing that women were allowed to write about. Anger was a male emotion and it was appropriate only to men. Angry women were crazy, and I feel very much: ‘Fuck you with all of that’.” In the sort of wilderness-years-to-wild-success story that publishing loves, Girl, as it has come to be known, took a feverish six months to write and nine years to find a publisher; Lesser Bohemians took nine years to write and six months to hit the shelves (she had already spent “six years on it” by the time Girl came out). She rejects “the inspiring triumph over adversity” narrative – “it really wasn’t” – instead finding the whole experience, and the attendant scrutiny, to be “a very fraught” one. “Of course it was wonderful to win prizes and to have my work out in the world, to be reviewed and taken seriously, but it was very hard to go from zero to 60 or whatever.” 'All of my books, at their heart are about loneliness. About feeling disconnected, dissociated' Since Girl was published, McBride has stayed in a lot of hotels. Strange Hotel, which might be described as a book-tour novel, playfully lists them all (small festival towns such as Hay on Wye alongside Cairo and Khartoum), more than 100 in total. “At first going to hotels seemed exciting and glamorous, but now I find it depressing and lonely,” she says. “Essentially they are all pretty much the same; there are better or worse. You do your thing and you come back to your hotel. And you get up the next day and it is like you’ve never been there at all. It was interesting to see if I could make something out of that seemingly dead time.” You don’t read a McBride novel so much as inhabit it for a brief, intense period; you are given the key-card to her characters’ minds, and suffer their grief and pain with them. “All of my books, at their heart, are about loneliness,” she says. “About feeling outside of the normal human experience, of feeling disconnected, dissociated” – for which the alienating, “strange” experience of staying in a hotel on your own is the ideal metaphor. In particular, it is a novel about the loneliness of being a middle-aged woman. “There is something essentially quite alone that most women experience in their lives, whether they are with someone or not,” she explains. “I certainly feel as I get older there is a kind of feeling of being disconnected, of being set outside of the mainstream. I think it is about no longer being treated as if you are of significance in the world.” Though at 43 McBride “feels as significant now as I did at 21, certainly to myself”. Rather than the material details of the woman in Strange Hotel, McBride wanted to convey “something of her experience of being alive, of being a human being”. We learn, in passing, her age, that she is Irish, has a son and has lost the love of her life. As with McBride’s “unformed girl”, there is a reason she remains nameless. The author has been at pains to stress the fictionality of her work. “If I’d wanted to write a memoir, I’d have written a memoir,” she says sharply. “People say that about Girl, about Lesser Bohemians. ‘It’s all you.’ Again that’s something that women get all the time. You can’t invent anything.” But, there’s no denying the autobiographical elements. “There are things that have been very hard in my life,” she says, referring to the deaths of her father when she was eight, and her brother, who died from a brain tumour when he was 28. She grew up the third child with three brothers in west Ireland, a “rough and tumble” childhood, but also very bookish. Her father taught her to read when she was tiny, reading Animal Farm to her aged six, editing out the sad bits. When he died, she developed the idea that becoming an actor would protect her and “make everything OK”. Lesser Bohemians (which is dedicated to him) draws on the freedom she felt escaping to London to study drama in the 1990s, magical thinking that was “completely destroyed” when her brother died, after which she spent “a really long time just being very lost”. She fell out of love with acting, but had no idea what else she wanted to do: “I didn’t know how I would ever be anything again or make anything of myself”; she felt she was “essentially nothing”. Discovering the playwright Sarah Kane, who killed herself the week her brother died and who was also 28, “shocked” her out of herself. “She showed me that you can be angry and you can be brutal, you don’t have to make up for it, hide it and be nice about it.” So she started writing what would become Girl. Her husband William Galinsky, a theatre director and arts festival organiser, kept her going through what felt like the failure of her late 20s and 30s, and it was through him that she made contact with the small independent Norwich publisher Galley Beggar, who signed her up (it was only their second title). McBride was 36 and six months pregnant. She finished the edits with her baby daughter in a bouncer on the floor of their house in Norwich. They have since moved to east London, which she loves: “London has always felt like home.” The second novel “was always going to be tricky”, and with The Lesser Bohemians, of which she is “very fond” and “proud” (she is currently working on a screenplay), some critics got more excited about the sex than the syntax. “McBride does it better than almost any other contemporary novelist I’ve read,” wrote Lara Feigel, but she is still smarting from a couple of “sniggery” reviews from male critics. “They were like embarrassed schoolboys about it,” she says. “Women being articulate about sex, women thinking deeply what it means, creates a lot of anxiety in men. It means you have to think about it in a different way, think harder. Or think maybe about the things that you’ve done.” Her own success “doesn’t mean there aren’t loads of other women getting their heads stood on by these idiots,” and the contemporary literary scene can hold a “very sour atmosphere” for female writers. She cites the reaction to fellow Irish novelist Sally Rooney – “raging about her being young and female and so outrageously successful” – as well as a recent “sneery” New Yorker profile of Edna O’Brien, “what men have been doing to her her whole career”. This new wave of female Irish writers that includes McBride and Rooney owes as much to O’Brien as to Joyce or Beckett, at least when it comes to writing fearlessly about sex, good and bad. “I think a lot of women are getting angry and bored with the idea that everything they write about is casually dismissed,” she says. “And that has maybe led women to be less soft in their approach to their experience of the female sexual body, of being on the receiving end of the male sexual body and what that can be like.” If Lesser Bohemians was “a book about love”, Strange Hotel is “a book about the absence of love. This is after love”. There is also a strange absence of sex: we learn more about the different air-con systems than the lovers or what they get up to. The sex itself isn’t important, she insists. For the woman it is “just a way to pass the time, it alleviates the boredom or the loneliness.” McBride wanted to subvert assumptions that casual sex for a woman (especially one no longer young) is somehow wrong, or a form of self-hatred: “Maybe a middle-aged woman fancied having a shag and met someone who she liked who was up for it. That happens.” “Maybe I should stop fucking around with language?” the narrator muses towards the end of the novel. “It’s not improving matters at all.” Part of “the fun” of this book was experimenting with a different form, McBride says, replacing “the fractured internal monologues” of the earlier novels with a more formal prose. “It was interesting to see her emerge despite her best efforts to hide herself.” But her gift of the gab, that flair for “fucking around with language”, will out: “I clearly can’t write in a straightforward, traditional way,” she concedes cheerfully. 'I clearly can't write in a straightforward, traditional way' She has little truck with what she calls the “heavyweight middlebrow” of contemporary literary fiction (“depressing”). And while she’s not naming any names – “Jesus, no way!” – there are writers who “got a lot of space and time and attention that they didn’t really deserve because they were confident, university educated men”. Although it has bothered her in the past, she now sees not going to university as “an absolute blessing” for a novelist: “I have no sense of what the rules are, it has given me a freedom to reinvent writing for myself.” Any yearning to write social realism vanishes the minute her “hands go on the keys”. And she has even less time for postmodernism. “I’m not interested in displaying brains and education or class,” she says. “I’m interested in the underneath of everything, the inside of everything.” McBride doesn’t do happy endings any more than she does full sentences: “I feel infuriated by books that write about difficult subjects but in which at the end everything is OK. It’s not that people can’t be OK, but people are always changed, you can never go back.” “So, what will happen next?”, the narrator asks at the end of Strange Hotel. What after? … is the central question of her fiction. “Because I am someone who has lived through, who hasn’t been destroyed,” she says. “I wasn’t the one who died. I was the one who lived. What doesn’t kill you doesn’t kill you. And there is no rule for what happens after that.” • Eimear Mc Bride will be reading from her new novel at the Purcell Room, Southbank Centre, London SE1, on 13 February. Strange Hotel is published by Faber (RRP £12.99) on 6 February. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.