Christian Eriksen’s move to Internazionale is in grave danger of collapse, with Paris Saint-Germain set to make a rival counter-swoop for Tottenham’s wantaway 27-year-old. According to the Mirror the French champions “have been monitoring” the situation and could try to add the Dane to their roster of midfield-based talent – of which they have so much apparently “Eriksen’s only concern could be forcing his way into the side”. Inter have further irons in their English fire, with an interest in Manchester United’s Tahith Chong, who is out of contract in the summer, though they are unlikely to get a clear run at that deal either with Barcelona and Juventus ready to join in the fight. Arsenal are ready to battle Manchester United for James Maddison – though that will have to wait until the summer – and to scuffle with Manchester City for John Stones, though “a senior Etihad source” tells the Sun there is “no chance” of the England defender moving south. Having already signed Pepe Reina and Danny Drinkwater in this transfer window, Aston Villa’s collection of familiar Premier League faces could be further boosted by the arrival of Steven Nzonzi, currently on loan from Roma to Galatasaray but on an indefinite suspension because of what the Turkish club called “undisciplined behaviour during a training session”. The 31-year-old said this week “it’s probably most advantageous for everyone involved that this loan ends and I find a new place”, and by the looks of things Birmingham could be it. West Ham could be about to give up on a deal for the Middlesbrough goalkeeper Darren Randolph and sign Marcus Bettinelli from Fulham instead. Tellingly the Cottagers have signed Jordan Archer, most recently at Oxford United, to provide goalkeeping cover should Bettinelli leave. Southampton and Crystal Palace are battling to seal a loan deal for the Tottenham right-back Kyle Walker-Peters, who has announced a desire for more gametime. The Saints are also closing in on Marin Pongracic, Red Bull Salzburg’s 22-year-old Croatian centre-back who started only four league games in an injury-ravaged 2019, while having also “expressed interest” in Fulham’s left-back Joe Bryan, according to the Mail, giving them a coveted one-day full house of defensive positional rumours. Burnley are after Bristol City’s Josh Brownhill, who according to the Sun is “rated in the £6m bracket”, even if the Robins will not be keen to lose the midfielder. Until last Saturday – when he missed the win at Wigan with a bruised foot – the 24-year-old had played every minute of every league match, most of them as captain. Chelsea have recalled Conor Gallagher from his loan with Charlton – even though the defensive midfielder had missed only one game all season, and that through suspension – and will send him straight back out on loan, this time to Swansea, who are 12 places above the Addicks in the Championship table and engaged in a promotion fight. “I’m disappointed,” said Charlton’s manager, Lee Bowyer. “I didn’t see this coming which makes it harder to take.” Gallagher will at least be spared an awkward reunion, with Swansea having already played and beaten Charlton twice this season.