If you’ve watched a magic show, you may have experienced – alongside delight at its confounding feats of conjury – a twinge of desire to see it all go catastrophically wrong. Mischief Theatre – of The Play That Goes Wrong fame – minister to that desire in spades with their latest offering, co-created with Penn & Teller. It styles itself a fundraiser for the Disasters in Magic charity; host Sophisticato recently lost his magician dad in an accident involving a collapsing attic full of showbiz props. The gag is that the acts are all lame: more rabbit-in-headlights than rabbit-out-of-hat. Daredevil The Blade is forever doing himself an injury. Sophisticato’s doves are all dead. And, for all his big promises (“I can taste people’s first names!”), there’s nothing clair about the Mind Mangler’s voyancy. And so, despite satellite link-ups with David Copperfield and (very amusingly) Derren Brown, the tally of funds raised refuses to rise. As those familiar with the company’s oeuvre will expect, the humour is broad. Trousers fall down. German duo Bear & Spitzmaus sport comedy foreign accents. A mischievous teleprompt operator feeds Henry Lewis’s Mind Mangler rude lines: “The time has come for me to reveal … my penis!” A closer-to-the-bone show might have played the malfunctioning magic with a straighter bat. But there’s no pretence that any of this is real, as The Blade’s arm falls off in a bullet-catch trick, and the Mind Mangler uses the same audience plant three times over wearing different improbable moustaches. In that context, the effort to generate real tension around a routine involving the Mind Mangler, a paper bag and a broken bottle is doomed to fail: given all we’ve seen, how can there be any jeopardy? But the evening remains entertaining, and under Adam Meggido’s direction the performers’ comic and slapstick skills are on fine display. Lewis’s repeated botched exits are droll, Henry Shields channels John Cleese to fine effect as the evening’s MC – and there’s real magic to enjoy alongside the tomfoolery. A fun night out, then – even if the chainsaw that slices Sophisticato’s mother in two is the closest it ever gets to a cutting edge. • Booking at the Vaudeville theatre, London, to 31 May.