The BBC’s waning interest in racing was highlighted both inside and outside the sport’s media over the weekend. On Saturday, Andy Dunn, the chief sports writer for the Daily and Sunday Mirror, took to Twitter to complain that Radio 5 Live’s sports report “did not carry a line” about the day’s racing during his drive home after covering the day’s early Premier League game at Watford. “What a shame they have simply ditched the sport,” he concluded, a thought which was echoed by Matt Hughes, his counterpart at the Daily Mail. “Desperate,” Hughes said. “Champion Hurdle and Gold Cup trials today – not a word on the BBC website.” Driving home from Watford today, @5liveSport Sports Report did not carry a line about today’s horse racing. Looking at BBC website right now, the horse racing section leads with a story about Frodon’s win … at Kempton A WEEK ago. What a shame they have simply ditched the sport The following day, Cornelius Lysaght, who will leave his role as the BBC’s racing correspondent after nearly 30 years when his contract expires later this year, put his side of the story in an interview with the Racing Post. The Corporation’s decision to dispense with such a vastly experienced and much-respected journalist was described as being akin to the breakdown of a marriage. “I remain in love with the other side of this marriage,” Lysaght told the Post. “Unfortunately, the other partner isn’t in love with me any longer!” Lysaght, though, feels more like an innocent third party, caught in the crossfire as what was once a rock-solid relationship between the BBC and racing dwindles towards a point where the two sides are scarcely on nodding terms. And if we’re honest about it, this semi-conscious de-coupling has been going on for years. Racing’s decision to pay Channel 4 for coverage a decade ago while expecting licence payers’ money for a small number of high-profile events was a bit of a passion killer. And when a rule-change allowed bookies’ ads on to TV, C4 was handed a monopoly on terrestrial coverage without a second thought. It made perfect sense in terms of the money, and the best way to maximise the value of TV rights is to sell the whole lot as a package. But you can see why the Beeb felt jilted. Why, in the end, would they then spend any more than a bare minimum to accommodate a sport that feels its future lies elsewhere? They will still turn up for the good stuff, after all. These days, though, racing is effectively two different sports from a broadcaster’s point of view. There are the “Premier League” events and there is everything else, and while many inside the racing bubble like to think that there are plenty of top-flight occasions, the view from outside looking in is different. Cheltenham, the Grand National and Royal Ascot definitely pass muster. The Derby too, just about. But after that? Hard though it is for many of us to accept, the signs are there in the current ITV deal. There has been talk in the past – well, I know I’ve done it – of meetings being “relegated” to ITV4 when they are not shown on the main channel. If we’re honest about it, though, it is as much a case of the big festivals being promoted to ITV1. Some tracks may grumble privately about dropping down the programme guide, but overall, it is a deal that both sides can rub along with. And yet, with less than a year left to run on the contract, there is still no confirmation that it will be renewed from 2021. Whatever the reason for the delay, as the haggling continues so the landscape continues to shift. A new Gambling Act is on the horizon. Will bookies’ ads on TV be a thing of the past in four years’ time? The rights will be worthless if so. And if they can’t get the numbers to add up, ITV will be tempted to put the “racing” money towards something else instead. Businesses like to plan a long way ahead, and time is running out to get the next TV deal over the line. The break-up with the BBC was difficult, but another failed relationship with a major broadcaster would be a terrible way for racing to start the new decade. Kempton 1.20 Rajman 1.50 River Cam 2.20 Alfie Solomons 2.50 Fleeting Prince 3.20 Visionara 3.50 My Boy Sepoy 4.20 Double Legend 4.50 Seaquinn Newcastle 12.55 Eternal Romantic 1.30 Black Abbey 2.00 Mulcahys Hill 2.30 Lugg River 3.00 Ballydonagh Boy (nb) 3.30 Dunly 4.00 Off The Hook Plumpton 1.40 Kid Commando 2.10 Treasure Dillon (nap) 2.40 Christmas In April 3.10 Marilyn Monroe 3.40 Shanahan’s Turn 4.10 Ede’iffs Elton Wolverhampton 4.25 Eglish 4.55 Corvair 5.25 Rideson 5.55 Toro Dorado 6.25 Matewan 6.55 Tulane 7.25 Rock Icon Tips by Chris Corrigan Exeter 1.00 Kilconny Bridge 1.30 Golden Whisky 2.00 Fanfaron Dino 2.30 Demopolis 3.00 Flagrant Delitiep 3.30 Arqalina 4.00 Prime Venture 4.30 Boulting For GloryLeicester 1.15 Do It For Thy Sen 1.45 Rouge Vif 2.15 Whitehotchillifili 2.45 Big Difference 3.15 Rootless Tree 3.45 Rizzardo 4.15 Kapga De Lily (nb)Newcastle 4.05 Lopes Dancer 4.40 Sunshine Fantasy 5.15 The Right Choice 5.45 Majestic Sands 6.15 Fortamour 6.45 N Over J 7.15 Ken's Sam's (nap)