Exeter may have spent a huge amount of physical and mental energy in overcoming Saracens last weekend but London Irish expect no drop in intensity from the Premiership leaders at the Madejski Stadium on Sunday. “We feel good about things,” says Stephen Myler, the experienced fly-half who joined the club in the 2018 close season after 12 years with Northampton. “There is a long way to go and we are fully committed to remaining in the Premiership. We had a difficult Christmas period but you have to move on. “We know we are going to have to be at our best against Exeter. I do not expect any drop-off from them after their performance against Saracens. They have been in the top four for a few seasons for a reason: they know that the Premiership is a tournament in which anyone can beat anyone else on their day. If you drop off, you will pay.” The Exiles need a victory after a respectable start to their Premiership campaign following promotion from the Championship gave way to a slump. Without a win in three, they had a player sent off in two of those matches while Blair Cowan saw red in the European Challenge Cup defeat in Toulon last month. Irish are leaving Reading in the summer after 20 years and moving to the new Brentford Community Stadium in west London. There are unlikely to be too many tears at the farewell party at the Madejski, where the Exiles have won only six of their past 22 Premiership matches and two in the last 11. “We want to go to Brentford as a Premiership club,” says the 35-year‑old Myler, who was in the Saints team that won the 2014 Premiership final against Saracens. “It is an exciting time to be part of the squad and when I joined at the beginning of last season, my goal was to have another crack in the Premiership. I feel I still have another couple of seasons in me and being here has given me a new lease of life. “It is not like Northampton, and not just in terms of the club. Northampton is a small town and there is a lot more stuff to do in London outside rugby. It is a different environment and one I think I needed. I remain as ambitious as ever and the approach here at the beginning of the season was not to see success in terms of avoiding relegation but to give the best version of ourselves.” Irish won their first three Premiership fixtures against Exeter, but have been successful only once in the 11 since then, on the second Saturday in January in 2015 when the flanker Cowan, the only Exiles’ survivor that day, scored two of their four tries. The Chiefs were at the end of a four-match losing streak following a hard-fought home victory over Saracens. “They are a side you can measure yourself against,” says Myler. “They are a team that believes in what it is doing and the players work hard for each other. They steadily improved after reaching the Premiership and they are now one of the toughest teams to beat. We will give it a go and the management team here is very astute.” The relegation battle this season has been complicated by the presence of Saracens – docked 35 points for breaching salary cap regulations – at the bottom. The champions went into the current round of fixtures 12 points adrift of 11th-placed Leicester but, if the bottom four clubs at the start of the weekend all repeat their opening seven matches, Saracens would be within a point of the Tigers, 11 behind Wasps and 13 away from Irish. “The bottom line is that if you pick up enough victories, you will not have to worry about what the teams around you are doing,” says Myler. “All we are thinking about is climbing the table.”