“Most families have a kind of official family story,” Vigdis Hjorth says. “‘This is how we do Christmas’, and so on. If one member does not share this official, nice story, there is a big tension. I think I have given a voice to that person who has a more complex story, who is not prepared to be part of it. The family won’t listen to her, and there is a great deal of unpleasantness…” Hjorth, 60, is talking about her unsettling, beautifully constructed novel Will and Testament, in which a woman in her 50s, a magazine editor in Oslo, capsizes her family by insisting that her father sexually abused and raped her as a child. Because Bergjlot, the narrator of the novel, shares many elements of Hjorth’s own autobiography and because the first-person voice of the book is so directly and convincingly written, it has ignited the ongoing controversy in Norway over “virkelighetslitteratur”, or “reality fiction”, and the ethics of using details of family history in novels. In this case, the “unpleasantness” in the novel has spilled spectacularly over into real life. Hjorth’s sister, Helga, a human rights lawyer, responded to the book by writing a novel of her own, Fri Vilje (Free Will), in which a character suffers the trauma of living with the public fallout from a narcissistic sibling’s “dishonest” autobiographical novel. Hjorth’s mother, Inger, threatened legal action against a theatre in Bergen, which staged an adaptation of Will and Testament. The lawsuit demanded £23,000 in compensation for every family member affected by the story. Hjorth, the author of 20 novels, was already a leading figure in contemporary Norwegian fiction, but because of the controversy, and because of the power of her book, she has lately become a kind of cause célèbre, winner of the Norwegian Booksellers’ prize for this novel, and prime subject of newspaper editorials. One of the reasons for this is that her book emerged into a literary culture already polarised in its reaction to Karl Ove Knausgaard’s intimately confessional novel sequence My Struggle, and its enormous international success. “Autofiction” – exploiting the rawest of intimacies of lovers and spouses – has come to seem a distinctly Norwegian export. To emphasise the point, I spoke to Hjorth in London after an event in which she had discussed on stage the porous bounds of literature and reality with Knausgaard’s ex-wife, Linda Boström Knausgaard, who has published a novel of her own, which appears to dispute her ex’s fictional account of their break-up. There is nothing like a neutral view. We start to read each other from the moment we meet. Fiction reveals that In the course of that earlier discussion, Hjorth had insisted repeatedly on the sanctity of fiction, the right of the author to both invent and to mine personal experience just as she sees fit. She had also read, in a compulsive, frenzied manner, from the translation of Will and Testament, bringing to life the internal drama of her narrator, Bergjlot, who is trapped in the double bind of all accusers: desperate in her efforts to be believed, and dismissed for her desperation. I suggested to Hjorth afterwards that reading her book, listening to her speak, brought to mind that famous quote from the Polish writer Czeslaw Milosz: “Once a writer is born into a family, then the family is finished.” Does she agree? She smiles. “You know, I think that if you write nicely about family life, then they say, ‘Yeah, that’s us.’ But if you don’t write so nicely, then, ‘That’s not us!’ It’s not a secret that I don’t have contact with my own family, but that has nothing at all to do with the novel.” All the same, it is hard, sitting down with Hjorth, not to be tempted to go through the facts of the novel and to establish which might be “true” and which not. Like all persuasive fiction the book establishes such a credible interior world that it defies the idea of make-believe. Bergjlot’s recovered memory of abuse, which has surfaced in adulthood, is triggered by the last act of her father, which has been to bequeath the lakeside cabins in which the extended family enjoyed holidays to her sisters and not to her. All the buried trauma that has estranged her from the family is suddenly entirely and believably present. In one effort to equate reality with that fiction a Norwegian newspaper produced the funeral order of service of Hjorth’s father to prove that it was reproduced almost verbatim in the book; Hjorth’s sisters allege that she has lifted email correspondence directly for her novel. Hjorth herself will not go there. “I won’t talk about my family.” Because? “Because,” she says, just about patiently, “I’m in enough trouble. And it doesn’t concern the novel.” If she were to write about her family directly one day, she says, she would “write it as myself, and – as Knausgaard does – a crucial thing – use their real names.” In the course of her earlier discussion she said that she started her novels with a particular urgent question she wanted to answer. What was the question this time? “It was ‘What’s the voice of a person like, when she or he has an important story that nobody wants to listen to?’” she says. For a number of years Hjorth has been working as a teacher in Norway with people who “have no papers” or who are refugees. “One example would be a mother, and the government has taken her three children,” she says. “The mother had only one sentence when I met her: ‘They took them – they came on Friday – they took the children, they took the children.’ One sentence again and again, it just keeps going around.” Some of that experience in helping to give such people the more measured and coherent voice to fight legal battles, fed into her construction of Bergjlot, she says. The theme of her book – the need of a victim of abuse to be believed, whatever the consequences, and however circumstantial the evidence – obviously also comes at a moment when the culture demands that accusers be given that right. I haven’t read any better fictional exploration of the implications of #MeToo than Hjorth’s book, not least because of its clear-eyed honesty about unreliable narration. Bergjlot is certain of the essential truth of her allegations, if not all of the facts. These admissions of doubt place the reader not only squarely in the mind of Bergjlot, haunted by abuse, waging strategic conflict with her family, but also captures the impossible emotional difficulty of her siblings and mother, whose entire hold on reality has been jeopardised by the allegations. Because the voice of the novel circles around the nature of the crime, it becomes a convincing psychiatric case study, as well as a distinctly gossipy family drama. I ask Hjorth if she has had therapy over the years – Bergjlot’s voice sometimes sounds familiar with the consulting room. “Yes,” she says, “I can be open about that.” I ask how different the experience of writing fiction feels from that process of confessional. “It’s very different,” she says, “because when you go to psychoanalysis, it’s because you’re in trouble and you want to live better. I don’t have that kind of pain. When I write, I don’t write to have less pain. So it’s a very different process.” But it seems somehow crucial to understanding how a mind like Bergjlot’s might work – she fears at one point, for example, a sort of reflexive self-indulgence in her allegations: “Am I caressing my scar?” she wonders… “What is interesting, when you go to see an analyst, you find out how many lies you have in your story about yourself,” she says. “Often you survive because you have these lies. But still, you have to get rid of those lies even though you have survived by telling them to yourself. And that’s a painful process. I think that people who have been in psychoanalysis, they learn not to lie as much as they did before. So, like we are talking here now, my mind might be thinking ‘Ah Vigdis, Is this right? Are you lying now? Is this how you like to see it? OK, be honest.’ So you learn the technique of communicating with yourself.” The difficulty for people with trauma like Bergjlot’s, Hjorth suggests, is that they become labelled by their victimhood and have to choose to resist or embrace “making that their identity”. Hjorth has lectured over the years on addiction and drinking culture – she is a lover of wine herself, she says, but knows when to stop – and has met many former alcoholics. “They have been sober for years and still when I meet them, they say: ‘I’m an alcoholic.’ That’s always a surprise to me. I’m curious about that. ‘Weren’t you a father, a brother, an engineer, before you were that?’” Again, she insists, Bergjlot’s voice also grows out of that understanding as much as any more autobiographical impulse. We talk about Knausgaard, I wonder how she felt, as a writer and a reader, when she first engaged with his books. “I love what he does,” she says, “though it is hard to say what he is doing. All writing is black letters on paper, but this one moves me and I don’t care about that one. Why is that? I would never imagine that I could be interested in reading about a man drinking coffee and smoking cigarettes, day in day out. But I was.” I admit I don’t know enough about Norwegian society, but I wonder if there is something in the expected surface of life – a sense of happy families perhaps – that makes the fictional deconstruction of books like hers and Knausgaard’s, shocking, or taboo-breaking. She suggests that it is a long tradition in Norwegian fiction, particularly among female writers, to expose the darker realities of family life. “I think literally the first sentence that Sigrid Undset, our Nobel prize winner wrote, in her first book was ‘I have been unfaithful to my husband’,” she says, with a laugh. “So it was always there.” The desire for truth-telling emerges, perhaps, from a particular sameness in Norwegian family life, she adds. “I think in England for example the difference between rich and poor has always been big and especially now. And so there are lots of versions of family life. In Norway I think we are more equal generally. And I think when everyone is living the same way, people compare all the time. It makes them look from behind the curtains at their neighbours…” Her book is very different from Knausgaard’s novels but one thing they seem to share is a meditation on a generational shift in masculine roles. The Struggle for Knausgaard is much to do with having to fill the endless hours caring for young children – a role his own father brutally abandoned. In Hjorth’s book, obviously, the highly patriarchal society of the narrator’s parents has a deeply sinister and problematic legacy. How conscious was she of that shift when she was writing this book? “I was conscious of it. I think the family structure in Norway, more than probably anywhere in the world, has become as equal as it can be between women and men. And fathers, whether they like it or not, are forced to take an active role, having contact with their small children. Changing diapers, feeding them, dressing the little girl up to go to a birthday party. The fathers of Bergjlot’s generation never did that. And perhaps what happened to Bergjlot was more common in that generation because fathers were not used to their daughters’ bodies. I think perhaps it’s much more difficult for a father who has been close to the body of the little girl to abuse her.” We return to those questions of truth and reality. For Hjorth it clearly is a family business. Her daughter, she says, is engaged in a PhD about the stories that are told in courtrooms, how they are constructed and how they are persuasive. Jurors and judges she suggests, are in this sense no different from readers and literary critics. “You know in a trial, four different people might give an account of events on a particular day, and the court eventually decides to choose one of them to believe.” In this sense, too, we all obviously have a fundamental desire to be advocates for our own lives – and the novel dramatises that fact. In Hjorth’s novel Bergjlot behaves in some ways like a maverick lawyer, marshalling all her resources to destroy the family case. Each interaction becomes a potential cross-examination. “I heard the email notification from my iPhone on the seat next to me,” she notes, typically, of a message from her sister, “an act of war, was my guess…” I wonder what Hjorth made of her own sister’s decision to respond in kind to her, as it were, with a novel. Did part of her admire that? “It was well written,” she says, “because [Helga] was angry and I think anger is good for writing. And for me it was very interesting of course.” The truth of that book, however, is obviously no more objective than any work of art, but perhaps dictated by experience. Hjorth has a favourite story to illustrate her sense of that. “After Picasso painted Guernica, his huge painting of the bombing of the town, one of Franco’s generals happened to stand with him in front of the painting. The general said ‘Did you do that?’ ‘No,’ Picasso answered, ‘you did.’” She finds it amazing that the idea of objective truth has persisted, when it comes to the perception of complex events. “Fiction is not true in the sense that journalism [tries to be true]” she says. “It is true in another sense. There is nothing like a neutral view. We start to read each other from the moment we meet. Fiction reveals that. Knausgaard, for example, shows how his character meets the world…” Does she believe that any such thing as a straight report of events is possible? “It does not exist. It is all about choosing. I could write 10 fictions about this meeting we are having and you will maybe like one of them: ‘Yes that was how it was.’” She smiles. Which seems as good a place as any to end. • Will and Testament is published by Verso £10.99. To order it for £9.67 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15 Karl Ove KnausgaardKnausgaard’s forensically detailed My Struggle memoir-novels were too frank for some of his relatives. His family were appalled by the portrayal of both his father and his grandmother – Knausgaard spends pages on the latter’s incontinence – and attempted to stop publication of the first volume, A Death in the Family. They failed and the books have gone on to be a global phenomenon. Kathy O’BeirneDon’t Ever Tell by Kathy O’Beirne is listed as the bestselling nonfiction book ever written by an Irish author. It is also, according to seven of her eight siblings, more fiction than non. The book details a childhood of unbearable cruelty, with a violently abusive father, regular sexual attacks from two older boys and time spent in brutal orphanages and the famous Magdalene laundries for fallen women. Mary, Kathy’s sister, said of the book: “If people tell lies for long enough, people will believe it. We all want to get on with our lives and remember our mother and father. They were good to us.” Michel HouellebecqIn his 1998 bestseller, Atomised, another work of auto-fiction,  Houellebecq portrayed his mother, Lucie Ceccaldi, as a sex-crazed hippy who abandons her child in order to pursue free love in a Cote d’Azur cult. The pair haven’t spoken since. In 2008, Ceccaldi responded with a memoir, The Innocent One, in which she attempted to set the record straight. In an interview to promote the book she said: “If he has the misfortune of sticking my name on anything again he’ll get my walking stick in his face and that’ll knock his teeth out.” Stieg LarssonIt’s not just the subject matter of books that can stir up ill-feeling. When Larsson died suddenly aged 50, leaving no will, his literary estate passed to his brother and father, with whom he had an apparently frosty relationship. His partner of 32 years, Eva Gabrielsson, was left with nothing despite the enormous success of the Millennium series. When Larsson’s family hired David Lagercrantz to write a follow-up to the books, Gabrielsson urged fans to boycott the book. Rose ChristoThe story of young adult novelist Rose Christo (real name Theresa Christodoulopoulos) is worthy of a book in itself. In September 2017, Christo revealed that she was the author of the brilliantly awful online Harry Potter fan fiction series My Immortal (sample sentence: “And then suddenly just as I [sic] Draco kissed me passionately. Draco climbed on top of me and we started to make out keenly against a tree. He took of [sic] my top and I took of [sic] his clothes.”). Christo also stated that she had been contracted by Macmillan to write a memoir about writing My Immortal, her Native American heritage and her search for a lost brother. The brother was rather less lost than Christo suggested as he swiftly appeared disputing many of Christo’s claims. Macmillan carried out an investigation and the memoir was pulled prior to publication.