Ligue 1 finally had a showpiece occasion to be proud of on Sunday evening. The Olympico in November between Lyon and Marseille was fitfully entertaining, but the other big fixtures this season have been disappointing. The Classique was terribly one-sided, with PSG thrashing Marseille 4-0; Lyon’s 1-0 loss to PSG was a dour affair; and their derby defeat to St Étienne was no better. For all that Ligue 1 promised this season, the biggest occasions had too often been damp squibs. That was, until Monaco – playing their first league match under new manager Robert Moreno – rocked up at the Parc des Princes on Sunday night and drew 3-3 with PSG. Having shifted away from Leonardo Jardim’s 3-5-2 formation, the former Spain boss lined his team up in what was either 4-3-3 or a 4-2-3-1, depending on whether one viewed Aleksandr Golovin as a No 10 or an advanced central midfielder. The change of formation allowed Monaco to play more on the front foot and use the pace of Keita Baldé and Gelson Martins on the flanks. The Portuguese winger was also liberated from the onerous task of tracking back, something that had undermined his performances as a wing-back. Thomas Tuchel’s approach was also, of course, to play on the front foot. Injuries and suspensions have prevented the manager from picking Mauro Icardi, Kylian Mbappé, Neymar and Ángel Di María in the same team until recently but the quartet decimated Amiens before Christmas and were equally potent in the 6-1 win over St Étienne in midweek. Tuchel picked all four again against Monaco in what was called a 4-4-2 but effectively became a 4-2-4, with Mbappé and Icardi forming a central pair and Neymar and Di María pulling wide. Di María sometimes dropped back into the role of a left-sided central midfielder when PSG lost the ball, but the team’s attacking intent was clear. Tuchel had made a point of emphasising the viability of the formation before the match, saying: “We attack together and we defend together. This is perhaps one of the most beautiful things in football. A team cannot win with five players. The best level requires playing as a team. If you want to play 4-4-2, there are a lot of things to do and spaces to protect. Everyone has to do what is necessary and the players are doing it at the moment.” The approach paid some dividends in attack but not everyone did “what is necessary” in defence. Neymar gave PSG an early lead, latching on to a brilliant ball over the top from Marco Verratti, but Monaco were unperturbed and worked quickly to over-run their hosts on the flanks. PSG full-backs Thomas Meunier and Juan Bernat were constantly caught out, with an irate Thiago Silva going to the touchline to remonstrate vociferously with Tuchel after his team had conceded two cheap goals and another three or four good chances. PSG sat deeper in the second half but by then Monaco, having made few changes, also played with far less attacking verve. Is the 4-2-4 system inherently flawed? That is a matter of some debate. When it works, it is certainly thrilling but, until Tuchel and his players can work out its kinks, they should stick to a 4-3-3. If Tuchel decides that his 4-2-4 experiment is too risky in big European matches, he will have to choose which of his four attackers to leave on the bench (unless he is prepared to play Di María as an orthodox central midfielder). PSG have produced their best performances this season when they have used a 4-3-3 with a midfield of Verratti, Marquinhos and Idrissa Gueye. That trio offers a balance of guile, physicality and effort – as shown by their dismantling of Real Madrid in September. However, with centre-back Abdou Diallo out injured, Marquinhos has been moved back to partner Thiago Silva in defence, which leaves PSG bereft of his metronomic presence in midfield. The game against Monaco gave PSG a stark and useful reminder that starting the “Fantastic Four” of Icardi, Mbappé, Di María and Neymar is unlikely to be worth it in the knockout rounds of the Champions League if it leaves them with a dangerously leaky defensive set-up. However, Neymar was quick to defend the formation after the game, saying: “We scored three goals. I think it worked well. We have quality, we know it. I think you made a mistake with this question.” Tuchel must navigate these dynamics carefully and with clarity. He has an opportunity to prove he has learned from this tactical mis-step on Wednesday night, when PSG face Monaco again in the league in a fixture that was rearranged after the original game in December was called off due to heavy rain. One thing is certain, Moreno and his players will go into the match at the Stade Louis II feeling encouraged. • Marseille’s move towards second place seems as much a procession as PSG’s march to the title. André Villas-Boas’ side travelled to Rennes on Friday night and earned a gritty 1-0 victory, with Steve Mandanda making a welcome return in goal. Marseille are unlikely to bring in any players this month but, despite their lack of depth, the signings they made in the summer have added to the team’s graft, no small matter as goals have been hard to come by. • Marseille’s unbeaten run – they have not since October – has propelled them up the table, but the profligacy of the chasing pack has helped. Plenty has been made of Lyon and Bordeaux’s inconsistencies, but St Étienne seem determined to outdo their rivals. They were beaten 2-0 by Nantes this weekend in an ugly match. Credit must go to the visitors’ in-form duo of Ludovic Blas and Moses Simon, but the Claude Puel renaissance seems to have ended as quickly as it started. St Étienne have now lost seven of their last 10 games in all competitions. The absence of Denis Bouanga has not helped matters, nor has the poor form of Wahbi Khazri and Ryad Boudebouz, but it is hard to imagine a bigger fall from grace over the last month. • Unless, of course, one considers the state of affairs at Toulouse, who sacked Antoine Kombouaré last weekend after they were knocked out of the Coupe de France by amateur side Saint-Pryvé Saint-Hilaire. Injuries have played their part, with Max-Alain Gradel the latest absentee, but the club’s malaise runs far deeper than that. Their players they brought in over the summer were questionable at best on their individual merits (save perhaps Efthymios Koulouris) but, worse than that, they showed a disturbing lack of coherence. The signings gave no indication of what sort of football the team would be set up to play. They conceded five at home to an unfancied Brest team on Saturday, leaving them without a point since October. This seems set to be a season of further ignominy. Rennes 0-1 MarseilleBordeaux 1-2 LyonAmiens 1-2 MontpellierAngers 1-1 NiceMetz 1-0 StrasbourgNîmes 2-0 ReimsToulouse 2-5 BrestSt Étienne 0-2 NantesDijon 1-0 LillePSG 3-3 Monaco • This is an article from Get French Football News• Follow Eric Devin, Adam White and GFFN on Twitter