Gay Kelleway has made a strongly worded call for more pre-race checks of racehorses and accused some of her colleagues of sending horses to the track which are not fit to race. The veteran Newmarket trainer, known for being outspoken, is at odds on this subject with many of her rivals, who insist that trainers can be trusted to send only sound horses to the races. “There’s a lot of horses running with injuries before they start,” Kelleway said. “We’ve got to start being a bit stricter. I’m sick of it. “What they don’t seem to pick up, the BHA, is how chronically understaffed everyone is, so corners get cut. I got to the stage last year where I was a bit disillusioned. I thought, do I want to be involved in this sport? “I think things have improved a lot for the staff but I think it’s got worse for the horses’ welfare, because things are rushed. You can’t count hours with animals. You might need to do that bit of extra time if a horse is sick.” Kelleway says she has had reports from owners and jockeys about the poor physical condition of some horses they have observed at certain other yards. She declined to name names but felt the authorities have not usually applied the same scrutiny to the sport’s bigger names as to the smaller operators. “I believe they should bring in what they do in Sweden, where you have to trot horses up to show they’re 100%. I’ve been to Stockholm and they were doing this before every race.” Kelleway took to Twitter on Thursday with a veiled threat to monitor the condition of horses from other stables while at the races. “I will be working for racehorses’ welfare this year at the racecourse with video evidence to back up my statements,” she wrote. The whip is a fair point but those in authority must stop horses lame before a race participating and that comes from bigger stables .. I myself will be working for racehorses welfare this year at the racecourse with video evidence to back up my statements pic.twitter.com/hrgay9fq73 She declined to elaborate on her planned actions but said: “I don’t care who I upset. All I care about is the horses. I don’t do it for the money and I never have done.” The British Horseracing Authority said: “Horses are looked over on numerous occasions by vets and equine welfare integrity officers on raceday before and after they race. If there are any concerns about a horse’s soundness, then they can be given a more thorough check-up by a BHA vet, including being trotted up. Horses can be – and are – withdrawn if the vets have any concerns about their soundness. “The BHA also works with trainers to identify ahead of time horses that are ‘poor movers’, meaning they have an abnormal gait which makes them appear lame when they are actually perfectly sound. Working together in this way means that these healthy horses are able to compete when otherwise they might have been prevented from doing so based purely on their walking action. However, these horses remain on our radar for closer inspection.” Musselburgh 12.20 Whiteoak Fleur 12.50 Dahills Hill 1.20 Tabou Beach Boy (nb) 1.55 Fourth Of July 2.25 Chanceanotherfive 3.00 Irish Roe 3.35 Blueskyandsunshine Wolverhampton 12.30 Jungle Capers 1.00 Griggy 1.30 Jungle Secret 2.05 Clap Your Hands 2.35 Jomrok 3.10 Invitational (nap) 3.45 Nehaall 4.20 Mount Wellington Hereford 12.40 Lady Chartreuse 1.10 Seymour Sox 1.40 Artistic Language 2.15 Waiheke 2.45 Red Risk 3.20 Ector 3.55 Getaway Totherock Southwell 4.40 Merryweather 5.15 Been Bobbied 5.45 Sea Of Mystery 6.15 Samovar 6.45 Microscopic 7.15 Break The Silence 7.45 Cape Agulhas