Tributes have paid to a “wonderful” British-based professional sailor who has died in a boating accident in Spain. Zane Gills, 37, who was originally from Australia but lived in Lymington, Hampshire, was described as incredible by his wife, Sarah, who announced his death in a Facebook post. Gills, – a well-known member of the sailing community who competed in the round-the-world Volvo Ocean Race – is understood to have died last month in a boating accident in Barcelona, but the circumstances remain unclear. His widow, Sarah, wrote on Facebook on New Year’s Eve: “It’s with disbelief I have to share with you that Zane has tragically died in an accident. We are all totally shocked and devastated by the news. He was an incredible man and will be very sorely missed. “We ask respectfully for space at this time and we will inform everyone of funeral arrangements in Lymington and Australia soon.” Her post prompted nearly 200 comments from friends offering condolences, including one who wrote: “Sarah I’m absolutely devastated literally chatting to him last wk, such a top lad who always had time to chat.” Another wrote: “I’m utterly speechless on hearing this. A true legend of the sport of sailing and a bloody good bloke to go with it. Very rare breed. Sending all our love and thoughts to you.” Gills’ death has also rocked the local amateur rugby club, Lymington Mariners, where he played for five seasons. A memorial game will be played in his honour next Saturday. Its chairman, Phil Jenner, tsaid: “We’ll hold a one minute’s silence and all wear black armbands for him. “Zane was a major part of the team. He’d been playing for us on and off for five seasons now. He was a great addition, on and off the field. He was always out and there with a smile on his face. “He lived life to the full and gave his all on the pitch and also off the pitch. He was a friend to everyone, never had a bad word to say about anyone. He’s going to be missed greatly.” The club’s former chairman Simon Olliff said: “The man was faultless, he was a wonderful man … He made such a big impact when he joined the club and was so popular. We welcomed him in every time he was available. Of course, as a professional sailor he wasn’t available on a regular basis but he had a place in the team whenever he came home to Lymington.” Gills raced with Team Telefónica in the 2011-12 Volvo event, in which sailors compete in a round-the-world race that last for months. The race organisers tweeted: “The Ocean Race family and the entire sailing community is saddened to learn of the passing of Zane Gills … We offer our deepest condolences to all of his family and friends.”