For all sorts of reasons, and as a lifelong reader, I’ve been going off the Guardian recently, but the Brexit day front page has brought complete redemption. The inspired depiction of a tatty plastic union jack sticking out of a crumbling sandcastle against a defocused white cliffs of Dover was genius. Whoever thought of this deserves all the prizes going.Jan WiczkowskiPrestwich, Manchester • “After 47 years, Britain leaves the EU at 11pm tonight,” your front page says. My watch, given to me in 1972, six months before we joined the EEC, has just broken down for the very first time. No bongs for it tonight.Adam RennieEdinburgh • On Brexit day, on the letters page, you publish a stunning close-up photo of a Euphorbia plant, looking like a mass of small islands surrounded by angry prickles. Did anyone else read this as Europhobia?Sue StewartNewcastle upon Tyne • In Ludlow we are celebrating 33 years of continuous town twinning with our partners in Normandy. No meetings in “dusty town halls” (Journal, 31 January), but families who organise together, travelling by coach and ferry and hosting in turn. We expect to continue but are sad that local schools no longer teach French.Sylvia DuffyChair, Ludlow Twinning Committee • I’d like to join the many readers who I’m sure wish Rafael Behr well (What having a heart attack taught me about Brexit, Journal, 29 January). Along with Jonathan Lis in Prospect magazine, he has been the most perceptive commentator on Brexit. Let’s hope the country bounces back from Brexit as quickly as Rafael has from his heart attack.Willy McCourtLondon • On our final day of EU membership, how apt that the government chose Sunderland – a town whose football team are in the third division – as the location for their cabinet meeting.Ted KinseyLittle Chalfont, Buckinghamshire • The Brexit referendum was held on 23 June 2016, which was my wedding anniversary. And Brexit day is on 31 January – my birthday. This makes it personal and I’m feeling victimised.Rachel DonnisonLondon • Is it too soon to initiate a petition to parliament requesting that the government applies for admittance of the UK into the European Union?Philip BrownStockport • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition