If you’re a novelist, a reputation for prophecy can be a mixed blessing – what do you do when reality catches up? For William Gibson, credited with coining the term “cyberspace” in a 1982 story, the answer, it seemed, was to leave behind science fiction for rompy spy capers such as 2010’s Zero History, in which a rock star’s hunt for rare denim leads to the heart of the military-industrial complex. Yet in 2014, Gibson went back to his roots with The Peripheral, a whizzy post-apocalyptic saga set in a multiverse of virtual time travel. It felt like a return to form – or at least it did prior to this disenchanting sequel, which puts The Peripheral’s narrative toybox in the service of a seductive but ultimately enervating parallel reality in which Hillary Clinton beat Trump and Britain voted Remain. Opening in San Francisco in 2017, it follows an apps tester, Verity, sampling a secret prototype for Eunice, an artificial intelligence project, or “cross-platform, individually user-based, autonomous avatar”, developed by a shady gaming-related startup that serves as a front for a US defence initiative that’s even shadier still. Our sense of jeopardy all but flatlines as the motives of a vast cast stay hazy Soon, Eunice goes walkabout, leaving Verity playing catch-up in a chase narrative that draws her into the orbit of characters based in 22nd-century London, including Lowbeer, a female cop seeking to redirect Verity’s timeline away from its villainously hacked course – which has done for Trump and Brexit (hooray!) but introduced an atom bomb crisis (boo!) sparked by bloodshed in the border city of Qamishli (“Would that be in Turkey?” someone asks. “Syria,” comes the reply, “a complicated place...”). When Verity learns that she must do what she’s told in order to secure “a better chance of avoiding nuclear war”, it’s as close as Agency gets to the “come with me if you wanna live” moment any self-respecting techno-thriller requires. But despite motorcycle dashes and VR-enabled century-hopping, our sense of jeopardy all but flatlines as the motives of a vast cast stay hazy. “There’s somewhere I need you to be seen, in order for somebody to have the time to finish doing something somewhere else,” Eunice tells a nonplussed Verity; it’s like being forced to watch someone jump through the hoops of a video game. Yes, there’s a measure of amusement to be had in Gibson’s typically careful construction of an implied reader who knows what it means to (say) call a particular shade of grey “aspirationally Scandinavian” or describe someone as looking “like a sturdy Amish farmboy having a healthgoth day”. And the action is full of goodies, obviously: invisible flying cars, icky shape-shifting nanotechnology (“assemblers”), a robot nanny transforming into a troupe of pandas... But it all has to be read through the gauze of a narration fussily insistent on its own intricacy: in the space of two pages we hear of things that are “complexly specific”, “complexly volatile” and “complexly conterminous”. While it’s Agency’s achievement to make you see how any multiverse would fall prey to cloak-and-dagger meddling, I longed to see what that might actually mean for people outside its tunnel-vision interest in a tech class who “power-use... next-level social media”, rinse with “naturopathic mouthwash” and carry tote bags made of “Dyneema... a sort of upscale Tyvek”, as the book’s single most Gibsonian phrase has it. Of course, to a conspiratorial cast of mind, Agency’s central metaphor – that the world is shaped by the pastimes of a unaccountable technocratic cadre – might well seem unimprovable. Still, the presence of a “gig-economy surveillance crew” known as Followrs (“like Uber... but for following people”) hints that there’s an untold story here; ditto the passing reference to “antigentrification murals”. Either way, it’s hard not to come away feeling short-changed by a novel that, neglecting its basic duty to excite, uses its headline-grabbing counterfactuals as an opportunistic peg for a tricked-out potboiler. • Agency by William Gibson is published by Viking (£18.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15