Paintings of a broken, divided, dystopian England are to go on display at one of the nation’s most magnificent stately homes, where Sir Winston Churchill was born. Blenheim Art Foundation announced on Wednesday that Cecily Brown, a member of the YBA generation (Young British Artists) of the early 1990s, would be the next contemporary artist to present work at Blenheim Palace in Oxfordshire. Brown will make new work that explores “a nation in turmoil”, displaying them among historic paintings and objects in Blenheim’s stupendous collection that offer more idealised, bucolic reflections on national life. Brown follows artists including Ai Weiwei, Michelangelo Pistoletto and Jenny Holzer in having a solo show at Blenheim. The last exhibition was Maurizio Cattelan who displayed a solid 18-carat gold toilet, which made headlines globally after it was stolen within three days of going on show. Based for the last 25 years in New York, Brown said it was a thrill to make work with England as its theme in a place that was so quintessentially English. “The idea of showing work in a stately home would never have occurred to me but I was invited to do it and I immediately thought ‘what a fabulous idea’ and ‘what fun’, really. It is completely out there and different to anywhere else I’ve shown my work.” After so long away – about half her life – the time felt right to explore the country of her birth, she said. “Especially at a time when Britain is in such a mess, really. Not to say everywhere else isn’t, America’s the worst of all probably and I don’t want it to come across like I’m insulting England.” However, she said the UK was a “broken country … conflicted about its future and its place in the world and seeming only to have its ‘glorious’ and gory past to offer.” London-born Brown, the daughter of the novelist Shena Mackay and the art critic David Sylvester, was considered by many as the outstanding painter of the YBA generation. But she felt out of step with the London art scene and in 1994 moved to New York, where she became a star. Brown said the older she got the more English she felt, and she had even discussed moving back. “But it’s not the England I knew, I don’t even know what it is any more … I’ve realised in the past few years I really do have a fantasy version of England based on something that is 30 years out of date.” Blenheim, with its own idealised version of what Britain once was, seemed like a “really rich stage” to show new work that explored those themes, she said. Brown has been influenced by paintings at the palace by Van Dyck and Reynolds as well as heraldry, armorial banners, and the martial scenes of the Blenheim Tapestries. She has also been thinking a lot about British history and “the very selective version we were given growing up, Rule Britannia and all that. Not all the atrocities Britain has committed and the horrors of colonialism”. Blenheim, one of the nation’s grandest houses and the ancestral seat of the Marlborough family, has been staging contemporary art shows since 2014. Edward Spencer-Churchill, the present Duke of Marlborough’s half-brother and founder of the Blenheim Art Foundation, said it was a pleasure to welcome Brown. “As the first British painter in our programme her phenomenal new body of work brings a fresh and exciting perspective on the rich tradition of painting at the palace.” Brown is making at least 20 new paintings of varying sizes, including her biggest ever, consisting of four panels to make up a work 5.36sq metres (almost 58sq ft). “It relates to hunting, a kind of smorgasbord of hunting and ladies with puppies wrapped in fox fur and dead soldiers and creepy monks. I’m really excited about it but it’s a bit nerve-racking because I’ve not seen it all together yet.” • Cecily Brown at Blenheim Palace will run from 23 April to 5 July.