If you’ve made it this far, you’ve got though the hardest two weeks – and what joy! We’re officially flying over the mid-Veganuary hump together: chest bumps all around. One thing I often find, midway through, is that you cook the same things over and over. I can plough through a surprising amount of carbs by sleepwalking into the pasta cupboard. Of course, I love carbs and you might too – but I want you to keep mixing it up and trying new things, so this week I’ve overindexed on vegetable-heavy recipes such as soups, stews, curries and salads to stop you reaching for the spaghetti tin. Feel free to mix and match with suggestions from week 1 or week 2, or sift through my back catalogue of recipes on The new vegan and make your own way through. This quick herby fruit salad by Angela Hartnett packed with seasonally appropriate blood oranges and pomegranates is what I’ll be making this week. But if you’re in need of something hot, try these baked apples or some roasted neon-pink rhubarb served with a good non-dairy yoghurt. I’ve been exclusively snacking on Twiglets and Perello olives, which are so good I’m taking out a Costco membership so I can buy them in bulk. Want to make something yourself? Try Nigel’s baba ganoush. Lunch is all about steaming hot bowls of soup this week. Here are three delights: the Green Kitchen’s green pea, broccoli and mint; my own mother’s beetroot and ginger in which you can vary the ginger according to the weather; and, finally, a Rachel Roddy classic – pasta e ceci. I’ve been a big fan of Claire Thomson’s no-nonsense, family-friendly recipes for years now and these roasted cauliflower and gram flour pancakes are just fantastic. I’ll be piling some caramelised red onions, spinach and peas on to mine and eating them with Patak’s lime pickle and non-dairy yoghurt. Delicious. On Tuesday I advise turning the oven on when you walk through the door, doing a little therapeutic chopping, then bunging Anna Jones’ winter panzanella in the oven. Wait until the gorgeous smells creep under the doors and up the stairs, making the house feel like home, then tuck in. On to Wednesday, and it’s time to spice things up with some chilli tofu – one of my most popular recipes on the Guardian. It’s spicy, nasal-clearing and we Indians eat platefuls of the stuff just like that, but you might want to scoop yours up with some chapatis. Keep the flavours rolling on Thursday with Tom Hunt’s roast pumpkin with chickpeas, kale, pomegranate and tahini, then finish the week on Friday with my potato, chard and coconut curry. On the weekend, it’s time to release the big pots. Pop one of these hearty root vegetable stews on the stove or pop Ottolenghi’s latest ratatouille in the oven. For afters, I’m thinking chocolate or ice-cream, or both. Kick back with Magnum’s new vegan ice-cream, or these perfectly sized Little Moons chocolate ice-cream bites – or else, make your own squidgy chocolate cake. Just one more week to go until you’ve completed the set and the world is your oyster mushroom.