Each year around mid-January, I crave a short period of simplicity in the food I eat; a reset of my palate and tastebuds. I’m not talking about a diet, as I don’t go in for those, but a short snap of eating simpler food to make me think about the eating habits I have built up. Like anyone else, I get into patterns and habits with food: some good, some bad, and driven as much by emotion as nutrition, so I do a reset to help me connect with what I am eating again. It breaks the habits I have fallen into and allows me to reconsider why I am eating, when I am eating and what really feels good for me and my body. A few times a year I do a longer seven day reset (more of that here), but this soup and smoothie are a couple of recipes that feel filling enough for a January day, but also have the greenness and freshness I crave. I make a big batch of this soup and eat it for lunch and dinner, plus the smoothie for breakfast, for a couple of days. I have made a point of keeping the salt very low here and use a lot of greens and easy to digest fruit and veg. If you find mornings hard, as I do, you can load up your blender with all the ingredients the night before and keep in the fridge for blitzing first thing. Prep 15 minMakes 21 pear or apple, roughly chopped1 small thumb ginger, peeled and roughly chopped½ avocado, scooped out, or ½ banana, peeled1 sprig mint, leaves picked2 large handfuls spinach, washedJuice of ½ lemon250ml cold water Put all the ingredients into a blender and blitz smooth. Add a little more water if it’s too thick. Serve immediately or store in the fridge for later in the day. An easy-to-make, easy-to-eat soup that is filling and refreshing all at once. Prep 20 minCook 40 minServes 4 1 tsp olive or coconut oil1 onion, peeled and finely chopped1 pinch salt1 tsp fennel seeds1 large thumb ginger, peeled and grated3 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped4 medium sweet potatoes (about 800g), peeled and roughly chopped1 pinch-½ tsp cayenne pepperJuice of 1 lemon200g winter greens, washed1 large bunch coriander, stalks finely chopped and leaves roughly chopped Put the oil in a pan over a medium heat, add the onion and a tiny pinch of salt, and cook for 10 minutes, until soft and sweet. Add the fennel seeds, ginger and garlic, and cook for a further three minutes. Add the sweet potatoes and a litre of boiling water. Bring to a boil and simmer for 20 minutes, until the sweet potatoes are soft. Take the soup off the heat and stir in the cayenne to taste, starting slowly and adding more as you go. Add the lemon juice, then the greens, stirring until just wilted. Add the coriander stalks and leaves, then serve the soup as it is or blitz smooth. Once cooked, the soup will keep in the fridge for up to five days.