1) Let’s start with a bang, as Leo Carter slams six sixes in an over for Canterbury Kings against Northern Knights in the T20 Super Smash, on his way to an unbeaten 70 from 29 balls. Carter is only the seventh cricketer, and the first Kiwi, to achieve the feat – others include Yuvraj Singh’s brutal dismantling of Stuart Broad at the 2007 T20 World Cup and Hazratullah Zazai picking off Abdullah Mazari in the 2018 Afghanistan Premier League. 2) The last great heist of the 2010s – Ugandan teenager Jacob Kiplimo is breezing to victory and a new course record at the 15km San Silvestre de Sao Paulo road race, but eases off as the line approaches. Enter Kenya’s Kibiwott Kandie … There’s plenty in the celebrating too early stakes, such as Ben Payne branding himself No 1 at the Atlanta Peachtree 10k in 2015 – just as Britain’s Scott Overall was relegating him to second place. Back in 1980, Steve Ovett’s cockiness was rightly punished by John Treacy – and here’s more complacency punished, as Heather Dorniden falls flat on her face in the 600m Big 10 Indoor Championship and still roars back to win. And here’s a 4x400m relay in which some got their tactics hopelessly wrong, and others spot-on: check out how Irish runner Phil Healy times her run to come from nowhere in the final 200m. 3) More finish-line theft at last month’s Paddy Power Chase at Leopardstown, as Plan of Attack is reeled in by Fitzhenry, before Roaring Bull enters the picture by the line to test the upper echelons of commentator Jerry Hannon’s vocal range. On two wheels, meanwhile, Luka Pibernik raising his arms a lap too early at the 2017 Giro d’Italia is an all-time classic. 4) Another finish line, but drama of a different kind as Croatia’s Filip Zubcic ends a decent giant slalom run at the World Cup in Italy, and narrowly avoids colliding with an official who was meandering across the course. 5) Purple reigns! The colourful Peter Wright rose above the world No 1, Michael van Gerwen, to win his first PDC world darts championship last week. Here’s his stunning final performance in full, and here he is rocking a very different look in the crowd for the 1995 BDO Winmau World Masters. Here’s his first taste of the world stage against Richie Burnett the same year, and several more hairstyles, hanging with chickens and interesting trinkets can be found in this clip meeting the dartist at home. 6) Gennaro Gattuso is 42 today – here’s Milan’s former midfield general with a stellar finish and even better celebration against Palermo in 2005. Lucas Leiva, another tough-tackling midfielder, turns 33 and has a few pearlers to his name too. Iain Dowie, celebrating his 55th, was generally stationed further forward and scored hatfuls at the right end in his day – but this remains our favourite. 7) Robbie Keane’s son, Hudson, shows goalscoring is in his blood with this burst downfield from kick-off in the FA Cup: So little Hudson did this yesterday @theboroofficial v @spursofficial game 😂😂 @claudinekeane1 #mascots #brothers #goal #utb A post shared by  Robbie Keane (@robbiekeane) on Jan 6, 2020 at 5:05am PST 1) Toronto Raptors are down by 30 points against Dallas Mavericks. But then … 2) Well-thumbed, but well-deserved – Audi’s Ski The World campaign features the brilliant free-skier Candide Thovex. The Frenchman’s helmets-eye shorts are also well, well worth your time. Spotters’ badges: BlackCaeser, whobroughtoranges Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.