With a stone-faced quip, actor Issa Rae summed up disappointment with the Oscars’ lack of diversity, again, while announcing the nominees for best director on Monday. Several women were considered to be in contention for the academy award this year, including Greta Gerwig for Little Women (who picked up a nomination for best adapted screenplay), Lulu Wang for The Farewell, Lorene Scafaria for Hustlers, Marielle Heller for A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood and Alma Har’el for Honey Boy. But the list for best director of a movie in 2020 – Sam Mendes for 1917, Quentin Tarantino for Once Upon A Time ... In Hollywood, Todd Phillips for Joker, Martin Scorsese for The Irishman and Bong Joon Ho for Parasite – didn’t include any of them. “Congratulations to those men,” Rae said. “Congratulations to those men.” - Issa Rae introducing the Best Director category is a MOOD. #OscarNoms pic.twitter.com/ihxnw0E6VJ The observation quickly became shorthand for years-long frustration with the lack of diversity in the academy’s selections. For many, it recalled a similarly charged moment at the 2018 Golden Globes in which actor Natalie Portman introduced the best director category with “and here are the all-male nominees”. Only five women have been nominated for the best director Oscar, and only one has won in the Oscars’ 92-year history: Kathryn Bigelow in 2010 for The Hurt Locker. The Golden Globes, held just over a week ago, also came under fire for their lack of diversity, with no women nominated for best director either. Rae’s comments touch on a frustration with the Oscars’ diversity beyond best director. Five years after the #OscarsSoWhite campaign, an online response to zero performers of color nominated in 2015 and 2016, only one actor of color was nominated this year, Cynthia Erivo for best actress in Harriet. That’s in part due to the surprising snubs of Jennifer Lopez as best supporting actress in Hustlers and Awkwafina for best supporting actress in The Farewell, which won her a Golden Globe already this year.