Whatever the result of Great Britain’s ATP Cup quarter-final against Australia, Andy Murray will probably be the first on the phone to Tim Henman and his band of unlikely heroes. Murray withdrew from the team in the new 24-nation event only two weeks ago to continue work on a groin strain that flared in the Davis Cup finals in Madrid six weeks ago, but he was in regular contact with the first-time captain and his players as they ground through three round-robin ties to reach the final eight with an emphatic 3-0 win against Moldova. Henman said Murray had been among the many well-wishers watching their progress from a distance. (Those in closer proximity had trouble peering through the smog on Wednesday, as the air quality index soared into the “hazardous” category in many places around Sydney.) “There’s been messages sent,” Henman said. “People have had plenty of messages from Leon [Smith, the Davis Cup captain] as well. Plenty of messages from Wimbledon people, LTA people. We have had great support from all the statistician people at the LTA. I couldn’t really fault it.” Had Murray been fit, Kyle Edmund eligible on ranking and Neal Skupski available for selection as Jamie Murray’s regular doubles partner, the Great Britain team would look decidedly different to this one. Nevertheless, they have risen to the challenge. They overcame a couple of early blips, and, although they needed Belgium to beat Bulgaria 2-1 on Tuesday night to get into the last eight by topping Group C, they probably would have otherwise been awarded one of the two runner-up places. Henman could not have asked for much more from Dan Evans, Cameron Norrie and Jamie Murray and his new doubles partner, Joe Salisbury. Even Andy Murray’s late replacement, James Ward, who has not played, has been a key part of the preparation. There have been no backward glances or dwelling on what might have been. They have knuckled down to the task – which gets a deal tougher here on Thursday. He revealed for the first time how surprised he was when Andy Murray asked him to captain the team, given he had never done anything similar during his long time in the game. “I didn’t know that the No 1 player had the choice as captain. The first conversation was probably in October. It definitely came from left field, from my point of view. The more I thought about it, the more I felt: ‘Why not?’ “As for Andy pulling out, I was probably aware that was likely to happen once there were problems in the Davis Cup and then looking at the scenarios after that with a bone bruise. I wasn’t holding my breath, put it that way. It is disappointing that we haven’t had Andy both on and off the court, because he contributes an enormous amount. But it is what it is.” Murray had invested a lot of emotional capital in returning to Australia, given the circumstances of his last visit. After losinga tough five-setter against Roberto Bautista Agut in the first round of the Australian Open last year, he was farewelled from Melbourne – and the game – in hasty and theatrical style. However, after a second operation on his right hip, he realised how much he missed playing and set about an arduous recovery programme. He details the process in an in-depth documentary, Resurfacing, and, after winning a tournament in Antwerp in October – his first in two-and-a-half years – he looked ready for another tilt at the Australian Open, where he has lost in five finals. Now, he has hurled himself back into rehab. Henman thinks Murray will get over his latest setback and return to the Tour only when he is ready. “It should be very black and white,” he said of Murray’s strategy. “He doesn’t come back unless he is 100% ready. There is just no point in risking anything. He has made such good progress. It’s frustrating that he has got a different injury. Is it connected, who knows? But he has just got to get it right. “In some respects, I would have expected him to make this decision a lot earlier than the day before Christmas [although he waited nearly a week to announce it]. Get ready and then, when he is ready, come back and build on where he left off in Antwerp.” Was he concerned that Murray’s latest injury might be more serious than some fear? “Not really. From what I understand - probably as much as you do - he has got a bit of bone bruising in his groin, so it is not actually the hip itself. Is it connected? You would have thought so. I think that is also the challenge because, when you talk about his resurfacing and then trying to get back to professional sport, you would always be looking at other examples. “We would always be looking at other examples to say: ‘OK, how did you progress and what was your rehab like and what were the complications?’ He doesn’t have that. That’s where I think everybody is slightly blind, whether it’s the player himself, the physios or the surgeons, because it’s kind of uncharted water. “But I still am not overly concerned. It’s disappointing that he has missed Australia, and it would have been an amazing story; symmetry is not the right word but, to go from where he was 12 months ago in that press conference [when he broke down in tears and spoke of retirement] to then be back competing, it would have been amazing. “But, if it’s not this year, then why not next year? I would definitely still take a long-term view.”