Metropolitan police have launched their first murder investigation of the year after a man was stabbed to death in north London on Friday evening. Police were called to Charteris Road in Finsbury Park at about 6.50pm after reports of a stabbing. The victim was treated by paramedics, but was pronounced dead at the scene just under an hour later. Enquiries into the incident, which occurred close to the junction with Lennox Road, are continuing, and a police cordon remains in place as forensics team work at the scene. Police have not made any arrests in connection with the death. According to friends at the scene, the victim was a 30-year-old UberEats and Deliveroo delivery moped driver from Algeria. The group, who are also delivery drivers, said the stabbing occurred after an altercation with a car driver. The delivery drivers condemned the lack of safety and support afforded to them by their employers and police. One said he felt unsafe “100%” of the time. Another said: “I was attacked here by people with a big machete and now this man has been killed for no reason. The police do nothing. They just come, take a statement and then they go.” Friends paid tribute to the victim. “He was a good man,” one said. “He doesn’t make any trouble. He works and he goes home and he ends up being killed while he’s working. The country is getting worse.” Richard Watts, leader of Islington council, tweeted that he was “horrified to hear about this appalling crime”. Watts said he was in contact with Islington police and local MP Jeremy Corbyn over the incident. “What an awful start to the new year,” he added. The stabbing came after the Met on Friday announced new measures to tackle violent crime, including a greater presence of uniformed officers in crime hotspots. Last year, the force recorded 149 homicides in the capital before 30 December – up more than 50% in the past five years. The figure marks a 10-year high for London murder cases. The number of stabbings has risen significantly in recent years, with knife crime responsible for 90 of last year’s murder cases, compared with 55 in 2014.