I thought this would happen. The British newspapers have unfairly targeted Meghan Markle since the wedding. Making individuals outsiders is their formula for selling papers or getting traffic. Meghan was a perfect target for them: a woman with opinions, with a past, a foreigner and black. I don’t blame Harry and Meghan, if I were them and had the money I would have done exactly the same. I wonder if the tabloids regret it? They will have to find another poor sod to get us all to despise now. Dylan Harrison, 51, social worker, Shropshire I’m an American woman married to a British man, who has lived in the UK for 15 years. As a mother of three, I can say that it is unimaginably difficult to have your first baby while living thousands of miles away from your loved ones. I never wanted to move back home more than when I was a new mom, at home in London with a tiny baby, and my family, closest friends, and everything I knew about child rearing was back home in America. The added pressure that Meghan must be under, including loss of identity, loss/change of career, and intense media scrutiny must be unbearable. I completely sympathize and applaud their decision to do what’s best for their family. Sarah Manley, 45, writer, London So we spend millions on doing up their home here for them and they decide that they want to spend time flitting between North America and here (with no thought for global warming). Being millionaires, perhaps they should reimburse the money spent on them and if they could stay in North America that would be brill. Irene, Dorset Good for them! If we must have a royal family, it should be as small as possible, and only include the direct line of succession. What a miserable life it must be for the 6th in line to the throne if they have to work in a completely pointless job with no horizon or prospects and massive intrusion into their private life. Charlotte, Luxembourg I fully encourage them to step back, however, I suspect that their financial independence will be for appearances sake only, and that the taxpayer will continue to throw significant funds their way. Independence should mean that they buy their own accommodation with money they have earned, and also fund any transport and security costs themselves. Anything else isn’t acceptable. Alan Clarke, 52, lawyer, Worcester It’s hard to resent a young family wanting to do what they feel is best for their future. However, the way they have seemingly gone about it comes across as disrespectful not just to the royal family but also the British public. This PR snub will only escalate the criticisms, particularly the accusation that Meghan is ungrateful and that she is insensitive to the institution she knowingly married into and will continue to benefit from by association in the future. It will also fuel beliefs that she is coming between Harry and his family. I think much of the criticism of Meghan has been cruel and unjustified, but she also hasn’t helped her own cause either, never more so than with this stunt. Laura Russell, writer, London Kudos to Harry. He gave it a go and must be torn about leaving his relatives to carry the burden – hence his commitment to continue to serve in some way. Nobody should have the right or obligation through birth to the highest office in the land. Those critical of Harry are presumably concerned that his move shows the world the royals are only human like the rest of us, after all. Mike Brady, 54, Warrington I do not blame them – the onslaught from the tabloids and at least one other paper has been scarcely disguised racism. I wish them luck, and if they need to go to another country to find decency around them, so be it. Peter, London