Johnny Sexton has been appointed Ireland captain for the Six Nations, while new head coach, Andy Farrell, has named five uncapped players in his 35-man squad. Sexton takes on the role following the retirement of veteran Rory Best. The fly-half, who has won 88 caps, has not played since suffering a knee injury playing for Leinster in early December but, according to his club side, is making “good progress” in his recovery. The 34-year-old’s only previous experience of captaining his country came in October during the World Cup pool stage win over Russia. “We have appointed Johnny as captain for the Six Nations Championship, you can see what it means to him and the enthusiasm he will bring to the role,” said Farrell. “He has been developing as a leader for a number of years with Ireland, Leinster and the Lions and he will be a positive voice for the group.” Sexton said: “First of all it’s a massive honour to be asked to do it and I obviously got a taste for it during the World Cup for that one game and I’ve done it in patches with Ireland in-game when either Rory or Pete have gone off in previous games. “It’s something that I enjoy but ultimately it’s a huge honour, the biggest honour of my career to be asked to do it and I’m really looking forward to it and looking forward to the challenges that are coming up and hopefully we can have a successful Six Nations.” Leinster trio Ronan Kelleher, Caelan Doris and Max Deegan are among the potential Test debutants selected for the tournament, along with Ulster pair Billy Burns and Tom O’Toole. Ireland begin the Six Nations with a home match against Scotland on 1 February. Forwards (19) Max Deegan (Leinster), Caelan Doris (Leinster), Ultan Dillane (Connacht), Tadhg Furlong (Leinster), Cian Healy (Leinster), Dave Heffernan (Connacht), Iain Henderson (Ulster), Rob Herring (Ulster), Ronan Kelleher (Leinster), Dave Kilcoyne (Munster), Jack McGrath (Ulster), Jack O’Donoghue (Munster), Peter O’Mahony (Munster), Tom O’Toole (Ulster), Andrew Porter (Leinster), James Ryan (Leinster), CJ Stander (Munster), Devin Toner (Leinster), Josh van der Flier (Leinster) Backs (16) Will Addison (Ulster), Bundee Aki (Connacht), Billy Burns (Ulster), Ross Byrne (Leinster), Andrew Conway (Munster), John Cooney (Ulster), Keith Earls (Munster), Chris Farrell (Munster), Robbie Henshaw (Leinster), Dave Kearney (Leinster), Jordan Larmour (Leinster), Luke McGrath (Leinster), Conor Murray (Munster), Garry Ringrose (Leinster), Jonathan Sexton (Leinster), Jacob Stockdale (Ulster) Gregor Townsend has backed Stuart Hogg to shoulder the responsibility of captaining Scotland after admitting the honour was too much for Stuart McInally. The Edinburgh hooker led the team out at the World Cup in Japan after being picked ahead of the former captains Greig Laidlaw and John Barclay but struggled under the weight of the role and was dropped for the final pool match against the hosts as the Scots went on to suffer a humiliating early exit. Townsend admits the extra duties involved in leading the Dark Blues took their toll on McInally. However, the head coach has been encouraged by the enthusiasm the Exeter full-back Hogg has shown since first being offered the top job. With Barclay and Laidlaw now retired from international action, the 71-cap full-back with two British and Irish Lions tours under his belt is the most experienced member of the 38-man squad Townsend has named for this year’s Six Nations, which Scotland start in Ireland on 1 February. Townsend said: “Stuart was obviously a very strong candidate given his experience, his leadership ability and his desire to do the role, which was a big positive because it can be challenging. “He’s a mature player in terms of what he contributes. He’s very consistent and really passionate about Scotland, about playing for the jersey and helping the team win.” McInally took six weeks off in the wake of Scotland’s failed World Cup campaign, later admitting the mental strain of carrying the nation’s hopes left him “never wanting to think about rugby ever again”. But Townsend believes relieving the forward of the burdens of leadership can help him rediscover his best form. Forwards: Simon Berghan (Edinburgh), Jamie Bhatti (Edinburgh), Magnus Bradbury (Edinburgh), Fraser Brown (Glasgow), Alex Craig (Gloucester), Luke Crosbie (Edinburgh), Scott Cummings (Glasgow), Allan Dell (London Irish), Cornell Du Preez (Worcester), Zander Fagerson (Glasgow), Grant Gilchrist (Edinburgh), Tom Gordon (Glasgow), Jonny Gray (Glasgow), Nick Haining (Edinburgh), Stuart McInally (Edinburgh), Willem Nel (Edinburgh), Jamie Ritchie (Edinburgh), Rory Sutherland (Edinburgh), Ben Toolis (Edinburgh), George Turner (Glasgow), Hamish Watson (Edinburgh). Backs: Darcy Graham (Edinburgh), Chris Harris (Gloucester), Adam Hastings (Glasgow), Stuart Hogg (Exeter, captain), George Horne (Glasgow), Rory Hutchinson (Northampton), Sam Johnson (Glasgow), Huw Jones (Glasgow), Blair Kinghorn (Edinburgh), Sean Maitland (Saracens), Byron McGuigan (Sale), Ali Price (Glasgow), Henry Pyrgos (Edinburgh), Finn Russell (Racing 92), Matt Scott (Edinburgh), Kyle Steyn (Glasgow), Ratu Tagive (Glasgow). “It was a tough decision to make with Stuart McInally not starting against Japan and not to be captain,” he admitted. “But he and I had been meeting regularly during that period and he hadn’t been playing to his best. We felt that was because of the new responsibilities and pressures of being captain.” Townsend has included 12 players who missed the cut for Japan in his Six Nations selection – including the uncapped Alex Craig, Tom Gordon, Nick Haining, Luke Crosbie, Kyle Steyn and Ratu Tagive. Duncan Taylor, Ryan Wilson and Pete Horne are the notable absentees while Richie Gray, Blade Thompson, Sam Skinner and Matt Fagerson miss out through injury.