Good morning. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories this Tuesday morning. An Indonesian man described by police as the most prolific rapist in British history is likely to spend the rest of his life in prison after being found guilty of 136 rapes against young men. Reynhard Sinaga, a postgraduate student from Indonesia, is believed by police to have committed at least 196 assaults over a two-and-a-half-year period after luring people to his flat in the centre of Manchester, drugging them and then raping them when they were asleep. Sinaga’s crimes were revealed after a marathon legal process that involved four separate trials, with details subject to a reporting ban until the final verdicts at Manchester crown court on Monday. Judge Suzanne Goddard QC described Sinaga as a “dangerous, deeply disturbed and perverted individual with no sense of reality”. The home secretary, Priti Patel, called for a review of the availability of “date-rape” drugs such as GHB. He was eventually caught when one victim woke up during an attack and phoned 999. The court heard how Sinaga preyed on young men as they left nightclubs in the city, often while they were inebriated or confused after losing their phone or lacking money for a taxi home. Sinaga filmed the attacks on his phone and police found hours of footage stored in his flat. Some victims can be heard snoring while the attacks take place. The slightly built, bespectacled Sinaga first came to Britain in 2007 from his home in Sumatra and eked out his studies for years while living off money from his father, a banker. He never hid his sexuality in Manchester’s vibrant gay scene and friends said they had no knowledge of his crimes. However, some had heard him describe “turning” heterosexual men as a sport and they joked about finding dead bodies in his bedroom. Middle East tension – Confusion surrounds the fate of US troops in Iraq after contradictory messages from the US military and the Trump administration in the aftermath of last week’s assassination in Baghdad of Iran’s top general, Qassem Suleimani. The US-led coalition of forces fighting Isis wrote to the Iraqi defence ministry saying it was preparing to pull out troops, but then the defence secretary Mark Esper said it was not happening. US allies distanced themselves from the confusion in Washington as mourning for the dead general continues this morning with the return of his body to his home town of Kerman. Fears about a widening conflict in the Middle East sent oil prices soaring to $70 on Monday although it has slipped back to $68 in overnight trading. And then there were six – Rebecca Long Bailey has confirmed her widely anticipated candidacy for the Labour leadership with an article in Tribune magazine criticising the party’s election strategy. Positioning herself as the heir to Jeremy Corbyn’s leftwing legacy, the MP for Salford and Eccles said she would stick with the current socialist policies with “unwavering determination”. She wrote: “I don’t just agree with the policies, I’ve spent the last four years writing them.” She becomes the sixth candidate to declare along with Keir Starmer, Emily Thornberry, Clive Lewis, Lisa Nandy and Jess Phillips. Here’s where they stand. Wildlife fire fears – There are grave concerns for unique wildlife on Kangaroo Island in South Australia after bushfires ripped through the area at the weekend, destroying biodiversity-rich bushland. An estimated 25,000 koalas have perished and there are fears for an endangered mouse-like marsupial, the Kangaroo Island dunnart, and the glossy black-cockatoo, which have both seen extensive areas of critical habitat burned. The island’s population of endangered glossy black-cockatoos – a unique subspecies – has been the subject of two decades of community conservation work to bring numbers from as low as 150 in the 1990s to as high as 400 in latest counts. Dr Gabriel Crowley has been working on the cockatoo project for 22 years and said every bird lost was a tragedy. “I’m a bit desperate actually.” The crisis continues to rage in many other parts of Australia with the insurance bill already at £350m. Chain reaction – Creditors to Jamie Oliver’s failed restaurant chain stand to lose most of the £80m owed by the business, according to the firm’s administrators. KPMG said secured and unsecured creditors would lose out after it had tried but failed to chase debtors for the money owed when the business collapsed in May. The celebrity chef’s holding company was owed £57m while councils and HSBC were among other creditors. Oliver said: “I appreciate how difficult this is for everyone affected.” Going green – Britain enjoyed its greenest ever year for energy production in 2019 as power provided by renewables outstripped fossil fuel generation on 137 days. A study by the Carbon Brief website found that renewables – wind, solar, hydro and biomass projects – grew by 9% last year and was the UK’s largest electricity source in March, August, September and December. Coal and gas generation fell 6% and is now half the level it was 10 years ago. Grave matter – Archaeologists have hailed the discovery of high-status Roman graves in Somerset as a “significant” find after the remains were unearthed during building work for a new school. Adults and children were included in the tombs along with grave goods such as pottery and brooches. Some of the bodies clearly belonged to important people, experts said, with one covered by a tent-like structure of stone slabs while others were buried wearing hobnail boots. The form of the burials was unusual and sheds lights on the transition between Iron Age and Roman society. The US drone strike on Iran’s most influential general could transform the Middle East. Our correspondent in the region, Martin Chulov, looks at what comes next. Plus: Catherine Shoard on the Golden Globes. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/01/06-69827-200107TIF_iran.mp3 If you have considered taking a leaf out of Greta Thunberg’s book and eschewing air travel, this is the read for you. Will Vibert, a Canadian, worked out he had emitted 14 tonnes of carbon in the past two years from flights alone, cancelling out efforts to reduce his footprint by cycling to work and limiting food waste. So when he had to leave Europe for home, he took a berth on a cargo ship at $100 a day (including food) and took a slow voyage back, enjoying vast ocean views and the company of crew and fellow environmentally minded travellers. All four results remain possible as the second Test against South Africa heads into a fifth day at Newlands following a brutal batting cameo from England’s Ben Stokes and a medley of classic hits from Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad on day four. Pep Guardiola has said he would rather live in the Maldives or play golf than manage Manchester United, even if it were the only job on offer. A second-half goal by Reiss Nelson saw Arsenal beat Leeds United 1-0 and reach the fourth round of the FA Cup after Marcelo Bielsa’s side dominated the first half at the Emirates Stadium. The IOC has expressed its concerns over “very serious and worrying” new allegations of doping and corruption in international weightlifting – which include claims that girl competitors as young as 13 have been encouraged to take banned drugs. Tottenham have confirmed the Metropolitan police have ended their investigation into the alleged racial abuse of the Chelsea defender Antonio Rüdiger during a Premier League match last month, having found “no evidence to support the allegation”. And after a large, mixed crowd turned out at Kingsmeadow on Sunday to watch her debut, Sam Kerr’s arrival at Chelsea feels like a gamechanger for the Women’s Super League. Nissan says it will hold Carlos Ghosn accountable for “serious misconduct” after he escaped Japan – allegedly using the bullet train – to avoid facing court on charges of financial irregularities at the car company he used to head. Asian stocks were up strongly overnight with the FTSE100 seen bouncing back by 0.6%. The pound is $1.317 and €1.177. The Times leads with “MoD sends emergency evacuation team to Iraq” and the Telegraph on the Iran crisis with “American troops pulled out of Baghdad”. The FT takes a markets line with “Soleimani successor vows to expel US as security threats drive up oil” and i reckons “UK caught between Trump and Europe”. The Guardian leads with the Sinaga case. “UK’s most prolific rapist may have preyed on almost 200 young men”, its headline says, while the Mirror simply has “Britain’s worst ever rapist”. The Mail asks “How many more did he rape?” and Metro says “195 victims of the world’s worst rapist”. The Express sticks to domestic politics with “Massive spending spree in Brexit budget”. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com