Who will win? I was tempted to say France until I studied the record books one last time. England have either won or shared the title in 1920, 1960, 1980 and 2000. The symmetry, entering the 2020 edition, is too strong to ignore. Predicted order: England, France, Ireland, Wales, Scotland, Italy. Key match: Hard to look beyond Sunday’s France v England. An opening-weekend win for Les Bleus and this year’s championship will be blown wide open. Most important player: Virimi Vakatawa. If he gets any decent ball, the remarkable French centre will illuminate the entire tournament. With Finn Russell sidelined, the sport needs a few more box-office attractions. Breakthrough star: I really hope France’s Matthieu Jalibert stays fit long enough to demonstrate his huge talent. If not, Ireland’s new No 8, Caelan Doris. I can’t wait for: Italy to burst into fresh life and make people sit up after four successive wooden spoons and 20 years of bottom-half finishes. Sadly, it seems unlikely to happen this season. Who will win? England. Their rugby is in a good, stable place. The excellent acquisition of Matt Proudfoot will add a huge amount of value and intellect to England’s forward pack. They’ll back their form at home with Wales and Ireland visiting later on in the tournament (arguably and historically the two toughest fixtures). Favourites but slight favourites. Predicted order: England, France, Ireland, Wales, Scotland, Italy. Key match: France v England. In the last two Six Nations the opening game against France has been the key fixture: Ireland two years ago when Johnny Sexton’s drop goal from 40m secured the win and they went on to win a grand slam, then last year the same with Wales. England have that opening fixture on Sunday … Most important player: Owen Farrell. It has been a turbulent, uncertain period for him and his Saracens teammates over the past few months. He will now have to lead this England team. Breakthrough star: Caelan Doris. Gets his first start for Ireland this weekend at No 8 and is having a great season with Leinster. I can’t wait for: The tournament to start. Rugby has had a lot of attention recently because of off-field issues. It’s great to get back to talking purely about rugby for the reasons we love this game. Who will win? England. I don’t predict any World Cup hangover, plus lots of changes at the top for other nations. Eddie Jones to drive them to the title. Predicted order: England, Ireland, France, Wales, Scotland, Italy – but France could finish anywhere from first to fifth. Key match: France v England. If France win, then beat Italy, they could move into unplayable mode. Most important player: Finn Russell. Scotland need the maverick back and on fire, not to be rooted to the bottom half of the table. Breakthrough star: John Cooney. Ireland have gone with tried and trusted for opening match but surely Cooney, who has been in imperious form for Ulster, will get his opportunity this Six Nations. I can’t wait for: Sergio Parisse’s last game in an Italian shirt. The legend was denied his All Blacks swansong but will hopefully get his final curtain against England. Who will win? France. They’ve had the most exciting and bold post-World Cup changes out of all the Six Nations. The vision is the 2023 World Cup which France will host, but I think they will start this new four-year cycle with success. Predicted order: France, England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland, Italy. Key match: Le Crunch. Sets the tone. If France win Sunday’s game then France win the championship. Most important player: Antoine Dupont has competition for his starting spot at scrum-half but his form is there with Toulouse and he is a genuine game-breaker. Breakthrough star: I’ve been a big fan of Ollie Thorley at club level and if given the chance to play then he could be a lot of fun to watch for England. I can’t wait for: A last-minute law change to ban the jackal and the body roll. Who will win? England. They have nouveau France first up, play Ireland and Wales at home and, after the World Cup, have the strongest foundation. Predicted order: England, Wales, Ireland, France, Scotland, Italy. Key match: Each round contains at least one key match, starting in Paris. Most important player: Any team reliant on one player is in trouble. Ask Sergio Parisse. England have a few more than the others. Breakthrough star: Caelan Doris. The Leinster No 8 is an enabler who will suit Ireland’s broader outlook. I can’t wait for: France to play as only they can. Who will win? England, who have a point to prove after the World Cup final, are more settled than France, Ireland and Wales, and have home advantage for the last two of those three fixtures, too. Predicted order: England, Ireland, Wales, France, Scotland, Italy. Key match: England’s opening fixture will tell us plenty about whether France really are a genuine threat for the title, and how Eddie Jones’s side are handling the fallout from the Saracens scandal. Most important player: It’ll be interesting to see how Johnny Sexton goes as Ireland captain, if he can get fit. His team need him too, with Joey Carbery out injured; their backup is very inexperienced. Breakthrough star: Competition for spots in England’s back row is pretty tight right now, but that arm injury to Billy Vunipola means Ben Earl has got a great opportunity to make his name. I can’t wait for: A first look at France, to see whether they are finally going to start playing the way we all remember from their glory days, which are beginning to feel ever so long ago. Who will win? England’s continuity installs them as favourites. Their hardest match is up first but Eddie Jones is expected to keep changes to a minimum against France and victory would set them up nicely. Predicted order: England, Ireland, Wales, France, Scotland, Italy. Key match: France v England. Any signs of a World Cup final hangover, or Saracens’ salary cap scandal having an effect, and England will struggle in Paris again. France are raw but approach the tournament with renewed optimism. Most important player: Mako Vunipola, all the more so in the absence of brother Billy. He had an astonishing start to last year’s tournament but when injury ruled him out England’s campaign fell apart. He won’t lack for motivation either after Jones’s claim that Joe Marler should have started the World Cup final. Breakthrough star: Johnny McNicholl. A class act for the Scarlets, the 29-year-old has not had as much attention as his fellow uncapped wing Louis Rees-Zammit, but is set to get his chance for Wales under fellow New Zealander Wayne Pivac. Will Addison, Ollie Thorley and half the French team are other candidates. I can’t wait for: Four new head coaches to put their stamp on things. There is an element of the unknown with Wales, Italy, Ireland and – most of all – France giving a tournament which hardly embraces change an added level of intrigue. Who will win? France are the only team who can challenge England’s dominance. The French almost pulled off a shock win over the Red Roses in the autumn international in Exeter but England, a year into their professional contracts, still look too strong. Predicted order: England, France, Ireland, Italy, Wales, Scotland. Key match: The tastiest fixture is Sunday’s aperitif when Simon Middleton’s England side travel to Pau for what will be a tricky fixture against France in unfamiliar surroundings. Captain Sarah Hunter, who will win her 120th cap, will need all that experience. Most important player: Aoife Doyle has already made her mark in sevens and the pacy back from Limerick is expected to galvanise Ireland’s backline after a four-year absence from the 15-a-side set-up. Adam Griggs, Ireland’s head coach, has named six players in his squad who have played sevens for their country and Doyle is the pick of the bunch. Breakthrough star: Morwenna Talling of Loughborough Lightning is a 17-year-old lock who could make an impact in an England pack that will miss the injured Marlie Packer. The precocious Talling has impressed in the Premier 15s this season. I can’t wait for: A more competitive tournament. Last year’s Six Nations ended in Scotland being submerged 80-0 in the rain at Twickenham and such mismatches aren’t healthy.