Nick Kyrgios led the way as tennis pledged financial support to help victims of the Australian bushfires. The disaster has seen lives and homes lost and vast areas of land ravaged by fire, with no end yet in sight. The new tennis season will begin in Australia on Friday as the inaugural ATP Cup gets under way in Sydney, Perth and Brisbane, with the Australian Open starting on 20 January. Kyrgios tweeted on Wednesday: “C’mon @TennisAustralia surely we can do a pre AustralianOpen exho [exhibition] to raise funds for those affected by the fires?” On Thursday, he pledged to donate A$200 for every ace he serves over the next month, and fellow Australian players Alex De Minaur, John Millman, John Peers and Sam Stosur quickly followed suit with similar promises. A subsequent announcement came from the ATP Cup that A$100 (approximately £53) for every ace served in the competition will be donated to the Australian Red Cross bushfire relief efforts, with the total expected to exceed A$150,000 (£79,000). In a message on Twitter on Thursday, Australian Open tournament director and Tennis Australia chief executive Craig Tiley revealed that plans were afoot. He wrote: “For weeks we’ve been watching the devastation caused by bushfires across Australia and the people affected are constantly in our thoughts. “We want to help these communities in a meaningful way and will announce a number of fundraising and support initiatives that will be rolled out across the ATP Cup, Australian Open and our other events over the coming weeks. Stay tuned for further announcements.” Cricket Australia has also announced plans to auction off players’ shirts from the Boxing Day Test win against New Zealand, with funds going to the Australian Red Cross. Sydney, where Great Britain play their opening match against Bulgaria on Friday, is the closest ATP Cup venue to the fires. Players due to compete in the Challenger event in Canberra, where air quality is currently very poor, were waiting to hear whether the tournament would go ahead.