When did wearing lipstick become so complicated? There are so many options: liquid, matte, shiny, satin, sheer… And then the number of colours. I mean, of course you could simply give in to decision fatigue and lie down in a dark room bare lipped. Or you could sport more than one colour, as per the SS20 Vivetta show. Feeling brave? Go to town and go for clashing hues – bright red and purple, anyone? Prefer more wearable? An orange and pink combo will lift every skin tone, and proves indecision is not always a bad thing. 1. Smashbox Always on Cream to Matte Bullet Lipstick £19, smashbox.co.uk2. Chanel Ombre Première Laque Liquid Eyeshadow in Rising Sun £26, chanel.com3. Dear Dahlia Blusher £26, feelunique.com4. Suqqu Shimmer Liquid Highlighter £26, selfridges.com5. Gucci Rouge à Lèvres Mat Lipstick £34, netaporter.com Lotus esprit Super Lotus, an ingredient created from the lotus plant, has been added to Youth Preserve cream to strengthen the skin barrier and smooth fine lines. Fresh Lotus Youth Preserve Cream, £45, spacenk.com Jelly and clean Sunflower Seed, Grapeseed and MeadowFoam Seed, in a texture that goes from jelly to oil to milk, and gets rid of makeup, pollution and SPF. Ren Perfect Canvas Clean Jelly Oil Cleanser, £25, renskincare.com Vegan rehydration This vegan milk moisturiser - yes, really - from hip US brand Cult Beauty is full of ingredients that thrive in arid conditions, such as baobab and aloe vera, so it’s great for dehydrated skins. Milk Makeup Vegan Milk Moisturiser, £35, cultbeauty.com Ask me about skincare to deal with the usual suspects – lines, breakouts, hyperpigmentation, etc – and I will reel off endless options. Same with colour cosmetics and hair care. Ask me for a brilliant primer for oily skin and you’ll hear tumbleweed. I have road-tested numerous primers and at this point I would be lying through my teeth if I could, hand on heart, claim to recommend more than a handful. There are primers that do absolutely nothing, primers that dim the radiance of your skin, and primers that make you look greasier than you did sans primer. Finding a primer that stops the oiliness seeping through and destroying your made-up face? Not so much. Which is why this one from Benefit is such an excellent find. Not only does the formulation include hyaluronic acid (essential for hydration, which we all need), it is oil free, lightweight, perfect for ALL skin types and does not interfere with the shade or textur e of your foundation. (Useful tip: if you are super oily, use it pre-foundation and also mix in with foundation.) Now, do note: this is a matte finish, so if you prefer a dewy look you’re best using a teeny bit and applying a glow-boosting setting spray on top of your makeup. Ultimately, though, if you want a primer that gives you a smooth canvas and won’t leave you looking lacklustre or slippery, here it is. The Porefessional Hydrate Primer, £29, benefitcosmetics.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.