On José Mourinho’s last visit here he railed at everything from ball boys to backroom staff but on this occasion his prime source of frustration stemmed not from Southampton but rather the protracted transfer saga surrounding Christian Eriksen, who is close to sealing a €20m move to Internazionale. Mourinho pointed the finger at the Serie A club before shrugging his shoulders at the manner in which fixtures are piling up for Tottenham Hotspur after having to settle for a replay. Before kick-off Mourinho bemoaned his side’s congested schedule and, after Sofiane Boufal cancelled out a wonderfully crafted Son Heung-min opener, the Portuguese has another game to add to the list. Son struck after a magical weaving run by Giovani Lo Celso, which appeared to pave Spurs’ passage to the fifth round – but they face a replay after Boufal lashed home inside the box from a cutback by Danny Ings. Lo Celso had a first-half goal disallowed by the video assistant referee and Ings thrice went close to levelling before Boufal’s late intervention. Mourinho was at pains to say an extra game causes no drama but Eriksen’s departure most definitely rankles. “I just want to say that this situation should not happen on 25 January, and it is not Tottenham’s fault that on the 25 January we are in this situation,” Mourinho said of the midfielder, who was not in his squad. “The only thing I can say is that since I arrived Eriksen is behaving in a very, very professional way with me and with the team. Tottenham is the last one to blame on this situation but to be on 25 January in a situation like this, it’s not nice.” Boufal struck three minutes from time to extinguish the significance of Lo Celso’s barnstorming run, which culminated in Son arrowing a shot into the far corner of the Southampton goal. Lo Celso skirted not one but five Southampton challenges, brushing aside Michael Obafemi and James Ward-Prowse before eluding Ryan Bertrand and a lunge by Nathan Redmond. Then he twisted away from Pierre-Emile Højbjerg before handing over to Érik Lamela, who supplied Son to do the rest. For long that seamless counterattack looked like being the difference in an entertaining encounter, during which another loan recruit, Gedson Fernandes, played an hour on debut. Lo Celso joined Tottenham on loan from Real Betis in August but Mourinho accepted the Argentinian has made a compelling case for that move to be made permanent. “I think the boy is earning a decision, he is making [it] an easy decision for the club to execute the options,” Mourinho said. “It has been an incredible evolution since I arrived. With me in the first couple of weeks he understood what we want – he is a good learner, a good kid. I think by himself he made a decision that the club is going to execute the option.” For Tottenham the FA Cup arguably represents their best chance of earning silverware this season and their first trophy since the League Cup in 2008. Mourinho made three changes from midweek, with Fernandes, Japhet Tanganga and Davinson Sánchez returning, but Eriksen and Danny Rose were notable absentees. Rose has 18 months to run on his contract but the England defender appears out of favour under Mourinho. Asked whether Rose would be a Spurs player in February, he replied: “I don’t know. Not injured, my decision. My decision is based on performance, and it is based on my analysis. We have Ben Davies, left-back injured for a long time, we have Danny. We have Japhet who is not a left-back but is very solid and very concentrated and it is difficult for him to make a mistake even playing in a position that is not his position, and Ryan [Sessegnon] is a 19-year-old learning how to defend, and of course his natural appetite is to be offensive. We have four options and it is my decision.” The arrival of Lamela provided Tottenham with welcome zest and he went close to doubling Spurs’ lead. The substitute scooped a telegraphed pass in behind Kevin Danso and Son’s first-time volley zipped narrowly over. But in the end Boufal hammered home the leveller to ensure a replay.