Mary Beard has revealed in an interview with the Radio Times that she has concerns that female nudes in western art are just “soft porn for the elite, dressed up in a classical guise”. Beard, who is promoting her BBC show The Shock of the Nude, will know this is no revolutionary proposition. John Berger’s book Ways of Seeing (1972) explored the difference between nakedness – to be without clothes – and nudity – to be a revealed body on display. “In the average European oil painting of the nude, the principal protagonist is never painted. He is the spectator in front of the picture and he is presumed to be a man … It is for him that the figures have assumed their nudity,” Berger wrote. A nude, within the European tradition, is an exposed subject of the gaze, purchased and available to an artwork’s owner. In some cases, this relationship is explicit: Charles II commissioned private nude portraits of his mistress, Nell Gwynn, from Peter Lely and Simon Verelst. In Lely’s, she appears as Venus: very much the “classical guise” identified by Beard. The available nude does not begin and end there. As with Marco Zoppo’s ripped redeemer in Deposition of Christ supported by angels (1471) and Jean Fouquet’s implausibly pert The Virgin and Child With Angels (c 1452), there is no shortage of Christian themes that license alluring exposure, perfectly suited to paintings for “private contemplation”. The model for Fouquet’s Virgin is Agnès Sorel, the mistress of Charles VII of France, who kneels adoringly on the accompanying panel of the diptych. While the power dynamic behind individual works is rarely so obvious, the female nude as a subject for art is so common that we barely notice it embodies the primacy of the heterosexual male as patron and collector. It acknowledges only one kind of desire. At the Royal College of Art, David Hockney lobbied for the introduction of male life models: his Life Painting for a Diploma (1962) featured a muscular figure drawn from a homoerotic physique magazine. Having your desire recognised and recognising your desire is important. To take Beard’s description of art as “soft porn for the elite” as criticism per se is to assume that honesty about our enjoyment of the revealed body somehow lessens the art; that art should be above that. This is naive. Setting aside questions of exploitation, there is nothing wrong with looking at something we enjoy, that excites us, that recognises our desires. Describing our museum collections in terms of pornography, Beard simply acknowledges the interplay of power, gender and sexuality on which they are constructed.