David Moyes said he wanted to make more than three substitutions at half-time after West Ham were knocked out of the FA Cup by 10-man West Bromwich Albion, who reached the fifth round despite Slaven Bilic making eight changes against his old club. Conor Townsend’s early goal sent the Championship’s pacesetters into the fifth round and ensured that Bilic enjoyed a triumphant return to the London Stadium. West Ham, who are battling relegation from the Premier League, were abject during the first half and Moyes reacted by using up all his substitutions during the interval. “I think I could have probably made a couple more if I was allowed,” West Ham’s manager said. “I just thought we passed the ball away. I wanted to see if I could do something that would make a difference. I think it got better. The second half got much better but we didn’t manufacture anything that was clear cut.” Moyes, who returned to West Ham after Manuel Pellegrini was sacked last month, said that nothing has changed at the east London club since his first spell. “I came with the same problem last time,” he said. “What I need to do is find something which can give us inspiration. The last time Marko Arnautovic gave us inspiration.” West Ham have league games against Liverpool on Wednesday and Brighton next Saturday and Moyes accepted that losing to a heavily rotated Championship team was a concern. “I totally accept it and it was pretty much a West Ham first team today,” he said. West Ham hope to strengthen their midfield by signing Slavia Prague’s Tomas Soucek. They have made a €15m bid for the Czech Republic midfielder but his club are holding out for €20m and the Hammers need signings before the transfer window shuts on Friday. “I’m desperately trying to get people in who we think can do something for the team and that’s not easy,” Moyes said. Bilic, who saw Semi Ajayi sent off near the end, backed Moyes to keep West Ham up. “David can do that,” West Brom’s manager said. “The players have to do it. They have done it before and they have to do it now. Now what is very important is the crowd recognise the situation, be behind the team and be behind the club.”