It is a fiendishly cruel premise: kill your pet or become vegetarian. The pets in question aren’t cats or dogs but lambs, cows and pigs for four families who have been given three weeks to raise them and then decide whether to send them to a sanctuary – or to the slaughterhouse. In the first of three episodes, committed carnivores Dawn and John find out about pig intelligence, while Cynthia and Sam’s new chickens are proving to be a hoot. Certainly food for thought. Followed by George Monbiot’s film Apocalypse Cow. Ammar Kalia A second series of the father-son US travelogue sees homebody Bradley Walsh dragged out on the road once again by his 22-year-old son Barney. This time they are starting in the Florida Keys and driving northwards along the east coast – but did anyone pack the Hobnobs? Ellen E Jones In summer 2019, two “carers” were found guilty of murdering Margaret Fleming, who had learning disabilities, back in 1999 and claiming benefits in her name for 16 years. This film explores the investigation that brought the pair to justice. Phil Harrison This six-part, true-crime drama tells the horrific story of the murder of an entire family at a secluded Essex farmhouse in 1985. Initially believed to be an open-and-shut murder-suicide, this dark opening episode sees DS Stan Jones questioning the narrative. Don’t be tempted to look up the real-life ending. AK The environmental campaigner and Guardian journalist George Monbiot presents a convincing and deeply concerning argument against eating meat. Focusing on the damaging consequences of animal grazing, Monbiot explores alternative, lab-grown food sources to allow rewilding of agricultural land. A sobering alternative to Meat the Family. AK This absorbing documentary tries to keep up with the Red Arrows team and their rad call signs – including Welly, Magic and Bogeye – as they prepare for their first US display tour in more than a decade. Step one involves flying a dozen distinctive Hawk jets from Lossiemouth to Nova Scotia – a testing trip. Graeme Virtue Britain’s best home potters (they do exist) assemble for another series of this charming, low-stakes show. Judges Keith Brymer Jones and Sue Pryke set their 12 contestants the task of throwing a breakfast set and egg cups at the wheel. Prepare for clay-based catastrophes and the mercy of the kiln. AK Georgy Girl (Silvio Narizzano, 1966) 6.55pm, Sony Movies ClassicSilvio Narizzano’s portrait of the promiscuous, swinging 60s looks dated now, but in its day it was a bold comedy of sexual manners. It centres on Lynn Redgrave’s sweetly appealing performance as Georgy, a plain-Jane dance teacher who is invited to become the mistress of wealthy James Mason. Paul Howlett Big Bash cricket: Melbourne Sixers v Sydney Thunder 8am, BT Sport 1. T20 league match action from Melbourne Cricket Ground. EFL Cup football 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Coverage of the first leg of the second semi-final. Basketball: NC State Wolfpack v Notre Dame Fighting Irish Midnight, BT Sport/ESPN. College basketball clash.