Last time Justin Bieber made a documentary, the result was Never Say Never, a 2011 3D concert film that caught the singer right at the epicentre of his sexless puppydog-puddingbowl teen idol phase. Unless you happened to be an eight-year-girl at the time, Never Say Never wasn’t particularly good. But it did directly inspire The Lonely Island’s mockumentary Popstar: Never Stop Never Stopping, so there is an argument that its existence was ultimately a force for good in the universe. But that was a long time ago. Now Justin Bieber has another documentary out. Unlike Never Say Never, this one won’t make $99m at the box office, because it’s being slung out on YouTube. The documentary, entitled Seasons, is 10 episodes long. Each episode lasts for roughly 10 minutes. If the first four episodes are any indication, they won’t exactly be highlight-heavy. In fact, a good editor could probably take the best bits of the whole series and fit it into a Snapchat post. Which might not have been what YouTube was expecting, given that this 100-minute collection of meandering home videos reportedly cost over $20m to acquire. The main thrust of Seasons is this: in 2015 Justin Bieber was on top of the world. He’d outgrown his annoying plastic teeny phase and become an artist of some credibility. He went on tour around the world, until one day he snapped and quit. Bieber left the tour, put his entire career on ice and disappeared completely. But now – get this – he’s back. Seasons marks the official unveiling of an older, wiser Bieber. He’s covered in tattoos. He’s got married. He’s capable of some reflection. His upcoming album is a deep meditation on everything he has learned about the world after being buffeted through several unimaginable highs and lows. It’s a spiritual koan on the purpose of existence as we know it, as evidenced by the album’s first single Yummy, which goes: “Yeah, you got that yummy yum/ That yummy yum/That yummy yummy”. OK, fine, if Bieber learned anything during his time away, he isn’t telling anyone. And he especially isn’t telling anyone watching Seasons, which is ultimately a shapeless document of nothing that exists for no reason other than reminding people he’s got an album out soon. Episode one hints at an underlying darkness – he visits his childhood home, and sadly stares at it for five or six seconds before driving away in his Range Rover – but other than that, it largely consists of aimless studio footage. In one scene, he plays the drums. In another, he phonetically sings a song syllable by syllable in a language he doesn’t understand. In another, one of his producers glumly recalls the time Bieber summoned him to the studio with 20 minute’s notice midway through a family barbecue. And, for an entire episode, he sucks face with his wife. This part is actually quite sweet. Early on in the series, someone reminds us that Bieber spent his entire adolescence being the most Googled person on the planet, which is bound to mess a person up. His marriage to Hailey Baldwin, however, seems to be a stabilising factor. They’re constantly together, and she carries herself with a mixture of support and anxiety for his wellbeing that he probably doesn’t get from the employees who derive a living from his success. At one point, Bieber and Baldwin play a game where they sit at opposite ends of their giant house and try to throw a tennis ball into a bucket. It’s an interminable scene, and they’re both bad at it, and you get the feeling it’s only in the documentary because nothing more exciting happened during the shoot. But in a way it’s nice. During the game, Bieber finally seems to be at peace. That said, it’s excruciatingly dull to watch. The Lonely Island would never be able to spoof Seasons, but perhaps that’s the point.