An industrious weaver called Krysta Relyea recently wrote a post on Instagram saying she had just realised she owned enough pairs of jeans to get her through the rest of her life, provided she maintains her weight. “Of course, patches and new zippers will be a must,” she said. “Some just need a little altering.” Search the terms with which she tagged that nugget – including #buynothingnew, #visiblemending and #makedoandmend – and a world of possibility opens up. Whereas visibly repaired clothes might once have been considered a sign of not being able to afford new ones, the mending movement celebrates the ingenuity our forebears deployed to make old things last. If your new year aim is to buck the national trend by not buying a suitcase-worth of new clothes – not to mention the new items to the value of £9,000 that the average household wastes or doesn’t use every year – mending skills may come in handy. Here are a few to get you started. •Reversed Visible Hem• I realized, if I maintain my weight, I own enough of jeans, to last thru my lifetime. •Of corse, I like some better than others- - patches, and new zippers will be a must. Some, just need a little altering, to suit my style. •These “skinny” jeans for instance, are a fine fit, except for my big feet and a too tight ankle. I decided to hem them up - - wrong side out - - and stitch a new cuff. • Now, very suitable, indeed! . . . #buynothingnew #cuffedjeans #handstitching #slowstitching #makeyourclotheslast #visiblehem #hemming #hemmingmypants #visiblemending #visiblerepair #mending #makedoandmend #mindfulfashion #nomoretextilewaste #creativealterations #makeyourclotheslastlonger #sustainablestyle #sustainablefashion #neverdiedenim A post shared by  Krysta Relyea (@k.a.r.arts) on Nov 7, 2019 at 3:57pm PST My mother taught me how to do this using thin darning yarn (wool), a darning needle (a largish, blunt needle with an eye big enough to thread with wool) and a cowrie shell (I didn’t grow up in the UK). That said, any fist-sized, hard, round object will serve you just as well (a tennis ball, a small glass or a lightbulb, say – or, of course, a darning mushroom). Prioritise comfort and durability when choosing your yarn. As one knitter on Instagram, Chiara Quaglia (@petulabuona), puts it: “No one wants a thick thing under the heel.” If the hole is small, just loop up the dropped stitches around the hole, gently pull the yarn to close the gap, and knot. If the hole is large, or the sock is threadbare, you will need to do a spot of weaving to reinforce the knit. Before you run away in panic, this is easier than it sounds. There are cute little looms out there that make the job much easier, but anyone who advocates fixing stuff will tell you not to buy anything special. The DIY site the Spruce Crafts has a detailed, step-by-step guide to weaving with a needle, while Instagram is awash with feet clad in socks so beautifully mended that they look like abstract art, proving that darning is best thought of as an opportunity, not a chore. Best of all, it works on any type of sock. Darning isn’t only for socks. It can be used for any woven item – including trainers made from canvas or other fabrics. Last summer, the Colorado-based artist Brit Horsfall took on a friend’s pair of bashed-up Toms trainers; using seven constrasting threads – one for each hole – and sewing in tight squares, she created a beautifully patterned pair of shoes. Got in the groove while overhauling these @toms with monochromatic darnings this week. Mending is a mindful practice, that highlights the imprint we leave on this world as we move through it. I’ve said it before; life happens in our garments. Mending these felt like being a part of a slowly developing X-ray of the owners feet... in thread of course. Still so fun. If you have toms that need love, I’d give them my all ✨ I’d like to see a few more of these happen and explore how peoples shoes and wear differ! . . . . #darnit #darning #mending #mendingmayhem #visiblemending #handsewn #handstitched #handmade #upcycle #menddontspend #betterthatnew #stoked #fiberartist #visibleclothingrepair #falltones #warms #artistsoninstagram #fiberarts A post shared by  brit horsfall (@brithorsfallart) on Aug 12, 2019 at 8:48pm PDT Flaunting what you can’t hide is the basic principle behind visible mending. The textile practitioner Tom van Deijnen volunteers his sewing skills at the monthly Brighton Repair Café, which takes on everything from broken lawnmowers to fairy decorations in need of soldering. He has shown on Instagram just how beautifully you can repair shoes – for example, by darning the canvas panels on a pair of leather brogues with linen thread. Crucially, he did what he could – and left the rest to a cobbler. Asking professionals to do what you can’t is another tenet of the movement. The London-based upholsterer Rachel South says upholstery is one of the tasks best left to a professional, because any flaw on the surface is usually a symptom of something that has gone wrong in the layers beneath: the horse hair, the springs, the coconut-fibre filling. If you do want to try it yourself, you can sign up to an evening course. Alternatively, call on one of the growing numbers of mobile upholsterers. For small signs of wear and tear, you can also – if the aesthetics of it please you (see Anne Dorte Johanson’s grey sofa for something Scandi that might) – do a little darning. Jo Elbourne, another textile artist, taught herself how to repair woven seats on wooden chairs when she came across a spool of rope in a charity shop (a third #visiblemending rule: always be on the lookout for secondhand materials). She says it is a great trial-and-error task: at worst, you undo what you have done and use the rope for something else; at best, you have a chair you can sit on again (if you have managed something sufficiently robust) or at least use for stashing books, towels or the day’s clothes. For woven baskets – wicker, grasses, rope – minor breaks and splits can be darned or glued; use wood glue for wicker. (Again, seek out a pro for anything larger.) Items like this are worth investing in. If you are feeling ambitious, some of the most eye-catching mends on the @mendingmayhem Instagram account (an excellent source of inspiration, advice and material swaps) are the cracked plastic laundry baskets that Brianne Hickman (@undertheneedlesewing) has sewn back together with big colourful Xs. With a material that hard, you need to make pilot holes on either side of the crack, but hammering a nail through – as you could, say, on a cracked wooden seat – would probably crack the plastic further. Depending on the plastic, you could drill holes with caution, starting with your smallest drill bit and reinforcing the surface on both sides with removable tape. If the plastic cracks, melt the holes instead. Hickman used a soldering iron (outdoors, she specifies, and not beneath a smoke detector) to do the job; David Kelly, a poster on the Q&A site Quora, suggests running a metal drill bit in reverse and using the heat from the friction to melt a hole. Having unintentionally burned wood while trying to drill holes into it, I feel certain this would work. Only attempt any of this if you know what you are doing. Katrina Cole, whose family has been in the business for many years, says a good leather or shearling garment or bag can become an heirloom if it is shown some love. First up, she says, invest in a tub of leather balm. It will remedy much of the loss of colour and softness caused by wear and humidity. Small tears – on a leather jacket, say – often don’t need to be sewn at all. Instead, cut a piece of leather or fabric slightly larger than the tear, cover it with Copydex (latex-based rubber cement) or UHU glue (never superglue – that is a surefire way to ruin your item for good) and place it carefully, glue side up, behind the tear. Smooth down each side to stick it to the patch, making sure the edges meet tightly. If you need to do more, use a spearpoint needle and strong thread – any thread will do for fine leather, but double it up for something thicker.