“Try walking in my shoes” is the familiar call to the power of shared experience in creating empathy and understanding. Now artist Lindsay Seers has given the principle a 21st-century spin, turning to virtual reality to create a unique insight into how we look after older people. “VR is like sitting in a mind, making it intense,” says Seers. Care(less) is her art installation that immerses us in the mind, body and outpouring memories of an older woman who has fallen in the bathroom of her care home. It is fused with the wandering consciousness of an avatar from the future examining her treatment by society. Over 20 minutes, the work is dizzying, poignant and thought-provoking – as well as shaming. In key scenes we share the perceptions of the older woman left alone to die on the floor, seeing not only how she is ignored in her final minutes but also how wider society has ignored her for years before, uncaring of the rich experiences of her life. Many of the failures in the care system referred to in the piece were being mirrored in my own life The avatar challenges the viewer as it interacts with the woman at the heart of the story. “We accept a lot of situations as if they aren’t constructs, conventions that could be otherwise,” argues Seers. “With the avatar I bring someone in from another world to analyse the situation we have now.” It’s a situation Seers considers to be a shambles of misinformation, ill-informed decisions and prejudice. More than 4,000 people donned VR headsets to experience Care(less) during its 2019 premiere at Brighton’s Fabrica gallery, and hundreds more during a week at Lincoln’s Frequency festival in October. An even larger potential audience awaits Seers when it goes to Birmingham’s Ikon gallery next month. Seers’ interactions with her own elderly father, who died while she was working on Care(less), informs the installation. “Many of the failures in the care system referred to were being mirrored in my own life,” she says. “And as my father moved towards death, he often switched from the everyday to a bizarre hallucinatory world. I used a lot of the atmosphere of his words in the imagery.” Seers is not the only artist to have explored the negative perceptions of older people. In 1973, US artist Martha Wilson’s groundbreaking Posturing: Age Transformation used photographs of herself artificially aged from 25 to 50 through dress and makeup. But Seers’ Care(less) is rooted in research, part of a three-year study funded by the Wellcome Trust at universities in Brighton, Birmingham and Lincolnshire. This looked at the experience of 65 elderly people paying for their own care – reliant on the vagaries of “the market” with no support from local authorities. “The study puts older people’s lived experiences at the centre,” explains Lizzie Ward, principal research fellow at the University of Brighton’s Centre for Arts and Wellbeing. She sees Seers’ VR work as a vital component of the project. “The aim was to reach people who may not read a research report but will go to an art exhibition,” she says. “Really exploring how art can reach out with messages that the written word – particularly academic material – cannot. Our aim was to get people to think about and discuss the meaning of care in all our lives.” For Seers, VR is a uniquely powerful tool to drive home key points about a societal issue that often seems easier to ignore for those not directly involved. “The work is inside you and all around you – you embody it and it embodies you. Each time you see it you will see different things and hear different things because there is so much to absorb in 360,” she says. “The work breaks boundaries, and is shaped by its emotional effect more than semantic knowledge.” Seers adapted Care(less) for Frequency, and will also adapt it for Ikon. But whatever changes she makes, it will remain a compelling, if unsettling, experience. Fabrica director Liz Whitehead says: “It can leave you a little shaken afterwards.” • Care(less) is at Birmingham’s Ikon gallery from 15 to 23 February