Lydia Quixano Pérez owns a bookshop in downtown Acapulco, where she is teetering on the edge of an emotional affair with her favourite customer, the alluringly well-read Javier. Lydia’s husband, Sebastián, is an investigative journalist, working to unmask “The Owl”, the leader of an inventively gruesome new narcotics cartel whose grab for power has left the city ravaged and fearful. There are few places on the planet more deadly to be a journalist, and the integrity that attracted Lydia to Sebastián terrifies her now that they have a child – it seems “sanctimonious, selfish”. When Sebastián publishes his exposé, Lydia’s darkest fears come to pass. Jeanine Cummins’s immoderately hyped third novel, American Dirt, opens with blood-sodden terror as The Owl takes revenge: a machine-gun slaughter at a family barbecue. “There are 16 bodies in the backyard, almost everyone Lydia loved in the world.” Only Lydia and her eight-year-old son, Luca, have survived, but there will be no justice, no protection: the police “do nothing, because that’s precisely what the cartel pays them to do”. A distant cousin in Colorado offers the only hope of escape from the cartel’s reach, so Lydia and Luca head for el norte with a threadbare plan to reach the border by freight train (the infamous La Bestia), and then bribe a people smuggler to help them cross the desert to US soil. But The Owl has eyes everywhere. All the elements are in place for a slick cartel thriller: a relentless villain; an improbable attraction; a clock-ticking chase to safety; a conveniently precocious child (Luca has an “intrinsic sense of his position on the globe, like a human GPS, pinging his way through the universe”). But despite its flamboyant and breathless first act, that’s not the novel American Dirt aspires to be. American Dirt is at its best when it knowingly explores the insulations, obligations and tenuousness of privilege From Theodore Dreiser’s An American Tragedy (1925) to Philip Roth’s American Pastoral (1997), there is a particular kind of literary ambition rooted in titularly American tales – a desire to puncture the soft complacency of American dreams. That dream may be the meritocratic myth of classlessness (Philipp Meyer’s sharp 2009 debut, American Rust) or the pretence of a colour-blind justice system (Tayari Jones’s exceptional 2019 Women’s prize winner, An American Marriage). Cummins’s title is no accident. “I am acutely aware,” she explains in her afterword, “that the people coming to our southern border are not one faceless brown mass, but singular individuals, with stories and backgrounds and reasons for coming that are unique.” American Dirt is her attempt to “honour the hundreds of thousands of stories we never get to hear” by inhabiting one. But it proves hard to reconcile the novel’s humane intentions with its propulsive, action-movie execution (film rights have already been optioned by the company that produced the Clint Eastwood-directed crime drama The Mule). It’s an activist’s gambit: create a trauma so immense that we cannot help but be swept along by the force of its pathos. It dusts American Dirt with a sheen of sensationalist unreality that obscures rather than illuminates the quotidian terrors that beat at the heart of this book. “This path is only for people who have no choice, no other option, only violence and misery behind you,” a priest warns early on in Lydia and Luca’s journey. “Many will be maimed or injured. Many will die. Many, many of you will be kidnapped, tortured, trafficked or ransomed … every single one of you will be robbed.” American Dirt turns each of these grim prognostications into object lessons, populated with characters who are vectors and vessels for instructional trauma. There is no doubting the wrenching truths – and years of meticulous research on Cummins’s part – that underpin each inhuman ordeal, but there is a fine line between world-building and didacticism, empathy and pity, bearing witness and trauma tourism. American Dirt is at its best when it knowingly explores the insulations, obligations and tenuousness of privilege. When Lydia and Luca beg the assistance of a busload of Pentecostal missionaries from some “faraway cornfield church” in Indiana, only to be met with hesitation. “Are they just drive-by Samaritans?” a local church member asks. “They just want to make pancakes and take selfies with skinny brown children?” Or when Lydia remembers her past self, “peripherally aware of destitution”, distractedly listening to news reports of the caravan of desperate families fleeing Guatemala and Honduras: “All her life she’s pitied those poor people. She’s donated money. She’s wondered with the sort of detached fascination of the comfortable elite, how dire the conditions of their lives must be wherever they came from, that this is the better option.” It matters that American Dirt is willing to ask and answer this ever-urgent question. But the outsized carnage in the novel’s opening pages gives Lydia and Luca an unequivocal answer. Their northward journey is unimpeachably worthy, the political, economic and moral complexities of migration rendered in monochrome. Who could argue with a persecuted mother and child fleeing the grisly hellscape Cummins describes (beheadings, babies hanged from trees, forced self-cannibalisation) for the sanctuary of the US, where the only danger to migrants is the threat of deportation? What emerges is a kind of modern Odyssey with the United States as Ithaca, a gleaming refuge. For a novel that sets out so earnestly to challenge the insular nationalism that leads the US‑Mexico border to feel like some kind of moral boundary, American Dirt may, despite or because of its manifest good intentions, accidentally reinforce the very kind of absolutist reasoning that keeps such myths alive. • American Dirt by Jeanine Cummins is published by Tinder (RRP £14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.