Getting my MBE for my work in music and business in 2014 was a nuts day. I received it alongside Joan Collins, who was being made a Dame, and at the end of the day, I looked at my mum, dad and sister, and was like: “Well look at that, Jamal is with Dame Joan Collins!” It was so surreal. Looking back on when I was starting out, my parents definitely struggled with the fact that I wasn’t going to uni, instead choosing to focus on making my music video platform, SB.TV, work. I was doing a BTec in media and moving image, but I really wanted to be out filming for SB.TV – the more I did, the more fire I had to continue. In the end, I made a deal with my parents: if I completed my diploma, they’d let me concentrate on my passion. They agreed, so I put my head down and got it done. Today, SB.TV is a full-blown entertainment company, but when I said I was getting into YouTube to start it, the response was mainly: “Uh, right …” as it had only been around for a year when I signed up in 2006. Even when it started to become more successful there was still a feeling among some people that it wasn’t going to work out and that I needed to get a “proper job”. And that’s what’s great about apprenticeships nowadays. I would have been able to take one within the music industry, alongside spending time at college learning the theory. But now there are way more options than there were back then. Deciding not to go to uni put me up against a lot of obstacles, and I doubt I would have experienced those today as apprenticeships can lead to the equivalent of a degree certificate. Saying that, I understand it can be hard for people – especially parents – to get their heads round. There’s still a lot of stigma attached to apprenticeships, for instance there’s an assumption that you can only do apprenticeships in trades like plumbing and construction, and that really needs to be reversed. My advice to parents would be to talk to your kid and work with them to figure out how they can achieve their dreams. Ask them questions, find out what inspires them, and together you can find a balance that will suit both sides. I look back and really wish I had been more open with my parents during my teens, as now I know they would have been so helpful in so many situations. University isn’t the only option, so don’t force your kid down that path when they could reach their full potential another way. And to any young person who doesn’t think the traditional academic route is for them, take your time and research. Soak up the different cultures around you, learn what makes you tick – an apprenticeship could be the ideal route. You can work in fashion, music, law ... there are so many avenues to explore. Try one, you won’t be tied down, and you never know, you might just love it. So what’s it actually like to embark on an apprenticeship? Lauren Franklin talks to an apprentice and his employer Ekansh Sharma, final-year software engineer apprentice, Accenture Why did you decide to do an apprenticeship?I had a place at university, but at the last minute I did a cost-benefit analysis, and the numbers didn’t make sense. I knew I wanted a degree in technology, and when I saw the Accenture programme it was exactly what I needed. I get a bachelor’s degree at the end of it, but I’ll have no student debt and three years of great work experience. What have been your highlights?There are so many! There’s a wide variety of opportunities. I started in capital markets, working with investment banks, then I worked in a high street bank in Leeds, followed by a government department to help prepare for Brexit, and then an Australian insurance company. It’s been so diverse, and there’s a lot of room to manoeuvre. How much support is on offer?There’s a big support network available. We have an HR adviser, a career counsellor, an academic adviser and apprenticeship ambassadors like Neha who are there to help us with anything and everything. When you’re ready for responsibility they’ll give it to you. You’re not just tucked away in the corner – you’re allowed to flourish. How did your family feel when you decided against uni?I’m from a very traditional Asian household, so you’re either a lawyer, a doctor or an engineer! When I told my mum, she was a little annoyed, but accepted it. Now she’s a big advocate of apprenticeships – she’s telling all her friends. The older generation sometimes don’t understand because the more traditional image is apprenticeships being for trades, however, there are hundreds, ranging from journalist to a nuclear missile engineer. You can even become a solicitor. How has the apprenticeship changed you?I’ve come on leaps and bounds. Confidence-wise, I never thought I’d be able to serve in leadership or in strategic roles, and getting that boost helped me get rid of imposter syndrome. When you start out you have that feeling of: “Do I really belong here?” but everyone is so supportive and is always there to help. Neha Swaly, senior manager and apprenticeship ambassador, Accenture How do you ensure apprentices get the best from the experience?Each [apprentice] has their own career counsellor who will be there for them throughout their career here. I make sure the roles they take match with the degree course they’re on, plus that they are getting the right balance with attending uni once a week. They get the support and are given a lot of space and trust to go and work. What advice would you give a parent whose child is considering an apprenticeship?With an apprenticeship, your child can establish themselves at a company while, in some cases, getting a degree. They will grow as an individual as they work in teams. And at Accenture, we’ll provide them with pastoral support to help them along. Fire it upEngineering, food, fashion – if you can think of it, there’s probably an apprenticeship available. From large corporations to agile startups, everyone’s getting involved. Excited? Visit apprenticeships.gov.uk Click here to listen to the Fire it Up! Spotify playlist