Talent now, more than ever, will take you only so far in motor racing. The ability to combine split-second decision making with almost ethereal reactions and sensitivity to an enormously complex piece of machinery has long set racers apart. But where once skill would be major the differentiator within their ranks, now it is money that seems to talk the loudest. This week the former driver Derek Warwick, the vice-president of the British Racing Drivers’ Club, warned that the increasing costs of racing meant that Britain may never produce a driver from an underprivileged background such as Lewis Hamilton again. Warwick fears many exceptional drivers will simply not progress unless they have a wealthy family. As young drivers in the UK cast around for seats in championships for the 2020 season, his concern seems valid. The numbers are stark. In 2016 the Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, gave his estimates of the costings. He said karting to international level could cost £1m, a season in F4 £350,000 and £650,000 for a season in F3. For GP2 (now F2) a further £1.5m. More than one season in any one series multiplies these figures and there was more to come. “You are on the verge of getting into Formula One but you are not there,” he said. “You need another £2m to £3m to get the drive.” He concluded by estimating a total of £8m. Four years later those numbers will have increased even further. Wolff’s calculations assume a driver has the backing to make it that far. The reality is few do, their careers curtailed long before the heady heights of F3. Johnathan Hoggard, who is 19, won the Aston Martin Autosport young driver of the year award at the end of last season. He finished the runner-up in the British F3 championship and Warwick describes him as a special talent. The award came with a £200,000 prize but while Hoggard acknowledges what an enormous help it has been, it is not nearly enough. Thus far he has been supported by his mum and dad, who have given all they can to meet the costs of British F3 – around £300,000. Hoggard wants to move to the F3 championship, two steps below F1. A drive which will cost at least £1m. “It’s not possible for mum and dad to fund it,” he said. “It was hard enough to fund British F3. They have brought me as far as they can but it is such a steep incline in budget. Before, the goal was F1 but I am having to think a bit more realistically about where we are and what we have available.” He is working hard to try to find sponsorship but that too is thin on the ground. Billy Monger, the double amputee driver with a high public and media profile, has still to secure sponsorship or a seat for this season. Further down the ladder the issues remain the same. Emily Linscott is a talented 17-year-old, who had wins in Britcar GT4 last year as well as podium finishes in the US Lucas Oil series. Thus far she too has been backed by her parents and wants to move to British F3 but the family can far from afford the step up. She, too, is trying to find sponsorship, knowing that victory on track is dependent on winning this numbers game. “Definitely finance is the biggest constraint,” she said. “I believe I have the skill to race but what’s holding me back is we don’t have anywhere near the money needed. My family have given their all but unless you have the money there is only so far you can go.” Popular conception has it that exceptional drivers will be picked up by development programmes. In some cases this is true but there are caveats. The first being that to be noticed you have to be racing and some cannot get that far. While equally, as the Jaguar Formula E driver Mitch Evans noted, even then it is not a free ride. “I had offers from a number of top teams, including Red Bull and Ferrari, to go on their junior schemes but I still had to provide some money,” he revealed in 2015. “A lot of driver development schemes are smoke and mirrors in terms of the drivers paying to be there. A lot of it is just about getting a foot in an F1 team in a roundabout way.” His words were given no little weight on Wednesday when Williams announced their test driver for the 2020 F1 season. Their choice, the Israeli Roy Nissany, has an underwhelming record, finishing 22nd in F2 in 2018. He is perhaps best known as being the son of Chanoch Nissany, who was the first Israeli to take part in an F1 weekend, testing for Minardi at the Hungaroring in 2005 where he almost 13 seconds off the pace and reportedly complained that his car had too much grip. His son is backed by the Canadian-Israeli billionaire Sylvan Adams and now has a place at the Williams team. What Hoggard and Linscott would give for such largesse. Hamilton has said he wants part of his post-racing legacy to include finding ways to encourage and support young drivers without wealthy parents into racing and in their careers. He also wants racing, including the FIA and F1, to consider the structures of the sport to make it more accessible. As things stand a mountainous task lies ahead and sadly for young talent across the globe, their chances may have long since slipped away.