George Furbank (England) The 23-year-old Northampton full-back has had a breakthrough season at Franklin’s Gardens having already equalled his 10 league and European starts last season. An attacking option if Eddie Jones is minded to re-deploy Elliot Daly, Furbank has flourished under Saints’ New Zealand coach, Chris Boyd. Caelan Doris (Ireland) The 21-year-old No 8 has stood out this season in a Leinster team stuffed with internationals. Rangy and quick, Doris is a powerful runner who showed his all-round game in the back-to-back European Cup wins over Northampton last month, when he ran a total of 140 metres from 32 carries and made 29 tackles. Thomas Gordon (Scotland) The 22-year-old Glasgow flanker is one of four uncapped players in the squad who were born overseas, in his case New Zealand. Gordon qualifies for Scotland through his grandparents and has the national attribute of being a pest over the ball, hard to shift and knowing which breakdowns to attack. Gabriel N’Gandebe (France) The 22-year-old Montpellier wing moved to France from Cameroon when he was nine and has been capped at under-20 level. He is one of 20 uncapped players named in the original squad of 42. N’Gandebe is a finisher with instant acceleration who can find space in the tightest of spots. Michelangelo Biondelli (Italy) The 21-year-old Zebre fly-half impressed at under-20 level. His rise is timely with Italy needing to find more creativity and finishing power behind their pack. Biondelli, who has also played at full-back, is making his mark in a struggling side, although his elevation after 11 appearances for his club was a surprise. Louis Rees-Zammit (Wales) The 18-year-old wing has scored 10 tries in as many starts for Gloucester this season and was sounded out by England before the country of his birth came calling. One for the future, perhaps, but Wales under Warren Gatland blooded players young, and Rees-Zammit would add excitement. Franco Smith (Italy) The South Africa international finished his playing career with Treviso and coached the club for six years from 2007. He has been appointed interim coach for the Six Nations after the early departure of Conor O’Shea. His task is huge: it is five years since the Azzurri won a match in the Six Nations. Andy Farrell (Ireland) An experienced coach after stints with Saracens, England, the Lions and Ireland under Joe Schmidt, Farrell is now in charge for the first time. A year ago, Ireland were riding high after following the grand slam with victory over New Zealand, but they slipped last year and a man who established his reputation as a defence coach needs to refine Ireland’s attack. Fabien Galthié (France) Galthié is a former France captain who has been charged with turning a team that has been Six Nations also-rans since 2010 into one of the leading teams in the world by the time France host the World Cup in 2023. The new coach has invested in youth but is looking to the past to recapture the swagger of Les Bleus while defence coach, Shaun Edwards, will add steel. Wayne Pivac (Wales) The fourth New Zealander to coach Wales in the last 21 years after Graham Henry, Steve Hansen and Gatland. His brief is to retain Wales’ meanness in defence while sharpening their attack and will be judged on the success of his predecessor Gatland rather than the state of the regional game. With games in Dublin and Twickenham, there will be no honeymoon for the former Scarlets coach.