Heston Blumenthal doesn’t stop talking. At speed. His thoughts veer off in a thousand directions, seemingly simultaneously. “Question everything” is the motto the chef plumped for on the coat of arms he was granted a few years back, and he does just that: our conversation takes in Newton, Darwin, Homer, Harry Potter, the Bible, the Qu’ran, the invention of the telephone, the invention of social media, breathing, Jaws and saws. The violence of the last two make me blink. Having spoken out in 2015 about TV becoming “too formulaic” and subsequently disappearing from our screens, Blumenthal likens the need to take a step back to the scene in Jaws where Roy Scheider is on the beach and hears a scream in the water, as the camera simultaneously zooms out and moves in. He segues swiftly into another metaphor, of a carpenter sawing away with an ever-blunter implement. “He should stop and have a rest,” he says, “resharpen his saw and start again. But when you’re in the middle of it, you think ‘I can’t stop, I don’t have time.’” Is this a sign of the culinary wizard coming back an even more intense character? Or perhaps he’s just bringing the drama he’s famous for in the kitchen to our conversation. “I have some funny metaphors I still need to work on,” he concedes. In any case, Blumenthal is very much back. This week, the man famous for serving up giant lit candles, ‘dismembered corpses’ and edible icebergs as food returns to television as one of the “kitchen gods” on Channel 4’s super-kitsch new cooking show, Crazy Delicious. Styled like a cross between Willy Wonka’s garden and the My Little Pony universe, Crazy Delicious is all puffy clouds and cherry blossom, babbling brooks and blue skies. Crucially, it is TV’s first entirely edible set – just the thing to bring Blumenthal out of his hiatus. In each episode, three intrepid home cooks are let loose in the fairytale garden to go forth and forage. With their haul, they compete in three tasks, presenting their spectacular, offbeat creations to Blumenthal and his cronies – American soul-food big-hitter Carla Hall and Michelin-starred Swedish fire-pit master Niklas Ekstedt – to compete for the golden apple. “It taps right into my heart, my blood, my culinary DNA,” says Blumenthal. The challenge he has always embraced, he says, is to make things that taste as good as they look, while being at odds with exactly what they look like. Doing it all in chocolate would be too easy. Instead, unleashing wild creativity – travelling to the outer rim of Bake Off, so to speak – is what he’s all about. Creativity is one thing, but the past decade has also brought Blumenthal a lot of pain. A norovirus outbreak got his signature restaurant The Fat Duck shut down not once but twice, in 2009 and again in 2014. Blumenthal and Zanna, his wife of 28 years, split up in 2011, then divorced six years later. And the tabloids had him in their gossip-spewing sights in the interim. The Daily Mail couldn’t stop quoting his next girlfriend, US food writer Suzanne Pirret, saying food and sex were her favourite two things, “best one after the other in either order; I’m not picky.” And the secrets that followed – the affair, the baby and subsequent nuptials with French real estate agent and lover 20 years his junior Stephanie Gouveia – sent the red tops into a tail spin. “You know,” he says, “I wouldn’t want to go through those things again. But I wouldn’t want to change them either. I wouldn’t have anything to learn from if it wasn’t for failure.” All those experiences have given him the opportunity, he says, to question a lot about himself. The last time he was interviewed by the Guardian, he was asked if he’d been in therapy. “Of course I have,” he replied. Now, he tells me he’s been thinking a lot about the importance of breathing: “It’s the most intimate relationship a human being can have, that with themselves and their breath.” Personal and professional trials aren’t the only things that have thrust Blumenthal into the spotlight. Comments he made in an interview last October landed him in hot water with women everywhere, when he brought up evolution, biology and women struggling with “the physical strain of lifting heavy pots and pans” when asked why there weren’t more female chefs at the top. He was misquoted, he insists, before digging right back into the evolutionary differences between men (they’re physically stronger) and women (they have a more advanced sense of smell, are emotionally more robust). They “should both be in the picking” was his point, he says. Still, this leaves his detractors’ arguments (“Thank goodness [women] can find the strength to lift their children, their buggies and all the shopping” tweeted a reader at the time) unanswered. Meanwhile, last week, he’s taken flak for suggesting diners should stop Instagramming their meals and just eat them instead. “Oh keep up” has been the general response to that bit of boomerism, which makes the undeniable tongue-in-cheek quality of Crazy Delicious most welcome. When I said Blumenthal, Ekstedt and Hall were gods on this show, I meant it: they’re dressed in head-to-toe white and sit at a table up in the set’s clouds. It is ludicrous. But when you think of the pedestal on which celebrity chefs are placed – their books as Bibles, their followers as disciples (incidentally, in 2014 Blumenthal invested in a racehorse named Acolyte) – it is refreshing to see the three of them so game. Was irony part of the appeal? “No, I was very scared of that,” says Blumenthal. “When we first walked up the stairs with our white trousers and shoes on, Niklas and I looked at each other and went, ‘gods??’” White being the worst colour for food-tasting notwithstanding, they thought to hell with it, and tucked right in. And that is not a metaphor; Blumenthal has actually been walking around eating the set. He wants the loopy ideas and bold dreams of Crazy Delicious to inspire everyone. “Imagine a candy floss cloud above the roof of your house attached with liquorice string, blowing in the wind,” he says – and I try to. Well, he continues, people imagining things like that collectively is how we talk on the phone, or interact on social media. After all, as he puts it, “we’re all born artists.” And if there’s anyone who can demonstrate how to stay that way, surely it’s the guy who brings fairytales to the table. Now, anyone for strawberry chicken wings? Crazy Delicious starts tonight at 8pm on Channel 4