When more than 900 adults and children died in 1978 at Jim Jones’s Peoples Temple in Guyana, it sparked rightful shock and outrage as to how so many people could have become brainwashed. This thorough and harrowing two-part doc examines Jones’s rise from fervent San Francisco preacher for wayward youth in the late 1960s to cult leader who was forced to flee the US. A deeply disturbing account of the destructive potential of belief. Ammar Kalia A 23rd series of this sometimes slightly generic but incredibly hardy forensic drama. In this opening episode, there’s a plane crash carrying the former US ambassador to Britain. An accident? When the team are called to investigate the suspicious suicide of a businessman, peculiar connections begin to emerge. Phil Harrison If January makes you want to do a runner, here comes Ben Fogle with another batch of brave people who have ditched their everyday lives for a new start. He’s off to the freezing coast of Iceland to meet Hákon, who has gone from alcohol addiction to a sober and solitary life on a private island. Hannah Verdier Pamela Adlon’s caustic and somewhat underrated comedy returns for a third season. Eldest daughter Max graduated from high school at the end of series two, and we open with Adlon’s single mum, Sam, preparing for Max’s life at college, although there are ghostly visions in store for the family. AK Dr Balta thinks of himself as an artist. His clients just want him to fix their bums and tums. He is the surgeon at the Comfort Zone clinic in Turkey, which promises its mainly British customers cut-price surgery. Can it help women such as 25-year-old Summer, who has sold one of her pets to fund her op? Ali Catterall Ahead of its 25th anniversary later this year, the daytime TV stalwart gets some post-watershed treatment in a double bill special. Breda is set to show her darkest side, while Diane needs to decide on her future with Edward, and Walter tries to bring everyone together – with mixed results. AK Sisters, 10.50pm, Film4 Jason Moore’s sweet and funny comedy stars Tina Fey and Amy Poehler as sisters Kate (party-loving hairdresser) and Maura (sensible nurse). They are supposedly all grown up, but revert to their inner teenage rivals when they decide to throw a farewell bash for the family home, which is being sold off. Paul Howlett Big Bash cricket: Melbourne Renegades v Perth Scorchers T20 match from GMHBA Stadium. 8am, BT Sport 1 International cricket: South Africa v England Day four of the second Test. 8am, Sky Sports Cricket EFL Cup football Coverage of the first leg of the first semi-final. 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event