Bruce Goff was the ultimate outsider architect. Despite being one of the most innovative, imaginative and downright interesting architects in history, with admirers including Frank Gehry, Mies van der Rohe, Philip Johnson and Frank Lloyd Wright, Goff, who died in 1982, remains a marginal figure. His exile was partly self-imposed, but there are signs that Goff was also pushed out – as a result of his sexuality as much as his unorthodox design philosophy. We’ve come to associate US midcentury modernism with minimalism – everything clean and straight and simple. Goff’s buildings were the exact opposite: curvaceous or unconventionally geometric, busy, flamboyant, mysterious. Critics of the era could not get a handle on him. Charles Jencks described him as “the Michelangelo of kitsch”. Others described his work as organic, futuristic, or sci-fi. He was pop and postmodern before the terms existed. What’s more, not one of Goff’s works resembles another, making him even harder to classify. A recurring motif is of diamond-shaped glass studs set into doors and columns. They are dime-store glass ashtrays Consider one of his most famous works: the Bavinger House of 1955. Designed for an artist couple in Norman, Oklahoma, its roofline is a rising spiral hung by cables from a central mast, like a twist of lemon. Its spiralling wall resembles a rockery, embedded with boulders, living plants and chunks of reused waste glass. There are no rooms inside; instead, sitting and sleeping areas are saucer-shaped pods radiating from the core. Even with the advent of computer-aided design, few architects could conceive of such a structure. It resembles nothing else built before or since. Goff would experiment with form, material, structure and ornament to almost absurd degrees. Materials he used in his buildings included aviation parts, goose feathers, oil rig equipment, orange artificial turf (on the roof), lumps of coal, and any kind of glass he could get his hands on. His 1948 Ledbetter House, also in Oklahoma, features a recurring motif of vertical lines of diamond-shaped glass studs set into doors and columns. In fact they are dime-store glass ashtrays. If Goff was the Michelangelo of kitsch, then his Sistine chapel was a house known as Shin’En Kan in Bartlesville, Oklahoma. Designed over a period of 20 years for a wealthy patron named Joe Price, Shin’En Kan had golden roofs and a sunken “conversation pit” lined in deep-pile carpeting. For the windows, he created starburst patterns of sequins and glass tubes, originally intended for the artificial insemination of turkeys. A gallery to house Price’s collection of Japanese screens had a hexagonal, glass-bottomed pool in the middle. On the floor below was a hexagonal Japanese bathtub, so the pool acted as a skylight, and Price could lie in the bath and look up at his art. “He was slightly humorous, but at heart he’s a serious architect,” says British architect John Sergeant, whom Goff stayed with when he came to Britain in 1978. “All the houses were very strictly geometrically controlled. I don’t think Goff was able to describe these things in intellectual terms; he just instinctively got them. He picked up the vibes, in music, in film. He was very aware of culture. I took him to a record shop in Cambridge and he came away with a suitcase full of far-out modern classical music – really noisy stuff.” Goff was an outsider from the start. Born in 1904, he grew up in Oklahoma – way off the cultural radar. Having demonstrated a flair for art as a child, the 12-year-old Goff was taken by his father to a Tulsa architects’ office, where he pleaded with them to give his boy a job. After quickly learning the basics of drafting, he began to produce his own designs. A colleague remarked that his ideas resembled the work of Frank Lloyd Wright, whom Goff had never heard of. So he wrote to Wright, who replied with words of encouragement, and advised him not to study at architecture school and to find his own path. Goff’s first major work was completed when he was just 22: the Boston Avenue Methodist Church in Tulsa. It looks like the work of a far older designer, with a soaring art deco spire, ornate detailing and a dramatic circular nave. Scholars are certain Goff was the main designer, though the church was a collaboration with his art teacher, Adah Robinson, who took sole credit. Goff’s “flamboyant personality” did him no favours with the church, according to reports. As one newspaper put it: “Mr Goff’s eccentricities were not well received.” It got worse when he began teaching at Oklahoma University in 1946. He was an inspirational teacher and, under his leadership, Oklahoma’s architecture school developed an international reputation; but in 1955 he resigned under a cloud. He was accused of abusing a 14-year-old boy. Many maintain the incident was a setup, engineered by rivals uncomfortable with Goff’s sexuality and jealous of his reputation. Goff was open about being gay and friends describe him as a kind and gentle soul who would never prey on underage boys. He retreated to the wilderness, although he was kept busy by a steady stream of patrons. Shin’En Kan was destroyed in a fire in 1996, which many suspect was arson. Perhaps those walls of coal weren’t such a good idea, after all. The Bavinger House, too, was destroyed. After the death of its owners, it stood empty and fell into disrepair. It was demolished, supposedly after being damaged by a storm in 2011. Many more Goff properties have been lost through straightforward neglect or disregard for his reputation – although some, including the Ledbetter House, are now on the National Register of Historic Places. Goff’s reputation is being rehabilitated. The Oklahoma film-maker Britni Harris recently completed a new documentary, titled Goff, which premiered at the Architecture & Design Film Festival in New York last October. It begins with a tour of Goff’s 1927 Tulsa club, once a grand meeting place for the great and good, but in the film a graffiti-strewn, burnt-out hulk. After extensive restoration, the Tulsa Club was saved. It opened as a hotel in April 2019. Goff didn’t come out of nowhere – he cited influences including Gaudí, Wright, Native American art and music, especially Debussy. His architecture was truly organic in that it arose out of its inhabitants’ needs, their lifestyles, their interests, their tastes, to the extent, as Sergeant puts it, that they were almost “architectural portraits”. Where most postwar Americans lived in identical, mass-produced boxes, Goff’s clients received something that reflected their individuality as much as his. And where many architects develop a signature style, Goff saw each project as a chance to think architecture anew. And if some of Goff’s solutions were too new for their time, his work still stands as a signpost to just how radical architecture could be.