Is your Christmas tree looking a little sad? One might imagine it is by now, for the ghost has truly flown, and left a flurry of needles on your floor. Still, let us not waste this moment to honour the tree’s life with a good bit of recycling. If I am honest, I don’t have a tree to recycle because I am not a fan of the Christmas tree tradition. So mostly I have to steal other people’s trees. I go around collecting up the corpses left out with the bins (clearly not the ones destined for the council recycling scheme) and take them back to my allotment. The needles of fir trees make excellent ericaceous compost, perfect for pleasing blueberries, cranberries, bilberries, heathers and azaleas. Depending on your tree, this might be as simple as sweeping up the fallen needles from the sitting room. If you have a fancy tree that’s been bred to never let go, snip off the branches from the main trunk. If you have access to a garden shredder this will speed things up no end. Otherwise chop by hand into smaller pieces, then scatter around the base of your ericaceous plants and let nature do her thing. You can also use the evergreen branches as frost protection; they are excellent for protecting perennial crowns. However, you may have nothing left other than bare twiggy stems and the trunk. The timber of fir trees takes an inordinate time to rot back; all those lovely-smelling natural oils in the wood are there in part to protect the tree from rotting. So, if you are going to add them to the compost, use them at the bottom of a new pile. A good compost pile is not dissimilar to building a good fire: you want airflow at the base to speed things up. A layer of slow-rotting branches will do just that. Alternatively, the branches make excellent supports for dwarf peas or broad beans. What to do with the remaining trunk? It could be used as an upright in a dead hedge. This sort of hedge comprises all the woody stems too tough or big for compost – raspberry canes, woody branches, that sort of thing – that are then stacked and left to very slowly rot. While they are doing this, they make a wonderful insect and wildlife habitat. The whole thing can get rather messy, but if you stagger upright posts either side of the hedge you can then lay the branches neatly inside. The perfect solution for the last bit of your tree.