Friday 8pm BT Sport 1 Venue SixfieldsReferee Darren England VAR No Odds H 10-3 A Evs D 11-4Head-to-head Derby six wins, Northampton none; four draws Keith Curle’s League Two side are unbeaten in six games and in the play-off hunt, and could make things awkward for a Derby team beset by off-field issues this season. The Cobblers are chasing their first fifth-round appearance since 1970, when they memorably lost 8-2 to Manchester United, with George Best scoring six goals. Another United legend will be on show as the TV cameras come to Sixfields, although Wayne Rooney may struggle to match that from central midfield. Niall McVeigh Friday 8pm BT Sport Extra Venue Kiyan Prince Foundation StadiumReferee Darren England VAR No Odds H 9-5 A 9-5 D 5-2Head-to-head QPR 25 wins, Wednesday 30; 17 draws QPR might be putting their dismal FA Cup record behind them; after going out at the first hurdle 15 times since the turn of the century, they’re one win from a second trip to the last 16 in succession. Garry Monk will want a reaction from his players after the 5-0 home defeat to Blackburn prompted a training-ground inquest last week. His team will have to marshall Jordan Hugill, who scored twice in Rangers’ 2-1 win at Hillsborough earlier this season. Niall McVeigh Saturday 3pm Venue St Andrew’sReferee Tim Robinson VAR No Odds H 2-1 A 6-4 D 12-5Head-to-head Coventry 17, Birmingham 23; 15 draws The tenants meet the landlords. Birmingham will be the visitors in their own home on Saturday, with Coventry the designated home side for the tie. The Sky Blues have been playing at St Andrew’s recently as issues with the Ricoh Arena rumble on. It’s a sell out, with Coventry’s 10,500 allocation slightly larger than Birmingham’s. Blues fans will have the novelty of sitting in the away end as their team bids to reach the fifth round for the first time since 2012. Michael Butler Coventry subs from: Wilson, Addai, Pask, Eccles, Drysdale, McCallum, Wakefield, Allen, Westbrooke, Kastaneer; Biamou, Bakayoko, Hiwula.Doubtful Jones (match fitness)Injured Jobello, Bartlett (both ACL) Birmingham subs from: Stockdale, Trueman, Roberts, Harding, Keita, Grounds, Bellingham, C Gardner, Sunjic, McEachran, Maghoma, Villalba, Bailey, Bela, Mrabti.Injured Kieftenbeld (knee ligament) Saturday 3pm Venue Fratton ParkReferee Graham Scott VAR No Odds H 5-4 A 2-1 D 12-5Head-to-head Barnsley 18, Portsmouth 21; 14 draws It is 113 years since these two clubs last met in the FA Cup. Barnsley are in a Championship relegation battle and this week suspended centre-back Bambo Diaby amid an ongoing anti-doping investigation. This Cup clash might be a nice distraction from that, but Portsmouth are yet to lose at home in the league. Currently unbeaten in six matches in all competitions, Kenny Jackett’s hosts will be confident of a mini-upset. Will Unwin Portsmouth subs from MacGillivray, Whatmough, Brown, Downing, Casey, Haunstrup, Cannon, McCrorie, Morris, Evans, May, Close, Pitman, Hawkins, Hackett-Fairchild.Doubtful Bolton, McCrorie (both thigh). Barnsley subs from Radlinger, Walton, Sollbauer, Sibbick, Oduor, B Williams, Dougall, Bähre, Simões, Styles, Thiam, Schmidt, Woodrow.Doubtful Oduor (thigh), Bähre (illness). Saturday 3pm Venue Madejski StadiumReferee Marc Edwards VAR No Odds H 6-4 A 2-1 D 3-1Head-to-head Reading 25, Cardiff 23; 21 draws These two sides can boast just two wins in their last 10 outings between them, both coming in the third round, against lower league opposition. There are just two points and places between the teams in the Championship table, with neither fearing relegation or having much hope of promotion, so this should be a free hit for both. Sam Baldock could return to the Reading starting line-up after a late goal at Nottingham Forest earned a draw in midweek. Will Unwin Reading subs from Rafael, Andresson, Gunter, Burley, McIntyre, Morrison, Howe, Blackett, Watson, Richards, Swift, Adam, Olise, Loader, Boyé, Puscas.Doubtful Meïté (personal reasons)Injured Lucas João (thigh), Yiadom (knee) Cardiff subs from Etheridge, Day, Bennett, Flint, Nelson, Traoré, Cunningham, Richards, Ralls, Pack, Whyte, Glatzel, Bogle.Doubtful Peltier (dead leg)Injured Ward (concussion), Mendez-Laing (thigh), Vassell Saturday 3pm Venue St Mary’s StadiumReferee Peter Bankes VAR Yes Odds H 9-5 A 7-5 D 5-2Head-to-head Southampton 39, Spurs 56; 30 draws Southampton are short on numbers in defence, with Cédric Soares and Jannik Vestergaard ruled out after suffering injuries in the midweek win over Palace. Shane Long is also absent but Danny Ings came off the bench at Selhurst Park; perhaps a sign Ralph Hasenhüttl fancies a Cup run. This trophy is José Mourinho’s best chance of silverware this season, but his side lost meekly here on New Year’s Day, and rumours persist of discontent within the camp. With Harry Winks injured, January recruit Gedson Fernandes could get his first Spurs start. Niall McVeigh Southampton subs from McCarthy, Lewis, Bednarek, Valery, Vokins, Slattery, Højbjerg, Smallbone, Ramsay, Redmond, Sims, McQueen, Armstrong, Obafemi, N’Lundulu.Doubtful Valery (illness), Bednarek (achilles)Injured Vestergaard (concussion), Long (knee), Soares (knee, Feb) Tottenham subs from Vorm, Austin, Alderweireld, Aurier, Foyth, Walker-Peters, Dier, Wanyama, Eriksen, Alli, Parrott.Injured Winks (ankle), Davies (ankle, both Feb); Kane (thigh), Sissoko (knee, both Apr) • This page will be updated with new previews throughout the day