Good morning – Warren Murray helping you step forward into Thursday with some news under your belt. Prince Harry and Meghan, the Duchess of Sussex, are to step back from senior roles in the royal family after waging a war with some quarters of the media over claimed intrusion and bullying. They will also break from the royals’ system of media access to stories and photos, instead dealing directly with specific journalists; prioritise their own charitable foundation, separate from William and Kate’s; and split their time between the UK and North America, the continent of Meghan’s birth, as they raise their son, Archie. The couple said they were seeking to “carve out a progressive new role within this institution”. A Buckingham Palace spokeswoman said discussions with the couple on their decision to step back from the royal family were “at an early stage”, adding: “We understand their desire to take a different approach, but these are complicated issues that will take time to work through.” It is under question whether the Queen, Prince Charles or any other members of the royal family were informed before the announcement. Caroline Davies writes that the Sussexes have said they will seek to become financially independent, though it is unclear how; and their move is seen as unprecedented in modern times, with comparisons being drawn to the abdication of Edward VIII. The reaction in the papers has been intense, while social media has inevitably been having its say about “Megxit” – and we have compiled a timeline of their royal highnesses’ highs, lows and media woes. Gardiner path to leadership? Barry Gardiner, the shadow international trade secretary, has said he is considering running for Labour party leader. Gardiner, 62, told the Guardian last night: “I am considering running and will decide in the next 24 hours.” It would make him the seventh declared candidate. Gardiner is understood to have been encouraged to stand as an alternative leftwing candidate by MPs concerned that Rebecca Long Bailey’s campaign has stuttered. The shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, is racing ahead in popularity among members, with a mounting number of official nominations. Gardiner, the MP for Brent North, has held his seat since 1997 and was a junior minister under Tony Blair. He argued for Labour to go along with the 2016 Brexit vote and against a second referendum. Scandal over Woodford dividend – Investors trapped in Neil Woodford’s main fund, which collapsed last year, have expressed dismay after the stock-picker and his business partner, Craig Newman, took home £13.8m in dividends. Administrators have told 300,000 investors they have lost nearly a fifth of their money. Woodford’s flagship fund, once worth more than £10bn, fell below £3bn as investors rushed to withdraw their money after a series of poorly performing picks. In full-year accounts issued on Tuesday, the company blamed press coverage for the fund’s demise as well as Woodford’s poor stock-picking. A Woodford spokesperson said: “The accounts relate to the financial year before the equity income fund was suspended. We can confirm that the partners did not take any profits or income during the fund’s suspension, nor was any management fee earned from managing Woodford Patient Capital Trust.” Insecure future for children – New research estimates more than 100,000 children are living in London without secure immigration status, despite more than half of them being UK-born. They may face problems accessing higher education and health care, and getting driving licences, housing and jobs. The findings were condemned by the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, as a “national disgrace”. The research warns the number of undocumented young people could surge if an estimated 350,000 young European nationals are not helped to apply for post-Brexit settlement. Meanwhile the number of children in care in England has gone up by 28% in the past decade, with council leaders warning of unsustainable pressure on support services. And the Tories have used their majority in the Commons to remove protections for child refugees from the Brexit bill. No 10 has insisted the right to be reunited with family in the UK will remain government policy, but does not belong in the withdrawal agreement legislation. Sounds like a winner – The soul singer Celeste has been named the BBC’s Sound of 2020 in the annual poll to evaluate the year’s brightest new musical hopes. The 25-year-old British-Jamaican star, full name Celeste Waite, also won the Brits rising star award in December. “I could never have predicted half of the things that happened,” she said. “I’m so grateful for every opportunity I’ve had so far and am looking forward to what 2020 will bring.” Celeste grew up in Saltdean, near Brighton. “Her songwriting is personal and poignant but with universal appeal,” said BBC Radio 1 DJ Annie Mac. “I think she could easily join the long list of Sound Of winners who went on to be global stars.” Previous winners include Adele, Sam Smith, Haim and Ellie Goulding. Healthy habits – Drinking in moderation, staying slim, exercising for at least 30 minutes a day and not smoking could extend people’s disease-free life by up to a decade, a study suggests. Researchers from Harvard and Amsterdam universities found that women leading a healthy lifestyle at 50 had a disease-free life expectancy of 34.4 more years, taking them to the age of 84 without diabetes, cancer or heart disease. This compared with 23.7 more years for other women. Healthy-living men aged 50 could could expect to go a further 31.1 years free from disease, compared with 23.5 years for others. Bushfires have swept large parts of Australia since October, leaving more than 20 people dead, destroying thousands of homes and devastating wildlife: some estimate that a billion animals have been killed. Guardian Australia’s editor, Lenore Taylor, describes reporting on the crisis. And: Julian Borger on the US response to Iranian missiles hitting its bases in Iraq. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/01/08-70182-200109TIFbushfires_.mp3 Fitness coaches don’t all start out as slim and healthy twentysomethings. Here’s how three overcame obesity and illness – and their advice for the rest of us, as told to Emine Saner. Seven UK betting websites are live-streaming FA Cup matches as part of a TV and media rights deal struck by the Football Association that runs until 2024, despite the governing body having announced an end to all sponsorships with gambling companies in 2017. After a four-day wait due to a clash with the men’s ATP Cup, women’s world No 1 Ash Barty finally took to the court at WTA Brisbane, only to fall to a shock defeat to American qualifier Jennifer Brady. England’s chances of winning the Test series in South Africa have been hit by the news that Jimmy Anderson has been ruled out of the final two Tests with a left-rib injury. Kelechi Iheanacho equalised with 15 minutes to play after Aston Villa had threatened a surprise first-leg win over Leicester in the Carabao Cup. Harry Maguire faces a prolonged period out after tearing a hip muscle, adding yet another name to Manchester United’s list of injured defenders. And the former Leeds Rhinos and Great Britain half-back Rob Burrow has revealed he has been told he has “very early stage” motor neurone disease but is hopeful he can live for another decade. Asian stocks have rebounded and oil has edged up after the US and Iran appeared to back away from further conflict in the Middle East. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan rose 1%, as did Hong Kong’s Hang Seng and Shanghai blue chips, reversing Wednesday’s losses. Japan’s Nikkei rose 1.8%, lifting stocks to their highest for the year so far, while Australian stocks climbed 1% to just below December’s record high. The pound is worth $1.310 and €1.179 and the FTSE is trending higher by around 0.3% as we head into the morning. The Sun gives us the Twitter hashtag headline for the day with “Megxit” and pretends the palace bombshell is its own exclusive. The Mail’s poster-style front page speaks of the “Queen’s fury” at the revelation. The Mirror says simply: “They didn’t even tell the Queen.” The Guardian reports the couple are going to step back from their senior royal duties and highlights their plans to become financially independent. The Telegraph says: “Harry and Meghan quit the Firm.” The Times points to a rift in the royal family and gives its readers a catchy: “Harry and Meghan quit amid royal family split.” The Express gives its front page to its headline: “Queen’s dismay as Harry and Meghan step back from royal life”, and finds room for a small picture of the Queen looking unhappy. The i makes it all about Harry, with the headline: “Prince quits.” The FT splashes with the US-Iran crisis but gives the Sussexes a downpage spot: “Royal couple pull out of public eye in search of financial independence.” You can see the front pages in our full report. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com