The trial of former Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein did not begin with the bang of a judge’s gavel, but with a wave of silence that fell over the crowd of people standing outside the county courthouse building in New York when the disgraced mogul emerged from a black SUV Monday morning. In the crowd were seven women who looked on solemnly as Weinstein walked, their arms draped over a barricade that separated them from him and his entourage. Some held signs that read “Justice for survivors” and “Listen to survivors”. Weinstein did not meet their pointed stares when he shuffled into the building with the aid of a walking frame. The group, a small coalition of the 80 women who have accused Harvey Weinstein of sexual misconduct, gathered to mark the start of what they hope will be the vehicle that brings justice for Weinstein’s accusers. “I stand in solidarity with the brave survivors who will take the stand against Harvey Weinstein in this trial. While the emotion of the day runs high, I join these other brave women who were also harmed by Harvey Weinstein to say: We aren’t going anywhere,” the actor Rosanna Arquette told reporters moments after Weinstein disappeared inside the courthouse. Weinstein has pleaded not guilty to five counts, including raping a woman in 2013 and forcing another woman to engage in oral sexual conduct in 2006. The trial is in its early stages, with jury selection beginning next week. Rose McGowan, an actor and activist, thanked the women who will be testifying in court in an open letter she wrote to Weinstein. “Today is a day for us to honor how far we’ve come and how much we’ve endured to get here. But it is not the end,” McGowan said. “We are free, we are beautiful, we are strong and you will never take that from us.” Prompted by questions from reporters, the women responded to comments Weinstein made in an email he sent to CNN in December that indicated he believes it will be possible for him to build a career in the film industry again. “Does anyone really want to see that? It’s like a pedophile saying, ‘I can’t wait to go back to coaching Little League as soon as this is all over.’ This is a dangerous predator,” said Lauren Sivan, a journalist who said Weinstein masturbated into a nearby potted plant in front of her in 2007. “Even if he is acquitted on this trial, let’s hope he will never be able to go back to doing what he was doing.” Rebutting Weinstein’s comments he made in an interview with the New York Post, lamenting the ruin of his supposed legacy of boosting women’s careers in Hollywood, McGowan said: “For every woman he put on screen, he took out about a hundred behind the scene.” In response to a question about the friendly emails that Weinstein’s defense team say show his accusers kept contact with Weinstein after their alleged assaults, Sarah Ann Masse, an actor, said she hopes “an expert who is trauma-informed” will speak about the experience of sexual assault survivors. “It’s incredibly common to stay in touch with your abusers if you knew them prior to abuse,” Masse said. “Hopefully the jury and judge will be informed enough to know not to listen to those ridiculous defenses.”