Two men, aged 29 and 39, have been arrested on suspicion of murder after three men were stabbed to death in Seven Kings, north-east London, on Sunday evening, the Metropolitan police said. DCI Stephen Clayman said the men and the victims were known to each other. “We believe the groups involved are members of the Sikh community,” he said. Officers were still contacting members of the dead men’s families, he added. “It was a horrific scene for anyone to come across and my heart goes out to the families and those affected by it because it is unprecedented to have something like this.” Police are still investigating a motive but have ruled out terrorism, he said. The arrests came after police were called to Elmstead Road in Seven Kings, Redbridge, just before 7.40pm on Sunday. All three men, believed to be in their 20s or 30s, died at the scene of their apparent stab injuries, Scotland Yard said. Clayman said: “While inquiries into this tragic incident are at an early stage, this is likely to be a triple homicide investigation. I must retain an open mind as to any motive as we are in the early stages of establishing the full circumstances.” The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, said extra police enforcement powers had been authorised for the borough of Redbridge until 8am on Monday following the attack. He wrote: “I’m in touch with senior Met police officers and local representatives after a serious incident in Redbridge tonight, where three men have lost their lives. My thoughts are with their families and the local community at this dreadful time.” The Ilford South Labour MP, Sam Tarry, tweeted on Sunday night: “Heartbroken to find out that three people have been stabbed in Seven Kings, Ilford, tonight.” In a separate post, he added: “Knife crime is a crisis engulfing our capital, bringing heartache, misery and fear to so many. The police, local authorities, schools, youth and mental health services desperately need the funding and support restoring. No ifs, no buts, no excuses.” Anyone with information can call police on 101 quoting reference 6374/19 Jan or, to remain anonymous, call Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111.