Ole Gunnar Solskjær was scathing about Manchester United’s first-half display in Tuesday’s 3-1 home defeat by Manchester City in the Carabao Cup semi-final first leg, describing it as the worst this season. United conceded Bernardo Silva and Riyad Mahrez strikes plus an Andreas Pereira own goal before the break. While Marcus Rashford’s second-half finish gives them hope of overturning the tie in the return leg the manager was unhappy. “From their goal until half-time is the worst we’ve played,” he said. “From the first goal until half-time we couldn’t cope. We let them play, our heads dropped, we made decisions we shouldn’t and it needed sorting at half-time. The second half was a good response – [but] it’s a steep mountain to climb.” Solskjær questioned his players’ mentality, adding it should not be down to him to gee them up at the interval. “It’s natural your head goes down when you feel you’re not performing, but we’ve got to get out of it quicker – we’ve got to get to the second-half mentality quicker,” he said. “It can’t be me coming in at half-time – that’s the learning this team [has do to]. We’ve got a young team. I’ve said it a few times but it’s not going to change between every press conference, that statement. I’m still in that phase. It’s a young team and we’re learning and these experiences must stick. And the second half gives me something to believe in because it’s respectable and a good second half.” Pep Guardiola described the opening half as one of his side’s best performances but warned the tie is not dead. He recalled how United lost 2-0 to Paris Saint-Germain last season but won 3-1 in the Champions League last-16 away leg to progress on away goals. “They lost to PSG last year, went to France and qualified. They are a dangerous team,” he said. “Hopefully our people can support us how United supported their team. We played really good first half. They changed to a diamond in the second half and we struggled a bit.” Of when the injured Harry Maguire might return Solskjær said: “We don’t know – its not a long-term one, so don’t think ready for the weekend but let’s see.”