The Carolina Panthers are completing a contract to hire Baylor’s Matt Rhule as their coach, while the New York Giants are in negotiations with New England Patriots assistant Joe Judge, according to NFL sources. ESPN reported on Tuesday that the Giants hope to recruit Jason Garrett, who was fired as Dallas Cowboys head coach on Sunday, as Judge’s offensive coordinator. Panthers owner David Tepper reportedly visited Rhule at his home in Waco, Texas, and decided he wanted the Baylor coach to succeed Ron Rivera, who was fired with four games remaining in the season. Rivera was the most successful coach in franchise history and was twice named AP NFL Coach of the Year. Rhule had also interviewed with the Giants, but with a move to the Panthers likely, New York now have their sights set on Judge. Judge has won three Super Bowls with New England in eight years as an assistant on Bill Belichick’s staff. He was the fifth candidate the Giants have interviewed since firing Pat Shurmur last week. Judge would take over a team that went 4-12 and 5-11 in Shurmur’s two seasons and has been to the playoffs just once since winning the Super Bowl after the 2011 season. But the Patriots’ special team coordinator and wide receiver coach would inherit a team with a talented young quarterback in Daniel Jones and former rookie of the year running back Saquon Barkley. The Giants also have the fourth pick in this year’s draft. Patriots coach Bill Belichick called the 38-year-old Judge “an excellent coach” and said he excelled in his added duties this season. “Joe’s done a great job. He’s done a great job with the kicking game,” Belichick said. “He’s expanded the role a little bit and that’s kind of had a little bit of a ripple effect in the way we’ve organized the kicking game, but that’s all worked out pretty efficiently. Joe’s done a good job of organizing that, as well as taking care on some other things with the offense and particularly receivers.” Rhule was named Baylor’s coach in December 2016. He went 1-11 his first season there, then improved to 7-6 in 2018. The Bears went 11-1 in the regular season this past season, although they lost to Oklahoma in the Big 12 Championship and Georgia in the Sugar Bowl. According to ESPN, Rhule’s deal would be for seven years and could earn the coach up to $70m. Rhule was a combined 19-20 in his three seasons at Baylor. This marks the first time the Panthers have gone with a college coach as their head coach. Previous coaches were Dom Capers, George Seifert, John Fox and Rivera. Perry Fewell was the interim coach the final four games this season, going 0-4.