On the shores of Saimaa, Finland’s largest lake, surrounded by pine, fir and birch trees, sits an angular, architect-designed house, black on the outside, shiny white on the inside (and, when the snow arrives and the lake freezes, white all around, too). A three-hour drive north-east of the capital, it’s the almost full-time home of retired journalists Leena Karo and Seppo Toivonen. And the architect in question is their son, Tuomas Toivonen, who built his parents’ house in 2008. The idea was to create a family home large enough for Leena and Seppo to live in year round (they also have an apartment in Helsinki) and for Tuomas, his sister Roosa, a film director, and their families to spend time there, too. “In winter, we might live the beginning of the week in Helsinki, doing cultural things and helping with our two grandchildren,” Leena says. “But by Thursday, we drive up here, stopping at a small village on the way for groceries. In summer, we move here entirely.” It’s remote enough to feel like a proper escape from the city, but not so far as to feel isolated: the nearest town, the provincial capital Mikkeli, is 40km away, and is surrounded by more than 40,000 summer houses. Leena and Seppo have neighbours, but are unable to see their houses or lights. In winter, however, they are often the only people living in the area. Leena’s brief to her son was for a large central living area, where everyone could be together; large lake-facing windows; and for a house that was easy to keep clean and organised, and would be warm when they arrived. Tuomas installed geothermal heating and a large wood-burning stove to ensure the house was livable in year-round, unlike most summer houses. At the centre of the house is an open-plan living/dining space, with a small galley kitchen and a spectacular picture window with views of the trees and lake. Alongside the other wall are flexible “tatami rooms”, inspired by Japanese living (their daughter-in law Nene is from Japan). During the day these provide spaces to retreat to with a book, but thanks to movable doors and walls, can be turned into guest bedrooms. Mattresses and bedlinen are stored in built-in cupboards. There is also a guesthouse next door. “Our children’s friends often use it, as well as our son’s parents-in-law, who visit us regularly from Japan,” Leena says. “In summer, I set a breakfast table on the terrace between the houses.” Though the floors, walls and ceilings are bright white, colour comes from a pair of Artek sofas that Leena and Seppo bought in the early 1970s, a burnt-orange rug from Morocco, and a wall of books. Key to keeping the space free of clutter, Leena says, is “huge amounts of storage”. Towards the lake shore is a sauna – a Finnish staple. They swim regularly during summer, and in winter, the family, including their four- and 11-year-old granddaughters, have a sauna and then dip in the icy lake, through a small hole cut into the ice. The water gets down to 1C. Seppo has a dip without a sauna every morning. “You feel so great afterwards,” he says. The house provides a welcome change of pace for the couple, who are active retirees. “We’re so busy in Helsinki, that we love coming to the countryside to read more, watch TV, listen to the radio, cook, and socialise with friends more intensively,” Leena says. It’s not all relaxation, however. For the past five years, they have been writing and editing newsletters and magazines for the summer residents in the province, to help make them feel part of local life. But when winter comes, they kick back. “I lie on the sofa, read my book, light the fire, and watch the snow fall,” Leena says.