I take issue with Boris Johnson’s call that we should overcome our divisions on Brexit (Johnson promises opponents he will be ‘a PM for everyone’, 1 January). I have always been concerned with social cohesion, which is why I voted to remain in the first place. I, and many others, have also taken time over the last three and a half years to talk to those who voted leave to try to find some common ground, which often was possible. Johnson, on the other hand, has made no attempt to reconcile leavers and remainers. In fact, he seems to have been hellbent on constantly ignoring one big part of the population and only trying to please the other with his hard Brexit. When Norway had an EU referendum with a similarly slim majority to not be a member, they tried to please both sides via the European Economic Area. If this had been attempted here most remainers tell me they would have reluctantly accepted it. This is because life, as they know it, wouldn’t change too much and their rights would be retained, even though it seems ludicrous to lose a seat at the table. If you want us to come together, this is where I suggest you start.Louise BrownGateshead, Tyne and Wear • Those who exhort us to put our differences behind us and reach out to people on the other side of the Brexit divide seem to forget that at the end of December 2020 all EU citizens are set to lose many of the rights to which they have grown accustomed. This particularly applies to the millions of EU citizens in the UK, and UK citizens living in the EU. The latter have been largely ignored by the UK media over the last three years. As a couple living in Italy for 12 years, and retiring on UK-earned pensions prior to the referendum, we have lost nearly 20% of our annual income due to the devaluation of sterling since UK citizens voted for Brexit in June 2016. During these turbulent three-and-a-half years there has been no hostility shown to us by Italians and other EU neighbours, only friendship and incredulity at the referendum result. As well as the loss of income, we worry about healthcare in our adopted country, and the unresolved question of whether we will receive annual increases to our state pensions in line with inflation. This should not be a worry for two professional people (a doctor and a teacher) who have paid taxes and national insurance in the UK throughout our 40-year working lives. Neither Theresa May nor Boris Johnson have “reached out” with assurances on these issues. Being civilised, law-abiding citizens who respect other people’s rights to differ on the Brexit issue, we don’t need Johnson’s encouragement to treat leave voters as friends and equals.Donald and Pat LawPisa, Italy • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition