If there are just a handful of fights we have to see in 2020 — by virtue of the excellence of the fighters being matched, the impact the bout would have in a weight division, or the gulf these fights would leave in our souls if they did not come to pass — what are they? The first meeting between these two heavyweights was, if not a classic brawl, an intense tactical match-up punctuated by one of the most amazing single moments in boxing for some time. Watching Deontay Wilder (one of the single most powerful punchers in the history of the sport) hunt Fury (a ridiculously good defensive technician for such a large man) for 12 rounds, knowing that Wilder could end it at any moment, had us on the edge of our seats. That Fury went down in the ninth round only accelerated the drama. That he went down again in the final round in what looked like a surefire knockout, only to summon some kind of necromancy to rise and fight to a draw, made it all the better. The unsatisfactory draw made a rematch a must. What are the chances of it happening? Unless a big injury, a failed drug test or some other unforeseeable catastrophe gets in the way, 100%. It’s booked for 22 February. Whatever happens in Las Vegas next month, one thing will remain unresolved: the years and years of edging towards finally knowing who is the best between Fury, Wilder and Anthony Joshua. Given Joshua’s financial clout in the UK, a battle between him and either Fury or Wilder would likely be the richest fight in the sport – outside of a (less appealing) rematch between the retired Floyd Mayweather and the ageing Manny Pacquiao. Fury and Wilder have established themselves as the two best heavyweights by ring accomplishment. Joshua, whose two fights last year took in his first defeat – a knockout to Andy Ruiz – and a victory in their rematch that was simultaneously impressive and a little shaky, is the clear third. Joshua v Fury would be a British extravaganza between a conventional fighter and the opposite; and Joshua v Wilder would be a fun battle between a traditional power puncher and a wild, unhinged force of nature. What are the chances? Joshua and the other two have long talked about getting in the ring yet, sadly, it still feels distant. It will probably happen at some point if Joshua and the victor of Fury-Wilder continue winning, but probably not in 2020. Let’s state the obvious at the start: this one comes with a big asterisk. Errol Spence was in a horrific-looking car accident in October – after which he was charged with driving under the influence – so it is difficult to predict when he will return to the ring. Although he has hinted that he will resume his boxing career without major physical impediment and may even fight in 2020. Setting that mystery aside, Spence and Terence Crawford are two of boxing’s elite young talents. Both are highly skilled and aggressive punchers and both are currently campaigning in the welterweight division. The bouts mentioned above would crown a new heavyweight champion, but Crawford v Spence could crown a new pound-for-pound king. What are the chances? Low to nil for 2020, sadly. Spence is talking about making a return this year but even the most diehard advocates for this fight would have to concede that he would be foolish to go straight to Crawford after such a massive trauma. A warm-up bout to test whether he has fully recovered how after a long layoff makes far more sense. The dynamic at junior welterweight is fairly similar to that at heavyweight, albeit with a story that has advanced a touch further. Josh Taylor, Regis Prograis and José Ramírez are the three top men at 140 pounds, in that order. We saw Taylor defeat Prograis by majority decision in October with little controversy yet with plenty of competitiveness. Taylor v Prograis was a fight of the year contender but Ramírez did not take part in the World Series of Boxing last year so we do not know how he would fare against the other two men. Chances? Pretty good! Both Taylor and Ramírez say they want to fight each other and they have both fought on DAZN, eliminating the promoter/network problem that gets in the way of some of the biggest, best fights. Ramírez was meant to fight Viktor Postol in China next month but that has been cancelled due to the coronavirus outbreak. Look out for Taylor v Ramírez later in the year. This one pits the current pound-for-pound king against his most dangerous threat. Vasiliy Lomachenko has incandescent skill. Teófimo López has incandescent power. López can box, but he is not in Loma’s league there. Loma can punch, but he is not in López’s league there. As Loma has aged some and moved up to lightweight, he has appeared a bit more vulnerable. You can see it having a similar dynamic to the first fight between Fury and Wilder, albeit with more contact, less stalk v defend, and less chance of an automatic KO should the more powerful man connect. What are the chances? This one is close to done for before the end of May. Top Rank says it’s a go for sure, with only the location and date to be settled. Think about it. Juan Francisco Estrada is the clear champion at junior bantamweight, while Naoya Inoue is the No 1 man at bantamweight, and yet they are just about the same size. Both have climbed up from lower classes and carried their strength with them. Inoue may very well be on the verge of becoming the clear champion of his division, too, with a fight booked against Johnriel Casimero for April. No disrespect to Casimero – that is not an easy fight – but Inoue ought to win it. What would be better than the best fighter in one division facing the best fighter in the next division? We’re talking two pound-for-pound top 10 fighters, one of whom is an underdog (Estrada) who has a habit of raising his game against top-notch opponents. What are the chances? Estrada has said he wants it but it does not ping on many people’s radar. With Estrada signed with Eddie Hearn and Inoue signed with Bob Arum, it might never happen at all, let alone 2020. Estrada’s injury history adds another difficulty to a fight that did not need any more impediment. When was the last time it felt as if all of the issues in the light heavyweight division had been truly resolved? Longtime champion Adonis Stevenson played keep-away from his top contenders. Oleksandr Gvozdyk finally wrested the crown from him, then lost it to Artur Beterbiev two fights later. Beterbiev would prove he truly belongs by taking on No 1 contender Dmitry Bivol and beating him. Beterbiev has superior power to Bivol’s sharp technique. Both, however, engage plenty. The winner can worry about Canelo Álvarez whenever he decides to make his permanent home above the middleweight division he currently rules. For now, Beterbiev v Bivol would give us some sense of closure. It also would give Russia one hell of a battle. What are the chances? Let’s put the odds at 50-50. Bivol has said he would like to face Beterbiev, Beterbiev has sounded open to the idea and the usual promoter differences feel surmountable. Bivol has a bout scheduled in the short term, making this another “maybe later in the year.” • This article appeared first on The Queensberry Rules• Follow Tim Starks and The Queensberry Rules on Twitter