I was eight years old when I learned what nostalgia feels like. Standing at the top of a hill near my family’s rented farmhouse in Ohio, I surveyed spiderwebs glittering in the morning dew while pining for firefly-lit evenings outside my old church in Tennessee. When I was 10, we moved to Slovakia. While my parents boxed up the house on Spruce Street, I ran out back to rake my fingers into the sandy earth, filling an old film canister with Pennsylvania dirt I’d label in blue ink: “U.S.A.” Later, when we moved back to the US just before my 16th birthday, I added a handful of now-defunct coins to my collection of photos, letters and United States topsoil. Growing up, I sometimes felt homesick in my own bed. The problem was that I’d had too many homes, too many addresses, so that they all swirled in my brain as an amorphous paragon. By the time I turned 11, I’d lived in 12 homes across five states and two countries. Home as a singular entity was something I’d never had, so how could I come back to it? I think that’s why I fell head over heels for Google Earth. In college, my boyfriend introduced it to me on his laptop one afternoon, inadvertently opening a portal to a new pastime. For the next hour, I raced around the world, scouring streets and neighbourhoods for landmarks from my childhood memories. I beamed. I also cried. For those yet unacquainted with this modern marvel, Google Street View is a web of interactive panoramic images that map most of the world’s streets. I’ve read online that the panoramas are updated every two to three years, but I know this to be false. On Street View, my first car – pixelated and stretched – still idles in my parents’ old driveway. I’m 32 now, with more than a decade of Street View excursions in the rear-view mirror. It’s still magic I’m 32 now, with more than a decade of Street View excursions in the rear-view mirror. It’s still magic. When I’m homesick, I take a walk down the streets on my screen. Sometimes I return to my neighbourhood park in Slovakia, where I can see that the ice cream shop has been painted but the park bench is the same. Sometimes I retrace commutes filled with blurry faces and cars warped in a weird collision of space and time. Once, I travelled overland – paved streets, not Google’s – to an old residence. I’d already been back several times via Street View, so the curve of the road was familiar. The speed bump was not. I parked across the street and looked up to what once was my bedroom. The flower boxes were gone. The blinds were closed. I yearned to feel something – a flickering return to self, a warmth that said “Home”. Instead, I saw an apartment building’s smooth facade, window-socket eyes with no expression. I didn’t beam. I didn’t cry. For me, homecoming is only possible because of our dizzying world of virtual reality, 3D maps and internet faster than planes can fly. Also because Street View performs a subtle miracle: it stops time. Pinning myself to solid ground on a latitude and longitude where I once belonged is not the same as coming home. Everything has changed, myself included. But on Street View? When I park myself in front of my parents’ old house in Indiana, I check the timestamp and see that it is July 2012. The house is closed up against Indiana’s humidity. I zoom in, wishing the front door could open because I know my family’s golden retriever is on the other side, probably daintily crossing her paws and lifting her head to listen for my brother’s return from work. She died five months later. Often I stop by the big, beautiful Ivanka pri Dunaji house where we planted red geraniums in the windows. Google hasn’t updated that street for a long time – I know because I stopped by again this morning. The geraniums are still blooming. Though I don’t frequent its anachronistic worlds often enough to call it ritual, Street View is there when I need it. My screen becomes a place big enough to hold every single one of my past lives in one moment. It records the details I can no longer remember, and creepy sci-fi trope or not, I love it for this. Google’s voyeuristic technology gives me the power my wallet and physics won’t – the power to go back home. Once, quite recently, I opened my laptop intent on finding my way back to Mohyla, a monument I’d biked to often with friends as a young teen. I began at my old address, then, click by click, followed the road through the neighbourhood and away. But in the middle of an intersection, Street View stopped me short. The rest of the road was unmapped. Despite offering me the world, Street View could not give me this place that brims with afternoon picnics, languid conversations with my best friend, and my first (and failed) attempts at sports. Google’s withholding left me closing my eyes with a smile, replaying a scene constructed from only the scraps of memories in my mind. • Leandra Beabout is a freelance travel and lifestyle journalist based in the US Midwest