A belated English language reboot of Japanese classic Ju-On: The Grudge (2002), this stars Andrea Riseborough and Demián Bichir as detectives investigating a series of violent and inexplicable deaths at the same house. Jacki Weaver plays someone called Lorna Moody, which bodes well. Kristen Stewart gives us her best Ripley in this deep-sea chiller about a motley crew battling supernatural beasties seven miles beneath the ocean’s surface. We’re placing heavy bets on TJ Miller’s character being a goner fairly quickly, and crossing our fingers that Vincent Cassel’s lasts a little longer. Following a fairly ecstatic reception for Jamie Lee Curtis’s series comeback in 2018, Laurie Strode and Michael Myers return for another battle, again directed by David Gordon Green. No spoilers, but Halloween Ends has just been announced for 2021, so we suspect both characters may emerge from this film vaguely in tact. John Krasinski’s character may be dead, but he’s back as director for this follow-up to his smash hit film about a family – headed by his real-life wife, Emily Blunt – who must live in silence lest they alert only-auditory monsters to their presence. That film ended with a possible solution; this one introduces substantially more characters and Cillian Murphy and Djimon Hounsou have joined the cast. Here’s hoping the ambition and focus that made the first film so compelling aren’t lost as its story scope widens. A stylish-looking spin on The Turn of the Screw, this stars Tully standout Mackenzie Davis as a governess hired to care for two young siblings (Finn Wolfhard and Brooklynn Prince) following the death of their parents. It’s written by twins who were responsible for the first two Conjuring movies and is directed by Floria Sigismondi, the Italian music video supremo whose only previous film is 2010’s The Runaways. Jordan Peele refreshes the man in the mirror for a new generation in this “spiritual sequel” to the 1992 horror, which returns to the same, now gentrified Chicago neighbourhood – and to Tony Todd as the vengeful ghost of the son of a slave who was murdered in the late 19th century. Todd gave his blessing to Peele’s involvement at the inception, saying “I’d rather have him do it, someone with intelligence, who’s going to be thoughtful and dig into the whole racial makeup of who Candyman is and why he existed in the first place”. If Beale Street Could Talk’s Teyonah Parris stars opposite Yahya Abdul-Mateen II. Paranormal investigators Ed and Lorraine Warren are back to face off against bad dollies and duff nuns in the latest round of jump cuts. This one isn’t set in Enfield, sadly, but should nonetheless be worth a round of popcorn. Edgar Wright’s first horror proper is billed as a psychological nailbiter in the vein of Repulsion and Don’t Look Now. Co-scripted by 1917’s Krysty Wilson-Cairns, it stars bright young things Thomasin McKenzie and Anya Taylor-Joy, while support from venerable thesps Diana Rigg, Terence Stamp and Rita Tushingham has already got us quaking. Universal’s resurrection of key monsters continues after the dead weight of Tom Cruise’s Mummy with this Australia-set latest from Insidious’s Leigh Whannell. Elisabeth Moss stars; a female-centric spinoff, Invisible Woman, has already been commissioned, scripted by Secretary’s Erin Cressida Wilson and with Elizabeth Banks doing almost everything else, including starring. From the producers of Get Out – including Jordan Peele – comes another stonking looking film dredging up the horrors and contemporary parallels of slavery. Janelle Monáe stars as a successful author trapped in a terrible alternative reality. Gabourey Sidibe, Jack Huston and Jena Malone co-star. Guillermo del Toro has produced this very Guillermo del Toro sounding film about a small-town teacher (Keri Russell) who takes an interest in a pupil harbouring a horrible, horny secret. Jesse Plemons plays her sheriff brother as Scott Cooper takes his first steps into horror after a career so far spent dipping his toe. Best till last: a new film from Charlie Kaufman. This also stars Plemons, as a man taking his girlfriend (Jessie Buckley) to meet his parents but who takes a terrifying detour. Based on the brilliant 2016 novel by Iain Reid, Anomalisa’s David Thewlis co-stars alongside Toni Collette. It’s being bankrolled and distributed by Netflix. We can’t wait.