Tim Henman has attempted to downplay concerns about the bushfire smoke and haze that will surely intrude on Great Britain’s opening match against Bulgaria in the inaugural ATP Cup on Friday. “In the context of what this country is going through with the bushfires and for us having to deal with perhaps slightly poor air quality, I think right there is the perspective,” the team captain said at the same venue where he lasted less than an hour in the 2000 Sydney Olympics. “I don’t envisage it being a problem at all. “Certainly our thoughts and hearts go out to the people that have been so badly affected, because it’s horrific. We will be prepared well and go out there and give it our best shot. At the end of the day, we are very lucky to be involved in a sport we love and for these guys and for me to being able to do it for a living.” Bulgaria’s player-captain, Grigor Dimitrov, whose opening match is in the early evening against Dan Evans, described the air quality as, “terrible”, but the former world No 3 hopes the nearby bushfires will soon be brought under control. As the oppressive pall continued to drift through the state capital from fires in the Blue Mountains and the south coast of NSW, Dimitrov said: “We are aware of it, but I think everything is under control. We saw a little bit on the news. We get the right information and suggestions from medical [advisors] and everybody. Everything seems to check out pretty good for us. We’re kind of happy that everything is [under] control right now, and nothing worse is going to happen. Obviously we’re concerned about that, but we’re all ready to play. Hopefully everything gets better as the days go by.” Dimitrov’s optimism might be misplaced as government agencies remain on high alert with temperatures expected to soar above 40C again this weekend after a brief respite the past couple of days. Unpredictable winds also threaten to whip dangerously through the thick, tinder-dry vegetation and forests. Henman says the heat could be an issue. “We were out practising the other day when it was 44 degrees and it was brutally hot,” he said. However, he added that a canopy over the Ken Rosewall Arena (ironically, added to guard against rain, which has not fallen here in any quantity for several months), would help. With the new roof on the stadium court, it’s really fantastic. That has certainly kept things a lot cooler.” Henman, returning after 20 years to a country where he won his first tournament, provides laid-back leadership that seems to suit the Great Britain squad of Evans, Cameron Norrie, James Ward, Jamie Murray and his doubles partner, Joe Salisbury. Asked to introduce his team, Henman struggled for words and raised laughter in the five-player squad when he said falteringly, “OK … My team. Dan Evans, uh …” Evans, falling about, said: “Introduce yourself, as well.” Evans, who has had the best season of his career and, at 42 in the world, is Britain’s frontline player here in the absence of Andy Murray. He will have the toughest challenge on Friday when he plays Dimitrov, who had a mixed season in 2019. The world No 20 beat Roger Federer on the way to reaching the US Open semi-finals, and is the only player in the tournament to captain his country, although France’s Gilles Simon is available if there are injuries to his squad. Dimitrov said: “I’m surrounded by a great set of guys that I finally get the chance to spend some time with. Clearly it’s [with] their approval, and I’m just very pleased I’m able to contribute something to the team.” He added: “It’s challenging, no doubt about it. It’s always been a dream of mine to be on the other end. I think to be a coach is never easy. I don’t know if I’m going to be a good coach. I can only share my experience, my thoughts with the guys.” Norrie, the world No 53, opens the tie for Britain against 423rd-ranked Dimitar Kuzmanov, with Murray and Salisbury completing the day’s play in the doubles against a Bulgarian pairing yet to be nominated. Less than a day after Nick Kyrgios urged Tennis Australia to raise money for victims of the bushfires ravaging large parts of the parched country, the game’s national governing body responded positively. “For weeks we’ve been watching the devastation caused by bushfires across Australia and the people affected are constantly in our thoughts,” said Tennis Australia’s chief executive, Craig Tiley. “We want to help these communities in a meaningful way and will announce a number of fund-raising and support initiatives that will be rolled out across the ATP Cup, Australian Open and our other events over the coming weeks. Stay tuned for further announcements.” Kyrgios, who has joined Australian teammates in Brisbane for their first-round tie against Germany, earlier tweeted: “C’mon @TennisAustralia surely we can do a pre @AustralianOpen exho to raise funds for those affected by the fires?” Kyrgios was encouraged by the response and said: “All the heartbreak this summer, it’s pretty tragic what’s going on, especially with my hometown, Canberra, being under a bit of smoke, the most hazardous smoke in the world. But I’m sure that all these guys [his teammates] will be happy to help.” The world No 1, Novak Djokovic, has been similarly moved by the plight of those affected by the fires that have claimed several lives and left thousands homeless, mainly in Victoria and NSW. As he arrived in Brisbane for Serbia’s match against South Africa in Group A of the 24-nation competition, Djokovic said on Twitter, “It was mixed emotions with #TeamSerbia to help raise awareness about koala’s endangered habitats. It’s very sad to know how many people & animals have lost their homes to the #bushfires. My heart and support goes out to all those affected.”