‘Unlike regular knives,” runs the press release for Viners’ new cutlery, “the pointed end has been removed, helping to tackle knife-related injuries.” And there’s a picture. They look quite silly without a pointy end, but they also call into question why this has never been done before – indeed, why kitchen knives evolved to be the shape they are. Because you never use the point, or maybe you do once every couple of years for a particularly slidey tomato. All regular chopping is done with the blade edge. I shall not be buying a pointless knife but I thought I would take the opportunity to run through the top kitchen injuries of myself and everyone I know, so that younger readers can avoid them. Note: almost all of these start with being drunk. If you’re never drunk, you could probably keep a leopard in your kitchen and get away with it. My dad licked a knife to get chocolate mousse off it – blade edge first Making something as innocuous as coffee, I once spilled a kettle of boiling water on to my hand, and woke up the next day with a giant blister that ran from my wrist to the tip of each finger. I had to get it re-dressed every day by the nurse at work. It was someone different each day, and they all said: “Have you always had a mole on that finger? Because, if not, a brown or black mark beneath a blister indicates gangrene.” And I’d say, “Hang on, let me check my mole inventory … no, wait I DON’T HAVE ONE OF THOSE, BECAUSE NOBODY DOES.” And they would always look at me, like “I don’t know why you’re shouting at me, love, you’re the one who spilled boiling water on herself.” And then they would say: “You’re lucky it wasn’t oil, or you’d have definitely lost this hand.” And the moral of this story is there is nothing more dangerous in the kitchen than boiling water, except boiling oil. After that, I didn’t deep-fry for about a decade. All other burning incidents pale into insignificance besides this one; indeed, your classic chef’s burn – a straight line across the forearm from the oven shelf – is a badge of honour and I feel quite chuffed when I get one of those. In the sharp sphere, the thing that’s a thousand times more dangerous than knives is glass. I once gashed myself with a broken tumbler (I’m trying to avoid saying where, because it makes me sound chaotic; OK, it was my hip), and left it overnight before I went to hospital, by which time it had begun to heal, but very inelegantly, like …well, not “like” – this was exactly what it was – a gaping wound. So they had to – doctor’s own words – “rough it up” before they could stitch it, which was exactly as it sounds, very painful and also a bit surreal. A friend severed a tendon on a broken jar of pickled onions, and couldn’t work for six months. It is so incredibly perilous that my honest advice is: whatever state of clumsiness you were in when you broke the glass, you are too clumsy to clear it up, and you should go immediately to bed and do it eight hours later. There is a lot of hidden danger to be had from a mandoline, especially when you’ve just bought it. I shaved the tops off four fingers in one go, straight into a dish of potatoes, which I then had to throw away. The waste bugged me as much as the copious loss of blood, although that could have been a displacement emotion. A friend got hospitalised filleting a sea bass, whose spines are incredibly sharp. Oh, and my dad licked a knife to get chocolate mousse off it, blade edge first, and then was so surprised by the entirely predictable event of cutting his mouth open that he kind of knocked into a kitchen cabinet and broke a rib. But he was incredibly clumsy: he made me look like I’d been to finishing school. Never forget the danger of food itself, which can get all kinds of hot, and also be poisonous. I find it karmically satisfying that chickens, which alive pose the threat level of a dirty look, can nearly kill you once they’re dead, by something as simple as a cooked one being placed on a chopping board recently inhabited by a raw one. Just by being no respecter of sell-by dates or basic hygiene, I’ve got ill via sausages, bacon, oysters, rice, mince and, one time, an unknown thing I put in my mouth because I found it in my pocket. I just asked my Mr for his worst kitchen accident, and he said: “My mother’s cooking”, but he was definitely making a hilarious joke because his Guardian-reading mother is an excellent cook.