I am a single parent who has escaped domestic violence. I am unable to work due to both physical and mental health issues and I am classed by the Department for Work and Pensions as long-term sick. I therefore have to rely on universal credit as my sole income. Recently, I received two penalty charge notices totalling several hundred pounds and a threat of legal action from the NHS for “falsely” claiming free prescriptions and free dental treatment. I am entitled to both, and the NHS has since acknowledged that. But I am being penalised for “ticking the wrong box” on the forms. There is no correct box because the prescription and treatment forms do not include an option for universal credit claimants. The NHS says that I must tick the “income-based jobseeker’s allowance” box, but I am not jobseeking because I am long-term sick. I am not prepared to make false statements, so instead I’ve written universal credit on the forms. My latest fine is £172.70, which I can’t afford. VG, London You are the latest of a number of readers to have fallen victim to indefensible bureaucratic turpitude. Six years after universal credit was introduced, there is still no corresponding box on many NHS forms. The NHS Business Services Authority (NHSBSA) website – responsible for verifying eligibility for free NHS treatment – instructs dental and pharmacy staff to ensure that universal-credit claimants tick the allowance box until the form is updated. Patients who are not informed or, like you, are unwilling to sign a false claim, face fines of up to £100 plus the treatment or prescription charge. Another £50 is added if they don’t pay within 28 days, hence your latest bill. Brendan Brown, director of citizen services at the NHSBSA, told the Observer that both penalty notices had since been cancelled after you confirmed your eligibility and that it was working with the Department of Health and Social Care to get a box added to forms early next year. The NHSBSA says that its records show VG ticked on the forms that she receives income support or employment and support allowance. It adds: “Our checks didn’t confirm that she receives either of these, so in both instances a PCN [penalty charge notice] was issued. When VG explained her situation, both cases were immediately resolved.” If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions