On Thursday’s Late Night, Seth Meyers recapped what has been a packed week in Washington, starting with Chief Justice John Roberts, presiding over Donald Trump’s Senate impeachment trial, warning both sides “to observe the decorum accorded to such an august body as the United States Senate”, according to Meyers. Roberts also reminded Senators to respect “the greatest deliberative body on earth”. “The Senate isn’t a deliberative body because it doesn’t deliberate; it does nothing,” Meyers retorted. “It’s where legislation passed by the House goes to die.” In this week’s trial, he continued, “we are very much seeing at least some of the senators live down to the very low expectations they’ve set for themselves”. On reports that numerous senators left the trial early, took extended bathroom breaks or were busying themselves with crosswords during testimony, former senator Claire McCaskill of Missouri explained: “For senators, this is hard, because they’re used to moving constantly, they’re used to talking constantly, they are not used to listening for long periods of time. “I love how the hardest thing to ask a senator to do is just shut the fuck up for one lousy day,” Meyers laughed. “You know who else is used to talking and moving and has difficulty listening for long periods of time? Children. We talk about senators the way pre-K teachers talk about story time.” Thursday marked the third day of Trump’s Senate impeachment trial, said Stephen Colbert on the Late Show, and so far “we’ve heard a detailed description of perhaps the greatest abuse of power ever by a US president – and turns out, America is watching”. The first day of the trial was viewed by 11 million people, which is “not Super Bowl ratings, but it’s at least Puppy Bowl ratings”, said Colbert. “Though that’s not really fair to compare puppies to US senators – the puppies still have their balls.” During Thursday’s arguments, House Democrats stuck to the basics, such as: what is crime? The congressman Jerry Nadler, for example, introduced the “ABCs of high crimes and misdemeanors”: “Abuse of power; betrayal of the nation, particularly through foreign entanglements; and corruption, particularly corruption of elections.” It’s catchy, Colbert observed, and offered his own spin: “The impeachment one, two threes: Trump never won the popular vote, he’s too corrupt to have the job and three years is really enough. “The president has 53 senators doing his bidding at his impeachment trial, but they’re not alone,” Colbert said, as Trump appointed several Republican House members to his impeachment defense team this week. “But one of Trump’s JV grovelers somehow got left off the team: Florida congressman and man unhinging his jaw to swallow all of Trump’s lies Matt Gaetz.” Gaetz is a well-known Trump fan boy – his campaign homepage features affirmations such as “Trumpiest Congressman in Trump’s Washington”, “Trump’s Ultimate Defender” and “Trump’s Best Buddy”. So why did Gaetz get excluded? “Because he dared disagree with Trump a single time,” said Colbert. After Trump’s drone strike on Iranian Gen Qassem Suleimani, Gaetz voted with several other Republican congressmen to limit Trump’s war powers – “big mistake if your lips leave Trump’s ass even for a second”, Colbert said, “just to put on some Chapstick, you’re dead to him”. “I challenge anyone who actually watched this today to argue they shouldn’t hear from witnesses,” said Jimmy Kimmel following Thursday’s impeachment trial. “It’s nuts. They have everything – this is open and shut.” Kimmel summarized a predictable news cycle emerging from Thursday’s arguments: “Democrats spent most of the day today debunking the various conspiracy theories manufactured by the president and his friends and then on Saturday, the president’s lawyers will get to work on rebunking those that have been debunked, and in the meantime, the president himself is taking matters into his own little thumbs.” Trump broke his all-time record for tweets on Wednesday with 142, adding to his presidency’s tweet count (as of November 2019) of 266,000. “It’s more than a Harry Potter book – and more fictional than a Harry Potter book,” Kimmel said. Still, Kimmel couldn’t help but wonder: “If some kind of miracle happens and these senators actually do the right thing for a change and remove the president from office – which they won’t, but if they did, I wonder what that would look like. Would they actually have to remove him physically from his office? What if he won’t leave? Will they drag him out and put all his stuff to the left, to the left? And when that happens, where would Mike Pence be? Would he be hiding in like the back of a van outside? Would there be hair pulling? “I mean, don’t you want to remove him just to see that?” Impeachment Trial Day 3: The senators want out and Trump thinks America needs less clean water. pic.twitter.com/dzEbFcuaoH “No matter how compelling the evidence might be,” said the Daily Show’s Trevor Noah on the Senate impeachment trial, “I have major doubts on whether it’s going to change anyone’s mind. Because, you see, a lot of these senators haven’t exactly been glued to their seats.” Noah pointed to reports that senators brought forbidden electronic distractions to the chamber, took hour-long bathroom breaks or just left the trial early. “This is not a good look, people,” he said. “You can’t just walk away – this isn’t a conversation with Ted Cruz. Because, you understand: these senators are jurors in a trial against the president. You can’t just go home early because you’re bored – that’s your job! “Imagine if normal people tried to pull that shit in the middle of jury duty,” he continued, “if someone’s just like: ‘Ugh, now I’ve got to hear from the victim’s wife? Ugh, I’m out of here, text me if something cool happens.’ “If you didn’t want to be bored at work,” he concluded, “you shouldn’t have become a senator.”