Only the most die-hard Taika Waititi fan would think that Jojo Rabbit is anything but a plucky outsider when it comes to the best picture race. Comedy notoriously doesn’t do well at the Oscars but a whimsical satire about a fanatical Nazi-loving 10-year-old whose imaginary best friend is a stroppy Adolf Hitler? Well, it’s hard to imagine that going down comfortably with Academy voters who tend to be risk averse and much prefer to stick with worthy prestige dramas. But people love an underdog and Jojo Rabbit is far from an obvious choice for this category. Raising laughs from such a gruesome period of history is a tricky – and not to mention downright risky – tightrope to walk, but the New Zealand film-maker takes to it with acrobatic skill and poise; applying his distinctive wit to a big-hearted and ultimately uplifting tale about family, acceptance and how ludicrous racism is. This isn’t the consensus across the board. Jojo Rabbit has become one of the most Marmite nominees this year (bar Joker), with critics cleanly divided between love and hate. Peter Bradshaw didn’t hold back, calling it “a pointless Hitler-spoofy YA adventure with a 12A certificate, obtusely accentuating little-kid cuteness and optimism amid the quaintly imagined non-horror” in a one-star review. Clearly, it’s not to everyone’s taste but, as Waititi said in an interview with the Guardian, appealing to “every single person” would just be plain “boring”. Still, you can put me firmly in the camp that was effortlessly charmed because it is a genuine delight. The surreal coming-of-age, an adaptation of Christine Leunens’s novel Caging Skies, is very much in the vein of Waititi’s body of work (Boy, Hunt for the Wilderpeople, What We Do in the Shadows) blending irreverent humour and goofy slapstick with an engaging story. Sure, it doesn’t have the technical brilliance of something like 1917, but Jojo Rabbit is the director’s most mature film to date and the way he navigates the different shifts in tone, ricocheting between absurdity and tragedy so nimbly that it never seems jarring, certainly deserves plaudits. Newcomer Roman Griffin Davis as the brainwashed Jojo makes a hilarious double act with Waititi, a buffoonish Hitler, who becomes increasingly moody and unhinged as he gets shut out by the boy’s growing awareness that his antisemitic beliefs might be wrong. Scarlett Johansson is so affecting as Jojo’s mother, the always dancing and effervescent Rosie, that she earned an Oscar nomination (her second this year) for best supporting actress. Sam Rockwell and Rebel Wilson provide great comedic support as inept Hitler Youth leaders. Yes, it is at times a bit too silly (the scene where the Gestapo show up and it turns into a mass of Heil Hitler-ing, for instance) but it always knows when to rein it in with some genuinely tender moments. At its heart, it’s a moving and empathetic story about unconditional maternal love; about believing your son is a good person even though he wants to be a Nazi. It’s the opposite of ignorance. It’s about love trumping hate. Always. Chances are the Academy won’t reward something this audacious, even with it’s timely message, but that’s just a stunning lack of imagination on their part. There’s an unabashed sweetness and boldness here that is painfully absent in the other contenders, most of which are telling stories that we’ve seen plenty of times before. You can’t say that about Jojo Rabbit. 