“I was born with a mind that is compromised by preternatural unhappiness,” wrote Elizabeth Wurtzel in 2013, “and I might have died very young or done very little. Instead, I made a career out of my emotions.” It was a career that saw the author, who has died of breast cancer at the age of 52, catapulted to prominence in 1994 with her memoir Prozac Nation: Young and Depressed in America. Wurtzel’s first book took readers to the heart of its author’s seismic depression and its fallout of binges and broken relationships; it also documented the early days of an antidepressant revolution, in which sufferers glimpsed the possible benefits of pharmaceutical intervention. But Wurtzel’s writing was never designed or able to be drily analytical – her default mode was one of what has come to be called, not entirely negatively, oversharing. As a memoirist never frightened to portray herself in an unattractive light, she was at the forefront of a new generation of life-writers whose willingness to reveal themselves delighted publishers who saw their work racing to the top of the bestseller lists. Her subsequent books Bitch: In Praise of Difficult Women (1998) and More, Now, Again (2001) in part dealt with the complex interaction between that early success and the way in which society treats women deemed to be problematic and hard to categorise. Her freewheeling and often hyperbolic prose style was cited as evidence of narcissism at the same time as critics and readers pored over her excesses, failures and frailties. “By turns wrenching and comical, self-indulgent and self-aware, Prozac Nation possesses the raw candour of Joan Didion’s essays, the irritating emotional exhibitionism of Sylvia Plath’s Bell Jar and the wry, dark humour of a Bob Dylan song,” pronounced Michiko Kakutani of the New York Times, and Plath – whom Wurtzel included in her lineup of difficult women in Bitch – was a recurrent comparison. In an interview she gave for that book, the author took a more pragmatic line on the emotional efficacy of her debut, saying: “I was very upset that Prozac Nation didn’t change my life.” Wurtzel’s life began in New York City. Her parents, Lynne Winters, a media consultant, and Donald Wurtzel, an IBM middle manager, divorced when she was two, and her relationship with her father was intermittent, culminating in his disappearance – a “disconnected telephone”, she wrote – when she was 14. At the time of his death in 2014, father and daughter had not seen one another since 2001. In 2016 she discovered that a close family friend, the photographer Bob Adelman, was her biological father, having had an affair with her mother when they both worked at Random House publishers; he had just died. “Life,” Wurtzel wrote, “is just a shock to the system.” Her heritage had become of even more significance to her after she had been diagnosed with breast cancer and found to carry the BRCA gene. Wurtzel’s mental health issues began when she was a child, and by early adolescence she was experiencing episodes of depression, self-harm and drug use. She had also written creatively since she was very young, excelled in her school work and was a champion speller. She became an undergraduate at Harvard, where a piece that she wrote about Lou Reed for the student newspaper the Harvard Crimson won the Rolling Stone college journalism award. She went on to an internship at the Dallas Morning News, although her spell there ended when she was accused of plagiarism; she subsequently worked as a music critic for the New Yorker and New York magazine, with mixed success. But Wurtzel’s most fruitful subject was to prove herself, beginning with Prozac Nation, which she had begun writing in 1986, while still at Harvard. Neither Bitch nor More, Now, Again – the latter capturing Wurtzel’s struggle to write the former, including her withdrawal from heroin and consequent addiction to Ritalin – enjoyed quite the success of Prozac Nation, which in 2001 was made into a film, with Christina Ricci in the lead role, but Wurtzel was undaunted. In 2004 she became a student again, this time at Yale Law School, where one of her contemporaries was Ronan Farrow. “I met Lizzie in law school,” Farrow wrote on Twitter when she died. “She started mid-career as I was starting young. We were both misfits and she was kind and generous and filled spaces that might have otherwise been lonely with her warmth and humour and idiosyncratic voice.” Wurtzel passed the New York bar exam in 2010 and went on to work for the firm Boies, Schiller and Flexner. She described this second career iteration as the result of a lifelong ambition to go to law school, rather than to practise as a lawyer, and she left the firm in 2012 to focus on her writing. “I may be the only person who ever went to law school on a lark,” she wrote. Having written extensively about failed relationships, Wurtzel expressed surprise to have married, in 2015, the photographer and writer James Freed. The couple separated in 2019, the same year that she announced she had cancer. “I have spent my whole life driving people crazy,” she wrote in 2018. “If you should not say it, I can’t wait to scream it out the window. I am impossible. I never understood why I was so wild. I never knew how come I had to be a firebrand. I thought there was something wrong with me. Then I realised there is something right with me. Now I know I was born this way.” She is survived by her mother. • Elizabeth Lee Wurtzel, writer, born 31 July 1967; died 7 January 2020