What were you hoping for?A fun evening and a very nice meal. First impressions?Interesting choice of shirt (short sleeves!). But cute. What did you talk about?Our jobs, music, ballet, where we studied, wine-tasting. Any awkward moments?Many, but the standout one was when I attractively dribbled water all over myself. Good table manners?I kept the wine glasses topped up, but he left me the last piece of eel. Best thing about Jacob?He is very chatty and loves food. Would you introduce him to your friends?Hmm, I think they’d have different interests. Describe Jacob in three wordsFunny, enthusiastic, grapefruit-lover. What do you think he made of you?Who is this Spanish girl and why won’t she stop talking about food and her family being chefs? Did you go on somewhere?Nope, I think we were both on the same page. And... did you kiss?A friendly hug. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?That I hadn’t gone on about food, just like I have again (sorry, not sorry). Marks out of 10?6. Would you meet again?I don’t think so. It was great to meet him, but we are quite different. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?An interesting conversation with someone personable. First impressions?Really friendly and relaxed. She’s very good-looking, too, which is definitely a bonus. What did you talk about?We were facing the open-plan kitchen, so she spent a significant chunk of the evening trying to engage the head chef in conversation. I found it charming, but it felt a bit as if she was more interested in him than me. (To be fair, he was a good-looking bloke.) Any awkward moments?Listening to Maria lecture a professional chef on how to make a Spanish omelette. Good table manners?Definitely. Best thing about Maria?She’s very assertive, which I like. Would you introduce her to your friends? Yeah, why not? Describe Maria in three wordsAssertive, relaxed, opinionated. What do you think she made of you?Not a lot, probably; things seemed to tail off in the second half. Did you go on somewhere?She spent the last 10 minutes in the restaurant looking up buses home, so I got the impression she wasn’t interested in continuing. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?To sit at a table rather than the bar. Marks out of 10?6. Would you meet again?We didn’t exchange numbers. • Maria and Jacob ate at Peckham Cellars, London, SE15 Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone likeminded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com