Leicester and Southampton had very different expectations when they met at Filbert Street on 15 October 1983. Leicester were rooted to the bottom of the table, without a win in their first eight matches. In contrast, Southampton were second in the table and knew a victory could take them top. It didn’t quite turn out like that. In fact, both teams would leave empty handed after the match was abandoned with just 22 minutes played. Heavy rainfall left the playing surface resembling a paddy field in places, as players and officials struggled to cope with the conditions. The game, which was captured on Match of the Day for posterity, started off relatively sedately. But with the rain lashing down and the wind picking up, the action soon started to take on a comedic slant. With the ball beginning to stick in the puddles forming on the pitch, playing football became a challenge. A torrential downpour during the game proved too much for the already saturated surface, as the mere task of dribbling and passing turned into a farce. Referee Robert Nixon halted proceedings to discuss the situation with one of his assistants, before deciding to carry on regardless. Cheers could be heard among the crowd of less than 9,000 at Filbert Street, as play restarted. Yet, with John Motson describing the pitch as “virtually unplayable”, chances of the match finishing looked slim. Players tried to take the pitch out of the equation by going aerial, although it didn’t work. Kevin MacDonald’s backpass to keeper Mark Wallington was thumped so hard it almost went out for a corner. MacDonald later found himself struggling to dribble the ball through the shallow end, before releasing Gary Lineker. He and Mark Wright slid towards the advertising boards like tobogganists, with every slip, mistake, failed pass and dribble and splash furiously “waheyed” by the amused spectators. The high point of the comedy was Steve Lynex performing the breaststroke after being fouled by Steve Moran. “A little swimming gesture by Steve Lynex as he fell, as if to indicate that’s the only way to get through,” said Motson. “It’s all something of a lottery,” he added, as the show continued. All good things have to come to an end, though. After Lineker twice failed to take the ball with him in quick succession, and players thrashed around at the ball hopelessly, Nixon had seen enough. “The referee has had to bring it to an end, and frankly I’m not surprised,” said Motson. Nixon, Milne, and McMenemy later appeared on the pitch to discuss the prospect of resuming the match. But, with rain continuing to fall, the outlook seemed bleak. Groundstaff prodded forks into the surface in a desperate attempt to drain some of the water. It was a fairly pointless act. Milne did not look happy as he left the pitch and he let out his frustration after the abandonment. “We could have cleared the ground given time,” he complained. His was not the only dissenting voice. Groundsman Steve Welch was adamant that Nixon had made a mistake, saying the playing surface was fit by 3.55pm. Maybe Milne and Welch were sensing the chance of a rare win for Leicester on a pitch that levelled the playing field. At least the referee had one supporter in Jimmy Hill. “It was clear there was no alternative other than to abandon the game,” said the presenter on Match of the Day. Leicester won the rematch at the end of November as they turned around their season and eventually avoided relegation. Southampton finished as runners-up to Liverpool in the league and also suffered the agony of losing an FA Cup semi-final to Everton. Southampton played 51 matches during the 1983-84 season, but it is those 22 minutes at Filbert Street that stick in my memory. Football can be a bit too serious at times, with too little room for a few “waheys” and levity in the crowd. Leicester v Southampton in October 1983 made for entertaining viewing and reduced professional footballers to the level of the paying spectators, proving that the sport can occasionally give us a refreshing break from the norm. • This blog first appeared on That 1980s Sports Blog• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter