When journalist Deborah Orr died from breast cancer last year aged 57, it provoked an outpouring of grief of the most genuine kind. Those who knew Orr didn’t smooth away her edges. Instead we were treated to a series of evocative, honest and very funny stories about her singular vision, her sandpaper-rough tongue, the wild and cussed streak that ran right through her core. Motherwell: A Girlhood, the memoir that Orr had planned for so long, showcases all those qualities and more. Ostensibly the story of her awkward relationship with her formidable mother, Win, the book (named after the town near Glasgow where Orr grew up) is also a meditation on motherhood and a powerful depiction of a particular kind of working-class Scottish life in the 60s and 70s. Orr (like most journalists unable to resist a good pun) worries that, like her mother, she was unable to “mother well” even as she pokes the bruises left by her childhood and carefully unravels the ties – and town – that bound her parents together and that she was so desperate to break free from. “The rules were Win’s – and the power – but John tended to be their enforcer,” she writes of her father, and as the book progresses so does a growing unease about just who enabled whom in this tight, tense relationship. Win was a hoarder, “weird about allowing things out of Clyde Terrace” and constantly on edge about what other people might think. The sort of woman who made enemies easily but was also “resourceful, vivacious, terrifyingly well-organised and copiously talented as an artist and a craftswoman”. She could be “great company” and was “adored not just by my father but by her whole, large family in Essex”. Yet she was also prone to sudden outbursts and terrible punishments, once making the young Deborah wear a badge saying: “I am a cheat” after she’d peeked at the tiles in a Scrabble game. By contrast, John initially appears as a benign force. The man Orr idolises, who cracks jokes and carries her on his shoulders, and whose world “is bigger than my mum’s”. But here too the faultlines can be seen. “My dad was funny, but his humour was cruel,” Orr writes. He was both drinker and gambler, a man filled with “performative anger” whose temper might not be as quick to rise as Win’s, but whose violence simmered behind that quick smile and ready wit. As the book progresses, so a picture slowly unfolds of a toxic marriage in which each partner was committed to upholding their idealised vision of the other at the expense of anyone else, be they friend, relation or, most troublingly, child. “I realise now that my mother’s main trouble was her pathological inability to understand at all that I was a separate entity from her. She wanted to keep me with her, in the same way as she wanted to keep her arm with her.” It’s an arresting and deeply unsettling image but, despite her memoir’s subtitle, Orr is interested in far more than simply picking dry the bones of her girlhood. Thus alongside her vivid memories of a now vanished way of life built on factory employment, regular churchgoing and the dream of a “house with a back and front door”, runs a thoughtful and thought-provoking examination of the nature of narcissism. It’s a subject that Orr, who divorced Will Self in 2018, knows a great deal about, although those hoping for the copious spilling of literary beans will largely be disappointed despite some pointed passages. “When I first moved in with my former husband … he inspected my collection of books, plucking the ones he fancied out of his shelves and taking them up to his office… He didn’t ask, or mention it in any way, and I tried and failed not to mind.” Later we learn that: “He once told me, early in our marriage: ‘I’m jealous of your thoughts, because they’re inside you.’ I thought it was the creepiest thing I’d ever heard. He thought it was an ardent declaration of love.” The Orr speaking here is the one that her many friends and admirers recognise: forthright and fabulous, prepared to face death’s darkness with a hard-won honesty and the tartest of quips. Yet one of the most fascinating things about Motherwell is the difference between the adult Deborah Orr and the awkward, sometimes bullied girl she once was. “[My parents] for a long time, didn’t know about the bullying. I was too ashamed to tell them. I knew it was bad to have enemies instead of friends, to be unable to get on with others.” That childhood sense of otherhood is arguably what made Orr such an inventive editor. Having stood alone for so long, both within her family home and outside of it, she learned to take comfort in her own judgment, even if that conviction didn’t always translate outside of the workplace: “I’ve always had problems with boundaries of ownership, never been quite sure what the rules really are. I give people things they don’t want and advice they don’t want. I let people take things too, when I shouldn’t.” Yet Motherwell’s true power lies in the fact that it is not so much a reckoning as a reinvention. It shows us how the young Deborah, rather than letting her troubling childhood define her, built herself out of what could have been broken tools, forging a personality that was brash, bold and brilliant. Sharply intelligent and utterly unsentimental, it is both a fitting legacy left by a blazing talent and a deeply moving reminder of all she might still have achieved. • Motherwell: A Girlhood by Deborah Orr is published by W&N (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15