Private landlords have backed calls for the government to issue physical cards to EU citizens to prove they have the right to be in the country post Brexit. The Residential Landlords Association (RLA) has previously cautioned that EU citizens risk discrimination if do not have a card showing their status when looking to rent properties. The group, in a joint statement with the EU citizens campaign group the3million and the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants (JCWI), said: “MPs should back what is a pragmatic and common sense proposal. It should not be controversial that EU citizens who have played such a positive role to the life of the UK should be able to easily prove their rights with a physical document. “A digital-only status will massively disadvantage EU citizens against British nationals with a passport, and anyone else who can quickly and conveniently prove their status with a simple official document.” Last year the RLA pointed out that some landlords may not know what countries are in the EU and would not go to the trouble of checking an EU citizens’ status online as the government requires. The House of Commons will be asked to vote on an amendment to the Brexit bill passed in the House of Lords that calls for a physical card to be issued. The government rejected the idea outright on Monday after the defeat in the Lords claiming a digital record was the most secure. Brandon Lewis, the Home Office minister, said the government had no intention of changing its policy. “I disagree with the results of today’s @UKHouseofLords vote. The EU Settlement Scheme grants #EUcitizens with a secure, digital status which can’t be lost, stolen or tampered with. There will be no change to our digital approach,” he tweeted. I disagree with the results of today’s @UKHouseofLords vote. The EU Settlement Scheme grants #EUcitizens with a secure, digital status which can’t be lost, stolen or tampered with. There will be no change to our digital approach. #WithdrawalAgreementBill https://t.co/881LNAjUIf This indicates the Lords’ amendment to offer physical cards will be overturned later on Wednesday. Critics have expressed confusion with the government’s position since a physical card could be issued alongside the digital number used to access an EU citizen’s status online. Previous research by the JCWI on the government’s right-to-rent policy found that of 150 anonymous inquiries from prospective tenants who asked landlords to conduct an online status check, 85% received no response and only three responses explicitly stated that the landlord was willing to conduct an online check. Landlords were happier to respond positively when the tenant could provide a clear physical document proving their status, they said in a statement. A survey of EU citizens published on Monday showed that 90% want a physical card to prove their right to be in the country and avert discrimination by employers and landlords after the UK leaves the EU. Last year the RLA said it was unreasonable to expect landlords to implement government immigration rules by placing the responsibility on them to establish a person’s right to be in the country. David Smith, the RLA’s policy director, said landlords “do not follow every twist and turn of Brexit” yet under the right-to-rent rules they face fines of £5,000 per adult tenant if they are found to be renting out a property to an illegal immigrant. “Technically EU citizens have the right to rent, but some landlords will not be aware of the law. Some may not even know what countries are in the European Union,” added Smith.