It’s easy to forget what a successful sitcom The Nanny was back in the 1990s. It won an Emmy and a Rose D’Or. It was the subject of a reunion special just five years after it went off the air. It has been remade countless times around the world; as Dadi in Turkey, La Tata in Italy and My Fair Nanny in Russia. So the news that The Nanny will soon become a Broadway musical makes perfect sense. Creators Fran Drescher and Peter Marc Jacobson announced the project yesterday, with the pair writing the new show’s book and Crazy Ex-Girlfriend’s Rachel Bloom and Adam Schlesinger hired to write the songs. And while this might be premature, I think it could work. On TV, intentionally or otherwise, The Nanny always had a slightly unworldly quality to it, and a sense of self-awareness that drifted back and forth from total sincerity to flat-out fourth-wall-breaking. It always felt like more of a live performance than a fully realised sitcom, and so it might turn out that Broadway is its natural home. And if that’s the case, the floodgates will open. Every sitcom you ever heard of will be rushing out its own version of a Broadway musical. That isn’t to say that they should, however. Here are three sitcoms that deserve a musical, and three that absolutely do not. Cheers was the perfect sitcom, and the elements that made it perfect would easily translate to the stage. It’s primarily set in one location, for example, which would keep costs down. There’s enough chemistry between Sam and Diane to underpin the requisite emotional stakes. And best of all, each character is distinct enough to carry at least one song. Frasier could get a fuddy duddy Gilbert and Sullivan patter number. Carla could grouch out something aggressive. And then there’s Cliff, by far the most suitable candidate for an Andrew Lloyd-Webber-style torch song about a life squandered. Should it be a musical? Yes If you remember 30 Rock’s insistence on occasionally meandering into the flabby wastelands of its live episodes, you’ll understand why it should never be let anywhere near a theatre. 30 Rock is a great sitcom, and it has great incidental music, but its charm came from its speed and snappy editing. The live episodes were slower and far less precise, and you can easily imagine that this would translate to a Broadway musical. Unless it’s just 90 minutes of people singing Werewolf Bar Mitzvah, in which case sign me up. Should it be a musical? No Now, this is a bit of a cheat, because It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia has already sort of received the musical treatment. In 2009 it adapted the classic music-heavy episode The Nightman Cometh into a 45-minute live show that toured around six American cities. The results, by all accounts were fantastic. The fact that it isn’t already a Broadway musical actively makes me angry. Should it be a musical? Yes There might be a musical in Saved by the Bell. If nothing else, Jessie Spano’s caffeine pill-induced freakout performance of I’m So Excited could be expanded into a full-blown number complete with a lightshow and dancing girls. However, just because it’s feasible, it doesn’t mean that a Saved by the Bell musical should actually happen. Think of the crowds they would have to perform to. Wave after wave of ironic fortysomethings all dressed in bad clothes and whooping at Mr Belding. The cast would be drained of all their spirit by the second performance. Should it be a musical? No A perfect candidate for a Broadway musical because every single episode was ultimately identical. A woman is a witch. Her husband doesn’t want her to use her powers. His mother-in-law, enraged by his oppressive hold over her daughter, causes a magical mishap. The woman fixes it with magic to appease her bully of a husband. Everyone is happy again. What a perfect, universal lesson for everyone. Should it be a musical? Yes A Friends musical would arguably be the most successful musical in the history of the world, given the sustained popularity of it as a television series. It would make money hand over fist regardless of quality. But would it be a worthwhile enterprise? Would it further the evolution of a noble art form while attempting to say something new about the human condition? Or would it just be loads of people in dated wigs singing songs called Pivot and We Were On A Break? Should it be a musical? No. But will it be? Probably