At least 17 people have died in bushfires on the east coast of Australia since the summer season began in October. Seven were killed in the horrific fire weather experienced in East Gippsland and the south coast of New South Wales on Monday 30 December. At least 18 people are missing and authorities have warned that the death toll could rise. The death toll is highest in NSW, where 15 people, including three volunteer firefighters, have died since October. South Australia and Victoria have both had one confirmed death but the Victorian toll is expected to rise, with 17 people still missing. Bob Lindsey and his wife, Gwen Hyde, died in a bushfire on their rural property on Deadman Creek Road at Coongbar, about 50km south-west of Byron Bay in northern NSW. Their bodies were discovered in their home on 9 October, the day after the fire went through. They had been married for three years, and both left behind children from previous marriages. Lindsey had operated a service station before retiring. Gwen Hyde died with her husband, Bob Lindsey. Hyde’s friend, Carol Dillon, told the Australian that Hyde had called her asking for advice about the fire only hours before. “Gwen rang me to see if I had the phone number for the fire brigade as she was getting spot fires in her orchard and wanted to know what to do,” Dillon said. [She was] a strong woman who died protecting the home and animals she loved. Vivian Chaplain was critically injured trying to defend her home at Wytaliba, 40km east of Glen Inness, on the 8 November fires in northern NSW. She died in hospital the next day. She is survived by two children and six grandchildren, and was remembered by her daughter-in-law as “a strong woman who died protecting the home and animals she loved”. She was a former director of Wytaliba village and was described by a friend as “relentlessly wonderful.” George Nole died in his car in the Kangwalla fire near Glen Innes, in the northern NSW bushfire crisis on 8 November. He was described by residents of Wytaliba as a “true gentleman.” Nole was born in Greece and worked as an electrician on Nasa’s Apollo program, the Glen Innes Examiner reported. He moved to Wytaliba in the 1980s, when the community was largely a nudist colony. A friend, Philip Hine, described Nole as a “reclusive nudist” and a man who moved to the isolated village “to be himself.” He had been diagnosed with leukaemia in 2014 and wanted to die at home. Julie Fletcher’s body was found in a burned-out building at Johns River, 20km south of Port Macquarie, the day after the 8 November bushfire crisis in northern NSW. A neighbour, Russel Souter, described her as a “quality person” whose family had lived in the region for several generations. Barry Parsons is also assumed to have died in the 8 November fires that raged across northern NSW. He lived alone in a shed at Willawarrin, 60km north-west of Port Macquarie. His body was found not far from that shed on 13 November, but he had not been heard of since the morning of 8 November, when he posted on social media: “seriously looks and sounds like [the apocalypse] out there. Fucked up being on your own in these times.” Gerard Wade, captain of the Bellbrook fire brigade, told the Australian that Parsons was quite well known in the region and his death “will touch lives real bad”. Others described him as “a lovely gentle guy.” Geoffrey Keaton was the deputy captain of the Horsley Park volunteer fire brigade. He and fellow volunteer Andrew O’Dwyer died when a tree fell in the path of their truck near Buxton in the NSW southern Highlands on 19 December, causing the truck to veer off the road and roll. “Just a half second either way and they would have been OK,” RFS commissioner Shane Fitzimmons said. They were travelling in a convoy after fighting the Green Wattle Creek fire near Balmoral. Keaton’s father was fighting the Gospers Mountain fire at the time. Keaton was given an honour guard at his funeral on 2 January, and Fitzimmons presented his young son, Harvey, with a posthumous commendation for bravery and service. He is survived by Harvey and his fiancee, Harvey’s mother Jess Hayes. Andrew O’Dwyer died when the fire truck he was travelling in veered off the road and rolled late on the night of Thursday, 19 December. He was a volunteer with the Horsley Park RFS and died alongside fellow volunteer, Geoffrey Keaton. They were travelling in a convoy after fighting the Green Wattle Creek fire. He is survived by his wife Melissa and daughter Charlotte. Melissa O’Dwyer told the Daily Telegraph that the volunteer brigade had become “aunties and uncles” to Charlotte and Keaton’s son, Harvey, “and that gives me a lot of comfort”. “They can hear the stories about their dads and how mighty they have been,” she said. Ron Selth died in his home at Charleston in the Adelaide Hills, which was destroyed in the Cudlee Creek bushfire on 21 December. In a statement, his family remembered him for his “incredible, sometimes injury-causing hugs” and said he would be “deeply missed.” “Some people give firm hugs – I don’t know what’s beyond firm, but that’s what Dad occasionally delivered. When he gave a hug, he meant it.” Selth had an engineering business in the Adelaide Hills. He is survived by his partner Suzy, three children, and six grandchildren. Volunteer firefighter Samuel McPaul died when the fire truck he was travelling flipped in a “fire tornado” at Jingellic, about 110km east of Albury, on Monday. He was expecting his first child in May with his wife, Megan. He attended school at Broulee on the NSW south coast and studied animal science at Charles Sturt University at Wagga Wagga. He was also a basketball coach in Holbrook and worked as a mechanic. A spokesman for the NSW Rural Fire Service said McPaul “did everything for the right reasons” and always put the community first. He is the third Rural Fire Service volunteer to die so far this fire season. Geoffrey Keaton, 32, and Andrew O’Dwyer, 36, died when a tree hit their tanker while they were fighting a fire at Balmoral, south-west of Sydney, on 19 December. East Gippsland man Mick Roberts was confirmed dead by his family on Wednesday. A family member found his body in the bedroom of his Buchan home. He was a well-known local cattleman and stayed to defend his 450-acre farm, but had been unaccounted for since a bushfire burned through the town on Monday. No matter how rough or hard he looked on the outside, he was so lovely on the inside. “He loved his farm,” his sister, Jenner Carter, told the ABC. “He would never have left his home no matter what.” She recalled his wit and dry humour. Other family members told News Corp that he was a well-loved, salt of the earth farmer, who “believed you don’t run from anything”. His grand-nephew, Toby Parsons, told the ABC he was “someone you could look up to”, a “hero” in the local community. “I always had respect for him and no matter how rough or hard he looked on the outside, he was so lovely on the inside and would always make you feel good,” Parsons said. Robert Salway died with his son Patrick, 29, attempting to defend the family property at Wandella, about 10km north-west of Cobargo, from the Badja Forest Road fire on Monday. Their bodies were discovered by Robert’s wife, Patrick’s mother, on Tuesday. They were described by friends as “one of the tightest, close-knit families you’ll ever come across”. Robert was a well-known dairy farmer in the Bega region. Patrick’s wife of five years, Renee, posted a tribute to him on social media. The pair were expecting their second child. “I will see you again Patrick, my best friend,” Renee posted on social media. “We are broken.” Patrick also worked in the dairy industry, providing specialist engineering services, and ran a performance horse business with his wife. He was also a rodeo rider. They are a 70-year-old man who was found dead outside a home at Yatte Yattah, 6km west of Lake Conjola, on Tuesday; a man found in a car on Wandra Road in Sussex Inlet on Wednesday, a person found outside a home at Coolagolite, 10km east of Cobargo; and a man found dead in a car in a road off the Princes Highway at Yatte Yattah on Wednesday. At least 17 people are still missing from small communities in East Gippsland, and authorities hold “very significant fears” for their safety. In New South Wales, a 72-year-old man is unaccounted for at Belowra and has not been heard from since Monday.