First there was The Great British Bake Off. Then came Extra Slice, Junior Bake Off, Masterclass, Professionals, Creme de la Creme, Sewing Bee, Pottery Throwdown, calligraphy hoedown, and … whatevs. You don’t need me to do this. You have all lived through Bakeoffageddon, too. Anyway, the logical conclusion of a decade spent having your cockles warmed by standard-issue humans losing it over a collapsed baked alaska is Crazy Delicious. A six-part “magical food competition” presided over by “food gods” Heston Blumenthal, Carla Hall and Niklas Ekstedt, brought to you by Channel 4, Netflix and, methinks, Beelzebub himself. Spoiler alert: I must warn you that Crazy Delicious is neither of the things it purports to be. It does boast Blumenthal, though, who guarantees a soupcon of crazy in the same way that Mary Berry guarantees nice, even when she’s country-house snooping. On paper, Crazy Delicious is genuinely bonkers: contestants cooking from an edible set “inspired by the vibrant and viral world of #foodporn”. I know. Crazy Yuck. In practice, though, the set, which includes chocolate soil and a prosecco brook, doesn’t come close to the primary-coloured psychedelia of 1971’s Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory. I just can’t get excited about a tree with a maple syrup tap attached to it, especially when it’s clear that half the ingredients the contestants are using don’t come from this edible paradise. (Unless they edited out forager Hannah, 24, hunting, killing and butchering a wild boar.) Even Gene Wilder couldn’t sort this mess out with a cheeky verse of “Come with me / And you’ll be / In a world of pure imagination”. And that’s saying something. Still, onwards. The food gods are introduced: “gourmet magician” Blumenthal, American soul-food guru Hall, who is also queen of the motivational “you go, girrrrrlll” line, and the Michelin-starred chef Ekstedt, who looks as if he has wandered off a grownup Chef’s Table-type show and got lost in a hell signposted “edible paradise”. Presented by the comedian Jayde Adams, who does things such as suck on a lemon only to find it is a lemon meringue pie (actually that bit is quite cool), our three “passionate home cooks” get cracking with the first challenge: to focus on one “magic ingredient”, in this case the strawberry. Ekstedt likes to thinly slice his when they’re green and hard, then coat them with salt and vinegar, but never mind such pesky culinary details. It’s all hands on deck to squeeze every last drop out of the global phenomenon that is #GBBO, which itself all but withered away last series. Adam, a 36-year-old youth worker, likes to cook with fire and create “big, bold, dirty” flavours. He makes strawberry cheesecake wings, which sound and look disgusting, although his pickle fries are apparently a revelation. Hardeep, the most adorably Bake Off-ish of the three, learned to bake with his mum and is scared of loud noises. He makes Eton mess trapped inside a giant tempered egg. Which, as any supporter of the franchise knows, will end in disaster because tempering chocolate is up there with souffles on MasterChef in terms of don’t-do-it. Naturally, the egg won’t come out of the mould, but the food gods are still impressed with his problem-solving. Hannah, clearly the best cook of the three, makes an on-trend trifle with hay creme pat. The gods pronounce it a “trifle on steroids”, which is exactly what Crazy Delicious is trying its hardest to be. The following round involves a reinvention of the hotdog and then – genuine shock! – Hannah is kicked out. Her campfire damper bread stuffed with wild boar is too dry, apparently, even though Hardeep’s hotdog is in every way imaginable a burger. The finale is a birthday-party face-off between a cake made of macaroni cheese and a cake that is in part a cucumber sandwich. None of this satisfies any of my appetites, but it does function as proof, should you still need it after a million other spin-offs, that this format’s goose is cooked. Worse, it has collapsed and been thrown in the bin in what is referred to in my house as “a right moody-poody”. It’s over, people. We need a new kind of comfort telly to gorge ourselves silly on.