Abigail Blasi Written about by Homer as the archipelago where the nymph Calypso so beguiled Ulysses that he stayed for seven years, the Maltese islands remain idyllically beautiful. They offer visitors spectacular beaches, cobalt sea, prehistoric sites dating back more than 5,000 years, and soul-soothingly beautiful natural landscapes. With more than 300 days of sunshine a year, Malta is ideal for some restorative R&R, and you can get here with minimal stress, no jet lag, and only a short-haul flight from the UK. Day one: soak up VallettaStart to unwind in Valletta, Malta’s elegant coastal capital, where five-star and boutique hotels offer spa treatments, massages and hot tubs and pools overlooking beautiful views. You could spend your first day exploring some of the sights of this Unesco world heritage site, one of the world’s most beautiful and unspoilt cities. Its pedestrianised centre is full of pavement cafes to relax and enjoy a drink in the warm sunshine. You can dine in the evening at outdoor, sea-facing restaurants, eating fresh seafood and other delicious local cuisine, and enjoy the warm Mediterranean sun. Day two: more spas, speedboats and the ‘silent city’Valletta is renowned for its spectacular boutique hotels, such as the glorious Palazzo Consiglia with an underground spa and rooftop pool. One suite in SU29 has a rooftop Jacuzzi-with-a-view, as do the suites in the historic townhouse of Casa Ellul. Locanda La Gelsomina, over the harbour in the even-more-relaxing small town of Birgu, offers in-house massages, private yoga and a Japanese Zen sound bath. Once you’ve spent a day smoothing out any knots, it’s an easy trip by bus or car to take it easy on the beautiful beaches of Golden Bay or Għajn Tuffieħa for a day of beach relaxation. This astoundingly scenic chain of soft-sanded beaches is lapped by the warm Mediterranean Sea, and offers every kind of watersports: indulge in some stand-up paddleboarding, waterskiing or take a speedboat along the coast to see the otherworldly rock formations and caves that glint with reflected blue light. The beachfront Radisson Blu Resort & Spa has superb spa facilities, or you could base yourself in a seaside town such as Mellieħa, close to another white-sanded beach, with lots of hotel choices. A cobweb-clearing walk along Malta’s Dingli cliffs offers sweeping panoramas for miles across the ocean, and you could finish the day with a meal in the tranquil “silent city” of Mdina. This hilltop, walled, golden-stone old capital, with its atmospheric and historic narrow lanes, is best experienced after all the daytime visitors have ebbed away. Days three and four: go Zen in GozoOn your third and fourth days, slow down your pace even more by heading to the neighbouring smaller island of Gozo, only a short trip by ferry. Hidden coves are reached via flights of vertiginous steps, with pale copper sands lapped by azure waters. Artist and poet Edward Lear visited in the 19th century and was so taken with this curious, dramatic landscape that he invented words to describe it: calling it “pomskizillious” and “gromophiberous”. Gozo’s country roads are ideal for cycling or walks, with sea views and seemingly hugely outsized churches in the middle of the countryside. The island’s famous for the warmth and hospitality of its locals, and is the kind of place where no one bothers locking their front door. Gozo is famous for its large, rentable “farmhouses” with gardens and pools, as well as some spectacular hotels, such as chic haven ThirtySeven and the five-star hideaway Kempinski Hotel San Lawrenz. You can also dine on spectacular fresh Mediterranean produce here. Gozo has many renowned restaurants, serving zero-mileage local cuisine cooked by some of the best chefs on the archipelago, with ingredients such as the local fresh cheese, locally grown tomatoes and olives, fresh fish, and local wines. Gozo’s five-star spas offer a wide range of treatments and therapies from across the world as well as saunas, Jacuzzis, steam rooms and indoor swimming pools. A longer restIf two days isn’t long enough, extend your Gozo trip with yoga and pilates retreats, which are ideal for longer wellness stays. The week-long Paola’s BodyBarre retreat, for example, gives you the chance to take part in daily pilates, barre, fitness and yoga fusion sessions, as well as excursions to copper-sanded Ramla Bay, the cerulean Blue Lagoon, Gozo’s coastal salt pans, and the vast Ġgantija temples, which predate Stonehenge. It’s remarkable how many relaxation and wellness activities you can fit in over a four-day weekend trip to Malta, recharging in beautiful settings or keeping active outdoors (although longer trips to Malta and Gozo are to be encouraged – there’s a lot that cannot be covered in a four-day trip). Book your wellness trip to Malta today to restore a sense of balance, for a holiday whose effects will last long after your return. With more than 300 days of sunshine a year, Malta offers more to explore