Harvey Weinstein believes he will be able to rebuild his career in the film industry, if a jury clears him on charges of predatory sexual assault, a criminal sexual act, first-degree rape and third-degree rape. Weinstein’s trial is set to begin in New York on Monday. The charges concern alleged assaults on two women, one in 2006 and another in 2013. More than 80 women have alleged abuse from harassment to rape by the former producer, who denies all claims of non-consensual sexual contact and has pleaded not guilty. In an email exchange with CNN published on Saturday, Weinstein said: “It will take a bit of work to build back to it. If I can get back to doing something good and building places that help heal and comfort others, I intend to do so.” Weinstein, 67, has given a series of interviews ahead of his trial, which could see dozens of women called by prosecutors in an attempt to establish a pattern of abusive behavior. The producer faces a long sentence if convicted. Last month, Weinstein was reported to be unrepentant regarding his alleged misconduct. On Saturday, he said: “The past two years have been gruelling and have presented me with a great opportunity for self-reflection. “I realise now that I was consumed with my work, my company and my drive for success. This caused me to neglect my family, my relationships, and to lash out at the people around me. I have been in rehab since October 2017, and have been involved in a 12-step programme and meditation. I have learned to give up my need for control.” He continued: “My meditation and focus on looking inward has helped me balance my emotions. The whole process has been overwhelming, but I am working every day to stay level.” He declined to express empathy for his accusers. “While I do have many empathetic opinions regarding many people,” he wrote, “I am following the advice of my lawyers on the eve of my trial to not offer any commentary on this. The public’s “biggest misconceptions” about him, he said, “have been made through the help of media”. Weinstein’s lead attorney, Donna Rotunno, told CNN her client was “the first one to say he did bad things” but rejected accusations of criminal conduct. “He cheated on his wife, he was dishonest about that, he had multiple women he slept with at different points and he would say that those were bad choices,” Rotunno said. “He’s lost everything for those bad choices. Nobody is trying to claim that he is a saint and that he never did anything wrong … I don’t believe Harvey is a rapist.” On Thursday, 25 women including the actors Rosanna Arquette, Rose McGowan and Lysette Anthony released a statement through the gender equality campaign group Time’s Up. Weinstein’s trial, they said, “is critical to show that predators everywhere will be held accountable and that speaking up can bring about real change. “We refused to be silenced and will continue to speak out until this unrepentant abuser is brought to justice.”