For Zak Crawley, after three hours and 23 minutes of hard graft in the searing Port Elizabeth heat, the disappointment at missing out on a maiden Test half-century was palpable. Yet his innings of 44 from 137 balls played a major part in helping England end the opening day of the third Test ahead of the game given the spin and variable bounce – illustrated by the Kagiso Rabada delivery that kept low to bowl Joe Root – that this slow pitch has shown during the first 90 overs. As things stand, Crawley is his side’s top scorer even if Ollie Pope and Ben Stokes, respectively on 39 and 38 at stumps, look primed to overtake his total on the second day. “It was tough going, it was a slow wicket, so tough to score,” Crawley said. “That said, there wasn’t a lot of quick nip, so it was also tough for the bowlers. It was nice to spend a bit of time out there but it was very attritional cricket. Just over two [runs] an over. It was a struggle but I enjoyed it. “I think it was a very good day for us in the end. Pope and Stokes played brilliantly to put us in a good position. If we can get in the late 300s that’s a very good score on this pitch. It’s only going to get worse from there and continue to spin quite a bit. Hopefully a few will go underground like Joe’s did and we can bowl last on it and bowl well.” For Crawley this series is an unexpected bonus given he is only in the team because of the freak ankle injury sustained by Rory Burns playing football on the eve of the second Test in Cape Town. In that match his scores of four and 25 were eclipsed by a stunning catch on the final evening off the bowling of Stokes – taken at the second attempt at third slip while on his backside – that captured South Africa’s ninth wicket of Anrich Nortje and hurried England to a thrilling series-levelling victory. Yet on the first day here Crawley, 21 and playing only his third Test, displayed the qualities to suggest he may have a long career ahead. With his first-class average of 30.28, the decision to pick the Kent batsman this winter was based more on a gut feeling from the national selector, Ed Smith, than on raw statistics. But his class, including a dismissive pull in the fifth over that dispatched a wide delivery from Vernon Philander to the boundary, was evident. Allied to that was the discipline, determination and patience top-order batsmen require to prosper at the highest level. “It’s probably against my natural game, I’m quite a free-scorer usually,” the opener said. “If I had the choice I’d be a free-scorer but if you’re playing for England you’ve got to play the situation. I was more than happy to block a few today.” I think I played well but it was very disappointing to get out the way I did When Crawley fell six runs short of his fifty, clipping Nortje to leg gully, England had 103 on the board. Yet his dismissal was also a reminder that, for all his potential, the youngster is nowhere near the finished article. He will need to convert such promising starts to ensure he remains in and around the Test team following this winter. The two Tests in Sri Lanka in March, a series Burns will miss, are likely to offer Crawley more chances before the English summer, even if the expected selection of the spin-specialist Keaton Jennings may offer him competition at the top of the order. Crawley, who made one in his only innings when making his debut against New Zealand at Hamilton in November, said: “I’m definitely feeling more comfortable now. The first couple of games I was feeling very nervous and trying to find my way a bit. Now I feel I can trust my game. If I can play well I know my game might be good enough for this level. I’ve got a little bit more belief in myself now. “I think I played well but it was very disappointing to get out the way I did. Once you get to 40 ideally you want to go on and get a big one. To score a hundred you need to be able to face 180-plus balls and so to face 130-140 I feel like that time at the crease has given me some confidence. “Hopefully that’s what I’ll do next time but I thought I played quite nicely, so I’ll take something from it.” Crawley’s family history suggests the ability to make the most of every opportunity may be in his DNA given his father, Terry, went from working as a carpet fitter in Bermondsey to forge such a successful career in the City he made the Sunday Times Rich List. If Zak can get anywhere close to emulating that rugs-to-riches story, he will prove extremely valuable to England over the coming years.