There is life in Bournemouth yet. For Eddie Howe this much-needed win was the perfect boost. At the final whistle he geed up the crowd and Bournemouth’s players crashed to the floor, exhausted and acutely aware of the significance of taking victory. Callum Wilson found the net for the first time since September to secure a priceless three points after a fierce Harry Wilson strike and an own goal by Pascal Gross paved the way for a defiant victory. An alarming run of defeats meant it was vital for Howe to stop the rot here and now Graham Potter and Brighton, who take on an endangered West Ham this weekend, must find a way to arrest a similar slide. A sense of trepidation was natural given the mounting pressure on both teams following deeply worryingly runs of form, with the hosts having lost 10 of their previous 12 matches and Brighton having only tasted victory once in nine, when they beat Bournemouth after Christmas. Howe had urged his squad to shut out the external noise and when Harry Wilson powered in the opener nine minutes before the break, all of his teammates except the goalkeeper Aaron Ramsdale charged towards the nearest corner flag to celebrate. On the touchline Howe was a picture of calm, urging his players to inhale the confidence and play with the kind of swagger that got them this far in the first place. That strike – the hosts’ first in more than seven hours of Premier League action – stirred the Bournemouth of old, with Ryan Fraser rejuvenated on the left, Harry Wilson penetrating down the right and Callum Wilson making his presence felt through the middle of the Brighton defence. Then there was Dominic Solanke, who has struggled under the weight of his £19m price tag since joining a year ago but who played a perfectly weighted pass to free Harry Wilson for that opener. The goal settled Bournemouth, who had looked flustered at times. The home supporters serenaded Howe from the get-go and, aside from a jittery period during which Ramsdale brilliantly denied Neal Maupay with a strong right-handed save after the Brighton striker picked up a wonderful scooped pass from Aaron Mooy, they had good reason to be cheerful. Both teams made two changes, with the former Brighton defender Steve Cook watching alongside Bournemouth supporters in the main stand after picking up a red card for taking matters into his own hands at Carrow Road on Saturday. Cook’s moment of madness was perhaps indicative of a player and team trying too hard but Bournemouth seemed to strike the right balance here, making life difficult for Brighton by pressing them into trouble and playing with a tempo that whipped up an already frenzied home crowd. When Mat Ryan dawdled on his goalline, the Brighton goalkeeper was fortunate to escape danger after Bournemouth, quick to sense blood, had seemingly cornered him, but soon enough he was fishing the ball out of his net. Diego Rico’s inswinging corner landed inside the six-yard box and Pascal Gross, jostling alongside Callum Wilson, inadvertently doubled Bournemouth’s advantage. After an encouraging start, Brighton had lost their footing but they almost reduced the deficit four minutes after the interval. Alireza Jahanbakhsh, who had an effort deflected over in the first half, gave Ramsdale a brief fright after his long-range effort cannoned off Nathan Aké before bouncing awkwardly wide of the Bournemouth goalkeeper’s right post. Howe’s critics have been quick to point the finger at his recruitment but Ramsdale, an £800,000 signing three years ago and now the England Under-21s captain, has been a revelation this season and made another fine stop to deny Lewis Dunk. Philip Billing almost gave his side further breathing space but Ryan saved superbly down to his right to prevent Bournemouth from adding a third. Graham Potter recognised Brighton’s threat had dissipated and took action with a triple substitution on the hour mark, summoning Leandro Trossard, Solly March and Aaron Connolly. For Bournemouth victory represents a huge psychological boost, though Howe’s side remain in the relegation zone on goal difference. For Brighton, who sit two points above Bournemouth and that dotted line, a chastening evening went from bad to worse when Callum Wilson seized on Adam Webster’s misfortune to round Ryan after latching on to a deflected Solanke pass. Despite Mooy’s strike 10 minutes from time, at last Bournemouth could bask in a vital victory.