What’s your morning routine? I wake up naturally at 6.30am and let the dog out. I drink two glasses of water – with lemon to clean up my liver, or salt if I’m dehydrated. I make a double espresso with a capful of organic half and half milk, so it’s 20 calories not 40. Then I get back into bed to read the papers. Do you exercise? On my Peloton in my bedroom for half an hour, or else I head out alone for a power walk. I feel guilty not taking the dog with me, but she sniffs more than she powers and is too slow up hills. If there’s time after, I’m straight into our backyard infrared sauna. A day out? Into New York, either to Manhattan or Brooklyn, to meet up with the offspring. One son works for a concierge company, so he knows where to make a reservation for a hip brunch. A local spot? My favourite restaurant in my town – Montclair, New Jersey – is Turtle + the Wolf, run by a chef who worked at the best places in the city. It’s not on the menu, but with 24 hours notice they’ll make you an incredible fried chicken. Dressed up or down? I’m always in a big, cosy cashmere sweater and leggings on Sundays, with comfy shoes and my hair in a ponytail. No makeup. I’m not worried about how I’m looking on Sunday. Do you entertain? All the time. We’re known for Sunday suppers – salads and soups. Right now a dear friend of mine – Rose Cali, a wonderful Italian cook – is staying in our carriage house. If we’re lucky, she’ll rustle up branzino and delicious pasta and I can treat myself to a cocktail. The perfect night? I’ll head upstairs early for a bath and some downtime, in my robe and into bed long before I’m tired. I leave my phone downstairs. It’s so rare that I’m alone, so it’s my time to get away from everything, although I’ll probably just binge watch The Crown or Mrs Maisel. Evolution_18 by Bobbi Brown is available exclusively from Boots This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.