Real Madrid have signed attacking midfielder Reinier Jesus from Flamengo. The 18-year-old joins the La Liga club on a six-year deal for a reported €30m (£25.6m) fee. Reinier is the latest young Brazilian talent to be snapped up by Real, following the recent signings of Vinícius Júnior and Rodrygo Goes. He will arrive after Brazil’s pre-Olympic tournament finishes in February, and is expected to initially join up with the club’s reserve side, RM Castilla – coached by Real legend Raúl. The club’s statement hails Reinier as “one of the leading emerging stars in the world game” whose strengths include “technical ability and creative talent on the ball.” The Brasilia-born playmaker won the 2019 Brazilian league title and Copa Libertadores with Flamengo, and was part of Jorge Jesus’s squad for the Club World Cup in Qatar. The departure of Reinier, who has been capped by Brazil up to under-23 level, is likely to anger his former coach. Jorge Jesus recently told Portuguese TV that “a player like [Reinier] can’t be sold for €30m. Flamengo doesn’t know how to value its brand.” Real Madrid spent more than £200m on signings last summer, including Rodrygo. The move for Reinier reaffirms Florentino Pérez’s determination not to miss out on the next South American superstar, after seeing Neymar join Barcelona in 2013. Aston Villa have completed the signing of Genk striker Mbwana Samatta for an £8.5m fee. The Tanzanian has signed a four-and-a-half year deal, subject to a work permit and international clearance, but will not be available for the visit of Watford on Tuesday evening. “I’m really pleased we have managed to bring Mbwana to the club,” said the Aston Villa manager, Dean Smith. “He has scored goals throughout his career and I’m looking forward to working with him.” The 27-year-old has scored 10 goals for the Belgian club in all competitions this season, including a goal at Anfield against Liverpool in the Champions League. His arrival came hours after Villa confirmed the departure of Jonathan Kodjia, who has joined Qatari side Al Gharafa for an undisclosed fee. Smith has also allowed Croatian goalkeeper Lovre Kalinic to join Toulouse on loan following the arrival of Pepe Reina. “[Lovre] needs game time, with Croatia qualifying for the Euros,” Smith said. “I’ve got Pepe and Orjan [Nyland], who’s been in fine form for us, so his chances are limited here.” Sheffield United are close to signing defender Jack Robinson from Nottingham Forest, with the 26-year-old set to complete his move to Bramall Lane this week. The versatile left-back is out of contract this summer and may cost as little as £1m. Robinson will join Jack Rodwell as Sheffield United’s second January recruit, with the manager keen to add strength in depth to his squad. “I’m no different to any other manager around the country,” Wilder said on Monday. “I’m looking to improve the players we have and bring more through the door.” Spanish goalkeeper Roberto has left West Ham for Alavés on loan after a dreadful stint at the London Stadium. The 33-year-old was signed as backup for Lukasz Fabianski but his error-strewn displays led the Hammers to re-sign Darren Randolph. PA