A vulnerable landlord allegedly starved to death by his tenants had been living in a “foul, unhygienic cell”, a court heard. James Anthony Sootheran was found dead in his bedroom at High Havens Farm in South Newington, Oxfordshire, on 18 March 2014. The 59-year-old former auctioneer’s clerk, who owned the property, which includes 60 acres of land, was more than 6ft and once weighed 17 stone. But in the months before his death he was seen appearing “scruffy, skinny and dishevelled”, Reading crown court heard on Thursday. Lynda Rickard, 61, and her husband Wayne, 64, who both lived with Sootheran when he died, are charged with his murder between 13 March and 19 March 2014. The couple, from Banbury, are on trial alongside Michael Dunkley, 48, Denise Neal, 39, and Shanda Robinson, 50, who are charged with fraud. All five defendants deny the charges against them. Prosecutor Oliver Saxby told jurors that the case involved “casual, opportunistic greed” that developed into “something utterly routine and brazen”. He said Lynda Rickard allowed Sootheran to become “utterly isolated” at the farm, even changing the settings on his mobile phone so it was unable to receive calls. The court heard how Sootheran, who was from a wealthy family of landowners, was found in a “terrible state” when he was visited in October 2013 by Richard Stubbs, who dealt with the family’s trust. “The bedlinen was stained and looked like it had not been changed in months, “ Saxby said. “A window pane was broken. In the corner, there was a pile of Anthony’s hair. There was no television in the room. There were no books, or magazines. In short, it was a cell, a foul, unhygienic cell.” Saxby said the alleged victims in the case, Sootheran and his 92-year-old mother, Mary Joy Sootheran, who suffered from dementia before her death in August 2012, were reliant on Lynda Rickard for care, but were ultimately “exploited” by her. “She was eyeing a windfall,” Saxby said. “That windfall came to be dependent on Anthony Sootheran’s death. And she got impatient, and worried that the windfall might elude her.” Saxby said: “In the simplest of terms, assisted by her husband, she starved him to death, thereby securing for herself and her family the windfall she craved.” The court heard that Sootheran had “complex” mental health issues and was a recluse who was prone to self-neglect. Saxby said Lynda Rickard had already admitted forging the wills of Sootheran and his mother. They entitled Lynda Rickard to half of Mary Joy Sootheran’s estate, valued at just under £1.5m, and a third of her son’s, worth about £3.5m, the court heard. Saxby said Lynda Rickard had also admitted to using between £50,000 to £167,000 worth of Mary Joy Sootheran’s money, and £40,000 to £133,000 of her son’s money. The jury was told Lynda Rickard had pleaded guilty to four fraud charges, two counts of forgery, two counts of conspiracy to pervert the course of justice, and possession of articles for use in fraud. Saxby said: “Lynda Rickard says that Anthony Sootheran’s demise was a consequence of how he chose to live his life, and that his death was entirely coincidental to her having forged his will.” He told jurors that Wayne Rickard denies “having anything to do with Mr Sootheran’s death”. Lynda Rickard is further charged with the manslaughter of Anthony Sootheran through gross negligence, while Wayne Rickard is accused of causing or allowing the death of a vulnerable adult. Lynda Rickard also denies a charge of fraud, in that she allegedly abused her position as carer for Anthony Sootheran by allegedly using his money for her own purposes. They are also both accused of a single count of fraud by false representation relating to Mary Joy Sootheran. They deny all of the charges against them. The fraud charges to the other defendants relate to allegations they falsely claimed the wills were genuine. The trial continues.