It was a day Rob Burrow never thought he would have to experience, but it became an occasion he will never forget. At 4:46 on Sunday afternoon, one of the most decorated careers in British rugby league’s modern history was briefly revived – but two years after retiring, this was not a desperate attempt to recapture the glory years. Sadly, this was a cameo set in a far more brutal, heart‑wrenching backdrop. They came from far and wide to show their support for Burrow, the Leeds Rhinos legend who was diagnosed with motor neurone disease last month. This day was originally a testimonial for another Leeds great, Jamie Jones-Buchanan, who retired last season after two decades of service to the club, but it was quickly changed to an occasion to celebrate both men, as well as raise more funds to support Burrow and his family as he takes on his toughest challenge of all. “I was tired but I absolutely loved every minute of it,” he said. “You don’t know how much it means ... no words will come close to describe how I feel right now. Thank you so much.” The sight of Burrow coming on to the field pre-match in tears, carrying his one-year-old son, Jackson, underlined the gravity of the situation and how sport is ultimately immaterial, invested as we may all be from time to time. The sporting world has rallied around Burrow since news of his diagnosis became public and this was a physical manifestation of all that support. Wigan, St Helens, Bradford, London; supporters of all teams were present to do their bit – even fans from other sides who were playing pre-season games on the same day. The players of Bradford, the opposition here, paid to come through the turnstiles and contribute to the fundraising effort. “He’s provided so many people with so much enjoyment, this is the least we can do in return,” said a fan outside Headingley as the queues assembled hours before kick-off. More than 19,000 people were here, the biggest crowd for almost four years, since the night Leeds were bidding to become world champions against North Queensland Cowboys when, for the first half at least, Burrow looked as though he was inspiring a major upset. Nobody came for the actual rugby – or at least the first hour of it. As the sun set with 17 minutes remaining, the sold-out crowd got the first glimpse of what they came for: Burrow and his legendary Leeds teammates stripped and ready for action. It was a who’s who of Super League royalty: Jamie Peacock, Kevin Sinfield, Keith Senior … even former greats from the opposition – Stuart Fielden and Robbie Hunter‑Paul among them – came out of retirement for the occasion. Some had not played for years – the former Leeds and Great Britain centre Keith Senior retired in 2011 – but this was not a day to complain about aching bones or bumps and bruises. Gradually they all came on to the field before, with five minutes left, came the star attraction: Burrow entered with tears in his eyes and was greeted by the loudest roar of the day. “I’m really not one for the limelight,” he said. “I’m looking forward to getting back to normal life and cleaning nappies ... but how can you not enjoy an occasion like this?” Typically, within seconds he was in the thick of the action and, though were no points added to the final 34-10 scoreline in Leeds’s favour, there was barely a dry eye in the house after full time, when a video montage of Burrow’s greatest moments brought cheers from all four stands. Rugby league has its critics – sometimes deservedly so – but a day such as this, as all those involved pointed out afterwards, was the sport at its very best, rallying around one of its most-loved players in his time of need. He certainly will not be alone in the challenges he faces. www.virginmoneygiving.com/fund/robburrow