Since the announcement of their plans for a “progressive new role” within the monarchy, Harry and Meghan, Duke and Duchess of Sussex, have got everyone asking what the historical precedent for their bombshell move is. The simple fact is that there is none. This is an unprecedented move in the British royal family, and could end up bringing ours more into line with the royal families of Europe, in which most members not in direct line have full-time careers, such as Prince Constantijn, younger brother of the King of the Netherlands, a lawyer who works in banking, or Princess Madeleine, daughter of the King of Sweden, who works for the family foundation, Global Child Forum and lives mostly in Florida. Between this and the abdication of Edward VIII there is no comparison. Harry is not king; there is no effect on politics. The prime minister, Stanley Baldwin, dreaded Winston Churchill using public support for Edward VIII to pull down the government. Our government is doing exactly as it pleases, no doubt delighted by the Sussex announcement as an excellent distraction. Edward wanted to stay in the country but the royal family dreaded a rival “second king” to George VI, so off he was sent, in exile, not allowed back for royal events – he watched his niece’s coronation on television with friends, sitting on a gold-painted chair. Harry has chosen to step down and he will still be here, just rather less. The whole principle of royals who aren’t close to the throne doing full-time duties is relatively new. Up until the 1950s minor royals could do very little and could live a quiet life. Then Elizabeth II expanded the “firm” as she came to the throne, to reflect the greater volume of work that needed doing. As The Crown shows, Elizabeth sacrificed everything for the monarchy. It was a different world, in which a private life could be kept so. Even then, with no social media and a largely respectful press, they felt the intrusion. As the Queen’s governess put it, in the 1930s, “royals are only private in the womb”. Now, Harry clearly feels that he and Meghan have suffered enough. So many commentators are saying that “half-in, half-out” is not going to work. I couldn’t disagree more. We’ve never tried the “flexi-royal” plan and I think it has huge potential. I expect the Sussexes to set up their own charitable foundation and support the Queen with overseas work and visits, particularly in the Commonwealth. Managed well, it would be the beginning of a real modernisation of the monarchy. As the Sussexes embark on their new life, meanwhile, there are big questions for the rest of us. Harry and Meghan meant to take on full royal duties. But not even two years after the wedding, they have been, frankly, chased out. Meghan has suffered a barrage of racist and sexist criticism, constantly censured for initiatives and actions that other royal women were praised for. Harry issued a statement about his fear of his wife falling “victim to the same powerful forces” as Diana. And still it continued. A few months ago, Prince Andrew revealed royal privilege and entitlement at its worst, refusing to apologise in his Newsnight interview for socialising with a sex criminal. And although he was criticised and forced to step down, it was a long time coming and it still seemed as if some in our society were angrier about Meghan wearing dark nail varnish than Andrew’s links with Epstein. Harry and Meghan’s decision to step back has gained huge traction and sympathy across the world. The royal family needs to work with their wishes or risk losing them for ever. This is a seismic moment in royal history and British society. It tells historians of the future much about our society, its self-perceptions, prejudices and fears. And most of all, it should mark our realisation – as we didn’t learn after Diana – that those who marry into the royal family are not our dolls to attack and throw around as we please. The Sussex announcement will, we hope, bring them happiness. And it offers future members of the royal family a path forward in which perhaps not everything, body and soul, must be given up to the crown. Kate Williams is a professor of history at the University of Reading and the author of Rival Queens