Jessica Arnold’s comment piece (I implore people to stop using private health: it’s killing the NHS, 8 January) makes a number of unfounded assertions about the impact of private healthcare on the NHS, and fails to acknowledge that the NHS has always used private companies, as well as voluntary organisations and social enterprises, to deliver NHS services – something that is entirely consistent with its founding principles. The workforce challenges faced by the NHS, which are shared by all major healthcare systems across the world, are not caused by the private health sector “poaching” staff but are a result of a range of complex factors, including an ageing workforce and pension policy. Moreover, removing the ability of NHS commissioners to make use of private sector capacity and expertise would only harm patients. If we’re really serious about improving NHS care, we desperately need to move away from tired old debates about “NHS privatisation” and focus on the real challenges the health service faces of joining up care and getting waiting times down.David HareChief executive, Independent Healthcare Providers Network • The argument of Jessica Arnold that the public should stop using private healthcare to save the NHS is flawed. The NHS is a valuable and treasured British institution that we all support. However, private healthcare, either provided through insurance or funded by individuals themselves, plays a crucial role in both augmenting and complementing NHS services. It supports access to quality healthcare and access to treatments for cancer, mental health and other serious conditions. Framing the reality as private equals bad, public equals good is an unhelpful and inaccurate polarisation. Rather than working in either the public or private healthcare sectors, many healthcare professionals work in both the NHS and independent hospitals, helping treat patients from all walks of life and from across the UK. We all want to help and protect the NHS, but pitting private versus public will not solve the challenges facing the NHS. Instead, we must all work together to improve the quality of healthcare, access to treatments and working conditions for healthcare professionals. If we do not, it is patients who lose out.James DaltonDirector, general insurance policy, Association of British Insurers • Jessica Arnold makes a strong case for the damaging contribution that private healthcare is making to the staffing crisis in the NHS, but the damage goes much further. There has always been a state of competition between the NHS and the private healthcare industry, but that competition does not take place on a level playing field. The great majority of clinical staff that work in private healthcare have been trained by the NHS, largely at the expense of the taxpayer. Private health providers do not carry the direct or indirect costs of this training. NHS hospitals have the responsibility to provide comprehensive 24/7 services, not only in A&E, but in most other medical and surgical specialties, whereas private healthcare providers can steer clear of such commitments. The way in which VAT is applied to many drugs, devices and equipment is less favourable to NHS hospitals than to private hospitals. All of these factors allow private health providers to undercut NHS providers when bidding for contracts to treat NHS patients. In many specialties, the income from a steady flow of predictable elective and outpatient work heavily subsidises the cost of providing round-the-clock emergency care. If elective care is contracted out to private providers, there is a strong possibility that your local hospital will be unable to continue to provide the level of urgent care that patients previously enjoyed. It also has an impact on training. Surgeons in training require exposure to the learning that comes from operating, under appropriate supervision, on patients in the controlled setting of “routine” operating sessions: if this work moves to the private sector, it can take much longer to build up the expertise and confidence of the next generation of surgeons. As waiting times have risen and inflexible conditions have been introduced as to what can and cannot be treated within the NHS, it is not surprising that the demand for private health insurance and self-paid treatment has risen inexorably since 2013, reflecting a lack of confidence that the NHS can provide a comprehensive and responsive service. Many of our parliamentarians, in every major party, have financial links to the private healthcare industry; the revolving doors between the civil service and commerce are spinning rapidly; and many senior doctors are also able to spot commercial opportunities. Unfortunately, this approach seriously undermines social cohesion in our divided country.Dr Colin HutchinsonChair, Doctors for the NHS • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition