There’s an agonising social exchange towards the end of the first part of Half of a Yellow Sun. Richard, a British man, is talking to a Nigerian poet called Okeoma about his interest in Igbo-Ukwu artefacts. “I’ve been fascinated by the bronzes since I first read about them,” says the eager and enthusiastic white writer. “The details are stunning. It’s quite incredible that these people had perfected the complicated art of lost-wax during the time of the Viking raids. There is such marvellous complexity in the bronzes, just marvellous.” “You sound surprised,” Okeoma replies. And when Richard says “what?”, he goes on: “You sound surprised as if you ever imagined these people capable of such things.” Richard, who has been eating hot pepper soup, can feel himself burning up both literally and metaphorically. He doesn’t just care about the bronzes. He is in love with an Igbo woman. He has learned the local language. Later, he will long to be accepted as a Biafran. But hasn’t he here just revealed himself to have the condescension and arrogance of the British colonial mindset? Has he been thinking of these people as somehow lesser than himself? Maybe. It’s typical of this fine novel that the scenario isn’t entirely black and white. When Richard later mulls over the conversation, he decides that Okeoma is wrong to think him condescending: It was the look in Okeoma’s eyes that worried him the most: a disdainful distrust that made him think of reading somewhere that the African and the European would always be irreconcilable. It was wrong of Okeoma to assume that he was one of those Englishmen who did not give the African the benefit of an equal intelligence. Perhaps he had sounded surprised, now that he thought of it, but it was the same surprise he would express if a similar discovery were made in England or anywhere else in the world. Richard can perhaps wriggle off the hook. Even so, this is a passage that caused me some uncomfortable self-reflection as well. The most famous images of the Biafran war were of children with distended bellies and haunting eyes, most often lining up at refugee centres and feeding stations. They are tragic and moving, but also thankfully far removed from the experience and domestic lives of most of Richard’s compatriots – which is to say, a reader like myself. But Half of a Yellow Sun starts in the early 1960s, a few years before the Biafran war even began, when the characters are leading lives that also seem far removed from the skeletons that stare out of those 50-year-old photographs. They are academics, writers and industrialists; smart and vigorous people, who live lives of “marvellous complexity”. Their high-powered professional lives are complemented by raucous, brandy-fuelled parties, witty conversation, leftist politics and tangled love affairs. They inhabit a rarefied, comfortable world that put me in mind of Iris Murdoch and the campus novels of David Lodge and Malcolm Bradbury. But if those sound like surprising comparisons for a book describing the eve of the Biafran war, then you have to ask yourself why. The challenge that Okeoma gives Richard might also be applied to readers of Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s novel. Even with conflict seeming not as distant from us as we might like to hope, it feels crude to draw too many modern parallels with the complete world that Adichie describes, and its unique circumstances. Just as much sets the novel far apart from our contemporary circumstances, and those 1960s novels about British intellectuals. There’s the fact that Ugwu, one of the lead characters, is a “house boy”, a servant who only becomes fully literate because his “master” sends him to school. There’s the long shadow of colonialism and all the faultlines, inequalities and resentments caused by British rule. And there’s the knowledge that the society Adichie describes so vividly is on the edge of catastrophe. Everything we read, we read in the knowledge of those horrifying photos and the war that must follow. It gives a brightness and urgency to these early pages, their significance and emotional impact heightened by the knowledge that this sophisticated society will soon be blown to smithereens … But more on that, next week.