When Thant Myint-U was eight he travelled from the US to Burma with his parents to bury his grandfather U Thant, the first non-European secretary general of the United Nations. But the funeral was not a family affair. A group of students and Buddhist monks seized Thant’s coffin and demanded a state ceremony from the country’s military overlords: the corpse became a rallying point for protests. Burmese troops overran the Rangoon University campus where Thant’s body had been held and killed many protesting students. Riots broke out against the army regime and hundreds were killed or imprisoned in the retaliatory crackdown. Myint-U’s parents were told to leave the country quickly. “I missed my fourth-grade classes,” Myint-U writes in The Hidden History of Burma, and instead “experienced firsthand a dictatorship in action”. Starker encounters followed over the years. After graduating from Harvard in 1988, Myint-U helped a group of Burmese dissidents who were planning a revolution from across the Thai border. As a historian, human rights campaigner and UN policy planner, he advocated for the brutally suppressed Burmese democracy movement through the 1990s and 2000s, while remaining undecided on the usefulness of economic sanctions. In the wake of Cyclone Nargis, he worked to convince the country’s generals to accept international aid and address the country’s abysmal poverty rates. After the dissolution of the junta in 2011, Myint-U was made an adviser in the Burmese president’s office. This book promises an insider’s view of the country’s political transition, but in many ways the events described bear out the perils of western thinking on Burma, which Myint-U mordantly summarised in The River of Lost Footsteps (2008): “The military government is bad, Aung San Suu Kyi good, and the international community needs to apply pressure on Rangoon and pressure means no aid, trade sanctions and more isolation.” It was an approach that ignored the country’s beginnings under the British empire and its growth as “a racial hierarchy”. Questions of economic and institutional reform were conveniently sidestepped, along with the region’s long history of ethnic armed conflicts. Diplomats and thinktanks didn’t want to interfere. “Showing solidarity with the democracy movement,” according to Myint-U, “was politically expedient. Results didn’t matter.” In 2020, the picture looks bleak. Just last month Aung San Suu Kyi was at the international court of justice in The Hague, defending the military, her long-time oppressors, against charges of genocide. At least 800,000 Rohingya Muslims have been pushed out to refugee camps in Bangladesh. Thousands of people belonging to other minorities, half a million by one estimate, have been internally displaced by 70 years of internecine wars. Militias and rebel armies control large patches of territory. Despite global investments, the heroin economy of the 1990s has flourished: the country’s methamphetamine industry, according to the UN, is worth $50bn, perhaps the largest in the world. Its constitution effectively legitimises discrimination by linking the idea of the taingyin-tha – “indigenous” or “national” races – to citizenship. The army and the ruling National League of Democracy (NLD) Aung San Suu Kyi’s party, have found common cause in an assertive Buddhist nationalism, fuelled by notions of a glorious precolonial past. In Burma, too, many monks believe that the Rohingyas reproduce like “African carp”. The Burmese word for “national” – amyo-tha – is the same as “race”. All of this is being played out in a region beset by years of economic inequality, made worse now by its vulnerability to the climate crisis and a mystical faith in free markets. Since 2012, social media has further polarised sectarian divisions and stoked more violence. Being online, for the majority of Burmese, is synonymous with being on Facebook, where incendiary anti-Muslim rumours and images are shared as news. Myint-U paints a depressing portrait of multiple parliament members, downing “a couple of whiskeys before logging on to Facebook, ready to post comments”. In a revealing moment, he meets a Buddhist woman from Rakhine, who blames “Bengali troublemakers” for the violence in her home town. But then she also remembers a Muslim childhood friend who left during the exodus: “I felt sorry for her … We sometimes send each other a little greeting on Facebook.” Elections have become the sole marker of democracy. Syndicates and illicit businesses have thrived in the absence of strong democratic institutions. Aung San Suu Kyi’s NLD is likely to win again in the general elections scheduled later this year, but the army’s shadow still darkens politics. The country’s justice system is too enfeebled to hold the old military establishment accountable for their crimes. Faced with international criticism, Aung San Suu Kyi has looked for protection closer to home. China has blocked any stringent action by the UN security council in response to the Rohingya crisis. With talks of sweeping investments in infrastructure, including a $9bn rail network connecting Mandalay to southwestern China, the economy appears poised to grow more reliant on Chinese markets. At a time when the failures of capitalism have become all too apparent worldwide, Aung San Suu Kyi seems to be rehashing proven mistakes. “Twentieth-century solutions,” Myint-U accurately warns, “are being offered as the default answers to the country’s 21st-century challenges.” • The Hidden History of Burma is published by Atlantic (£18.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.