Iranians have gathered in the south-eastern city of Kerman for the burial of the military commander Qassem Suleimani after four days of funeral processions in cities across Iran and Iraq. Hundreds of thousands of mourners filled the streets of Suleimani’s home town on Tuesday morning, appearing to match the huge turnouts in Baghdad, Tehran, Qom, Mashhad and Ahvaz in recent days to say farewell the commander of the Revolutionary Guards external operations force, who was killed by a US drone strike in Iraq on Friday. “The martyr Qassem Suleimani is more powerful... now that he is dead,” the Revolutionary Guards’ commander, Maj Gen Hossein Salami, told the sea of black-clad mourners. “The enemy killed him unjustly.” Mirroring fierce threats of retaliation from across Iran’s leadership since Friday’s assassination, Salami threatened to “set ablaze” American interests in the region, drawing cries of “death to Israel” from the crowd. People converged from across the region on Kerman’s Azadi Square, where two flag-draped coffins were on display, with the second reportedly containing the remains of Suleimani’s closest aide Brig Gen Hossein Pourjafari. Qassem Suleimani, killed by a US drone strike in Baghdad, had become well known among Iranians and was sometimes discussed as a future president. Many considered Suleimani to have been the second most powerful person in Iran, behind supreme leader of Iran Ali Khamenei, but arguably ahead of President Hassan Rouhani. He was commander of the Quds Force, the elite, external wing of the Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, which the Trump administration designated as a terror organisation in April last year. He was born in Rabor, a city in eastern Iran, and forced to travel to a neighbouring city at age 13 and work to pay his father’s debts to the government of the Shah. By the time the monarch fell in 1979, Suleimani was committed to the clerical rule of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, and joined the Revolutionary Guards, the paramilitary force established to prevent a coup against the newly declared Islamic Republic. Within two years, he was sent to the front to fight in the war against the invading Iraqi army. He quickly distinguished himself, especially for daring reconnaissance missions behind Iraqi lines, and the war also gave him his first contact with foreign militias of the kind he would wield to devastating effect in the decades to come. By the the time the Iraq government fell in 2003, Suleimani was the head of the Quds force and blamed for sponsoring the Shia militias who killed thousands of civilian Iraqis and coalition troops. As fighting raged on Iraq’s streets, Suleimani fought a shadow war with the US for leverage over the new Iraqi leadership. Once described by American commander David Petraeus as ‘a truly evil figure’, Suleimani was instrumental in crushing street protests in Iran in 2009. In recent months outbreaks of popular dissent in Lebanon, Iraq and Iran were again putting pressure on the crescent of influence he had spent the past two decades building. Violent crackdowns on the protests in Baghdad were blamed on militias under his influence. Eighteen months before his death, Suleimani had issued Donald Trump a public warning, wagging his finger and dressed in olive fatigues. “You will start the war but we will end it.” Michael Safi “We’re here today to pay respects to the great commander of the holy defence,” said one of the mourners, who came from the southern city of Shiraz to attend the funeral in Kerman. “Haj Qasem was not only loved in Kerman, or Iran, but also the whole world,” Hemmat Dehghan said. “The security of the whole world – Muslims, Shiites, Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan and especially Iran – all owe it to him,” the 56-year-old war veteran said. Suleimani was killed outside Baghdad airport on Friday morning in a drone strike ordered by US president Donald Trump, ratcheting up tensions with arch-enemy Iran, which has vowed “severe revenge”. The White House on Tuesday denied a visa to Iran’s foreign minister, Javad Zarif, preventing him from attending a UN security council meeting in New York scheduled for Thursday. “They fear that someone comes to the US and reveals realities,” Zarif said from Tehran. The visa ban breaches a 1947 UN “headquarters agreement” under which the US is generally required to give foreign diplomats access to the country, even if they are restricted to the area around the site of the international organisation. Zarif has been subject to such restrictions in the past but Washington says it can deny visas outright for “security, terrorism and foreign policy” reasons. The assassination of Suleimani, 62, heightened international concern about a new war in the volatile, oil-rich Middle East and rattled financial markets. Iran’s semi-official Tasnim news agency reported on Tuesday that the country’s leaders had worked up 13 sets of plans to revenge the killing. The report quoted Ali Shamkhani, the secretary of Iran’s Supreme National Security Council, saying that even the weakest among the reprisals would be a “historic nightmare” for the US. He declined to give details. “If the US troops do not leave our region voluntarily and upright, we will do something to carry their bodies horizontally out,” Shamkhani said. An urgent bill was meanwhile passed by Iran’s parliament declaring the US military’s command at the Pentagon in Washington and those acting on its behalf to be “terrorists”, subject to Iranian sanctions. The measure appears to mirror Trump’s decision in April to classify the Revolutionary Guards a terrorist organisation. Iraq’s parliament has demanded the government expel the 5,200 American troops stationed in the country in response to the attack, which also killed top Iraqi militia leader Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis. The US has scrambled to respond to the Iraqi order, delivering a letter the country’s defence ministry on Monday saying preparations would begin right away “to ensure that movement out of Iraq is conducted in a safe and efficient manner”. But soon afterwards, the defence secretary, Mark Esper, told journalists in the Pentagon: “That letter is inconsistent with where we are right now” and insisted that no decision had been taken to evacuate Iraq. The chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, Gen Mark Milley, said the letter had been sent in error. The Nato chief Jens Stoltenberg warned on Monday that Iran must avoid “further violence and provocations” after the alliance held emergency talks on the crisis. The European Union, whose foreign ministers will hold emergency talks on the crisis on Friday, said it was in both Iran and Iraq’s interests to “take the path of sobriety and not the path of escalation”. Saudi Arabia – an oil-rich US ally seen as vulnerable to Iranian counterstrikes – also appealed for calm after a “very dangerous” escalation. Suleimani is expected to be buried at the martyrs’ cemetery between 2pm and 4pm (1030 to 1230 GMT).