England’s World Cup seemed to be judged on the no-show in the final against South Africa, the manner in which they overwhelmed Australia and New Zealand in the previous rounds largely forgotten. They had one of the youngest teams in the tournament with Eddie Jones changing direction a year out from Japan and jettisoning some of his more seasoned players. The result was that they played with greater pace, if not invention, and at last had a complementary back row. Playing the two previous Six Nations champions at home – Ireland and Wales – makes them favourites, but much will hinge on their opener in Paris against a France side that should play without fear or inhibition. Jones has made the point that losing World Cup finalists have struggled the year after, but the same could be said of the winners, New Zealand post-2011 excepted. The tournament often marks the end of a cycle, but England will be little changed from Japan, although their Saracens contingent are grieving. Jones has brought in Matt Proudfoot from South Africa to mould the forwards while Simon Amor is a left-field appointment from the sevens circuit to inject unpredictability into the attack. Jones wants England to become the greatest team the world has ever seen. But Europe will do for now. Fabien Galthié plans a remake of Love Story after Les Bleus spent most of the 2010s auditioning for Hammer horror movies. France’s new head coach fears there has been a disconnect with the crowd at the Stade de France and wants to rekindle the fans’ passion for their team. He has invested in youth, looking ahead to the 2023 World Cup which France are hosting having made a hash, on the field, of the 2007 event. They start with England at home and can expect an onslaught in the opening quarter since the visitors’ understanding of Shaun Edwards’s defensive system will put France under immediate strain. In France’s favour they have won the last two Junior World Championships and a feature of their better teams in Europe this season has been aggressive defence complemented by an attacking freestyle that used to be the hallmark of the French, all running angles and offloads. With pace and power behind and, should their conditioning endure for the whole match rather than the first half and a few minutes more, France will be in a position to recapture the past, although this campaign will be about signs of progress. Like Wales, Ireland are starting a new era following the departure of the successful Joe Schmidt, but the difference is they have promoted from within. Andy Farrell is an experienced second-in-command but now has to get used to telling players they are not in the team, such as the in-form scrum-half John Cooney with the established Conor Murray starting against Scotland on Saturday. If little in his demeanour suggests he will have a problem with that, selection itself is another matter. Schmidt approached that part of the job with caution, his paradigms shifting slowly as he gradually phased in young players, and a side that had started the year at the top of the world rankings looked uninspired in Japan. Leinster are unbeaten this season and the nucleus of that team equally adept in defence and attack, including the threats behind of Jordan Larmour, Garry Ringrose and Jonathan Sexton, will be involved in the Six Nations. Ireland were organised under Schmidt, masters at keeping possession, but they largely avoided risk and relied on plays. That should change with Mike Catt, an improviser in his England playing days, masterminding attacking strategy and placing more emphasis on the unstructured. Farrell has two home matches to start his tenure, against Scotland and Wales – who have not won in the tournament in Dublin since 2010 and 2012 respectively – before his return to Twickenham. Italy used to appoint francophiles as their head coaches but Franco Smith, a South African who finished his playing career with Treviso, has taken over from Conor O’Shea – whose four years in charge were notable for structural improvement rather than Six Nations victories in the Six Nations. The Azzurri won 12 of their 100 matches in their first 20 years in the tournament, half of the victories coming against Scotland, who accounted for their two successes on the road, although they drew in Cardiff in 2006. That is an underwhelming record and the side’s talisman for the last 16 years, Sergio Parisse, will only have a walk-on role, saying arrivederci in the final match at home to England. Smith believes statistics hide the improvement in the attitude of his players, forged by playing in the Six Nations and the Pro14, but his desire of finding an Italian way that is distinctive is ambitious. Where to start? Gregor Townsend and Eddie Jones are the only two surviving head coaches from last year, but they had contrasting World Cups. Scotland failed to make the knockout stage after a timid opening-round display against Ireland left them needing to defeat the hosts, who by that stage had more than a nation behind them. Preparations for the Six Nations started badly with Finn Russell, the side’s dynamo, being sent home after he failed to show up for training following a late-night drinking session. Townsend says it is not a case of Finn being finished, but it leaves him further on the back foot as the side prepares for Dublin, a city where the Scots have won only once in the Six Nations, one of just seven successes on the road in 20 years. Adam Hastings, who will replace Russell at No 10, is a player growing in influence and the more reliable goal-kicker in the post-Greig Laidlaw era, but for a side that does not have the most powerful tight five around, the loss of the mercurial Russell is wounding, following reports of his discontent over tactics in Japan. If referees clamp down on slowing the ball down at the breakdown, Scotland will be a threat. If they don’t, they won’t. The holders are not expected to emerge from the long shadow cast by Warren Gatland, at least by bookmakers who reckon youthful France and Ireland will finish closer to England. Wayne Pivac is Wales’s first new coach for 12 years, a change from the times when 12 months was closer to the average tenure, but the New Zealander does not have much in common other than his nationality with Gatland, who took Wales back to the 1970s in terms of success, if not style. Wales were underrated under Gatland: beside a defence masterminded by Shaun Edwards, who will make a quick return to Cardiff with France, they had no one outstanding characteristic but became hard to beat. They were not reliant on one part of their game having to function and their grand slam success last year was based on an ability to chase a game, as they showed against France and England, and defend a lead, which they did at Scotland and at home to Ireland. Pivac has pledged to make Wales’s attack more stiletto than bludgeon, although he starts without three of last year’s first-choice backs. His first task is to maintain the indomitable spirit that took them to the title and the World Cup semi-finals. Achieve that, make them more cutting edge and Wales will be contenders again. • This is an extract from our weekly rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.