Born in Derbyshire, Jack O’Connell, 29, had a role in This is England in 2006 and went on to appear in Skins from 2009 to 2013. In 2015, he won the Bafta Rising Star award and, in 2017, he performed with Sienna Miller in the West End revival of Cat On A Hot Tin Roof. His films include Unbroken, Money Monster and Seberg, which is in cinemas now. He lives in London. What is your greatest fear?Big spiders. Which living person do you most admire and why?My nana. Speaking to her, you wouldn’t know if she’s lost a leg or won the lottery. She’s very balanced and stoic. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Paranoia. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Paranoia. What is your most treasured possession?One or two bits of jewellery from my late father. What is your favourite word?Gaggle. What did you want to be when you were growing up?A footballer. My grandad, Ken Gutteridge, made his name as a coach and was a great man. We were tight as anything; he used to give me a pound a goal, then I was scoring too many so he gave me a pound a hat-trick. I played for a team called Alvaston Rangers, and then had trials at Derby. What is top of your bucket list?To travel round Europe in my caravan. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Coronation Street. What is your most unappealing habit?Smoking. What is your favourite smell?Tobacco. If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose?Oasis. What do you owe your parents?Everything, especially to my mum who gave me numerous lifts. There’s no way I could do what I do without their support. What or who is the greatest love of your life?Derby County. What does love feel like?A bit one way when you support Derby. Which words or phrases do you most overuse?Ay up me duck. If you could go back in time, where would you go?I’d go as far back as possible, just to have a look. What do you consider your greatest achievement?Not many actors come from where I am from. I am quite proud of that. What makes you unhappy?My football team losing. How would you like to be remembered?A sound lad. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?Not to think of the past, not to think of the future, just the here and now. Tell us a joke:Q: What do you call a French person wearing flip-flops? A: Phillipe Phillop.