When the Tennessee Titans face the Baltimore Ravens in Saturday’s divisional round of the NFL playoffs, one quarterback will take the field and stick it to the critics who questioned his ability to thrive at the position. In between, one supposes, Lamar Jackson will take some snaps, too. To be clear: no signal-caller has had a better season than Jackson, the Ravens’ dazzling dual threat, whose inevitable coronation as the league’s most valuable player is sure to make even bigger fools of the talent evaluators who pegged him as a better fit at wide receiver or running back simply because he’s black. But if there’s a redemption story that comes close, it’s Ryan Tannehill of the Titans. This past season saw the quarterback register Joe Montana-like numbers in completion percentage (70.3) and yards per attempt (9.6), while throwing 22 touchdowns against six interceptions. For an encore the 31-year-old made his maiden playoff appearance last week and led the Titans to a road upset of the defending Super Bowl champion New England Patriots. And while Tannehill didn’t perform anywhere near his best against the Patriots’ top-ranked defense, logging 15 attempts for a scant 72 yards while throwing an interception and fumbling twice, he did toss an early touchdown that set the table for Tennessee’s second playoff win in 11 seasons. The margin for error won’t be much more generous for Tannehill against the Ravens, who lay claim to a top-five defense and the league’s best offense. That he even finds himself in this situation at all is a development few saw coming when Tannehill arrived via trade from Miami last March. Recall: the Titans still belonged to Marcus Mariota, the well-intentioned, oft-injured former Heisman trophy winner the team selected with the second overall pick in the 2015 draft. Meanwhile Tannehill, after dashing Dolphins fans’ hopes of finding a true successor to the great Dan Marino, appeared to be entering the journeyman phase of his career. Pairing Tannehill with Mariota was a no-brainer move for a Titans front office struggling to discern whether their streaky franchise QB, who is fast approaching the end of a four-year contract extension that paid out a whopping $21m this season, should get a raise or get to steppin’. But when Mariota was benched during a shutout loss to Denver that dropped Tennessee to 2-4, Tannehill did more than salvage the team’s season; he sealed Mariota’s fate, rallying the Titans to seven victories over their last 10 games. All the while the taciturn Texan endeared himself to teammates with his determination and indomitable spirit, virtues that were impossible to miss in a Week 14 tilt against Oakland. On the Titans opening possession Tannehill threw an interception to Raiders defensive tackle Maurice Hurst. Rather than concede a certain pick-six, Tannehill slipped one Raiders block and chased Hurst, chopping down the 290-pounder to complete what might well be his signature play as a pro. .@dionj95 swats it, @mohurstjr snags it.......then runs for 55 yards on the return! #TENvsOAK pic.twitter.com/EvTfLtVUAF Last weekend, he led his team into Gillette Stadium and scored the biggest victory of his career, effectively plunging the most prominent American sports dynasty of the millennium into a tailspin. For Dolphins fans, this had to hurt. Here was the very thing that Tannehill – a shoo-in for comeback player of the year honors this year, by the way – was drafted to do. And for him to do it now? In another uniform? It just goes to show what little feeling the experts who develop and coach football players actually have for talent, even when the quarterback is white. Tannehill didn’t come out of the womb flinging spirals. He was an athletic polymath like Jackson, too, excelling in golf, baseball, basketball and as a sprinter before seriously committing to football in high school – and even then he dabbled as a defensive back and punt returner in between dropbacks. At Texas A&M he broke out as a receiver, nearly setting a new freshman yardage record in 2008 and leading the team in receiving in 2009. When he finally got a chance to start at quarterback in his senior year, Tannehill threw for more than 3,700 yards, completing passes at a 62% clip. What’s more, he was just as much a force in the classroom, finishing a runner-up for the William V Campbell trophy – the Heisman for scholar-athletes. The third quarterback chosen behind Andrew Luck (who retired before the start of this season) and Robert Griffin III (who backs up Jackson in Baltimore), Tannehill entered the league in 2012 under intense scrutiny. The Dolphins’ appearance on HBO’s Hard Knocks, in which Tannehill admitted he wasn’t an NFL fan and didn’t know which teams play in what divisions outside his own AFC East, did not inspire much confidence. And even though Tannehill would go on to post the NFL’s third-highest passing yardage total through his first four seasons (trailing Marino and Peyton Manning) while also showing a knack for extending plays and picking up yards with his legs, the lot didn’t add up to more than one winning season in Miami. The more Tannehill seemed to underachieve, the less interesting he seemed in comparison to his Insta-posting, gun-toting wife. In Tannehill’s defense: those were the same seven years that Dolphins burned through three general managers, two head coaches and three more offensive coordinators – starting with Mike Sherman, Tannehill’s college coach. What’s more, this was also the period that saw a racially motivated bullying scandal spill out of the Dolphins locker room and into the headlines. Tannehill, in his second year at the time, rose to the defense of loathsome ringleader Ritchie Incognito – whom the quarterback infamously called “the best teammate I could ask for.” When Tannehill wasn’t being filleted by the local media for failing to live up to a six-year, $96m contract extension, he was flamed on social media – with a teammate’s wife leading the chorus – as overly sack-prone and sensitive. Then in 2017, adding injury to insult, Tannehill tore his ACL. Two years later the Dolphins took his talents out of South Beach, but not before Tannehill had the chance to go out on one of the great walk-off plays in NFL history – which, as it happens, came at the Patriots’ expense. Who knew he was just getting started. Tannehill’s career resurgence owes as much to lack of pressure and perseverance, as the rugged complement of teammates that now surrounds him. In addition to rookie AJ Brown, a deep-threat receiver whose production spiked after the Titans’ QB switch, Tannehill leans on Pro Bowl running back Derrick Henry, the 2019 league rushing leader whose legs drove the Titans to victory against New England. He also has Titans coach Mike Vrabel and a play-calling star on the rise in first-year coordinator Arthur Smith on side. It’s the kind of top-down stability that would make a once-beleaguered castoff like Tannehill want to stick around – and last month, the Titans started internally discussing a long-term extension that would give Tannehill a significant raise over his current one-year, $12m deal. But Tannehill, for his part, hasn’t said whether he’ll stay put or try for a bigger payday in free agency. For now he’s content to live in the moment and look only as far as Saturday’s date with Jackson – a clash of kindred spirits, perhaps. If Jackson is the quarterback for a new age, call Tannehill ahead of his time.