The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has said he will ask parliament to grant him immunity from corruption charges, a step that is expected to delay his trial until after elections in March, when he hopes to win a majority coalition that would shield him from prosecution. Netanyahu was indicted in November on charges of bribery, fraud and breach of trust. After failing to assemble a governing majority following back-to-back elections last year, he will have a third shot at remaining in office in March. Wednesday’s announcement essentially turns the upcoming election into a referendum on whether Netanyahu should be granted immunity and remain in office or step down and stand trial. A recent poll indicated that a majority of Israelis oppose giving him immunity. In a nationally televised address, Netanyahu repeated his assertion that he was the victim of an unfair conspiracy, lashing out at prosecutors, the media and his political enemies. Claiming credit for a series of economic and security achievements on his watch, he said he would seek to invoke the law that would protect him from prosecution as long as he remains in office. “In order to continue to lead Israel to great achievements, I intend to approach the speaker of the Knesset in accordance with chapter 4C of the law, in order to fulfil my right, my duty and my mission to continue to serve you for the future of Israel,” he said. Normally, a request for immunity would need to be approved by the parliament’s house committee and then submitted to a full vote. But the house committee does not exist because a government was never formed after September’s election. Court proceedings cannot begin until the question of immunity is settled. The opposition Blue and White party said it would seek to form the house committee before the March election to take up the question of immunity. But it remains unclear whether it will be able to move forward. The parliament Speaker, Yuli Edelstein, a member of Netanyahu’s Likud party, said he would hold talks on the matter next week. The Blue and White leader, the former military chief Benny Gantz, said it was a “sad day”. “I never imagined that we would see the day that the prime minister of Israel would avoid standing before the law and the justice system,” he said. “Today it’s clear what we’re fighting for. Netanyahu knows he’s guilty.” Netanyahu said he was not evading justice and still planned to go to court to fight what he said were fabricated accusations. “The law is meant to ensure that elected officials can serve the people according to the will of the people,” he said. Should Netanyahu succeed in assembling a 61-seat majority in favour of immunity, he would avoid prosecution. But that appears unlikely even after the March vote, with most polls predicting another split decision that would leave Likud and Blue and White in deadlock, with neither able to secure a parliamentary majority. The uncertainty means it could be many months before a new government is formed, leaving the question of immunity on hold as Netanyahu remains in office. The indictment, on charges of trading political and regulatory favours for positive press coverage and accepting lavish gifts from wealthy supporters, marked the culmination of three long-running investigations. Netanyahu has dismissed the allegations as an “attempted coup” and has vowed to battle them from the prime minister’s office. He received a boost last week when he easily defeated a senior Likud member in a primary election for the party leadership. The vote shored up his base, but he faces a much greater challenge going into the general elections. An opinion poll conducted this week by the iPanel and Midgam research firms found that 51% of respondents opposed granting Netanyahu immunity, with 33% in favour.