You had to commend Joe Root’s honesty when he walked after gloving behind a short ball from Anrich Nortje on the opening day of this second Test against South Africa. Yet perhaps the time is nearing for him to be equally honest about his own position as England’s Test captain. To be frank, it just isn’t working out. This latest innings from Root, a largely fluent 35 from 49 balls, offered more evidence as to why he should not be in the job. Up to the point where he nailed Keshav Maharaj for a sublime swept four to move on to 29, the Yorkshireman was imperious. After that something changed and his rhythm was disturbed, firstly flirting with danger when top-edging Maharaj before being dropped on 31 off Nortje and then being removed by the same bowler two balls later. Shorn of the opener Rory Burns through injury and coming into this match with a top three boasting only 15 caps between them, England needed their captain to lead from the front. Unfortunately, he did not. Again. The end result – yet another calamitous collapse – was all too predictable. Forget the flaws in his on-field captaincy for now – and they are myriad. England need Root at his very best with the bat if they are to have any hope of progressing as a Test team. At the moment they are going backwards, a rather uncomfortable position for Chris Silverwood, the new coach who is still looking for his first win four Tests into his tenure. Much was made of the great relationship the pair of Yorkshiremen had when Silverwood was announced as the successor to Trevor Bayliss in October. Although Silverwood should be given time to stamp his mark on this team, the early signs are that he is struggling to make much, if any, headway in what was always going to be a sizeable rebuilding job. Whatever support the coach can offer Root as captain, it will never banish the mental pressures that impose themselves on those who take on the role. To say Root’s own game has not been affected since he took over as captain from Alastair Cook in early 2017 is to deny all the evidence. When he came into the job, his Test average stood at 52.80. Back then he was rightfully ranked alongside the modern batting greats of India’s Virat Kohli, Australia’s Steve Smith and Kane Williamson of New Zealand. Sadly, that is no longer the case given Root’s average as captain stands at 42.42. That is still a very good return for most batsmen. However, Root is not most batsmen – he is the best England have and they desperately need him to progress rather than regress. Tellingly, since he took on the captaincy the averages of Kohli (63.68), Smith (67.31) and Williamson (57.70) dwarf Root’s over the same time three-year period. It is no coincidence England have not lost any of the 17 Tests where Root has made a three-figure score. He is the heartbeat of the batting unit yet trying to make him the heartbeat of the team as captain has undoubtedly not been for the greater good. You can point to the fact he has won more Tests (17) than he has lost (15) since taking on the job. Yet how many more victories might England have achieved had Root’s form with the bat kicked on even remotely similarly to that of Kohli, Smith and Williamson over the past three years? Things appear to be getting worse too, with Root’s average over the past 24 months dropping to 39. Cricket, and especially batting, is so much of a mental game that any disturbance to a player’s equilibrium can have a huge impact. To suggest that Root’s form has not been affected by the extra responsibility is ludicrous. Many people jumped to Root’s defence when he scored a double hundred against New Zealand at Hamilton before Christmas. It was a fine innings but ultimately it came on a flat pitch and England did not win the game. The last time Root scored a hundred in a winning cause came 11 months ago against West Indies in St Lucia. The series had already been lost by then. Root will make runs whether he is captain or not. But the key is he is likely to score many more if unburdened of that responsibility. In November before the series defeat in New Zealand, Ashley Giles, England’s director of cricket, said Root was the man to lead England on the next Ashes tour of Australia in 2021-22. “We have talked about him leading and winning in Australia,” he said. “We’ve not said: ‘Maybe if you get there.’ We plan for him to be our captain.” That now seems a remarkably premature shout from Giles because the truth is Root’s captaincy looks like it could reach a critical mass in a matter of months, if not weeks.