With Callum Chambers sidelined for up to nine months with a ruptured cruciate ligament, Mikel Arteta has turned his gaze to the Bundesliga in search of a replacement. Arsenal’s new manager has identified Bayern Munich’s Jérôme Boateng as the ideal man to fill the Chambers-shaped hole in his squad and will be able to bring him to the Emirates if Arsenal stump up the thick end of €15m (£12.8m). The World Cup-winning 31-year-old last played in the Premier League for Manchester City against Fulham in February 2011. Surplus to requirements at Juventus where he has featured just eight times this season, former Liverpool midfielder Emre Can could make a surprise return to Merseyside wearing the blue of Everton. Carlo Ancelotti has identified the 26-year-old German international as a January target and Goodison Park bean-counters are preparing a bid somewhere in the region of £30m. Despite being in dire need of an assist-providing, goalscoring midfielder, Manchester United are stubbornly refusing to meet Sporting’s valuation of Bruno Fernandes, who has made little or no secret of his eagerness to move to Old Trafford. United have been locked in negotiations over a fee for the 25-year-old but in a state of affairs that suggests they don’t understand the law of supply and demand, the Manchester Evening News say they are “baffled” by the Portuguese club’s £68m valuation. Along with their local rivals Manchester City, United have also made enquiries about Inter’s 22-year-old Argentinian striker Lautaro Martínez. Aston Villa have joined Crystal Palace and Inter in the chase for Olivier Giroud, who looks certain to leave Chelsea before the end of the January window. Along with Leicester, Villa are also mulling over a move for Serhou Guirassy, a striker with Ligue 1 side Amiens. Elsewhere in France, Reims left-back Hassane Kamara could soon find himself the subject of a tug-of-love between Watford and Lyon. Is Milan’s Polish striker Krzysztof Piatek off to Tottenham Hotspur? Not according to the Daily Mail, who say talks between the two clubs have stalled. Following Leicester’s surprise defeat to Burnley yesterday, Brendan Rodgers fielded questions about the conspicuous absence of Ben Chilwell and Hamza Choudhury from his matchday squad, not least because Chilwell has been been the subject of reported interest from Chelsea and Manchester United. “They weren’t available for training in the week in some of the important sessions that we had and of course I had to go with the players who we trusted to come here and get the result,” explained Rodgers after watching his team lose at Turf Moor, while in the background various players who couldn’t be trusted to go there and get the result shuffled sheepishly on to the team bus. And finally, Inter are expected to ramp up their efforts to sign Christian Eriksen this week, in the hope of having the Danish playmaker in their line-up for next weekend’s game against Cagliari. Sunday’s draw at Lecce left them four points behind Juventus, who lead Serie A and Antonio Conte wants to get the Tottenham midfielder on board sooner rather than later.