The otherwise excellent article about the current popularity of singing in choirs (All together now, G2, 3 January) fails to mention a crucial choral tradition that is very much alive and well. There are many choirs around the UK whose repertoire comprises radical and protest songs, both old and new, drawing attention to prevailing political and social ills and celebrating past triumphs and neglected champions. My own choir, Red Leicester, can frequently be heard in Leicester and beyond singing at events where power is questioned and held accountable. It is also a proud member of the Campaign Choirs Network, a UK-wide affiliation of like-minded choirs who join together at national protests and gatherings to provide a choral backdrop to the events themselves. In these politically uncertain times, their vocal contribution is more valuable than ever.Martin PenningtonLeicester • The benefits of group singing are fully appreciated in Norfolk. Since 2004 a therapeutic activity for staff and patients at a local mental health hospital has grown into the charity Sing Your Heart Out (SYHO), which runs free, drop-in singing workshops across the county. More than 150 people weekly come to professionally led daytime sessions promoting mental wellbeing through group singing in harmony. Inclusive and non-judgmental, SYHO provides a lifeline for many vulnerable people: they connect with others through singing, and contribute to something that is powerful and uplifting. Arts-based activities, including singing, offer multiple physical and mental benefits yet are so often expected to fund and sustain themselves, relying on grants, donations and dedicated volunteers. If only those in power would properly recognise and value of this work in practical, meaningful ways.Julia RumsbyLittle Melton, Norfolk • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition