What were you hoping for?Someone to go dancing in the moonlight with. First impressions?Wow, you’re here before me despite me being 15 minutes early. What did you talk about?The dares she was doing instead of a new year’s resolution, her film review blog, trips to New Orleans. Any awkward moments?Talking about the fact that we had to write a review of our date. Good table manners?Nothing to complain about. Best thing about Charlotte?She was willing to call time straight after dessert, rather than continuing when we didn’t have a connection. She also seemed to genuinely care about the children she works with. Would you introduce her to your friends?I’m not sure she’d enjoy the experience. They’re very intrusive. Describe Charlotte in three wordsPrompt, assertive, mild-mannered. What do you think she made of you?“Why does this guy keep forgetting all his stories halfway through?” Did you go on somewhere?No. Even additional drinks at the restaurant were turned down. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Maybe if we’d gone down different conversational routes we would have gelled more. There was potentially a better date in there somewhere, but we just couldn’t bring it out. Marks out of 10?5. Would you meet again?If we ran into each other on the street, I’d stop to say hi. What were you hoping for?A Clark Kent type. Someone who doesn’t make me feel freakish for being 5ft 11in. First impressions?He’s not opened with a joke like “What’s the weather like up there?” so we’re off to a pretty good start. What did you talk about?How he’s just started tap dancing, my work outside of teaching, his promotion of Norwich as a tourist destination, films v books. Any awkward moments?Trying to work out if it was OK to leave when we’d finished the meal. We ended up awkwardly asking the waiters before shuffling out. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com Good table manners?Impeccable. Best thing about Alex?He’s very nice and can hold a conversation well. Would you introduce him to your friends?I guess so, though they’d have to forgive him for hating coffee and not really liking Star Wars. Describe Alex in three wordsEasygoing, friendly, affable. What do you think he made of you?Hopefully not too awful. Did you go on somewhere?No. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?More compatibility: we’re different personalities and it didn’t really click romantically. Marks out of 10?6. Would you meet again?Possibly as friends. • Alex and Charlotte ate at Pasta Nostra, London EC1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone likeminded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com.