A recent episode of The Simpsons saw America’s favourite dysfunctional cartoon family take a step back in time. In one scene, the young Marge Simpson, a reporter on the Springfield Shopper, interviews a local conceptual artist about his change of subject from mouths to noses. “So,” rasps Marge, “you’ve moved into painting giant schnozzes.” “Marge,” the artist replies, “the mouth has had its day. It’s time to find out what the nose knows.” The artist in question, who voiced his cartoon character himself, was John Baldessari, who has died aged 88. Unusually for a conceptual artist, the maker of the (real) series titled Noses & Ears, Etc. (2006), was known for his sense of humour. His Wrong series (1966-68), of intentionally faulty snapshots – one showed a palm tree apparently sprouting from the artist’s head – each incorporated (and broke) a rule from a photographic manual. Another piece from that time was a black-and-white photographic print of a cover of Artforum magazine, featuring a Frank Stella painting, with the caption This Is Not to Be Looked At, made by a hired sign-painter. Such interplays of image and text would remain a staple of his art for the next 50 years. Born in National City, California – a small town noted for its strip joints and sailors’ bars – John was the son of Antonio Baldessari, an Austro-Italian immigrant, and Hedwig (nee Jensen), a Danish-born nurse. Antonio was a ducker and diver, with fingers in many pies, including scrapyards. John was involved in the family business from an early age, “taking apart faucets and reconditioning them, painting them, and taking nails out of lumber … I sometimes think that has a lot of bearing on the art I would do,” he said later. After education at Sweetwater high school, he moved on to the local state college in San Diego, ostensibly to study chemistry. Instead, Baldessari found himself drawn to art; in 1954, he enrolled at the University of California at Berkeley as an art history student. While there, he attended a summer school at UCLA, attracted by the presence of Rico Lebrun, “a hot LA artist of the time, a Neapolitan who had moved to America”. This set a pattern that would recur in Baldessari’s career. Although he probably did more than anyone to establish Los Angeles as a rival to the art scene in New York, his own sensibility owed more to Europe than to California. “I have European parents,” Baldessari said in a 1992 interview for the Archives of American Art. “I was probably raised European without even realising it … I remember trying to shop my paintings around LA and not having any success, and somebody said, ‘Well, your work is more European’.” After two years at Berkeley and UCLA, Baldessari suddenly returned to San Diego State College. This apparently retrograde step was driven by an ambition to teach. Running children’s classes and university extension courses in painting, Baldessari continued to paint himself, using an abandoned cinema bought by his father as a studio. After seven years of this, he realised that none of his pictures – some 500 in all, in styles ranging from fauvism to dada – had sold, or was likely to. At the same time, he had been invited to teach at the newly formed University of California San Diego. Enlivened by the work of his colleagues there, Baldessari began to experiment with new forms of art-making, including the Wrong series. These works were included in Baldessari’s first one-man show, at the Molly Barnes gallery in LA in 1968. Buoyed by the change in direction, in 1970 Baldessari made a drastic act now etched in the annals of conceptual art: he burned all his paintings. With five friends, he shredded the unsold canvases and took the remains to a local crematorium. In the space of four hours, his entire output from 1953 to 1966 went up in smoke. “There was a lot of doubt and anxiety,” Baldessari recalled. “But I breathed a sigh of relief when the crematory door slammed shut.” The resultant ashes were baked into biscuits, some of which were shown in the Museum of Modern Art’s groundbreaking survey of conceptual art, Information, that same year. Others were placed in an urn, a plaque recording the artist’s name, the birth and death dates of the destroyed work, and a recipe for the ash biscuits. Cremation Project, Corpus Wafers (With Text, Recipe and Documentation) is now in the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington DC. A few weeks after the cremation, Baldessari took a job at the California Institute of the Arts in Los Angeles. Then the city’s hottest school, CalArts with its handsome funding allowed the 39-year-old artist to experiment with new media such as video and film. Among his CalArts works was Baldessari Sings LeWitt (1972), a madcap video in which the artist intones, a cappella, Sol LeWitt’s 35 Sentences on Conceptual Art to camera. It was in Europe, however, that Baldessari’s career was to really take off. In 1971 he had his first European show, in Amsterdam – a series of black-and-white photographs in an open ring-binder, adorned with a scrap of newspaper bearing the headline Art Disaster. The following year came nine more European exhibitions, among them ones in London, Bonn and Paris. In Cologne, in 1972, he met the king-making New York gallerist Ileana Sonnabend, who offered to represent him. He would stay with Sonnabend for 26 years, before switching to the Marian Goodman gallery. In 1985, Baldessari began to efface the images of public figures he disliked with stick-on dots. These soon evolved into the painted dots which, as collages, paintings or prints, would occupy him for much of the rest of his life. “A hundred years from now,” Baldessari ruefully noted, “I will probably be remembered as the guy who put dots on faces.” In 2006, he began the print series Noses & Ears, Etc. that drew the critical wrath of Marge Simpson. Another print series, Double Bill, saw Baldessari appropriating and pairing the work of fellow artists – David Hockney and Giovanni di Paolo, for example – only one of which (Hockney) was acknowledged in the title on the print’s lower edge. Endlessly inventive, in 2007, the 76-year-old artist made his first sculpture, Beethoven’s Trumpet (with Ear) Opus # 127, 130, 131, 132, 133, 135, in which the whispers of visitors activated snatches of Beethoven quartets. Like many people of unusual height – he was 6ft 7in tall – Baldessari was unexpectedly diffident. This may have contributed to the lateness of his success. He was nearly 60 before the Museum of Contemporary Art in LA gave him a retrospective, although the 30 years that followed saw Baldessari enter the pantheon of greats. A travelling retrospective, Pure Beauty, began at Tate Modern in 2009 and ended at the Metropolitan Museum in New York two years later. He was awarded a Golden Lion in Venice the same year; President Barack Obama presented him with the National Medal of Arts in 2014. He was equally revered as a teacher, his former students including the artists David Salle, Tony Oursler and Mike Kelley. “Students are the first to tell you you’re full of shit,” a beaming Baldessari once said. “I like that kind of feedback.” In 1960, he married Carol Ann Wixom, a Montessori teacher; they divorced in 1986. Their children, Annamarie and Tony, survive him. • John Anthony Baldessari, artist, born 17 June 1931; died 2 January 2020