If I had to describe The Masked Singer to someone who hadn’t seen it I would say it was like the outcome of the “make a TV show” challenge on The Apprentice. In case you have somehow missed its OTT weirdness, the premise is as follows: 12 celebrities sing in outrageous fancy dress costumes, and you – along with a panel of celebrity judges (including Ken Jeong from The Hangover, for some reason) – try to work out who they are. Hence the incredibly strange viral moment that did the rounds last week of “a pharaoh” taking off his mask to reveal the former home secretary Alan Johnson. Let me be clear: The Masked Singer is bad television. The Guardian review of the show gave it one star, calling it a “prerecorded unspectacular crushed at birth by its contrived premise”. There are many moments I know I will recount one day in some form of therapy, such as the time a 6ft duck sang Like a Virgin while also somehow dressed as Madonna, before returning the next week to sing Ave Maria while a jealous chameleon looked on. The celebrities’ speaking voices are troubling, too, having been hidden in such a weird way that they all sound like disoriented, hungover Doctor Who villains. Yet despite all of this, I will watch every episode and think you should, too. Why? Because it turns out that The Masked Singer is so bad – so ridiculously naff – that it may be a work of genius. I’m not the only one who thinks so, either: 5.5 million people watched the first episode, with figures barely dipping since. Entire WhatsApp groups have been dedicated to working out important questions such as: “Could the bee really be Cara Delevingne?” Why? Well, for one thing, this TV format is a form of internet clickbait. The celebrity panel – either intentionally or because they have forgotten they are on an ITV budget – lures you in, its members implying that the person inside each outfit could be anyone, right up to a serious A-lister. Other guesses for the bee, for instance, have included Kylie Minogue, Margot Robbie and Olivia Colman. “Olivia Colman?” you scoff. “Surely not!” Then your mind starts playing tricks on you. Could the Oscar winner be trolling us all, squeezing in a Lewis Capaldi cover between filming episodes of The Crown? After all, the original South Korean version did manage to book Ryan Reynolds. You know for a fact that you will probably end up disappointed but – like clickbait – you cling on anyway. Similarly, the chameleon was thought to have been Idris Elba, Chiwetel Ejiofor or Stormzy. It was in fact Justin Hawkins from The Darkness. The constant, crushing disappointment is strangely compelling. A short film of clues is shown before each performance. One included footage of a butterfly behind some DJ decks. When it was revealed that the winged creature was in fact EastEnders’ Patsy Palmer, we were informed that the decks were a nod to her DJing career in LA. Because of course! The Masked Singer shouldn’t exist. Television has never been more highbrow and far-reaching – and yet so many of us are choosing to watch a hedgehog attempt karaoke. This is for the same reason Channel 5 still dedicates serious prime-time to celebrities ranking various chocolate bars and biscuits, and why ITV once aired a one-off show celebrating 20 years of the Black Eyed Peas presented by “their friend” Joanna Lumley. This is not an accident. They know we crave this stuff – and so does social media. The Masked Singer really is the best kind of trash TV … not least when you’re watching Jeong’s face during the celebrity reveal, gauging just how confused he is. In fact, I’m waiting for the inevitable next step: a scenario in which the members of celebrity panel spend their entire lives trying to guess who is behind the mask, only for the talent to be so low-rent that even they hadn’t heard of them. If that wouldn’t make for appallingly watchable TV, I don’t know what would.