Prince Charles is to warn that lessons of the Holocaust are “searingly relevant to this day” as “hatred and intolerance still lurk in the human heart”. He is due to address world leaders gathered in Jerusalem on Thursday to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the liberation of the Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp. He will tell the World Holocaust Forum: “We must be fearless in confronting falsehoods and resolute in resisting words and acts of violence. “The lessons of the Holocaust are searingly relevant to this day. Seventy-five years after the liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau, hatred and intolerance still lurk in the human heart, still tell new lies, adopt new disguises, and still seek new victims.” The prince will deliver his address at Yad Vashem, the World Holocaust Remembrance Center in Jerusalem, where guests are expected to include the US vice-president, Mike Pence, the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and the French president, Emmanuel Macron. The prince will say: “All too often, language is used which turns disagreement into dehumanisation. Words are used as badges of shame to mark others as enemies, to brand those who are different as somehow deviant. “All too often, virtue seems to be sought through verbal violence. All too often, real violence ensues, and acts of unspeakable cruelty are still perpetrated around the world against people for reasons of their religion, their race or their beliefs. “Knowing, as we do, the darkness to which such behaviour leads, we must be vigilant in discerning these ever-changing threats, we must be fearless in confronting falsehoods and resolute in resisting words and acts of violence. And we must never rest in seeking to create mutual understanding and respect.” The prince has been invited to the event by the Israeli president, Reuven Rivlin, as part of a two-day visit to the Holy Land. He will meet British Holocaust survivors, and will be joined by the UK chief rabbi, Ephraim Mirvis. He will also tour Bethlehem, and hold a meeting with the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, on his visit to the occupied Palestinian territories. It is the prince’s first official tour of Israel and Palestine, though he has travelled there to attend the funerals of the former prime minister Yitzhak Rabin in 1995 and the former president Shimon Peres in 2016. It follows a visit to the region by Prince William in 2018. The Queen has never made an official visit to the area. Charles is likely to pay his respects at the resting place of his grandmother, Princess Alice of Battenberg, in Jerusalem’s Church of St Mary Magdalene. The mother of Prince Philip, she was honoured by the Jewish people for hiding and saving the lives of Jews in Nazi-occupied Athens during the second world war. Scott Furssedonn-Wood, Charles’s deputy private secretary, said of the World Holocaust Forum: “The prince is honoured to be among the small number of international leaders who have been invited to address the event and have the opportunity on behalf of the United Kingdom to honour the memory of all those who were lost in the Holocaust.” The prince travelled to the Middle East by chartered plane. It is believed the ministerial jet RAF Voyager is undergoing scheduled maintenance. Defending the decision, aides said scheduled flights could not satisfy all of the considerations, including efficiency of time, size of delegation and safety and security.