If this game is to prove a microcosm of their season, Leeds United can be mightily encouraged. The Championship’s top two sides maintained their nine-point lead over the chasing pack with this thrilling draw and if the Yorkshire club can prove as resilient between now and May as they did in recovering after half-time here, then their return to the Premier League is all but assured. Semi Ajayi gave West Bromwich Albion the lead inside 80 seconds, as Slaven Bilic’s side looked the more penetrative and organised in the first half, before the Nigeria defender deflected in Patrick Bamford’s header early in a second half that Leeds edged. Marcelo Bielsa’s side stay top, on goal difference from West Brom, level on 52 points, yet they will know that having gained 48 points in the first half of last season only to fall away with a meagre 35 in the second half of the campaign before losing in the play‑offs against Derby, much hard work lies ahead. But it is a worrying pattern: in the previous season they had 39 points at halfway and only added 21; in 2016‑17 it was 45 and 30. The reintroduction of Bamford for Eddie Nketiah at half-time reignited Leeds, who were good value for their point. “I thought we should have won the match,” said Bielsa, the head coach. “We managed the game well. There were chances in both boxes but maybe our chances were a little bit more possible.” Nketiah, having started only these past two league games while on loan, now returns to Arsenal. Bielsa will consider replenishing his squad, as the little-used Jack Clarke also prepares to return to Tottenham, but potential signings may be discouraged by that pair’s opportunities. West Brom have lost only twice all season but, with just one win in six games, they also welcomed this draw after the letdown against Middlesbrough on Sunday. “Both teams should use it [this result] to know mentally, ‘We are good, we coped with the best’ – from their side and from our side,” Bilic, the head coach, said. “This performance was more than enough to get our belief and momentum back. “I told the players yesterday, unusually: ‘I don’t care about the result, it’s about the performance.’ We started like that [banged his hand on table] and we finished like that [another bang on table].” West Brom indeed seemed more “up for it” from kick-off and when Matt Phillips forced Ezgjan Alioski into conceding a corner Kiko Casilla could only punch Matheus Pereira’s delivery up towards Ajayi. When his header was nodded back in from beyond the six‑yard box by Kyle Bartley, Ajayi clipped the ball on the half-volley goalwards. A buzz on the officials’ wristwatches indicated the ball had crossed the line before being cleared. Fresh from their breathtaking 5-4 victory at nearby St Andrew’s on Sunday, Leeds proceeded to dominate possession. There were several dangerous crosses but no clearcut chances in the first period as West Brom, despite losing Kieran Gibbs to a recurring hamstring injury, worked hard and maintained a disciplined shape. Conor Townsend came on at left-back. Casilla pulled off the save of the half, when diving to tip aside the exciting Pereira’s free-kick, but Leeds had a strong claim for a penalty rejected when Luke Ayling’s cross-shot struck Jake Livermore’s self-conscious arm. Where’s VAR when you need it? Reprieved, West Brom should have gone in 2-0 up at the break when Phillips broke clear on to Robson‑Kanu’s astute through pass only to shoot at Casilla. If West Brom had started the first half on fire, then Leeds lit the touchpaper for a cracking second period. Bielsa was in no mood to stand on ceremony and replaced Alioski and Nketiah with Barry Douglas and Bamford for the restart. Within six minutes, his decision was vindicated. Jack Harrison got down the left wing and delivered a wicked cross to the near post where Bamford stole a march on his marker to flick on a header that went in off Ajayi. There was a good late save from Sam Johnstone to deny Bamford before Casilla brilliantly tipped over Kyle Edwards’s powerful shot as the game entered stoppage time. It was a thrilling game, full of high tempo and losses of possession, but few would argue these are the best two sides in the division.