Twenty-eight people are missing as catastrophic bushfires continue to tear through Victoria’s east. The premier, Daniel Andrews, said 28 people were unaccounted for, on top of two confirmed dead from the East Gippsland fires. A state of disaster has been declared in the region, with residents in the north-east Walwa told to get out before it’s too late. “We have grave fears for the safety and wellbeing of those 28 people who cannot be located,” Andrews told reporters on Friday. “Having said that, though, these numbers will move around. A number of people who were part of the original 17 [missing people] were located yesterday.” It comes after Andrews declared a state of disaster for East Gippsland on Thursday night. The declaration entails powers introduced in the aftermath of devastating 2009 Black Saturday blazes which have never been used before, including compelling people to evacuate. Residents in north-eastern communities including Biggara, Tintaldra, Towong, Towong Upper, Walwa, Nariel Valley, Lucyvale, Berringama,Koetong, Shelley and Burrowye were ordered to get out. “If you can leave, you must leave. That’s the only safe thing for you, your family and, indeed, for others who may be called to your assistance,” the premier told reporters on Friday. “We cannot guarantee your safety.” The emergency management commissioner for Victoria, Andrew Crisp, said while the disaster declaration allowed authorities to compel people to leave, they would not be arresting anyone who stays. “This is a large area, there is a lot of door-knocking that has already happened,” he told ABC News on Friday. “Victoria police, working with others, will go around and, no, we’re not going to be arresting people. We just don’t have the resources to do that.” He said the threat is not just from existing fires, but new ones starting on Friday. “As we saw with Mallacoota, that wasn’t one of our existing fires and it quickly blocked the highway,” he said. “This is your opportunity to get out.” More than 780,000 hectares have been razed by about 50 fires burning in Victoria’s east and north-east. The military has been providing relief and resources for fire victims across East Gippsland and will help evacuate about 1,000 people from Mallacoota from Friday morning. A group of 39 firefighters and two liaison officers from the United States also arrived on Thursday to help respond to the Victorian situation. Another 71 firefighters, 61 from the US and another 10 from Canada, were expected to arrive next week. On Wednesday a second man’s body was found by his family in Victoria at a property at Maramingo Creek, near Genoa. “It is believed the man suffered a medical episode while fighting the fires,” Victoria police said in a statement. It follows the family of Buchan man Mick Roberts finding his body at his home also on Wednesday. Temperatures were forecast to creep up on Friday before exceeding 40C in some areas on Saturday as winds pick up. The New South Wales premier, Gladys Berejiklian, declared a seven-day state of emergency across the state beginning on Friday. It is the third state of emergency declared this bushfire season.