Fresh off an opinion-dump on the subject of female chefs, Heston Blumenthal is back in the news – this time railing against our tendency to take too many photographs in restaurants. In an interview to promote his forthcoming Netflix show, Crazy Delicious (not to be confused with David Chang’s Ugly Delicious, or the surely-soon-to-be-commissioned Angry Delicious featuring Gordon Ramsay), Blumenthal admits to having been “very tempted” to intervene and prevent his diners from Instagramming their food, as it stops them from being “in the moment”. It’s a puzzling position to take, given that Blumenthal is as responsible as anyone for the current mania for visually arresting, highly Instagrammable fare. So-called molecular gastronomy or modernist cuisine – the approach to cookery that Blumenthal pioneered along with the Catalan maestro Ferran Adrià, among others – may have had its day in the sun long before Instagram’s mid-2010s boom, but it frequently delighted in presentational trickery and trompe l’oeil. At Blumenthal’s restaurant Dinner, in Knightsbridge, London, the meat fruit – a chicken liver parfait, coated in mandarin jelly, that looks uncannily like an actual mandarin – has remained one of the most instantly recognisable plates of food in London. At the Fat Duck, his Michelin-starred restaurant in Bray, Berkshire, course after course boasts the sort of flourish that is just begging to be memorialised (and, after spending the best part of £500 a head on dinner, customers have earned the right to do just that). Blumenthal’s television shows, meanwhile, took the Fat Duck approach and blew it up for a widescreen format, cementing an association in viewers’ heads between fine dining and a Willy Wonkaesque flair for spectacle. It would be hard to exaggerate the extent to which the modern restaurant industry now revolves around Instagram. In the social media age, top influencers are courted just as assiduously as national restaurant critics; restaurants go to extraordinary lengths to design decor, service-wear and dishes to maximise their potential for going viral. Food, in particular, needs a distinctive touch or two to “pop” on a saturated Instagram feed – when I compiled a recent list of London’s “hottest” dishes of 2019, I was struck by how many of them brought a sense of theatre to the table, from the bold geometry of the Black Sea pide from Oklava to the ludicrous, borderline priapic lemon meringue pie at Gloria (really, it’s almost Blumenthalian). Far from detracting from the experience, photographing these creations – some of them, surely, designed with Instagram in mind – becomes part of the fun, a welcome additional layer to the restaurant-going experience. Photography in restaurants – particularly ones where people are spending a lot of money – will always be a divisive subject. Spend enough time at new openings and PR-curated events and you will encounter influencers jostling shoulder to shoulder to get that one perfect shot, the thirstiest of their number scaling furniture and unpacking professional-grade cameras or – no lie – carrying plates outside to benefit from the natural light. It takes some getting used to, for sure – and that’s without discussing the restaurants with a more concrete reason for objecting to the use of phones at the table, such as high-end sushi joints, where the window during which a piece of nigiri is at the optimal temperature for eating is vanishingly small. But it’s worth noting that these are extreme examples – and that against all of this we must also stack a number of clear positives: the ease with which young chefs can build a following, the enjoyment of memorialising special dining experiences, the sense of community that has developed in a dedicated space in which people can share their faintly dorky enthusiasm for all things food-related. There’s even the argument that Instagram is actually moving food culture forward, by accelerating the natural process by which dishes and cuisines evolve. In 2018, the San Francisco Chronicle journalist Jonathan Kauffman wrote a piece asking “Is Instagram making our dim sum better?”, arguing that it provided a good-natured competitive hotbed for ambitious chefs to one-up each other in search of Insta-domination. At times – especially as the latest unicorn-sprinkled monstrosity goes viral and creates countless lowest-common-denominator imitators – Instagram can feel depressingly homogeneous. But in popular accounts such as that belonging to the pastry wizard Calum Franklin there is also scope for the platform to introduce a dash of creativity and much-needed innovation into a sector that has definitely seen better days. It is for this reason that Blumenthal’s recent wobble feels not just boomerishly reactionary, but actively disappointing. This is a man who was once obsessed with how the context and environment in which we ate influenced our enjoyment of the stuff we were putting in our mouths – a man who pre-empted the great influx of phones into dining rooms by equipping customers with iPods so they could listen to the sound of the sea while they ate a succession of marine delicacies. The Heston of old would have delighted in having to contend with a new technology – would, doubtless, have giggled at the thought of all the ways he could mess with phone-wielding guests’ preconceptions. A course served entirely in the dark, perhaps, or a dish (like the legendary “Interpretation of vanity” served at San Sebastián’s Mugaritz) that melts, deliberately, before the diner can complete their shot. The contemporary obsession with frames and filters could have been a genuine creative spur; it’s a shame to see Blumenthal relegate it, and in such reductive fashion, to a mere annoyance. If he wants the Fat Duck to remain relevant as it approaches its 25th birthday this year, one of the most innovative cooks of his generation should really get with the times. • George Reynolds is a food writer based in London