Before Manchester United set off for Tranmere Rovers as part of their quest to find a team from Merseyside that they can beat, Ole Gunnar Solskjær held a press conference. It may only be the FA Cup but when Solskjær speaks, everyone listens. Then they laugh. But that’s just how things are: nobody really exists these days unless they’re being trampled by sheep on at least one social media abomination. We are the world. We are the children. We are the ones who make a brighter day. So let’s start giffing. Meanwhile, Solskjær’s boss, Ed Woodward – or Entertainment Weekly as The Fiver likes to call him since United started re-enacting the teetering cabin scene from Charlie Chaplin’s Gold Rush – was entitled to sit back and reflect on the efforts made so far to support the manager during the January transfer window. United have reinforced this month by engaging … a PR firm, presumably to arrange some positive coverage of the club and, in particular, Entertainment Weekly. Well isn’t that the sort of creativity United have been crying out for all season? Nope. This is more bad recruitment. If Entertainment Weekly wanted an influential media wonk to improve his image, he should have put in a call to The Quaff and Puke and asked the barman to kick The Fiver awake. Our advice would have been as cheap and effective as Tin. No need for Fleet Street contacts or well-placed fluff pieces. Quite the opposite, in fact. The Fiver would simply have told Entertainment Weekly to circulate photos of a man whose concept of currying favour with critics involves sending goons around with a bonesaw. “Are you sure you want regime change?” the photos would imply. “Because there aren’t many people who could afford to buy United from the Glazers.” United are in a pitiful place alright. Next stop: Prenton Park. Things can only get better? “I hope and want the team to see this loss as a very painful defeat and that it can spur us into action because we cannot allow something like this to happen again. I won’t tire of saying it, this is not what Atlético Madrid should be about, this defeat doesn’t represent the team. The fans don’t deserve this, the club doesn’t deserve this” – Saúl Ñíguez fronts up to discuss the difficulties with cojonesball, after Diego Simeone’s side slumped out of the Copa del Rey to third-tier Cultural Leonesa. “In recent weeks there have been many references by Big Website hacks to Manchester United’s worst ‘start’ to a season. Given that United have played 24 league games, can this still be considered the ‘start’ of the season? I think most fans would consider that we are now approaching the ‘end’ portion of it. Surely once double figures have been reached, the season is well under way and far from starting?” – Robert Bradley. “I see Marcus Rashford hopes to return quickly from knack, but if it’s too late will his back-crack get Ole the sack?” – Alan MacLean. “Re: squirrels (Fiver letters passim). If Germans find it is hard to say ‘squirrel’, they should try the French version, ‘écureuil’” – Ian Gatensby. “Congratulations to 74-year-old Eez Eldin Bahder on signing for third-tier Egyptian club, 6 October (Fiver letters passim). That’s a Pharaoh age for a footballer” – Karim Fatih. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’the day is … Alan MacLean, who wins a copy of Death is a Laff Riot. New prizes to come next week! Football Weekly Extra is right here. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/01/23-56790-gnl.fw.20200123.jf.5thnot5th.mp3 Lewes FC have challenged the FA to “right the wrongs” and redress the huge gap in FA Cup prize money for men’s and women’s teams. The total women’s prize fund is £309,355, around 1% of the men’s £30.25m. “These [figures] are determined by the amounts of money generated through commercial revenue, including national and international broadcast rights,” shilled an FA suit. Liverpool’s relentless march to the perch continues apace and Jürgen Klopp is still revelling in the late win over Wolves. “We don’t go for perfection, we go for a perfect reaction,” he cooed. “We try to fight back in difficult situations in games, which is what the boys did again. I’m really, really pleased.” Tottenham are in talks with Real Sociedad over the signing of Willian José but – and you may have heard this one before – the clubs are way apart in their valuations, with Spurs having offered roughly half of what the Spaniards want. Frank Lampard’s Chelsea manager Frank Lampard isn’t sure when Tammy Abraham will be back, but says the striker hasn’t suffered ankle-snap. “We were worried about a hairline fracture,” he sighed. Tranmere boss Micky Mellon is taking a leaf out of Manchester United’s book to keep expectations in check before their FA Cup fourth-round mud-fest. “We will try to represent the club again and the players will run their socks off again and who knows?” he tooted after their win over Watford. Get all your FA Cup fourth round team news here. And John Akinde has signed for Gillingham. “Give only credit to my chairman Paul Scally and the big fella himself,” parped Steve Evans, who may or may not have found religion. Eni Aluko on her new job at the Villa. Southampton goalkeeper Alex McCarthy gets his chat on with Ben Fisher. Jonathan Liew discusses how everything is essentially fine at Manchester United. Jordan Henderson was a bit good against Wolves, as Sachin Nakrani points out. Get in the mood for the FA Cup with 10 whole things to look out for. Check out the latest European deals on our transfer window interactive. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!