My colleague and friend Nick Mason, who has died aged 81, became deputy sports editor of the Guardian after the demise of Robert Maxwell’s ill-fated 24-hour London Daily News in the summer of 1987. Like Nick, I had worked on the sports desk of the LDN, which survived barely six months. I began working as a freelance subeditor at the Guardian and the then sports editor, Mike Averis, asked me if he should take on Nick as his deputy. Mike did not really need to ask. Before the LDN, Nick had been deputy sports editor at the Sunday Times, where he and his editor, John Lovesey, had helped to transform sports journalism. Before that, the sports pages had tended to be hived off in the back of papers, mainly made up of stories and match reports with little linking them to the real world of news. Lovesey and Nick saw that sport could be an arena for political protest and examined controversial subjects such as drug-taking and football hooliganism, using graphics and eye-catching photos to transform the way people look at sport. Nick had a particular fondness for athletics. His interest in running led him and his colleague Norman Harris to set up the Sunday Times fun run in Hyde Park in 1978; it continued annually until superseded by the London Marathon. Away from newspapers he was an author in his own right, one major project a history of all types of footballing codes, including Australian Rules and American football. The son of two civil servants, Ronald Mason and his wife, Margaret (nee Coles), Nick was born in Harrow, north-west London, and attended Epsom grammar school, Surrey, before winning a scholarship to Charterhouse school, Godalming. At Mansfield College, Oxford, he gained an English degree in 1961. While in the city he met Jane Nankivell, a nurse, and they married in 1962. Nick took a traditional path into journalism. Having gained experience on the university newspaper, Cherwell, and on the Oxford Times during the holidays, on graduating he went to the Evening Chronicle in Newcastle as a reporter. When he moved on from there to the Sunday Times in 1966, he started on the magazine, under Godfrey Smith. Until Nick’s retirement from the Guardian in 1999, he and Mike worked in tandem as a kind of sporting Odd Couple, Mike in the broad-brush role and Nick as the perfectionist page designer with an encyclopedic knowledge of sport. Nick continued to have links with the Guardian, writing occasional obituaries on sportsmen and women, his most recent being that of Sir Roger Bannister in 2018. He is survived by Jane, their sons, Peter, Robert and Anthony, daughter, Rosalind, and by eight grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.