It’s grey, it’s dull and it’s the month we’re meant to abstain from anything that makes us happy. Subtle use of bronzer and highlighter, as seen at Self-Portrait SS20, will help you radiate an illusion of happiness. Avoid any with glittery particles (they stick in your pores), resist a heavy hand (a light dusting will do) and if you go for liquid or cream, mix in your serum for a more natural look. Finish with a pop of lip colour and, who knows, the faux optimism might become real. 1. NARS Tinted Glow Booster £28, narscosmetics.co.uk 2. Revlon SkinLights Prismatic Bronzer £9.99, boots.com 3. Stila Stay All Day Liquid Lipstick £17, stila.co.uk 4. Stila Heaven’s Hue Highlighter £29, cultbeauty.co.uk 5. Sensai Bronzing Gel £31, harrods.com Regular readers will know how much I rate regular facials to get your skin into shape. A recent find is Skinwork. It’s a teeny, insider’s haunt in the basement of the fashionable Alex Eagle lifestyle store in Soho. When I visited, I hadn’t had a facial for a while – despite what people think, I don’t spend every second of my life having treatments – so my skin was dire. It wasn’t responding positively to anything. You can use great products, but the truth is the older you get, unless you have the best genetics in the world, sometimes the only thing that helps is a treatment. Skinwork are interesting as they don’t use myriad products but focus on massage and the skill of the facialist – great for smoothing fine lines, plumping skin, cleansing and radiance boosting. My favourite element is the anti-bac pore extraction technique that’s like a Hoover for the skin. Results? Magnificent. This was boosted by the chemical self-neutralising peel, added as a final step. I recommend this for anyone with pigmentation issues. Yes, your skin will tingle slightly (and in the days that follow may peel a teeny bit) but it will be the best you’ve seen it in a long time. Skinwork facial at Alex Eagle Studio from £110 alexeagle.co.uk Elusive aroma This smoky, leathery mysterious fragrance is from the company behind the Ordinary. The notes are secret and there is only one place in the world you can get it (London’s Beak St) but it’s absolutely worth the trip. Avestan, £38, avestan.com Pore results Who doesn’t love a gadget with quick, tangible results? Created by a facialist to the stars, this will decongest pores for super-clean skin. Sarah Chapman Skinesis Pro Pore Refiner, £128, sarahchapman.com Pack your trunk Full of niacinamides, ceramides and antioxidants to boost hydration and replenish skin, this overnight mask is perfect for winter. Drunk Elephant F-Balm Electrolyte Waterfacial, £44, cultbeauty.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.