The US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, arrived in Kyiv on Thursday amid a bruising Washington impeachment battle and a storm around his alleged remarks to an NPR reporter: “Do you think Americans care about Ukraine?” Pompeo is scheduled to meet President Volodymyr Zelenskiy on Friday, as he seeks to put a positive spin on relations between the two countries at a crucial moment in the Senate impeachment trial of Donald Trump. The visit, Pompeo’s first to Ukraine, was important to “highlight US support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”, a spokesperson told reporters. That support has come into question because of Trump’s apparent affinity for Vladimir Putin and accusations that he delayed $392m in military aid to Ukraine in order to pressure Zelenskiy into announcing an investigation into the Biden family. In a July 2019 phone call, Trump asked Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, to mount an investigation of his potential rival for the White House in the 2020 election, Joe Biden, and son Hunter Biden – and also to investigate a conspiracy theory that Ukraine, instead of Russia, was behind foreign tampering in the 2016 election. Trump framed the requests as a “favor” after he reminded his counterpart that “the United States has been very, very good to Ukraine”. Overshadowing the conversation was the fact that Trump had recently suspended hundreds of millions of dollars in military aid that Congress had approved for Ukraine to defend itself against Russia . News of the call emerged in a Washington Post report on 18 September that an internal whistleblower complaint, filed in August, involved “communications between Trump and a foreign leader”. Trump’s attempted dealings in Ukraine caused a scandal in US diplomatic ranks. The Democrats have obtained text messages between top US envoys in Ukraine establishing that diplomats told Zelenskiy that a White House visit to meet Trump was dependent on him making a public statement vowing to investigate Hunter Biden’s company. Trump does not dispute public accounts of what he said in the call, as established by the whistleblower’s complaint, released on 26 September, and a call summary released by the White House itself. But Trump and allies have argued that the conversation – “I’ve given you that, now I need this” – was not actually as transactional as it appears to be. Trump’s personal lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, has pressured Ukraine to smear Biden, and the whistleblower said White House officials had caused records of Trump’s Ukraine call to be moved into a specially restricted computer system. The vice-president, Mike Pence, has acknowledged contacts with Ukrainian officials while claiming to have no knowledge of Trump’s Biden agenda. On 3 October 2019, Trump even suggested that: “China should start an investigation into the Bidens.” Unlike when he was a candidate, Trump’s invitations for foreign powers to attack his domestic political opponents now have all the power of the White House behind them. Critics say this is a plain abuse of that power and it undermines US national security because it places Trump’s personal agenda first. The Trump administration also stands accused of obstruction of Congress for resisting congressional subpoenas for documents and testimony relating to the crisis. A lot of people – from the whistleblower, to career government officials swept up in the affair, to legal scholars, to Democrats and even some Republicans – believe it’s plausible that the president has committed an impeachable offense. Tom McCarthy in New York Zelenskiy, meanwhile, will look for commitments to diplomatic and military aid in his country’s conflict with Russia, which has left more than 14,000 dead in south-east Ukraine, and may also seek an invitation to the White House. The Ukrainian president would look past Pompeo’s reported faux pas and roll out the red carpet, said the Kyiv-based political analyst Volodymyr Fesenko, because Ukraine’s need for US support was paramount. “He can’t really complain about what has been said. Ukraine needs a close, partner relationship with the United States,” said Fesenko. “We are just in different weight classes.” But Zelenskiy was likely to resist any efforts to have him weigh in on the impeachment battle, Fesenko added, noting that the US was preparing for 2020 elections and Zelenskiy understood that Trump was “just one of the candidates”. The discussions are likely to cover bilateral relations and Ukraine’s conflict with Russia, gas politics and the US’s sanctions on the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, possible investment opportunities and the progress of reforms in Ukraine. Pompeo is also scheduled to meet with Ukraine’s foreign and defence ministers, as well as representatives of Ukraine’s religious, civil society, and business communities. The trip is the first leg of a four-country tour through the former Soviet Union for Pompeo that will also take him to Belarus, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. But it is in Kyiv where the spotlight will focus most firmly on Pompeo and his attempts to repair the damage done over the past two years. Former officials say the scandal has hollowed out the ranks of senior Ukraine experts in the US government and reduced US interest in the peace talks over the war in south-east Ukraine. Trump still has not nominated an ambassador to Kyiv and Pompeo has faced criticism for failing to support the former US ambassador Maria Yovanovitch against Trump’s political supporters, including Rudy Giuliani. In an op-ed published in Foreign Policy, Kurt Volker, Trump’s former special envoy to Ukraine, blamed “partisan politics” and the impeachment process for leaving Zelenskiy “exposed and relatively isolated”. He called on Pompeo to propose a state visit for Zelenskiy to the White House, a carrot that the Trump administration had previously dangled before him, and to appoint a new ambassador and point person for future Ukraine negotiations, to help replenish the expertise lost in the last year. “Partisan politics, and in particular the impeachment process, caused most officials dealing with expertise on Ukraine either to leave government or hunker down to avoid getting caught in the crossfire,” he wrote. While Pompeo’s visit could be beneficial, “the Trump administration has withheld high-level contacts for entirely wrong-headed reasons and made milestones like Pompeo’s visit to Ukraine far more the exception than the rule”, said Andrew Weiss, the vice-president for studies at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. “They’ve left Ukraine alone in the room with both Moscow and Europe and having to fend for themselves,” he said.