The instant chat messages and emails sent between 2015 and 2018 show unnamed employees discussing the potentially fatal implications of what they believed was substandard work on the 737 Max project. May 2018“I still haven’t been forgiven by god for the covering up I did last year… Can’t do it one more time. The Pearly gates will be closed.”“I just received a shovel to start my journey to the hotter place.”“I’ll end up there either way.”May 2018 “I’ll be shocked if the FAA passes this turd.”May 2018 “I have used the words ‘misleading’ and ‘mischaracterization’ a lot over the last two years in relation to this program. I could be even more honest and use other synonyms that even better describe what has been going on”. May 2018 “Get silencer, put on end of gun, place adjacent to temple, and pull trigger - the problems stop. At this point, how can they consider continuing?” March 2018 “Not sure I will be returning in April given this - am not lying to the FAA. Will leave that to the people who have no integrity”. February 2018“I don’t know how to refer to the very very few of us on the program who are interested only in truth…” “Would you put your family on a MAX simulator trained aircraft? I wouldn’t.” “No.” April 2017“This airplane is designed by clowns, who in turn are supervised by monkeys.” “They expect to do only two sets of one weeks airplane testing!!! Normally the FMC [flight management computer] is tested during an entire flight test program … Jesus, it’s doomed. I said we must do much more than that.”February 2017“Amazing what a brown envelope can achieve … It isn’t anywhere near as it would appear to be reading the report. The FAA were neither thorough nor demanding and failed to write up many issues. And the lies, the damn lies.”September 2016“This is a joke. This airplane is ridiculous”.“We are having issues with every update we do.”“It seems like they’ll never get it right. Fix one thing, break 3 others.”“No one wants to fix anything.” August 2015“I just Jedi mind tricked this fools. I should be given $1000 every time I take one of these calls. I save this company a sick amount of $$$$.” “What did you convince them of?” “To simply produce an email from me to the DCGA [an unnamed national aviation regulator] that states all the airlines and regulators that accept only the MAX CBT [basic training] to make them feel stupid about trying to require any additional training requirements.”