Boris Johnson has hinted he will arrive at a compromise solution over the decision on whether to let the Chinese company Huawei build parts of the UK’s 5G network in the face of US warnings that it will compromise intelligence-sharing. The prime minister insisted he would do nothing to jeopardise the relationship between the US and UK when it came to cooperation on security. However, he is expected to come down in favour of allowing Huawei to build “non-core” parts of the network, which is the advice of Britain’s security advisers. Speaking at the King’s College London mathematics school after launching a post-Brexit visa plan, Johnson insisted there could be a solution that was a “very, very important strategic win for the UK”. “The way forward for us clearly is to have a system that delivers for people in this country the kind of consumer benefits that they want through 5G technology or whatever but does not in any way compromise our critical national infrastructure, our security, or jeopardise our ability to work together with other intelligence powers around the world. The Five Eyes security relationships we have, we’ve got to keep them strong and safe,” he said. Pressed on what decision he would come to, he said: “We are going to come up with a solution that enables us to achieve both those objectives and that’s the way forward. “There’s no reason why we shouldn’t have technological progress here in the UK, allow consumers, businesses in the UK to have access to fantastic technology, fantastic communications, but also protect our security interests and protect our key partnerships with other security powers around the world.” The US has stepped up warnings in recent weeks against Britain allowing Huawei any role at all, urging the prime minister to match its ban because of fears that China could exploit security loopholes in order to spy on British citizens. The US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, who is due to visit the UK later this week, tweeted on Monday: “The UK has a momentous decision ahead on 5G. British MP Tom Tugendhat gets it right: ‘The truth is that only nations able to protect their data will be sovereign’.” Tugendhat, the Conservative chair of the foreign affairs committee, also warned that the move would hand power to Beijing. Johnson is expected to take the final decision on Tuesday after a meeting with security advisers and the cabinet, which includes some sceptics of Huawei, including Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, and Priti Patel, the home secretary. A minister is likely to make a statement to the House of Commons on the final decision in the afternoon. Downing Street sources have said there is no other credible supplier for the infrastructure Huawei would provide, and that the US has been unable to suggest one. Britain’s spy agencies argue that any risk that Huawei technology could be compromised by the Chinese state to undertake surveillance can be contained.