A former Barclays executive told a jury that the bank’s directors took a legal risk by signing off on a controversial side deal with Qatar that he helped craft, as it could be viewed as a way to hide payments linked to its emergency fundraising in 2008. But Roger Jenkins, a former head of the lender’s investment banking business, added that he was comforted knowing that the bank’s ex-chairman, John Varley – known by colleagues for his ethics – had backed an agreement that was “so close to the line”. Jenkins was responding to evidence, including phone calls and transcripts, presented by prosecutors for the Serious Fraud Office during cross examination at an Old Bailey trial in London on Tuesday. The Serious Fraud Office (SFO) has accused Jenkins and two former Barclays executives of devising fraudulent advisory services agreements (ASA) in order to disguise payments worth £322m to Qatar. It alleges that the money was actually a fee demanded by Qatar in exchange for investing £4bn in the bank as part of an £11bn emergency fundraising drive at the height of the financial crisis. The court has previously heard how Qatar was demanding an additional 1.75% fee in addition to the 1.5% commission that was to be paid to all of the investors who took part in the capital raising in June 2008. The fees effectively meant Qatar was able to purchase Barclays shares at a heavily discounted price, according to prosecutors. The jury heard a phone call on Tuesday, in which Jenkins discussed the potential risks surrounding the structure of the capital raising and advisory service agreement with fellow defendant Richard Boath. However, Jenkins said in the call that neither he nor Boath were directors of the bank. Jenkins was asked by SFO prosecutor Ed Brown what he meant by that comment. “We have seen email after email from [lawyers] Clifford Chance talking about the fact that this mechanism shouldn’t be interpreted and misunderstood as disguised commission. The worry is it might be interpreted as disguised commission … so the legal risk is … being misunderstood,” Jenkins said. Brown also read out a telephone transcript in which Jenkins said he was “very surprised that John Varley, given his ethics, is doing this [deal]”. The court also heard how defendants grappled with how to pay Qatar’s prime minister, Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber al-Thani, extra fees in line with what was offered to the country’s wealth fund Qatar Holdings. There were concerns that paying the prime minister fees for apparent advisory services – through a separate ASA – would look “dodgy”. Jenkins said on Tuesday: “I was comforted by the fact that he [Varley] approved it, that the board approved it, because it was close to the line, from optical point of view. So I’m very surprised that given his ethics and – I hold him in the highest regard – [Varley] is okay with this.” Jenkins and his two former colleagues – Boath, a former head of Barclays’ European financial institutions and Thomas Kalaris, the former head of Barclays wealth division – face charges of fraud as well as conspiracy to commit fraud. All three deny the charges. The SFO’s case followed a five-year investigation into the details of the rescue package. The fraud charges carry a maximum 10-year prison sentence. The trial continues.