Russell Crowe and Cate Blanchett have used their Golden Globes speeches to highlight Australia’s bushfire crisis, and the link between climate change and worsening bushfires. The unprecedented fire season has so far burned through 8.4 million hectares across Australia, destroyed thousands of homes and killed 23 people. On Sunday night, Australian actors thanked volunteer firefighters and drew attention to the “climate disaster” that has made the country’s fire season longer and more intense. Crowe won best actor in a limited series or motion picture made for TV for his performance as Roger Ailes in The Loudest Voice. But the Australian actor, whose home in Nana Glen in New South Wales was hit by fires in November, did not attend the ceremony because he was with his family preparing for the latest bushfires. Actor Jennifer Aniston, who was presenting the award, read out Crowe’s statement on his behalf. “Make no mistake the tragedy unfolding in Australia is climate-change based,” Crowe said. “We need to act based on science, move our global workforce to renewable energy and respect our planet for the unique and amazing place it is.” Blanchett, who was presenting an award, used her speech to give thanks to volunteer firefighters, and draw attention to the global “climate disaster”. “There are a lot of Australians in the room tonight,” she said. “I know we are all very grateful for the call-outs to our fellow compatriots who are suffering under the bushfires, so thank you. “I wanted to do a special call-out to the volunteer firefighters who have been at the centre of battling the climate disaster that is facing Australia. “And of course, when one country faces a climate disaster, we all face a climate disaster, so we’re in it together, so thank you very much.” "I want to do a special callout to the volunteer firefighters who have been at the centre of battling the climate disaster in Australia. And of course when one country faces a climate disaster we all face a climate disaster. We're in it together." #GoldenGlobes pic.twitter.com/uiumjV4XpT Other actors and presenters, including Patricia Arquette, Phoebe Waller-Bridge and Ellen DeGeneres, also spoke about the Australian bushfires, and urged viewers to donate. Arquette won best supporting actress in a series, limited series or TV movie for her role in Hulu series The Act. “I am so happy to be here and celebrate this, but also I know that … we see a country on the brink of war, the United States of America … and the continent of Australia on fire,” she said. “While I love my kids so much, I beg of us all to give them a better world. For our kids and their kids, we have to vote in 2020 and beg and plead for everyone we know to vote in 2020.” Before the ceremony, fellow Australians Margot Robbie and Nicole Kidman also used social media to encourage people to donate to Australian firefighters. @redcrossau @wireswildliferescue @salvosau @nswrfs @cfavic A post shared by @ margotrobbie on Jan 5, 2020 at 1:08pm PST Our family’s support, thoughts and prayers are with everyone affected by the fires all over Australia. We are donating $500,000 to the Rural Fire Services who are all doing and giving so much right now. A post shared by  Nicole Kidman (@nicolekidman) on Jan 4, 2020 at 3:10pm PST