The head coach of Hamilton Academical, Brian Rice, has reported himself to the Scottish FA for a breach of its betting rules and admitted a lapse in his recovery from a gambling addiction. The SFA has charged Rice for bets placed on football, which is prohibited, between July 2015 and October 2019. Rice and the Scottish Premiership club’s chief executive, Colin McGowan, took the highly unusual step of issuing detailed statements as news of the charges emerged. Hamilton have vowed to fully support Rice, who was appointed as their manager last January. Before that the 56-year-old was assistant manager at Inverness and St Mirren. “This decision was one of the hardest I have had to take but in a way also the easiest,” said Rice. “I have made no secret of the fact that I have struggled with the disease that is gambling addiction in the past. The reality is I am an addict and, while I have been proud of the fact I have been in recovery from this disease, a key part of the recovery programme is honesty: honesty to myself and honesty to those who have and who continue to support me, including my family and my football family at Hamilton. “I wrote a letter to the Scottish FA self-reporting my gambling and did so as an admission that my disease has returned, in order that I commit to recovery. I have apologised to those at the club in whom I have sought counsel and I apologise today to the players, fans and colleagues I have let down through my gambling addiction.” There is no suggestion Rice, who served Hibernian and Nottingham Forest among others during a lengthy playing career, made bets against the clubs who have employed him. The Scottish FA has not detailed the wagers placed but it is understood the number is considerable. It now remains to be seen to what extent Scottish football’s governing body treats Rice’s honesty as a mitigating circumstance when considering sanctions on 30 January. “I accept that a breach of the rules will come with punishment,” said Rice. “The reason I am speaking out is to remove the stigma attached to this horrible, isolating disease, in the hope that those involved in Scottish football who are similarly in its grasp feel they can seek help and draw strength from my admission.” McGowan said Hamilton are proud that Rice has taken this public stance. The chief executive added: “Having spoken extensively to Brian since his addiction resurfaced, I know that he’s followed a well-worn path from smaller, less frequent bets to the snowball effect of a daily addiction. He has re-engaged fully with professionals, is committed to recovery and has the full support of all at Hamilton Academical. “Honesty is a key step in the recovery programme and is non-negotiable. It is why today is such a significant step. I would like to thank the Scottish FA for the empathy shown throughout this process, whilst respectful of the need to safeguard the integrity of the game and the rules upon which football is founded. “As a head coach in the Scottish Premiership, news of his breach of gambling rules will come with profile, media attention and scrutiny. But this is a far more serious issue than a breach of a football rule, a breach that both Brian and the club accept. It is the latest example of a disease that afflicts many people across Scotland and doesn’t discriminate by profile or professional capability. “Today, we support our head coach and we feel certain that the community will get fully behind him.” The long-term scale of Rice’s problem is emphasised by an interview from 2013, when he feared being jailed in Qatar after struggling to repay money lost on online roulette machines. At that time Rice said: “I’m so ashamed. The gambling is something I’ve been hiding for 30 years – all through my playing days.” • Free help and advice about problem gambling is available online at BeGambleAware.org or by calling the National Gambling Helpline on 0808 8020 133.