As concern swelled about a potential military confrontation with Iran, Donald Trump appeared at the White House on Wednesday to deliver a notably non-provocative message, emphasizing that no Americans had been killed in Iranian missile strikes the night before. But the choreography of the announcement, with Trump flanked by cabinet members and backed by eight military officers, communicated a clear subtext: America stood ready to strike. To some eyes, there was a further subtext. The tableau was a reminder of the revolving-door nature of Trump’s leadership, with the cast of military brass surrounding him having rolled over entirely from three years ago, and likely to change again. Others found the parade of generals more suited to a dictatorship than to the US presidency, whose civilian occupant nominally controls the military but who traditionally makes announcements about war and peace standing alone behind a lectern or seated at the Resolute desk. Surrounding Trump with generals could have been intended as a reply to the wildfire spread of criticism of Trump in national security circles following his weekend order to assassinate the Iranian general Qassem Suleimani. As a matter of basic stagecraft, the scene was typical Trump, who as president has used the uniform as a backdrop for speeches and announcements on topics from border security to gang violence. Trump, the real estate pitchman, also likes props. When the quality of certain products he has put his name on over the years was questioned during the 2016 presidential campaign, Trump gave a speech next to a table stacked with Trump-branded vodka, bottled water and raw steaks. Trump has resorted to more traditional formats for military-related announcements, as when he announced the death of Isis leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and when he announced Suleimani’s death. And he has a long history of rolling out the generals. Occasionally, the production falls flat. When Trump praised “both sides” at a 2017 news conference after white supremacists marched in Charlottesville, Virginia, his chief of staff at the time, the retired general John Kelly, was filmed repeatedly wincing.