West Brom’s winless run stretched to six games after the Championship leaders suffered a 1-0 defeat at home to Stoke. The striker Tyrese Campbell, whose father Kevin played for the Baggies, scored the only goal after nine minutes. West Brom failed to force a serious save from the Stoke goalkeeper, Jack Butland, as their recent difficulties continued. Slaven Bilic’s side have now taken only four points from their last 18 available but they still lead the table by a point from Leeds United. “It’s the same group of players who even with six games without a win, OK, it’s a mini-crisis – but we are still on top of the table,” said Bilic. This group of players, together with staff and the fans, have done it. So there’s no magic formula – commit yourself more, work hard, dig in and get it back. It’s a blow for us, of course, but we can’t make excuses.” Stoke moved four points clear of the relegation zone after securing successive away wins. West Brom were dealt an early blow when their left-wing, Grady Diangana, making his first start since 14 December following a hamstring injury, was left hobbling in only the second minute and he was soon replaced. Nick Powell sent Tom Ince racing away and Ahmed Hegazi failed to clear. This allowed the winger to square to Campbell, who steered the ball in from 10 yards for his fifth goal in nine league games. Sadly for Campbell that was his last meaningful piece of action as he became the second player to limp off. Lee Gregory replaced him after 25 minutes. West Brom had been well below par for the first 20 minutes before Matheus Pereira saw a close-range header held by Butland on the line. Then Kenneth Zohore went close with a curling effort from 22 yards and Pereira nearly scored an equaliser when his curling free-kick sailed just wide with Butland at full stretch deep into first-half stoppage time. West Brom started the second half as they finished the first, on top. Hal Robson-Kanu’s stooping header dropped wide after Zohore’s lobbed centre, then Pereira’s inviting cross was punched clear by Butland before Zohore screwed his shot wide after a pacy, diagonal run. Stoke had barely got out of their own half in the second period but they hit Albion on the counter on the hour with a good chance to make it 2-0. In the end Gregory could only sidefoot wide from six yards after a driving run by Joe Allen. “I’m delighted – it’s a massive three points,” said Michael O’Neill. “The back four and Jack Butland were fantastic but equally we limited West Brom to not many chances. That’s down to the work and shape of the team and how we played.” Stoke had to defend for their lives in the last few minutes but their defence and Butland stood firm, the goalkeeper catching or punching away cross after cross to preserve their clean sheet.