Donald Trump is set to sign the first phase of a new trade agreement with China on Wednesday after two years of tension between the two economic superpowers that have rattled economies around the world. The first phase of the deal is expected to further open the Chinese market to US companies and will include roughly $200bn in Chinese purchases of American goods and services. But it will also leave in place much of the $360bn worth of tariffs that the US has already imposed on Chinese goods and the threat of additional punishment if Beijing does not live up to the terms of the deal. Trump campaigned on tackling what he saw as China’s unfair trade practices, accusing the country of “raping” the US and perpetuating “the greatest theft in the history of the world”. The often rancorous trade dispute has hurt agriculture, manufacturing and other sectors of the US economy and the uncertainty it has engendered has worried business leaders. But its impact on the broader economy does not appear to have been as dire as some predicted. The trade deal, if it holds, could be a major boost for Trump in an election year when he can argue his tough stance with China has paid off. The treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, called the deal a “very significant agreement” but said the Trump administration would impose further tariffs if China does not abide by the agreement and move to address other issues in the next phase of discussions. “This gives China a big incentive to get back to the table and agree to the additional issues that are still unresolved,” Mnuchin told CNBC. While the deal is expected to give US companies greater protection for their trade secrets in China, big issues remain. The US wants China to address the huge subsidies it gives to industries including steel and solar panels that have allowed Chinese companies to dominate those markets with cheap exports. Beijing also rejected a call to include a pledge not to hack US companies, arguing such a promise was not part of a trade deal. Mary Lovely, professor of economics at Syracuse University, described the deal as a “trade truce with large state-directed purchases attached”. Even so, she wrote, “the truce is good news for the US and the world economy.”