Late-night hosts took apart the latest speech from Donald Trump and his attempts to smooth over an international conflict he started in the first place. On Jimmy Kimmel Live! the host joked about the speech given by Trump after Iranian missiles targeted US troops over night. During his words, Trump stumbled over a number of terms while also repeating falsehoods. “He really nailed this speech,” Kimmel said. He continued: “I think he needs to rebooted”. It was also the latest in a long line of complaints from Trump over the lack of credit he feels he is owed. “If he can’t get people to kiss his ass, he just stretches back and kisses it himself,” he said. Kimmel also expressed concern over the president’s power. “Up until now the only wars he was involved in were with Bette Midler and Cher,” he quipped. There have also been murmurs of a cyber-attack to which Kimmel joked: “Aren’t we already under cyber-attack from the president’s Twitter account every day?” On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert spoke about Trump’s tweet of a low-res American flag which was later followed by the Iranian official Saeed Jalili tweeting a better-quality image of his own flag. “They’re fighting with clip art now,” Colbert said. “It’s meme warfare.” Trump’s speech began in a stranger manner than usual with him telling cameras that he wouldn’t let Iran acquire a nuclear weapon before saying hello. “As long as I’m your dentist your fillings will never be composed of mashed-up other people’s teeth. Hello, I’m Doctor Ditworth,” Colbert joked. Trump believes that Iran is standing down because of him, to which Colbert quipped: “Thanks to an elaborate system of ropes, pulleys and mirrors, I appear to be standing up.” He also joked about Trump’s many fumbles during the speech. “Rest easy America,” he said. “That is the man deciding who ligs and who dibes.” Iran strikes back at the U.S., and Trump slurredly assures America that all is well. pic.twitter.com/yDbsooGWdI On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah spoke about the Iranian response which didn’t kill anyone and took place after giving Iraqi forces a six-hour heads-up. “In international diplomacy this type of action is known as ‘Hold me back bro,’” he joked. He also referenced Trump’s bizarre beginning to his speech which he said made it “sound like the beginning of an infomercial”. He continued: “Trump’s mouth was missing more targets than those Iranian missiles.” While Trump appears to be comfortable with a truce, Fox News pundits were trying to suggest something more extreme in response, including one who continued to list all of the places the US should attack. “This is wild,” he said. “This dude is just adding bombing targets like he’s making impulse buys at the cash register.” On Late Night, Seth Meyers referred to it as “a rambling speech” and joked that when Trump emerged from a brightly lit doorway, he looked like “Mr Burns with radiation poisoning”. During his words, Meyers said that Trump “swung wildly from bluster to threats to offerings of peace to flat-out lies”. Trump also found a way to blame Obama for the strike by claiming Iran’s weaponry was funded by the previous administration. “What’s Trump gonna blame him for next?” he asked. “Is Obama the one who told you to breathe through your nose before every word like a scuba diver about to go underwater?” When Trump was asked about an exit strategy, he said he didn’t need one. “Of course Trump doesn’t have an exit strategy for war,” he said. “He didn’t even have a literal exit strategy when he and Ben Carson missed their cues for a debate, got stuck in a hallway and then just froze.”