An earthquake with a magnitude of 6.8 has killed at least 18 people in eastern Turkey. More than 500 have been left injured and several are trapped in the wreckage of toppled buildings. Rescue teams from neighbouring provinces were dispatched to the affected areas, working in the dark with floodlights, and defence minister Hulusi Akar said troops were on standby to help. TV footage showed rescuers pull out one injured person from the rubble of a collapsed building in the eastern Elâzığ province. At least three people were believed to be trapped in a building in the area, where officials said four or five structures were toppled, including one at least four stories high. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said on Twitter that all measures were being taken to “ensure that the earthquake that occurred in Elâzığ and was felt in many provinces is overcome with the least amount of loss”. He said the ministers for the interior, health and the environment were sent to the afflicted region. The quake struck at 8.55pm local time, 5.55pm GMT, at a depth of 6.7km near the town of Sivrice, the Disaster and Emergency Management Presidency (AFAD) said. It was followed by several aftershocks, the strongest with magnitudes 5.4 and 5.1. Elâzığ is about 750km (465 miles) east of the capital, Ankara. The health minister, Fahrettin Koca, said 13 people were killed in Elâzığ, including two people who suffered heart attacks, and five others died in Malatya. A total of 553 people were hurt, including 11 who were in serious condition. Thirty buildings had collapsed from the quake in the two provinces, according to the environment minister, Murat Kurum. People were being moved to student accommodation and a sports centre amid freezing temperatures. Elâzığ’s governor, Çetin Oktay Kaldırım, told Turkish television station NTV that a fire broke out in a building in Sivrice, near the epicentre, but was quickly brought under control. The interior minister, Süleyman Soylu, was at a meeting on earthquake preparedness when the quake struck. The Kandilli seismology centre in Istanbul said the quake measured 6.5, while the US Geological Survey gave the preliminary magnitude as 6.7, and said the quake affected not only Turkey but also Syria, Georgia and Armenia. Different earthquake monitoring-centres frequently give differing estimates. Turkey sits on top of two major fault lines and earthquakes are frequent. Two strong earthquakes struck north-west Turkey in 1999, killing around 18,000 people. A magnitude 6 earthquake killed 51 people in Elaziğ in 2010.