Isabel Allende’s 23rd book begins in the furnace of the Spanish civil war, where trainee doctor Victor Dalmau is holding a human heart between his hands, and ends more than 50 years later in a Chile recovering from the fall of Pinochet. Through that huge span, we follow Victor and his wife, Roser, as they flee across continents and witness the decades-long fallout from Franco’s rise to power. Given that Allende has set herself the task of covering half a century in a relatively short book, it isn’t surprising that dialogue is minimal. Most of the story is told in episodic narration, or even summary. An omniscient narrator sees into the minds not only of Victor and Roser, but of many people who brush past along the way, sometimes revisiting them, sometimes leaving them behind in the political riptides. This kind of narration is extraordinarily difficult. Characters are a lot like gym weights; it’s much easier to hug them close than it is to hold them further away. Allende’s style is impressively Olympian and the payoff is remarkable: a huge overview of generations, decades and countries. As we might expect of Allende, that omniscient voice is kind to all the characters, even when they do stupid or horrible things. Victor starts an affair with 21-year-old Ofelia and gets her pregnant, fully aware of her conservative family and the inevitable outburst of violence that will ensue from her father, but there’s no authorial comment in sight. Nor is any hint of narratorial judgment passed on the commander who oversees the concentration camp where Victor is incarcerated during the Pinochet years. There’s a powerful sense that Allende considers bitterness and misery to be anathema, like the endlessly pragmatic Roser, who points out that “there will always be pain, but suffering is optional”. Even in the hands of a titan like Allende, this approach isn’t always successful. The narratorial circumspection – the refusal to go fully into any character’s voice and give vent to raw feeling – sometimes flattens the story more than it enriches it. It numbs horrifying moments, such as the long march of refugees from Spain to France, or the atrocities of the concentration camps, and it deadens joyful moments, too. It also leads Allende into saccharine generalisations of a kind that would never have made it into a tighter story without irony. In the last section, there is a concentration of lines such as: “It led to widespread indignation and strengthened the traditional respect for the laws that most Chileans had.” By the end, the prose reads much more like creative non-fiction than a novel, full of dates and sudden jumps in time. This is explained by the fact that Victor is a real doctor who fled Franco’s Spain; all the huge events that happen in the book really did occur. There are no heroes, just survivors, so imposing a clear plot arc would be a bit superficial. Instead, A Long Petal of the Sea is structured as a series of waves, with tides of sudden catastrophe in which the characters have almost no agency, and ebbs of peace. • A Long Petal of the Sea is published by Bloomsbury (RRP £16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.