Following reports that the Duke and Duchess of Sussex might spend considerable amounts of time in Canada in the future, here are some reactions from Canadians: I don’t mind that they are taking a different approach. But if they are planning on spending a lot of time in Canada I hope they don’t expect Canadian taxpayers to pay for all their security. I hear it’s pretty expensive. Dylan, Canada Good for them! The tabloid press has finally killed one of the geese that lay golden eggs. Come to Canada where people will give you respectful distance (or ignore you)! Open a wellness retreat in British Columbia-have special sessions for injured soldiers. Maybe Meghan’s mom could lead yoga sessions. We are an easy jumping-off spot for other Commonwealth countries. Once recharged, return to Britain for your duties to support Her Majesty. Christine, 59, civil servant, Toronto Good for them. Brava to Megan for putting up with the firm for so long and getting Harry to see the light. Eric, 73, Toronto After what the tabloid press has done to them since the wedding, I am not surprised. And now the same press is howling because their favourite targets refuse to play the game any more. I wish them well. If they want to come back to Canada, they’ll be more than welcome and, by and large, allowed to develop their own lives, raise their kid(s) without too much interference, and no one will give two hoots who is what skin colour. Because, let’s face it, that has a lot to do with what has been going on, doesn’t it. Catherine, Canada I think it’s great that they are putting their family first and forging a path for themselves. Meghan has been criticized in the most misogynistic, racist and vile way. If they intend to live between Canada and the UK, I don’t like the fact that the Canadian taxpayers have to foot the bill for their security detail. Hopefully, their business/brand is successful enough to fully pay for it. Now that would be truly progressive! Sera, 23, health worker, Toronto Harry and Meghan have every right to step down and not take a responsible role in royal affairs. If they wish to do this however they should renounce all their royal titles and the privileges that go with them. Perhaps for a quieter life they would be happy to adopt the name Mr and Mrs Nobody. Christopher Morris, Newmarket, Ontario What is the fuss? Two young people want to have lives of their own, with a modicum of privacy to bring up their child and make their way in the world. They are not the property of the royal family, or of the English people. The British should be embarrassed, ashamed. The British tabloids should be seen as they are; depraved, ignorant grubbers. I hope they come to Canada. They will be welcomed and accepted and allowed to live appropriate lives and be positive contributors. Peter McAuslan, 74, distiller, Sutton, Quebec Damned if you do, damned if you don’t. There have been so many complaints about how expensive it is to support the royal family, you would think more people would applaud this move. It makes sense to par down the family if not get rid of them completely. Carol, high school teacher, Toronto I for one, in Vancouver Canada, am overjoyed with Harry and Meghan having the ‘moxy’ to take on the British royal establishment and to take charge refusing to play along with other people’s outdated games. I wholeheartedly welcome them to Canada and wish them every success and happiness as Canada’s most admired and beloved new refugees from life-stifling unpleasantness back home. I sincerely hope this modern and progressive royal couple will be allowed to continue to inspire, as they have been doing. David Jackson, 75, retired teacher, Vancouver 