One supermarket that served the Muslim community in Christchurch has been forced to close and the other is facing an uncertain future amid plummeting sales, 10 months after the deadly terrorist attack on two mosques in the New Zealand city. Those running the stores say the drop in business followed the deaths of breadwinners from dozens of families in the gunman’s attack on 15 March, in which 51 people – many of them men with families – were killed and dozens more injured. Among those killed was Amjad Hamid, a husband and father of two, and a cardiologist at Christchurch hospital who also managed the family business, Mediterranean Food Company, known as Mefco. Since his death, his brother, Ayman Hamid, who owned the supermarket, and his niece, Noor Hamid, had been running it in his stead. Amid dwindling sales, the Hamid family had been forced to increase prices and top up the business with their own funds, and had struggled to pay the rent. They arrived at Mefco on Saturday to find an eviction notice on the door. “A lot of the regulars that we had either passed away in the shooting or moved away after the shooting,” said Noor Hamid, who usually works as a lawyer. She added that the store, which stocked Mediterranean produce including fresh Lebanese bread, Halal meat, white cheeses and fresh olives, sold luxuries rather than staples. “People really underestimate the fact that it was mostly the main breadwinner who died,” she said. “And once you’ve lost an entire income ... we sell spices and things that you could probably live without if you weren’t making that much money.” The business had struggled financially since 2017 when it had moved to a new location in Christchurch, she said, but after the mosque attacks sales fell dramatically. “We used to make three times the amount of bread and sell it all,” she said. “Now we’re baking once a week and not even selling that. That was the biggest indicator.” Tighter budgets and fewer celebrations among the city’s Muslim community, as well as grief that prevented widows from leaving their homes, had hit businesses, she said, as the survivors and victims’ families came to terms with new circumstances. “My aunt was telling me, ‘I used to shop every week and now I can barely go out and do the groceries,’” she said. “I think her lust for life is kind of gone.” Advocates working with vulnerable families in the city said the need for their services had increased as a direct result of the attacks. “We have had an increase since March the 15th,” said Denise Jaeger, who runs the Muslim Community Food Bank in Christchurch. The number of families delivered parcels by the monthly service had grown from eight when it began four years ago to 30 now – “six or seven” were only on the books as a result of the mosque attacks, Jaeger said. Though New Zealand’s government offers income and other support to the bereaved families and survivors, Jaeger said many were struggling to survive on welfare benefits when they had received an income previously, and some of those injured in the attacks were still working reduced hours. For others, the arrival of family members from overseas to help widows and survivors had led to even more straitened circumstances, as one income had to stretch further to cover a larger family. “There’s money for nothing extra,” she said. “It’s the basics, that’s all that they can get.” Mefco’s landlord, Gurwinder Singh, said he had bought the premises in October partly based on the 10-year lease held by the business, which had seemed a secure prospect. He said he had not been told that the family who owned the business had negotiated a reduced rent with their previous landlord, and he needed to service his mortgage. “If they got problems, I understand, that can happen with anyone,” he said, adding that he would have been happy to keep Mefco as a tenants if it could afford the full rent. “The owner sold the property, took the money, and I’m stuck now to pay the mortgage,” he said. Noor Hamid said Mefco’s seven employees would lose their jobs. “They helped bury my uncle, these people – they’ve got families,” she said. “It’s hard to tell them we’ve got no way of paying you. We’ll have to give you notice.” A 15-minute drive across the city, Christchurch’s other Middle Eastern store, Maihan Supermarket and Halal Meat, has also experienced tumbling sales. There had been a “40% drop down” in sales since the mosque attacks, said Mahammad Jawad Rabani, its owner. Many customers had moved to Auckland, he said. “Every week, drops down, down, down, down,” he said. “Not just one time, every week.” He would “try his best” to continue the business, Jawad said, but he added: “I don’t know what will happen to me.” New Zealand’s government offered a financial assistance and advice package to businesses affected by the mosque attacks. But it only applied to those close to Linwood Mosque which were forced to shut for a period after the shooting and struggled to get back on their feet afterwards. 