Exeter secured their first home draw in the European Cup quarter-finals and they will return to Sandy Park in the last eight even though the ground’s capacity falls 1,400 short of the required minimum of 15,000. Rather than take the match, which depending on how results go on Sunday could be against disgraced Saracens, to a venue miles away, the organisers have exercised discretion. Exeter, who stirred themselves after the break after a careless, distracted start, had already qualified while La Rochelle were seeking an unlikely route into the quarter-finals that would have meant entry by the cat-flap rather than the back door as they needed four of five other teams to lose while they won at the pool winners. It gave the Top 14 side motivation and twice they responded in the opening 25 minutes after had scored trademark tries through their forwards. The first, scored by Luke Cowan-Dickie who had earlier forced a penalty near his line after locking over the ball, came from a driving maul after a penalty was kicked to touch. The second also followed a penalty, which La Rochelle liberally gave away throughout the match. It was close to their line, Jack Maunder tapped and went and Dave Ewers forced his way over. It was Exeter at their most ruthlessly efficient, but for the rest of the opening half they were sloppy and slapdash in attack and defence, denied an interval lead when Joe Simmonds’s loop and outside break resulted in a try rather than a penalty because Ian Whitten was ruled to have obstructed Ihaia West in the build-up. La Rochelle were then level at 14-14, twice responding within four minutes to Exeter’s tries. They scored first from a scrum, passing to the left wing where the Fiji international Kini Murimurivalu stepped inside Jack Nowell and through Joe Simmonds and were then awarded a penalty try after Geoffrey Doumayrou’s inside pass to Vincent Rattez on Exeter’s 22 after West’s chip into space was deliberately knocked on by Stuart Hogg. The referee, Frank Murphy, immediately sent the Scotland full-back to the sin-bin and asked for a review of the incident to determine whether Rattez would probably have scored a try had Hogg not palmed the ball with his right hand. The evidence of the night, when one handling error followed another, suggested not, but when the replay was paused at the moment Hogg knocked on the La Rochelle full-back had a clear run to the line. Tracking back was the Exeter No 8 Sam Simmonds who had shown his pace with a break from his own half and it looked a stretch to say that Rattez, who looked to the heavens after dropping a soft pass in the second period, would probably have scored. La Rochelle were, though, the Chiefs’ match for the opening 45 minutes despite losing two forwards, including their captain Romain Sazy, early. The scrum was the only area where Exeter enjoyed a marked superiority despite the hefty presence of Uini Atonio. The prop, who weighs a few feathers under 24st, was treated three times and failed to come out for the second period having spent much of it on the floor after collapsing a scrum – but he set up the position for his side’s first try after clattering through Sam Hill. Exeter tightened up after the interval, fortified by a few words from their director of rugby, Rob Baxter, whose temperature rose in the first half as the cold of the night set in. They kept it simple and within 17 minutes had secured the try bonus point through two tries by Sam Simmonds, whose performances from No 8 this season have put him in contention for a recall to the England squad. His first came after Luke Cowan-Dickie took a penalty quickly as La Rochelle set themselves up for a scrum five metres from their line and the second was scored from a scrum. Simmonds has faced questions about whether he has the size to make it in Test rugby in his position, but here he showed his strength and technique. It decided the result. Ollie Devoto’s break from his 22 created a try for Stu Townsend as Exeter, who extended their unbeaten run to 10 matches, relaxed and turned it on.