‘I’m Richard Hammond and I’m on a mission to explore the really big,” says our host at the start of this new series on Discovery. “And yes I know everyone seems big to me.” Hammond is 1.68 metres tall, and has spent most of his career looking up to Jeremy Clarkson (1.96m) and James May (1.82m), which is no way to live. I am not saying that Hammond has a Napoleon complex, still less that this series is a sublimation of his weekly humiliations on Top Gear and The Grand Tour, but it probably wouldn’t have been made were he taller. Indeed, it probably wouldn’t have existed if Clarkson and May had been cut down to his size in a car crusher like an obsolete pair of Morris Marinas, which would have been my preferred solution. In later episodes, Hammond will go up big buildings, pilot big ships and other examples of overcompensations for male inadequacy. But for this first instalment, he visits the world’s largest car factory in Wolfsburg, Germany, to make a puff piece so glowing that Volkswagen’s PRs must have been high-fiving each other when they saw it. For the rest of us, Richard Hammond’s BIG seems grotesquely misplaced. These, after all, are the end times. Clarkson’s Baldrick just doesn’t know it yet. “When you create enough cars each year to create a tailback from New York to Las Vegas,” Hammond says, “they have to be shifted off site as quickly as they are made.” That is why, he explains, each day 10 trainloads carrying 1,800 cars made by 4,000 robots with the assistance of 63,000 humans leave Volkswagen’s 6.5 sq km site. Each vehicle has passed through the world’s biggest paint shop where a crack cadre of robots wearing overalls spraypaints each car. Each one contains 10,000 parts from 600 suppliers as far away as Malaysia and Turkey. Top stats, Hammond. But hold on. What’s that noise coming from Sweden? It’s Greta Thunberg wailing over the madness Hammond celebrates. She collects those salty tears in a bowl and pours them into the Baltic. Why? To hasten the rise of sea levels and thereby the extermination of humanity. Hammond has that effect on people. We do not know whether any of VW’s robots get paid leave, but one has clearly been moonlighting. The script is devoid of human input. “You spend most of your time hanging out with robots?” Hammond asks Stefan Braun, the head of VW’s body shop. “Yes, that’s my life,” says Braun. “So you’re the lord of robots?” pursues Hammond. “Kind of,” says Braun with a fixed grin. Why are robots on the manufacturing frontline? “You get more out of a robot than you get out of humans,” Braun explains. Automation is happening in every sector. Hammond himself was replaced years ago by a robot, a rudimentary model programmed to giggle at white middle-aged male bants. Braun may be a cyborg, too, but a more sophisticated one. If VW is serious about productivity, he really ought to be. At least the robot scriptwriter has a sense of humour. “Next,” says Hammond before an ad break, “I get to work with the biggest tool in the factory.” Oh goody, I thought: Clarkson’s going to make a guest appearance. Fingers crossed the pair would turn Laurel and Hardy as they bungled fitting a rear spoiler to a VW Golf. Disappointingly, Hammond meant a different kind of tool. The Wolfsburg factory is so big it has its own sausage factory producing more sausages than Volkswagen makes cars. But unless robots like currywurst, the writing is on the wall for the head chef, Dietmar. To be fair, Dietmar has been making sausages for VW staff since 1973, so could probably do with a career change. Hammond never clinches the point that what goes on here shows our species is finished. We are not needed to make cars nor to drive them. We are on the hard shoulder of the highway to trans-humanism, sucking on the exhaust pipe of history. Viewed thus, this documentary is not a celebration of mass manufacturing but an update of Invasion of the Bodysnatchers. Did Volkswagen pay for what amounts to a 60-minute advertisement? Probably not, but it really should reward Hammond for helping us forget the VW emissions scandal. Instead of finding out how its R&D geniuses cheated pollution tests, he plays the clown in a wind tunnel, standing in a harness as an eight-metre diameter fan blasts 32.11 megawatts of air at 160mph into his undulating face. “I can barely stand! I’m really glad I ate all that sausage earlier; a bit of ballast to hold me down!” Top telly. They will be repeating this on Dave until the last viewer is terminated by a robot tasked with turning off the last TV. Just see if they don’t. It can only be a matter of time before BP sponsors an award for Tireless Dedication to Sanitising a Toxic Brand. It will be an outrage if Hammond doesn’t win it.