The Valencia striker Maxi Gómez scored once and helped force an own-goal to beat Barcelona 2-0 in La Liga on Saturday. The loss was the first for Barcelona in three matches under their new head coach, Quique Setién, who was hired to replace Ernesto Valverde. “I think perhaps we need to understand things in a bit of a better way,” Setién later told Barcelona’s website. Barcelona’s first defeat in 10 league matches means Real Madrid can take top spot with a draw at Valladolid on Sunday. Both teams have 43 points and an identical goal difference of +25. Valencia went ahead thanks to an own-goal by Jordi Alba in the 48th minute, when Gómez’s volley that was flying wide deflected off the Barcelona left-back and into the net. Gómez put the result beyond doubt in the 77th minute. Espanyol are investigating after Athletic Bilbao’s Iñaki Williams claimed he was racially abused during the 1-1 draw. Williams, a 25-year-old forward born in Bilbao, reportedly told his captain Iker Muniain about the abuse, who then informed referee José Sánchez Martínez about it. Williams tweeted after the game: “It is very sad that today we continue to experience racism scenes in football. We have to end it among everyone. Thanks for your support.” In Germany, the Bundesliga leaders RB Leipzig slumped to a shock 2-0 defeat at mid-table Eintracht Frankfurt, ending a 13-match unbeaten run in all competitions. Almamy Touré put the hosts ahead three minutes after the break with a stunning strike from the edge of the penalty area and Filip Kostic sealed it in stoppage time. Leipzig, whose last defeat was by Freiburg on 26 October, dominated the match with 22 shots to Frankfurt’s seven. Their lead at the top was cut to two points by Borussia Mönchengladbach, who came from behind to beat Mainz 3-1 at Borussia-Park. Robin Quaison gave Mainz a 12th-minute lead but a goal in each half from Alassane Plea turned the game around, before Florian Neuhaus added a third two minutes from time with a spectacular lob from 50 yards. Bayern Munich thrashed Schalke 5-0 at home with goals from Robert Lewandowski, Thomas Müller, Leon Goretzka, Thiago and Serge Gnabry. In Serie A Josip Ilicic scored a hat-trick, including an opportunistic free-kick from the halfway line, as Atalanta crushed Torino 7-0 away. The hosts were also reduced to nine men by the end.