A 2019 report by Unicef, which analysed legally protected leave for new parents in 41 of the world’s richest countries, found that 26 offered paid paternity leave, while 40 had paid leave for new mothers. While paid paternity leave (a period of absence offered for new fathers) is usually shorter than maternity leave, it is often better paid, with 16 countries offering full pay for those on average earnings. As attitudes change and countries increasingly start to recognise its importance, access to paid paternity leave is improving. The number of countries with statutory paternity leave provisions globally rose from 40 to 94 between 1994 and 2015, the International Labor Organization found. The most generous countries for paid leave for fathers are Japan, South Korea and Portugal, according to the Unicef report. The least is the US – the only country analysed not to offer any kind of paid leave to mothers or fathers. Figures from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) show the average length of paid leave reserved for fathers among its members is 8.1 weeks. Here’s a look at paid leave for fathers around the world. With an impressive 30 weeks available to new fathers, on paper Japan’s approach to paternity leave looks progressive, but in 2017, just over 5% of fathers who qualified for it took paid leave, according to Unicef. Leading factors for not taking it were staff shortages, employers not offering it, and “unfavourable atmosphere”. Leave is tax-free and paid at 67% of earnings for the first 180 days and 50% afterwards. In 2007, when South Korea’s policy was introduced, it was very rare for men to take paternity leave. In 2018, 17% of parents who took leave were men – but a government report found the majority still feared the impact it would have on their careers. Fathers can take 3-5 days in paternity pay (for which they are paid in full for the first three days and the last two are unpaid) followed by one year of parental leave paid at 80% for the first three months, and then 50%. Having bumped its paternity leave up from two to eight weeks between 2016 and 2019, and this year increased it to 12 weeks, Spain is rapidly overtaking other countries. Next year it will expand to 16 weeks – the same length as the country’s maternity leave. Paid at 100% of salary, fathers are not allowed to give the weeks they don’t use to their partners. The father, or non-pregnant parent, can first take 10 days paid at 78% of earnings for the birth of the child. All parents are also able to take up to 480 days of parental leave between them – 90 days of which is reserved for each of them. Providing they meet the work history and income requirements, fathers (and mothers) can each take 195 days at 78% of earnings and 45 days at a set rate of 180 kronor (about $19) per day. Fathers have their own non-transferrable three months of leave – as do mothers – with an additional three months that they can choose how to use between them. Leave is paid at 80% of earnings. All parents have a right to leave, no matter what their employment status, but due to gender pay gaps, on average employed men are paid considerably more to take leave. Fathers and other parents are entitled to non-transferrable 5-8 weeks of leave - but only if they use some of the 35-61 weeks shared parental leave. Leave is paid at either 55% of average insured earnings (with a cap) for 35 weeks, or at 33% for 61 weeks. Officially, fathers are entitled to five working days of leave paid at 100%. However, with about 60% of men working outside the formal economy, the majority do not qualify. The policy also applies to same-sex couples. There is no stipulated paternity leave in Australia and parental leave – 18 weeks paid at minimum wage (A$741, or about $508, a week before tax) – automatically goes to the mother unless she opts to transfer it over to the father. But “dad and partner pay” gives new fathers and partners of mothers two weeks’ pay, also paid at national minimum wage, for taking unpaid leave. Paternity leave is only accessible to employees (not, for example, people who are self-employed or contractors) and is paid at a rate of either £149 (about $195) a week or 90% of the employee’s average weekly pay, whichever is lowest, for a maximum of two weeks. Leave, which cannot be split up, can be taken between the birth of the child and up to 56 days later. Up to 18 weeks of parental leave is available to fathers and mothers up to the child’s 18th birthday, but it is unpaid and limited to four weeks per year. Like mothers, fathers in America are not covered by any national paid leave policy. The only available leave, under the Family and Medical Leave Act, is unpaid and covers around 60% of Americans. However, eight states – California, New Jersey, Rhode Island, New York, Washington, Massachusetts, Connecticut and Oregon – and the District of Columbia – have introduced their own paid family leave policies which include parental leave paid at a percentage of the employee’s salary.