In 2013, the director Trey Edward Shults got a call from a hospital in Missouri; his father was dying of pancreatic cancer. They hadn’t spoken in a decade. His dad was an alcoholic and addict with a history of domestic violence. “I didn’t want to go,” he says. “My dad wasn’t a part of my life. So you care, but you don’t, if you know what I mean? You compartmentalise.” In the end, his girlfriend persuaded him to drive to Missouri. Shults comforted his regret-filled father as best he could. Two months later, he wrote his second film, the low-fi apocalyptic horror It Comes at Night. In three days he had finished the script, featuring a deathbed scene with the same words he spoke to his father. His new film, Waves, has again recreated the experience. “The movies are me doing therapy with myself,” he says, grinning. His first two films, he says, are “pure exorcism”. We meet in a hotel in London on a grey, rainy afternoon. At 31, Shults is the new wonderkid of US indie cinema. Critics hailed him as the new Darren Aronofsky, John Cassavetes or the millennial Terrence Malick (who hired him, aged 18, as an intern on The Tree of Life). He doesn’t look the part of an auteur quite yet, though. My first impression is that he is more tech entrepreneur: a broad-shouldered big guy, clean-shaven, strong handshake, jock-ish. The three films he has directed have been portraits of families in crisis. He shot his debut, Krisha, for virtually nothing in his parents’ house in Texas, casting his aunt as a recovering alcoholic who relapses over Thanksgiving. “The entirety of the Krisha story was inspired by my cousin. She overdosed and passed away. We have a lot of addiction running in our family.” He is friendly and engaged, with no filter of hotshot coolness. The new film, Waves, is split into two acts: the hero of the first is a popular high-school senior, Tyler (Kelvin Harrison Jr), a wrestling star and the golden child in his wealthy African American family. When things begin to go wrong for Tyler in quick succession, he unravels and makes a mistake. Something terrible happens. Waves is a gob-stoppingly ambitious film, an immersive experience. Shults straps the audience into the perspective of the characters; you feel what they are feeling. In one scene, the camera spins and whirls 360 degrees in a car as Tyler and his girlfriend cruise along the Miami coastline, young and carefree. Shults wrote a lot of himself into the main character. He was an angry teenager, he says. “I destroyed my room. I broke my hand from punching a wall. I’ve had very intense fights. I used to have big rage issues. My theory is I got a lot from my biological father.” Then one day something snapped. “I remember thinking: I am not the victim here. I need to be accountable. I need to work on this or this is going to get worse, like it did for my dad.” His mum and stepfather are both psychotherapists. “I would be a total mess without them.” They pushed him academically and in sports, and encouraged him to enrol in business school after graduating. He dropped out after a year when he got hired on The Tree of Life (he interned on Voyage of Time and Song to Song too). Shults is generally open and transparent, but he bristles when I mention Malick’s name. Has he shown his films to the man who must have been a mentor? “Er, no, I haven’t seen him since Song of Songs. I don’t think I’ve seen Terry in a long time,” he says, curtly. I haven’t seen Terrence Malick since Song of Songs. I haven't seen him in a long time After his internships ended, Shults returned to live at home but, broke and watching movies, he reluctantly applied to flight attendant school, where he was kicked out during training, but did meet his girlfriend. She still works as a flight attendant – and it was she who prompted the trip to see his father. She went along, too, shooting the trip on video. In Waves, Shults recreates the experience in the film’s second act as the focus switches to Tyler’s sister, Emily (Taylor Russell), who drives with her boyfriend (Lucas Hedges) to see his dying father. Shults gave Hedges the videos his girlfriend had filmed of him and his father to prepare. The shoot was devastating. “It was the hardest thing I’d ever done,” he says. “I broke down after one scene. I felt an all-consuming, terrifying dread. Ultimately, it was cathartic. I’m happy we did it, but when I was in it, I was like: maybe this is unhealthy. I’m taking things too far.” For now, Shults says, he is done with personal film-making. “I put everything I have creatively and as a human being into this movie. I need to live more life for a couple of years. So I have no idea what’s next, honestly.” Does he fancy joining the Hollywood big league, directing a Marvel movie? He squirms. “I actively do not want to go down that route. I have zero interest in Marvel movies and superhero films. I can’t watch them. I don’t find them very interesting. I loved Star Wars as a kid. But then I grew up.” If he does adapt a book, I wonder if his family will breathe a sigh of relief. Don’t they get sick of him putting their lives out there for the world to dissect? Shults laughs. “No! Happily, everyone loves it. They are very supportive.” Last question. His films don’t exactly paint a rosy picture of family life. Does he want kids of his own? Shults looks taken aback. “I think so. I’m not in a rush. We have five cats at home right now. It’s insane. One of my cats is in the movie. He’s like my son and they’re my kids right now. But family is incredibly important to me.” I leave him smiling to himself at the understatement. • Waves is released in the UK on 17 January