A pared-down face is the palate cleanser we need after last month’s obligatory maquillage (over) indulgence. Start with glowing skin. Add a booster into a little bit of foundation and apply like a serum. Forego pencilled brows; instead, go for the brushed but groomed finish. Blush will give your face life – much needed in this weather – and a touch of shine is all you need on your lips. It’s a look that requires minimal exertion. Just as well. You’ll need all your energy to stop your newly made resolutions falling flat by the end of next week. 1. Westman Atelier Eye Love You Mascara £50, net-a-porter.com 2. MZ Skin Glow Boost Ampoules £155, mzskin.com3. Lime Crime Bushy Brow £20, cultbeauty.co.uk 4. Dior Lip Glow Oil in 001 Pink £28, dior.com 5. Cle de Peau Cream Blush £50, harrods.com I’d always felt a face not cleansed conventionally – a wash with water – is not a clean face. So micellar, a cleansing combo of purified water, hydrating elements and mild surfactants you use on a cotton pad to get rid of dirt, grime, makeup and excess sebum? No thanks. Or so I thought. It has long been favoured by the French and beauty editors, but my issue, as someone who loves the splash of water, is that it is rinse free. But then I began to notice how much better my skin (and hair) was whenever I travelled. And it was all to do with the water. I live in a place notorious for hard water that has high concentrations of dissolved minerals – the stuff that builds limescale in your kettle and leaves glasses in your dishwasher cloudy. It also changes the skin’s chemistry leaving you more susceptible to rosacea, acne, eczema and enlarged pores. So, short of rinsing my face with Evian – I have been tempted – I began trialling micellar water. Bioderma’s version has a cult following for good reason. It takes everything off – including mascara – deeply cleanses without drying and subsequent products work more efficiently. It does feel like a faff – you need to go over your face a few times – but unless you install a home water softener, this is the next best thing. Bioderma Sensibio H20 Micellar, £10.80 feelunique.com A prebiotic, antioxidant offering that smooths, balances and boosts moisture in parched skin. And despite the name, it’s topical. So please don’t drink it. Elemis Superfood Calm Cica Hydration Juice, £40, elemis.com Every hair type can benefit from this superfood-rich hydration range from Aveda. The pomegranate oil leave-in conditioner will keep your hair hydrated for up to 72 hours. Aveda Nutriplenish Hair Range, from £9, aveda.co.uk Dry and dehydrated skin and hair will love this multitasking balm. The rich butter-and-botanical-oils formula includes avocado and jojoba seed. Malin + Goetz Meadowfoam Oil Balm, £38, malinandgoetz.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.