For Ewan, Jamie and Lachlan MacLean, it’s been a struggle to keep their feet on the ground after rowing in record-breaking time across the Atlantic. “When I went to sleep last night, I thought I’d wake up on the boat with the alarm going off, and someone screaming ‘to port, to port’,” said Jamie. For their parents, Sheila and Charlie, the brothers’ arrival in Antigua on Thursday must have come as a relief. Their only children, aged 27, 26 and 21 respectively, have just spent 35 days, nine hours and nine minutes in a 28ft boat, travelling 2,720 nautical miles from the Canaries in the Talisker Atlantic Challenge. They came third, breaking the record for three rowers by six days, and in the process becoming the first three brothers, and the youngest trio, to make the trip. “I wonder how their mother feels,” said Kelly Carmichael, mother of another competitor in a Royal Navy team the MacLeans beat to the finish line. Sheila, who was helping to tidy up the boat on Friday, laughed it off: “I had such a quiet Christmas; I want them to go out into the mid-Atlantic every year.” The brothers’ boat, Broar, was loudly welcomed into the dour 18th-century surroundings of Nelson’s Dockyard, Antigua by a set of very modern hornblowers, a line of super-yachts at anchor. By the standards of the race, the MacLeans had it relatively easy. Fortitude IV, the British foursome who won the race, had capsized stern over bow and rolled during the crossing, which one of the team described as “startling”. Meanwhile Sam Coxon, who was on Ocean5, the boat that arrived 10 hours behind the MacLeans, stepped on to the wharf with a long-harboured plan to go down on one knee to his girlfriend Natasha, only to find he couldn’t, because, he said, “my knees were so wobbly”. He proposed anyway. Rowing the Atlantic is increasingly popular, although fewer people have made the crossing than have climbed Everest. Thirty five boats competed this time. The brothers, who grew up in Edinburgh, spent their summers in Sutherland in the far north of Scotland. Jamie plays the bagpipes, Ewan the guitar and Lachlan an accordion, and they’re a striking lot, with sun-bleached hair and green eyes. The challenge was Lachlan’s idea, with Jamie first on board. “Then Ewan was like, ‘Lads, what’s going on? I’m not going to be able to live through any future family Christmases if you guys do this and I’m the odd one out,’” said Jamie. Nine out of 10 teams that register for the race don’t make it to the starting line. “It costs around £120,000,” said Lachlan. “To raise that sort of money when we are two students and one young professional, it’s quite a challenge.” They are also raising money for the charities Feedback Madagascar and Children First. They found sponsors and bought a secondhand boat and patched it up.“We spent so much time working on the boat that we knew the whole thing inside out,” said Ewan. The Dyson design engineer believes this gave them an edge. He made innovations: a streamlined keel, lighter bedding made by his mother. “Being brothers was hands down the biggest advantage though,” said Jamie. “We get on so well.” When the cables for their iPhones didn’t stand up to the conditions, they couldn’t listen to music or podcasts. “That was a big thing because it meant we talked,” said Lachlan. “We had some great conversations,” said Jamie, as Lachlan added: “We talked about everything, from our childhood, through to our projects, to the future.” Ewan then interjected. “Our life plans.” Lachlan is studying philosophy at the University of Glasgow, while Jamie studies architecture at Glasgow School of Art, although this experience may take them in new directions. They agree they will definitely do something else together. Often long-distance rowers fall out, forced to fury by the confined space. “Our fall-outs only occurred when there was an accusation of someone eating more than their fair share of porridge,” said Lachlan. Jamie is currently the chief suspect: “I’m the one who has lost the least amount of weight.” The welcome they received came as a shock. They believed they had travelled so fast their family wouldn’t make it on time, and that no one would be waiting. “Ewan and I were rowing,” said Jamie. “We couldn’t see anything.” When the horns began to sound on the yachts in the harbour, Jamie and Ewan started asking Lachlan what was going on. “And then mum popped up beside us,” said Ewan. “She’d managed to get a lift on a local’s rib.” They celebrated their record breaking arrival by eating – a lot. “We made a stack of blueberry pancakes and streaky bacon and maple syrup with loads of peanut butter and apple,” said Ewan. Because of the training, it’s been three and a half months since any of them have had a drink. “That’s going to change tomorrow,” said Lachlan.