Animus Vinho Verde, Portugal 2018 (£4.79, Aldi) Mid-January is a time when most of us are hunkering down and looking to save a few pennies after the splurges of last month. And a question that might emerge as we ponder where to cut our spending while waiting for the fateful pat of the credit card bill on the doormat: is it actually possible to enjoy wine on the cheap anymore? Since February last year, a remarkable 61% of the price of a £5 bottle of wine is made up of duty and VAT (that’s the £2.23 flat duty rate plus 83p in VAT). So when you factor in the costs of packaging and transport (as well as the supplier’s and retailer’s margins, however thin they may be), there can be little wonder that drinking pleasure at this price point has become increasingly hard to come by. Hard, but as Aldi’s perky, citrussy, light Portuguese white proves, not entirely impossible. Waitrose Rich and Intense Italian Red, Puglia, Italy NV (£4.99, Waitrose) Although both Aldi and Lidl have been adding (often very good) bottles at higher prices, the German discounters are still more or less synonymous with the cheaper end of the market with which they made their name – and they are still masters of the unglamorous art of sourcing bottles that are than merely drinkable while still giving change from a fiver. Quite a lot of change in the case of Lidl’s Cimarosa South Africa Pinotage 2018, a wine that calls for that quaintly euphemistic wine critics’ term gluggable: ie a wine whose simple, juicy qualities are magnified by its absurdly small (£3.99) price tag. The same word can be applied to much of Waitrose’s sub-£5 own-label range, where the wine names take the form of descriptions and, in the case of the dark cherry succulence of the Italian edition, proves that this poshest of supermarkets can do cheap pretty well, too. The Wine Atlas Feteasca Neagra, Romania 2018 (£5.25, Asda) One way of finding a bargain is to look for a country or region where the quality of the wines is out of sync with its reputation – which is really just a polite way of saying, “look for the unfashionable”. Romania, for example, may not have the cachet of western European regions, but the country’s wine producers have been slowly rebuilding their industry in the past couple of decades, and the best of its production is some of the best value wines around. Certainly, few other regions can make decent, recognisable pinot noir at the sort of prices that Romania manages in wines such as Waitrose Romanian Pinot Noir 2018 (£5.99), which is a charmingly light, soft, summer-berried confection. Just as good is the pair of wines made from native Romanian grape varieties for Asda’s Wine Atlas range: a rounded, peachy white Feteasca Regala 2018 (£5.25) and the spicy, supple Feateasca Neagra red. Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.