It’s time to go rogue with your eyeliner. Many SS20 catwalks (like Victoria Beckham, Courreges, Mugler and, as seen here, Matty Bovan) showed models walking down the runway with lines drawn across and around eyes and brows in a way that was totally unexpected. You’ll need an eye primer (it creates a great canvas) and a steady hand (stretch the skin taut as you draw). And if you are wondering why on earth you’d try this look just remember: it’s a consistently conventional approach to makeup that causes premature ageing, not fine lines. 1. Charlotte Tilbury Pillow Talk Eyeliner £19, charlottetilbury.com 2. MAC Extra Dimension Eyeshadow in Evening Grey £16.50, maccosmetics.co.uk 3. Glossier Colorslide Gel Eyeliner £13, glossier.com 4. Victoria Beckham Satin Kajal EyeLiner £20, victoriabeckham.com 5. MAC Eye Kohl in Prunella £15, maccosmetics.co.uk I once wrote a piece called Dirty Pretty Things about the stuff that lurks in your makeup bag long after they should have been chucked out – things like makeup brushes. They are a hotbed for bacteria. Nice. In the quest for great skin, we spend a fortune on cleansers, serums, moisturisers, masks and, in many cases, treatments. And then one day we realise nothing seems to be delivering results as perhaps they once did. We dab on an extra bit of foundation, a swoosh of highlighter, a colour-boosting blusher to detract from what really lies beneath, and blame our skin issues on stress, hormones, pollution, a bad reaction to a new product… And yes, sometimes that is the case, but more often than not, like so many things in life, the answer to the problem is usually less complex. In this case, your skin issues could simply be down to those bacteria-ridden makeup brushes. You see, even when we wash our brushes, if they have been with us for a while, they still harbour germs. And so when you carry out your multi-step skincare regime and then put on your makeup with the same brush you’ve been using day in and day out, your hard work is simply going to the dogs. So don’t bother going all out with this ‘New Year, New You’ nonsense. Just get yourself a new set of makeup brushes. Estée Lauder Act VI Brushed by Fame set, £64, esteelauder.co.uk All for one Crafted with naturally derived ingredients, this zesty scent is a throwback to the pioneer of gender-neutral scents, CK One. CK Everyone, £42, boots.com Capital assets For me, this ode to Paris – a glorious chypre scent of green verbena, bergamot, rose, patchouli and oakmoss – is one of Diptyque’s best recent launches. Diptyque Eau de Capital, £120, diptyqueparis.com Good enough to eat This modern gourmand hits the right notes. Sensual vetiver, fresh grapefruit tea and a sweet warm vanilla. Jo Malone Vetiver and Golden Vanilla Cologne Intense, £78, jomalone.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.