For 40 years, the photographer Nicholas Nixon took a picture of his wife with her three sisters in the same formation, one image per year. His Brown Sisters series is the inspiration for Alexandra Wood’s new play, enacted across the same length of time and with no hint of airbrushing. Wood’s shots of the Tyler sisters are taken in single scenes, one for every year, from 1990 to 2030; we meet the youngest two as teenagers and leave them as middle-aged women. It might be One Day for siblings, except that there is less romance and more bickering between Maddy (Caroline Faber), Gail (Bryony Hannah), and Katrina (Angela Griffin). What emerges is a drama about the complicated love between sisters and also a picture of contemporary womanhood that gathers power as it goes along. It may have gathered more power if Nixon’s project were not followed so faithfully. As clever as the concept is, the journey across every single year slows the pace and the play feels long, even if discrete scenes are short: some last minutes, others are over in seconds and encapsulate everything from watching the film Bridesmaids and singing karaoke to children’s births and parent’s death. Abigail Graham’s stripped-back production might also have done more to heighten dramatic effect. The stage is bare but for a sofa, some steps and a screen displaying each year. The actors go through four decades in the same clothes. The lightning often seems stark and unchanging and props are minimal – a scarf, a pair of roller-skates, a bottle of wine. This places too much onus on the script and its delivery. The actors give spirited performances, especially Griffin, who sparks with character as the youngest sister, while the writing is funnier as it goes on and observant of the women’s changing dynamics. But it does not capture our hearts as fully as it might. In its earliest scenes, when Gail and Katrina have their stroppy teenage blow-ups, it has the shouty, quotidian feel of a TV soap opera. These echoes are gone by the second half, which gathers in force: one short but heartrending scene shows the sisters making sandwiches. They are sullen and silent, until one bursts into tears and it becomes wordlessly clear that a parent has died. Wood’s script has some nuance, and the sisters’ antipathies and loyalties ring true. Katrina butts heads with Gail in earlier years, but shows fierce protectiveness when Gail is ill and heartbroken. Two sisters talk about a serious subject, the third sings or dances, lost on another wavelength. Classic stories of sisters are fashionable again, from Greta Gerwig’s reworked Little Women in cinemas to Inua Ellam’s reworked Three Sisters on stage. What is refreshing about Wood’s play is that it is emphatically contemporary. The women’s lives contain divorce, same-sex love and lesbian motherhood. Men and marriage aren’t necessary. As Gail says: “I don’t want to waste time on an average relationship.” Billed as an exploration of the “deep and unruly waters of sisterhood”, it lives up to that promise and reminds us that the blood-bond of sisterhood has hard edges. But the play is not devoid of romanticism; the sisters face big losses but ultimately without bitterness. The last snapshot is not about the terrible mysteries of suffering, as it is for Chekhov’s three sisters, but of a world that “wasn’t all bad”. • At Hampstead theatre, London, until 18 January.