In the autumn of 1940, as the Luftwaffe made its daily death runs over the south coast and on to London, Virginia Woolf started drafting the outlines of a new book. Provisionally titled Reading at Random, it was to be a history of the creative impulse, of the expression of emotion as refracted through the idea of England – an alternative England, shaped not by the exploits of its statesmen and soldiers but its artists and communities. Women so far, she observed in A Room of One’s Own, had appeared only “as a glimpse ... in the lives of the great, whisking away into the background, concealing … a wink, a laugh, perhaps a tear”, but that was not for want of ability or something to say. Woolf was determined her new history (it was never published) would take into account “the immense effect of environment and suggestion upon the mind”. It would thus, Francesca Wade points out in her new book, allow women to take centre stage. Square Haunting, which tells the lives of five women at a time when each of them lived on Mecklenburgh Square, in Bloomsbury, initially seems nothing like as ambitious a project, especially as only one of the women, the social and economic historian Eileen Power, lived there for more than a year or two. But through this conceit of time and place, Wade somehow funnels accounts of modernist poetry and prose, as well as Russian and German Jewish intellectual refugees, ancient Greek scholarship, medieval economics, the League of Nations, Chinese art and imperial decline, Grand Guignol, Freud, the October revolution, the BBC’s educational lectures, a history of the London School of Economics, the rise of nazism, and a sympathetic portrait of a teddy bear. In the process she both reframes half a century of supposedly familiar literary and intellectual history and illustrates everything Woolf meant by “a room of one’s own”. “I had to GET AWAY to make good,” the poet and novelist Hilda Doolittle, or HD, wrote to her life-partner Bryher, having left Philadelphia for Europe in 1911, and fetched up five years later in a room on the square: “Can you see how London at least left me free?” The future crime writer Dorothy L Sayers took the same room four years later, just after she became part of the first cohort of women to graduate from Oxford. It lacked electric light, and curtains, but “is a beautiful big room”, she wrote to a friend. “The landlady is a curious, eccentric-looking person with short hair … and thoroughly understands that one wants to be quite independent.” The linguist, translator and classicist Jane Ellen Harrison arrived at 11 Mecklenburgh Street in 1926. She was 76, but this too was a new beginning, far from the Cambridge colleges where she had felt belittled and constrained. Historian Eileen Power lived at 20 Mecklenburgh Square, which became the joyfully glamorous centre of a kind of alternative Bloomsbury, full of social reformers, economists and would-be politicians. She thought conventional wifeliness nothing but a “judicious mixture of a cow, a muffler, a mirror. A lump of plasticine, a doormat and a vacuum, and algebraically indicated by a negative”, and went to great lengths to avoid it. Woolf took up residence in 37 Mecklenburgh Square in August 1939 with her husband, Leonard, and their Hogarth Press. She is the only one for whom the move was not an overt existential statement: they were escaping building work at their home in nearby Tavistock Square. The women’s characters and situations leap off the page, helped by the kind of details – from interior decor to what they wore – that bring prose alive. Such observations are also political. After her house was blown up by a time bomb on 16 September 1940, Woolf looked out over the rubble and said: “I want my books & chairs & carpets & beds. How I worked to buy them – one by one.” The women are robust and witty (Sayers), vulnerable (HD, in hospital after a stillbirth, was chastised for taking up a bed a soldier might need) and intrepid (Power, stopped because she was female, disguised herself as a man to cross the Khyber Pass). They are humblingly open‑minded and idealistic (Power and Harrison), unbelievably persistent (Harrison, who because she was a woman was denied successive jobs at Cambridge University until she was 48, while her friend Gilbert Murray waltzed into a professorship and a salary of £1,300 aged 23) and often raucous fun (Powers’ glittering kitchen dances). It is a measure of their vividness, and the depth of Wade’s research, that these figures far outshine TS Eliot, DH Lawrence, Freud and Keynes, who while secondary characters in this story, are more accustomed to the limelight. Wade's book is endlessly interesting, unshowy, tightly argued and large-hearted HD (a writing name given by her first boyfriend Ezra Pound) prefigured the recent feminist reinterpretations of Greek myth by translating the female choruses of Euripides’s Iphigenia in Aulis, then reimagining Eurydice, Cassandra, Calypso and Helen of Troy. Wade reads Sayers’s detective novels, the first of which was written in Mecklenburgh Square, as both entertainment and a study of male-female relations culminating in the marriage of equals that features in her famous work Gaudy Night. In that novel, the square appears as a metaphor for intellectual independence. Harrison, whose work, as Wade shows, influenced both The Waste Land and Lawrence, literally rewrote history, accompanying male archaeologists on digs and seeing what they had failed to see: that before Homer solidified the male-dominated Olympian pantheon, female goddesses often reigned alone. (“The ‘outrageous myth of the birth of the goddess Athena from Zeus’ head, Harrison argued, is the ‘religious representation … of a patrilinear social structure’ designed to erase the mother.”) Meanwhile Power wrote the medieval and pre-industrial worlds as both global and domestic, arguing, for instance, that the introduction of the turnip to England was more important than the beheading of Charles I. All of this was achieved (admittedly with the privileges of class) alongside a kind of exhausting private vigilance, where independence of mind and spirit had to be defended at all costs. Sometimes those costs were high. There is a moving account of Sayers’s discussions with an older and uncommitted lover about birth control: “His position as an artist was never at stake in their tussle, while she knew hers was liable to combust in a moment’s carelessness.” She became pregnant by another man, and Sayers, knowing single motherhood would erase her artistic potential, took eight weeks off from her job to give birth in secret and relinquish her son. HD’s partner Bryher protected and crucially did not compete with her, while Harrison spent her last years with the translator, novelist and poet Hope Mirrlees. Power, whose “idea of life is to have enormous quantities of friends but live alone”, eventually made an intellectually sustaining match with a younger man, while Woolf, of course, had the luck to be married to the supportive Leonard. Wade, whose book is endlessly interesting, unshowy, tightly argued and large-hearted, ends her account of HD with a reading of her 1960 novel Bid Me to Live, in which the main character, Julia, finally sees a way to escape the bonds of gender. She is, as an artist, “both and neither. It is simply myself sitting here, this time propped up in bed, scribbling in a notebook, with a candle at my elbow.” And that is enough. • Square Haunting by Francesca Wade is published by Faber (RRP £20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.