The first thing that should probably be said about the bizarre finale to the card at Wolverhampton on Wednesday is that it was an apprentices’ handicap, and therefore a contest in which all of the riders were, by definition, inexperienced. As such, it was one that punters could easily avoid if they did not want to risk money on a race designed for young jockeys who are not, as yet, the finished product. The second, though, is that even the least experienced jockey in the field had had more than 200 rides – one is well into four figures – and their collective failure to appreciate that Dylan Hogan, on the runaway winner Wanaasah, was riding them all to sleep was painful to watch, not least for anyone who had backed one of his rivals. Hogan set very solid fractions on Wanaasah from the start of the two-mile contest and was soon well clear of the main body of the field, with only Georgia Dobie, on the eventual runner-up Fearless Warrior, making any attempt to keep tabs on him. He was 30 lengths clear with a circuit to run and though Fearless Warrior closed to within six lengths at the line, the third horse home was still 16 lengths behind the winner. At the inevitable stewards’ inquiry, all nine of the beaten jockeys were asked to explain themselves and “indicated that they considered the early pace was very quick and not sustainable, therefore feeling that the leader would weak and come back to them in the latter stages”, although Sean Davis and Tom Greatrex did express “some concern” that Wanaasah “was getting a mid-race breather whilst maintaining its lead”. The jockeys also “stated they had asked their respective mounts for a finishing effort in the back straight and … all were of the opinion that no horse would’ve finished any closer, had they been asked to quicken from further out.” The last point is the one where many punters may beg to differ, and the explanations were noted – rather than accepted – by the stewards, pending routine analysis of the betting patterns on the race by the British Horseracing Authority. Contrary to some reports, this is not – as yet – a formal investigation, and seems most likely to conclude that there was nothing more going on here than a wholesale brain-fade by the beaten jockeys. That, though, is not an excuse and it is difficult to see how at least eight of the riders – Dobie being the possible exception – can escape retrospective bans under the rule that covers “asking for an effort or making some other permissible manoeuvre too late as a result of serious misjudgement or inattention”. Rules are rules, after all, but in the end, it seems more likely that their public embarrassment on Wednesday will do more to deter any repeat performance in future than the 10-day “entry point” ban. Today’s action is down to just three meetings after Wincanton succumbed to waterlogging following an inspection this morning, and Zolfo (2.10) is well worth a bet at around 4-1 to complete a four-timer on the card at Market Rasen. He stopped the clock in a very decent time when bringing up his hat-trick at the same course last time and is only 5lb higher today. Willie Mullins breaks new ground with his first runner at the track in the Listed Alan Swinbank Mares’ bumper and the punters, not surprisingly, have taken the hint but 15-8 is very short for a horse with no form under Rules and Midnight Callisto (2.45) will be a live runner at around 10-1 if she can recapture the form of her win at Fontwell in November. At Its Own Expense (2.20) and Subway Surf (2.55) should both go well at Ludlow, while the veteran Foxy Forever (5.30) is fairly priced at around 7-1 at Newcastle. Market Rasen 12.40 Fix Sun 1.10 Oscars Leader 1.40 El Kaldoun 2.10 Zolfo (nap) 2.45 Midnight Callisto 3.20 Cusheen Bridge 3.50 Madera Mist Ludlow 12.50 Moon Of Baroda 1.20 Allart 1.50 Gosheven 2.20 At Its Own Expense 2.55 Subway Surf 3.30 Alcala 4.00 Getaway Luv Newcastle 3.55 Sulafaat 4.30 Palazzo 5.00 Ballyare 5.30 Foxy Forever 6.00 Monya 6.30 Gunmaker 7.00 Klopp