Goals from Leigh Griffiths and Calllum McGregor earned Celtic a narrow 2-1 win against Partick Thistle and a safe passage into the Scottish Cup fifth round despite a late scare when Jeremie Frimpong conceded a penalty converted by Stuart Brannigan. Griffiths pounced to take advantage of a defender’s clearence to slot home the opening goal at Fir Park. McGregor added a second with a deflected shot after Kenny Miller had struck a post for the home team. Frimpong’s charge on Dario Zanatta as he raced in on Fraser Forster led to Brannigan’s penalty in injury time but it came to late to find another goal, though did provide a small reward for a diligent Thistle performance. Neil Lennon’s side picked up their 32nd consecutive victory in domestic cup competitions and take their place in Sunday’s last-16 draw. Kilmarnocklaunched their Scottish Cup campaign with Chris Burke creating all the goals in a 6-0 mauling of Queen’s Park. Alex Bruce was first to benefit from the former Rangers winger’s pinpoint crossing with a header. The returning Stuart Findlay then added the second and third goals. With the home side 3-0 up at half-time, Greg Kiltie, recent signing Nicke Kabamba and Connor Johnson settled the game as a contest. The Championship side Ayr caused a surprise in knocking out Premiership Ross County 1-0 thanks to a Steven Bell header in the first half at Somerset Park. Non‑league Bonnyrigg Rose were edged out 1-0 by Clyde. Troubled Hearts achieved some respite with their first win in 10 games, a 5-0 win against League One Airdrie, with Sean Clare, Stevie Naismith, Euan Henderson, Craig Halkett adding to Andy Irving first-half goal allowing the Jambos to progress. Hamilton inflicted the same score on Edinburgh City with first-half goals from Andy Dales, Scott McMann, Scott Martin and second-half goals from Andy Winter and Mickel Miller adding shine to the victory at New Douglas Park. St Mirren made hard work of beating non-league Broxburn 3-0 but took their place in the fifth round with two goals from Jon Obika either side of a Danny Mullen strike settling a scrappy contest as their East of Scotland League opponents defended resolutely for long spells. Livingston swerved a similar fate courtesy of Steven Lawless’s late double, which helped Livi to a 3-1 victory at home to League One leaders Raith. Behind to John Baird’s first-half strike, the Lions looked to be out as they toiled to break down their lower-league visitors but they were handed a lifeline when Rovers defender Iain Davidson gave away a penalty with just 13 minutes remaining. Lawless showed composure with the first of his two penalties before Lyndon Dykes propelled Livi into the lead 60 seconds later. Chris Erskine was then uphended by Michael Miller in added time to allow Lawless to put the tie to seal for the Lions. St Johnstone eased past Morton 3-0 despite a delayed half-time due to a floodlight failure. Premiership rivals Aberdeen left it late, with a 86th-minute Sam Cosgrove penalty beating Dumbarton 1-0. Christopher Long’s hat-trick fired Motherwell into the fifth round with a 3-0 win at Dundee. Inverness won 3-2 at Alloa and BSC Glasgow beat East Kilbride 3-1 while Arbroath and Falkirk drew 0-0 and will replay.