Marnus Labuschagne celebrated the anniversary of his shock selection at No 3 with another century as Australia piled on 283 for three on the opening day of the third Test against New Zealand. One year after selectors were criticised for picking him at first drop for the SCG Test against India, Labuschagne rewarded them with a fourth century of the summer at the same venue. The right-hander went to stumps unbeaten on 130, with Australia ramming home their advantage after having already wrapped up the series last week at the MCG. His Test batting average now stands at 62.61, the third highest in Test history. Steve Smith made 63, taking 39 balls to get off the mark before his pursuit of a first hundred for the summer was ended when he edged Colin de Grandhomme to first slip. He and Labuschagne combined for a 156-run third-wicket partnership, their highest while batting together. Matthew Wade then hit a quickfire 22 not out from 30 balls before stumps in front of a crowd of 36,420. New Zealand in comparison endured arguably their most difficult day on a tour that has become a nightmare. Tom Latham was forced to take on the captaincy with Kane Williamson ruled out sick, while Glenn Phillips made his debut after only flying in from Auckland on Thursday night. Spinner Mitchell Santner and batsman Henry Nicholls were also too ill to play as a virus swept through the group. With Tim Southee omitted and Trent Boult nursing a broken hand, it left Neil Wagner and De Grandhomme as the Black Caps’ only two bowlers surviving from the MCG. Wagner (one for 48) bowled well, taking David Warner’s wicket for 45 and helping keep Steve Smith grounded early in his knock. De Grandhomme (two for 63) also got the wicket of Joe Burns, who edged to slip when on 18. Ultimately, the Black Caps bowlers provided nowhere near enough support to de Grandhomme and Wagner, with Matt Henry finishing the day with no wickets for 68 on his return to the team. Labuschagne picked off the replacement spinners Will Somerville and Todd Astle with ease, lifting the former into the member’s stand for six just before tea. The 25-year-old also played nicely off his pads, with 63% of his runs coming through the legside. He brought up his hundred glancing De Grandhomme for four in the evening session. Dropped before the start of the Ashes before being recalled as a concussion substitute for Smith at Lord’s, Labuschagne has now amassed 1,105 runs at 85 since that career-changing moment. He has only once failed to reach 50 in his seven innings this summer, when he was run out for 19 in the second innings in Melbourne.