Bournemouth’s defending left a lot to be desired as they crumbled against Watford but their failure to penetrate Nigel Pearson’s improving side was equally alarming. No team has scored fewer goals in the Premier League this season and those front–foot displays of yesteryear – they scored almost 100 goals en route to promotion in 2015 and more than any team outside the top six last season – feel a distant memory following a ninth defeat in 11 league matches. “Historically we have always been free-scoring and we have always had goals in us,” their manager, Eddie Howe, said. “We have always had the ability – even if we have conceded first – to come back and win games. That is probably where the feeling has gone missing, the creativity and that feeling we are going to score. We have to do better in that respect.” Ben Fisher • Match report: Bournemouth 0-3 Watford Another Liverpool win and another that led to praise for a host of players in red. Quite right too, but there should also be an appreciation of the display delivered by the man in black. Yet again Alisson was outstanding with his positioning and handling, playing as a sweeper on occasion while every shot that came his way was, as ever, held with minimum fuss. No Premier League goalkeeper has a better clean sheets percentage than Alisson this season (46), or has a higher save percentage (83.9). Since arriving from Roma for £66.9m in July 2018 the Brazilian has provided Liverpool with a calm, brilliant authority that was severely lacking during the days of Simon Mignolet and Loris Karius. Should Liverpool, as most people expect, win the title, then Alisson will have contributed as greatly as any outfield player. Sachin Nakrani • Match report: Tottenham 0-1 Liverpool Manchester City have stumbled at times this season but the momentum is building nicely now. Kevin De Bruyne keeps getting better, making all the players around him look good, even if Sergio Agüero, Gabriel Jesus and Riyad Mahrez hardly need the help. Were Pep Guardiola’s men to embark on a longer hot streak than they did to finish their triumphant 2018-19 campaign, and win their remaining 16 Premier League fixtures, they would finish with 95 points. But considering the form the leaders, Liverpool, are currently in – not to mention their 14-point advantage – this would be nothing more than a minor inconvenience for them. Last season supporters everywhere marvelled at the ludicrous circumstance that a team as good as Liverpool ended up without the title. In May the tables will have turned. Luke McLaughlin • Match report: Aston Villa 1-6 Manchester City The future of Chelsea’s right flank appeared to be taken care of during the win over Burnley. Reece James and Callum Hudson‑Odoi have risen through the ranks together and their interplay caused plenty of problems for Sean Dyche’s side. James, a right‑back whose crossing ability rivals Trent Alexander-Arnold’s, never stopped marauding forward and Hudson‑Odoi, who is regaining confidence after recovering from a ruptured achilles tendon, capped a fine display with his first Premier League goal. Their understanding was seen in the way they combined for Chelsea’s second, a slick one‑two creating space for James to cross for Tammy Abraham to head home. “Hopefully it’s just the start of the partnership as far as first-team football goes,” Frank Lampard said. “When Callum is being as aggressive as he was today and Reece is behind him, of course it is a big thing.” Jacob Steinberg • Match report: Chelsea 3-0 Burnley As if Mikel Arteta’s in-tray had not been full enough, losing the man he readily calls “probably the most important player” is a blow he could certainly have done without. There were no complaints about Pierre‑Emerick Aubameyang’s red card at Crystal Palace but there is a risk his absence for three games will seriously expose the fact that he has bailed Arsenal out on more occasions than anyone would care to remember since arriving in January 2018. The nature of Arteta’s response, with slim resources to call upon, will be important in maintaining the positive vibes he has created. “Hopefully they have to take a step forward now,” he said of those who might shoulder Aubameyang’s burden. “Someone else has to do it and I want to see their reaction too.” It could be a chance for Gabriel Martinelli, the gifted 18-year-old, to reassert his potential. Nick Ames • Match report: Crystal Palace 1-1 Arsenal Danny Ings could have had a hat‑trick in Southampton’s impressive comeback win at Leicester. But the 27-year-old’s winner offered more compelling evidence that he is thriving under the tutelage of Ralph Hasenhüttl. Surely a first England call-up since he won his solitary cap under Roy Hodgson against Lithuania in 2015 is now on the cards. Brendan Rodgers, who signed him for Liverpool from Burnley that summer, certainly thinks so. With Jamie Vardy apparently not keen on making himself available for Euro 2020 and Bournemouth’s Callum Wilson badly out of form, Rodgers said Ings is making a strong case after scoring seven times in the league since the start of December. “There’s no doubt,” said the Leicester manager. “He just needs to keep the consistency and availability and he’ll show he’s one of the best strikers about.” Ed Aarons • Match report: Leicester 1-2 Southampton On Sunday it will be a year since Manchester United last won three consecutive league games. As Harry Maguire identified after this convincing victory against Norwich, Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s side are leading a hand-to-mouth existence. “Our problem has been inconsistency,” he said. “We have played two good games and one bad and it has not been good enough. We are not getting carried away. It was a good performance, a clean sheet, a win, but we have to go again on Wednesday and get another good result.” That is an FA Cup replay against Wolves. At least United do have a supremely consistent performer in Marcus Rashford – scorer of two against Norwich on his 200th appearance. “He’s a top player with top quality,” Maguire said. “He has everything.” Sunday’s opponents, though, are Liverpool at Anfield, so United may suffer another setback. Jamie Jackson • Match report: Manchester United 4-0 Norwich The controversy surrounding Robert Snodgrass’s disallowed goal may comfortably overshadow West Ham’s performance at Sheffield United on Friday night but there were serious concerns away from VAR for David Moyes to digest. The Hammers’ pursuit of a new goalkeeper – with Middlesbrough’s Darren Randolph still on their radar – will likely have intensified over the weekend, with Lukasz Fabianski seemingly suffering a recurrence of his hip injury and another error from his replacement. David Martin’s mistake, which led to Oli McBurnie’s winner, was the latest example of the Hammers’ deep-lying issues in goal, something Moyes will need to resolve quickly if he is to steer the Hammers away from the relegation zone. Throw in their lack of potency up front and this was a frustrating night for West Ham long before VAR intervened. Aaron Bower • Match report: Sheffield United 1-0 West Ham Carlo Ancelotti was quite diplomatic about the fourth-minute penalty Everton were denied against Brighton, considering a goal so early might have lifted the post-derby gloom almost immediately. “I think it was a penalty,” the manager said of the incident when Lewis Dunk clearly pulled Theo Walcott’s shirt as he tried to reach Dominic Calvert‑Lewin’s flick and attempt a shot. “But Theo didn’t go down and that made the referee’s job quite difficult.” True, though even after a VAR check the penalty was refused, despite the tug being visible to most in the ground. If the combination of officials who studied it decided advantage needed to be played because Walcott was still on his feet with a chance of scoring, the result will be managers telling their players to go to ground at every opportunity – especially if their finishing is as weak as Walcott’s. Paul Wilson • Match report: Everton 1-0 Brighton Something about Wolves’ draw with Newcastle suggested Nuno Espírito Santo was sending a message to his bosses. With Diogo Jota injured, Pedro Neto was given a chance to shine. He struggled, not the only summer signing to do so at Molineux this season, with Jesús Vallejo and Patrick Cutrone having already departed. But Neto stayed on until the 85th minute as Wolves laboured in their hunt for a winner. One look at the bench showed why: a collection of inexperienced players, with the 21-year-old Benny Ashley-Seal, who made his full debut last week, the only forward. The message was plain: Wolves are short of attacking options. Nuno made clear to the media he wants new forwards in this window, as he has been doing for some time, but on this occasion he may have chosen other means to get his point across. Paul MacInnes • Match report: Wolves 1-1 Newcastle