Name: The pope. Age: In position for 2,000 years or so. Appearance: An incredibly effective method of birth control. Really? But there’s something so sexy about the pope. Tell that to the Italians. Italians don’t think the pope is sexy? They don’t, and there is proof. Whenever the pope visits an Italian town, there is a reduction in unintended pregnancies. How did they work that out? Well, according to a report in the Journal of Population Economics, researchers studied 129 official papal visits between 1979 and 2012, looking at the medical records in areas visited by the various popes. They found abortion rates had dropped by between 10 and 20%, but there was no rise in births. Maybe people were just using contraception. Contraception? While the pope’s around? Hardly! The researchers pointed out that “since the Catholic Church has traditionally opposed contraception, increased abstinence seems a more plausible option”. Did you say the study recorded all visits between 1979 and 2012? Yes. But Pope Francis didn’t begin his papacy until 2013. What’s your point? Maybe things have changed since then. Why? Because, compared with his stern predecessor, Benedict XVI, let alone his predecessor John Paul II, Francis seems so cool and permissive? Yes! Well, did you not see that video of him smacking that woman’s hand last week when she grabbed him in the crowd? Now, imagine him discovering you doing something he thinks you shouldn’t. Good point. I’ll abstain. Finally, some sense. Now, let’s all move on. I don’t know about you, but I feel like I can’t escape the pope at the moment. Why? Because he’s everywhere. I can’t even go to the cinema to avoid him. Why not? Because of The Two Popes, one of the buzziest awards season films of the year. That’s about the pope. A sexy pope? Maybe. Although, as the title suggests, there are two of them. One is played by Jonathan Pryce and the other is played by Anthony Hopkins. They’re sexy, right? Not really. OK, well, there is also The New Pope. What’s The New Pope? It’s the upcoming sequel to The Young Pope, Paolo Sorrentino’s avant-garde Sky Atlantic drama, starring Jude Law as an American pope named Lenny. Oh, I saw the trailer for that. It had Jude Law strutting along a beach wearing just a tiny pair of Speedos. Ah, finally, the mythical sexy pope. Do say: “I’m sorry, I can’t have sex with you. The pope is nearby.” Don’t say: “Are you sure it’s not Jude Law?”