The Thick of It writer Armando Iannucci applies his caustic wit to a near future of galactic tourism in this new series starring Hugh Laurie. The smug captain of space cruise-liner Avenue 5, Ryan Clark (Laurie), comes upon trouble when technical difficulties hamper his guests’ trip round the rings of Saturn. With irascible and hapless multimillionaire owner Harman Judd (Frozen’s Josh Gad) to deal with, time is running out for engineer Billie McEvoy (Lenora Crichlow) to get them home, lest they drift off course and into deep space. Ammar Kalia Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall and Steph McGovern add to the glut of diet shows with a new series on health fads and tech solutions. With the help of Dr Zoe Williams, the pair tackle compulsive snacking by the NHS staff at the Llandaff surgery in Cardiff, as well as testing electronic muscle-toners. AK There is some kind of adorable genius about this nature series’s animatronic animals as they head to the tropics to become a part of real animal groups. In Zambia, Spy Hippo fights to infiltrate a pod, but it is Spy Gorilla who really delivers on the cute front, beating its chest and trying to win over a silverback. Hannah Verdier It is episode two of Neil Gaiman’s fantasy series, based on his book with Terry Pratchett, and England’s long history of witchcraft starts to play its part in the looming apocalypse. If you can stomach how arch and mannered it all is, the sparkling, high-budget visuals offer a blizzard of clever ideas. Jack Seale After episode two’s bonding between eater and eaten, this finale gets down to brass tacks. Yes, the families like animals. But do they like them enough to forget how delicious they taste? Most omnivores live with uneasy consciences these days – this has been an insight into how much guilt we can handle. Phil Harrison Richard Hammond is in Delaware at a military air base to continue his exploration of the world’s biggest man-made structures. Here he finds the gargantuan C-5M Super Galaxy cargo plane, which holds more world records for carrying heavy loads than any other aircraft in history. AK Everybody Knows, 10.15pm, Sky Cinema Premiere This bold kidnap melodrama is far removed from Iranian director Asghar Farhadi’s more familiar fare – perceptive character studies such as A Separation – but with Penélope Cruz and Javier Bardem as former lovers facing up to a dark secret from their past, it exerts a powerful grip. Paul Howlett Bowls: World Championships 1pm, BBC Two. The ladies singles semi-finals from Hopton-on-Sea, Norfolk. Premier League Football: Leicester City v West Ham Utd 7pm, BT Sport 2. Top-flight match from the King Power Stadium. Premier League Football: Manchester United v Burnley 7.30pm, BT Sport 1. An Old Trafford head to head.