Scott Morrison has said he doesn’t take the angry reception directed his way in fire-ravaged communities personally, because he understands people “fixate” when upset. Morrison has weathered increasing criticism over his leadership during the fire crisis, which culminated when residents of Cobargo in the Bega Valley, which was engulfed on Tuesday, reacted angrily during the prime minister’s attempt at a photo opportunity. Asked about the criticism on Melbourne radio 3AW on Friday morning, the prime minister said he wasn’t taking it personally. “I know people are angry and they’ll often fixate on … a prime minister or someone else,” he told Neil Mitchell. “People are angry and people are upset … well, whether they’re angry with me or they’re angry about the situation – all I know is that they’re hurting, and it’s my job to be there to try and offer some comfort and support,” he said. “That’s my job. I don’t take these things personally, why would I? “I know that people are hurting, I know that they are raw, and I know what our job is and it is to work closely with the states to support them and everything that they need and to preempt their requests and ensure that our defence forces and other agencies are ready to go.” The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, declined to criticise the prime minister’s leadership, but said a more national response was required. “My only concern here is that there seems to be an approach which is that people have to ask for support rather than a proactive sitting down, which would be what would happen with Coag, around the table and say what is needed,” he said. “Certainly I think defence assets, every one of them, at this time should be available. “This is the scale of what is occurring here, of a mass evacuation. Not from a town, from a region that is bigger than most countries in Europe.” Asked if he was “confident” he had done everything he could, Morrison said: “Well, of course. “I mean, this is a massive fire, that has been running across four states – arguably now five, because Tasmania has been affected more recently as well … ” he said. “So it is our role to support and give every assistance we can, and I appreciate what premier Andrews has been saying about that.” The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, defended Morrison and said cooperation between the state and the commonwealth had saved lives. “I think emotions are high, [these are] very tense times when people have lost everything and I can understand that people, you know, it’s very difficult, very, very difficult circumstances,” Andrews said. “As the premier of Victoria, I can only say thank you to the prime minister for the partnership we have … The partnership between our emergency services, led by Victoria police and the ADF, is unprecedented and I’m very grateful for the partnership and open dialogue and the constant communication I’ve had with the PM. “That’s keeping Victorians safe.” The prime minister’s forced attempt to shake a woman’s hand was shown around the country, an image which was repeated when he was snubbed by an exhausted firefighter who also rejected a handshake. Morrison later said to the incident controller he was sure the man was just tired, to which he was told he had lost his home. Gosh this is so awkward. Australian PM Scott Morrison goes to try and shake the hand of a firefighter who does not appear keen. (The PM was abused earlier by angry locals) Filmed by @GregNelsonACS @abcnews #AustraliaBurning #NSWbushfires #SouthCoastFires pic.twitter.com/3zjeJp3jWe NSW Liberal frontbencher, Andrew Constance, who was briefly listed as unaccounted for as he defended his Bega Valley home from Tuesday’s horror blaze, did not have a lot of sympathy for the prime minister when he was asked about the criticism on live television. “Well, I didn’t even know he was coming and I haven’t had a call from him,” Constance told the Seven network. “So to be honest with you, the locals probably gave him the welcome that he probably deserved. “I’d say this to the prime minister today: the nation wants you to open up the cheque books, help people rebuild their lives. “I know this is tough and I know I’m on his side of politics, but you know, Gladys [Berejiklian, the NSW premier] and [the RFS commissioner] Shane Fitzsimmons came here two days ago and they obviously visited the fire-affected part of my electorate in the north. Glad’s going to come back, but this is the feeling that people are going through.” Morrison said he had not heard those comments. The prime minister received a warmer reception at the evacuation centre he visited on the outskirts of Bairnsdale, Victoria, on Friday morning.