The actor Rosanna Arquette, one of Harvey Weinstein’s most prominent accusers, says she plans to attend the trial of the disgraced film producer when it starts in New York on Monday. Arquette will not be giving evidence in the case, but she said she will be there to lend support to the handful of women who have been allowed to give testimony in court of Weinstein’s alleged sexual misconduct and abuse. “I feel very protective,” Arquette said of those due to give evidence. She added: “Whatever happens, it’s still going to be hard for the people that came forward.” Arquette, who appeared in the Weinstein-produced film Pulp Fiction, is close friends with Annabella Sciorra, the Sopranos actor who claims Weinstein raped her in 1993. The alleged incident occurred too long ago to be tried separately, but will be used by prosecutors to support accusations of a pattern of behaviour by Weinstein. The 67-year-old faces two counts of predatory sexual assault, one count of a criminal sexual act in the first degree, one of rape in the first degree and one of rape in the third degree. He denies the charges. Arquette said: “This is a man that is a real predator. He’s destroyed many women’s lives ... We need to keep the focus on this crime, and this case with Harvey Weinstein is huge because so many people are looking at it.” She was one of the first women to come forward in 2017 at the start of the #MeToo movement after New York Times and New Yorker investigations into widespread allegations of sexual abuse and harassment by Weinstein. She accused Weinstein of derailing her career after she resisted his advances, a claim he denies. Arquette is hoping the testimony of Sciorra and others will lead to an eventual conviction against Weinstein, which if successful could result in him being jailed for life. She said Sciorra’s life was “shattered by this experience for many years”. Arquette, who is best known for appearing alongside Madonna in Desperately Seeking Susan, added: “The justice system works in a way ... people can get out of criminal behaviour, and we’re praying that that doesn’t happen and that justice is served.” Rose McGowan, another of Weinstein’s most well known accusers, has decided not to attend the trial fearing it will be too traumatic. She said: “I also have to focus on what’s healthy mentally for me and seeing him is extremely difficult.” McGowan has accused Weinstein of raping her over 20 years ago and destroying her career; charges he also denies. Weinstein has denied all wrongdoing and all accusations. McGowan said: “I had body flashbacks for years when I would see and receive photos of him or if I saw him in person, I would lean over and throw up in a trash can and my body remembered, you know, things that my brain wanted to silence.” McGowan said seeing Weinstein face criminal charges “will speak volumes to people in the world that have been hurt. And I hope it gets justice for the women involved. Personally, I have justice. My justice might just look different than that.” She added that if Weinstein is found guilty of even one charge, “it’s a victory, but it’s also a victory to still be standing after all this damn time. It’s also a victory to spread the news to other survivors, that is not our shame. It’s also a victory to basically have him as the face of rape for all time.” On Monday, the judge will outline the schedule for proceedings for a trial that is expected to last up to two months. Jury selection is due to begin later on Monday or Tuesday. The Los Angeles district attorney’s office is considering whether to bring charges in eight separate cases against Weinstein while Scotland Yard continues to investigate allegations of misconduct.