Ole Gunnar Solskjær sarcastically thanked the Tranmere goalkeeper, Scott Davies, for firing up his Manchester United players ahead of their emphatic FA Cup fourth-round victory at Prenton Park. Davies, a lifelong Manchester City fan, gave an interview before United’s 6-0 win over Rovers that celebrated the demise of the Old Trafford club and argued they could no longer look down on their city rivals. The Rovers keeper bumped into Solskjær outside the changing rooms at Prenton Park following the game and the under-pressure United manager seized the opportunity to respond directly. Solskjær told Davies: “Thanks for helping us fire up the fans and the players.” The 32-year-old laughed off Solskjær’s comment and the United manager headed off to conduct his post-match media duties. United overcame a potentially tricky cup tie against League One opposition with a clinical and commanding display, with Harry Maguire’s first goal for the club setting them on course for their biggest win since the 8-2 defeat of Arsenal in August 2011. “Today was a game that everyone, apart from United fans, wanted us to lose, so there’s been a bit of pressure on the players but they’ve enjoyed today,” said Solskjær. “Now they can have a nice couple of days’ rest and then we’ll be off and running again. The attitude was spot on, it was a difficult pitch but we went about it the right way. “We worked hard, we played simple but effective. We played the right way. We tried to keep it on the floor, which we’re better at than maybe trying to play in the air, which wouldn’t have been as effective, and they did well. When you score two or three goals early on it makes it a comfortable day. The boys enjoyed it, I enjoyed it and the fans enjoyed it, so it was a good day.” Despite the comprehensive win United’s away contingent chanted for the club’s owners, the Glazers, to get out of Old Trafford as their protests against the Americans continued. Solskjær, when asked about the anti-Glazer chants, replied: “We’re just going to try and get the results right and keep working to move the club forward. Supporters are always happier when you’re winning games and when you’re successful so we’ll just keep on working to get results.” Maguire opened his account with an outstanding 25-yard finish as United responded to consecutive 2-0 defeats against Liverpool and Burnley. “It’s some way to score your first goal for the club,” his manager added. “That’s not the way we thought it would happen but finally it’s come and it’s good for him.”