The more things change … there is more than the whiff of a fresh breeze whistling through Dublin this weekend, however familiar the bite of wind on our faces at the Aviva Stadium, but no one should expect too great a deviance from the usual narrative when Ireland entertain Scotland. Andy Farrell begins his tenure as Ireland head coach, stepping up one rung with the departure of Joe Schmidt after the latter’s reign of unparalleled success, touching the heights, albeit briefly, of the top of World Rugby’s ranking system. Some might argue that Ireland’s ongoing failure to solve the problem of a World Cup makes pressing the need for change, but history suggests these long-term projects involve lengthy acclimatisation to each and every level attained. Ireland are now comfortable with the idea of dominating a Six Nations. As part of the previous regime, Farrell is likely to see his as a project of development rather than of transformation. Scotland ought to know what to expect – an all-out assault of power and accuracy that will require them to tackle even more than usual in this brutal era of rugby history. It is an assignment they have rarely enjoyed. Scotland have beaten Ireland only four times in the 20 editions of the Six Nations to date, just the once in Dublin – and that at Croke Park in 2010. The last time they won on the current site was at the old Lansdowne Road in 1998. Analogous to their more quicksilver approach, Scotland have made 10 changes to the team that last played Ireland, a concerning capitulation in the World Cup in September (Ireland have made two). The most quicksilver of all of them is absent, Finn Russell apparently enduring one of those “troubled” periods most geniuses encounter at some point or another. Whether his replacement, Adam Hastings, will dramatically affect Scotland’s approach is unlikely. They remain a side heavily invested in speed and ambition. And, whether they like it or not, they will need to appreciate the virtues of a good old-fashioned tackle. No one makes teams tackle like the Irish. The tackle count in the match between Leinster and Connacht at the start of the year exceeded 500 for the first time, breaking the previous record of 496 in the match between Leinster and Glasgow last season, in which Glasgow made 331 tackles, 43 of them by the ever-willing Johnny Gray. In the Six Nations, seven of the top-10 team tackle counts have been registered against Ireland, including all of the top six. There seems no reason to expect this pattern to change appreciably, even if the captaincy of Ireland has changed too, from the workhorse to the eventer, Rory Best to Johnny Sexton. Scotland also have a new captain, the racehorse Stuart Hogg. There is absolutely no reason to think they will change their approach, however many new faces they are throwing at a problem that has confounded them so often. One point of common ground between the two sides is a debutant at No 8. Nick Haining’s route to the base of Scotland’s scrum has been the more unconventional. Cut from the Western Force academy, the 29-year-old headed over to Jersey for three years, where he attracted the interest of Bristol in the Championship. After a season in the Premiership, Richard Cockerill recruited him to Edinburgh, where he has shared duties with the formidable Viliame Mata. His Dundonian grandmother provides the link with Scotland. The theory is that his 18 stones of athleticism might provide Scotland with some ballast against the onslaught. He can also run, having played 20 minutes on the wing for the Force during the 2013 Lions tour, and has the footwork and skills one might expect from the ballet dancer he once was, back in Australia. Opposite him this weekend is Caelan Doris, the latest sensation from the Leinster academy. A mere 21 years old, he has moved through the ranks like a pedigree, adapting to each level as if it were little more than his destiny. Now he has reached that of the Six Nations. He will hope to make it his with no more of a to-do than any of the other levels and, like Ireland, start to explore those few remaining higher.