If you’re a married woman in Jersey and you want to discuss your tax affairs with the government, better ask your husband’s permission first. No, this is not an excerpt from a 1950s guide to managing finances but the current reality on the self-governing island. But this could finally be about to change. The “only husbands talk tax” rule is up for debate in February with proposals to overhaul women’s taxation and bring in changes next year. Currently a married woman can only discuss her tax affairs with Revenue Jersey if her husband has notified the department. Susie Pinel, a Treasury minister, is bringing forward legislation, which if passed into law, will allow married women to access their own tax affairs. The States Assembly is debating changes to the law on married women’s taxation next month. Until then, married women can only file their own tax return if they have opted for a separate assessment. The new online form follows the same legal requirements as the paper form. pic.twitter.com/EAANJw7AVp Pinel said: “This is the first step towards full independent taxation and it’s long overdue. “Currently married women can elect for separate assessment but if they chose not to it is the husband’s obligation to file on behalf of both of them.” Before 2003, married women could not be assessed separately. Since 2013, income tax forms have included a box husbands could tick to give their wives permission to deal with their own tax affairs. Under Pinel’s proposals, from 1 January 2021, both spouses and civil partners will be able to contact Revenue Jersey to discuss a couple’s tax affairs and update their tax information. In 2022 a couple will still receive a joint return, but they will both have rights to sign it, will share responsibility for completing and lodging it accurately and on time, and will also have joint liability for the payment of all personal income tax. From 2023 – for tax year of assessment 2022 onwards – independent taxation is expected to be introduced in Jersey with transitional rules for couples already married or in civil partnerships.