The UK’s cultural heritage is at risk unless there is a significant shift in how theatre buildings are preserved, according to a study which shows that dozens of institutions could be lost. The annual Theatres at Risk register, which is collated by the Theatres Trust – the national advisory public body for theatres – lists 30 buildings across England, Scotland and Wales it believes could be demolished or redeveloped, despite having a potential future if restored. The actor and musician Gary Kemp, who is a Theatres Trust trustee, said Britain’s many theatres and cultural buildings could be saved if they were supported. “There are some truly stunning and unique buildings on the Theatres at Risk register but importantly, none of them are lost causes,” he said. “With the right level of support and the expertise provided by the Theatres Trust, all have the potential to be restored and enjoyed by their communities for generations to come.” The Burnley Empire, which is grade-II listed and has been empty since 1995 when it closed as a bingo hall, is one of those at-risk theatres. First opened in 1894 and redesigned in 1911 by the prominent theatre architect Bertie Crewe, it hosted everyone from Harry Houdini to the Mötorhead frontman Lemmy Kilmister when he was in the Rockin’ Vickers. In December 2018 the Empire was taken over by the Burnley Empire Theatre Trust, which bought it from the Duchy of Lancaster and started the long process of restoring the vandalised building. A phased redevelopment of the site is planned and could take more than a decade to complete. Sophie Gibson, the director and chair of the Burnley Empire Theatre Trust, said: “History is repeating itself. When this was built it was a musical variety hall and the town of Burnley needs that again. People want high-quality entertainment on their high street again.” Claire Appleby, the Theatres Trust’s architecture adviser, said the work of small volunteer groups such as the Burnley Empire Theatre Trust was often what stopped buildings being demolished or redeveloped. “These buildings are still there; you might pass them everyday on your way to work and not notice them,” she said. “If you have passion about local heritage or culture, people need to try to save these buildings.” Two theatres have been removed from this year’s list, including Bradford Odeon, which in 1930 was opened as the New Victoria, the largest ciné-variety theatre outside London, and is currently being restored, and Peterborough New Theatre, which reopened in September 2019 and is hosting large-scale theatre productions. Bradford Odeon will reopen in 2020-2021 and is expected to host an estimated 300,000 visitors each year with a programme of more than 200 events. Appleby said that groups such as Burnley Empire Theatre Trust and Bradford Live – the organisation behind the restoration of the Bradford Odeon – must work harder to convince local authorities and communities of the worth of their buildings as funding cuts hit councils. “Bradford Odeon has had to be imaginative with its funding. The building is not listed, which makes it difficult,” she said. “But there’s a gap in the market for a large music venue in the city, and it will create £10m for the local economy once it’s operating.” Appleby added that funding for restoration projects is increasingly difficult, especially as local authorities see their contributions from central government fall. “You need your council to support you, and you have to persuade them that you are a viable group,” she said. “Councils have to keep their core services up and running, and in many cases they don’t have the money to invest – so you need creative ways to get funders on board.” Jon Morgan, the director of the Theatres Trust, praised Edinburgh council for giving £1m funding to Leith Theatre, and London Borough of Waltham Forest was lauded after it bought Walthamstow Granada. Morgan added that investment by both councils allowed the venues to become important boosts to the local economies and regeneration of their areas. Of the 176 theatres that have been on the list since it began in 2006, 78 have been reopened or are being refurbished. A new addition to the list is Groundlings Theatre in Portsmouth, a Georgian theatre that was built in 1784 and is currently open but in a “financially vulnerable” position after a break-in caused significant damage.