Rebecca Long Bailey (Journal, 30 December) cites, as an example of what she calls “progressive patriotism”, support by Lancashire mill workers in 1862 for Abraham Lincoln’s war to end slavery in the United States. It was indeed a generous act supported by the Liberal MP for Manchester, a mill owner, Sir Tom Bazley, and was part of a wider Manchester campaign for free trade – best exemplified today by the no-frontier trade of the EU. However, in 1917, unions representing railway workers, miners and engineering workers passed a resolution to stop “coloured”, Chinese and other foreign workers coming to help Britain produce more arms and food in the first world war. In 1945, Polish soldiers who stayed in Britain were sent down mines to dig vital coal. British miners refused to work with them so separate shifts and even working men’s clubs were set up to keep them apart. In 1968 London dock workers and Covent Garden porters marched to Westminster to support Enoch Powell’s xenophobic demagogy. In our own time there are not a few Labour MPs and trade union leaders who have played into the hands of Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage with denunciations of EU citizens working and paying taxes in Britain. Edith Cavell, the British nurse based in Brussels, shot by the Germans as a spy in 1915, famously said: “Patriotism is not enough.” Loving your country and its fellow citizens is one thing, but invoking patriotism with or without an adjective like “progressive” is dangerous political territory.Dr Denis MacShaneFormer Europe minister • After all the build-up, Rebecca Long Bailey’s opening statement of intent felt like the political equivalent of the X-Men Dark Phoenix film – you’re led to expect fireworks and all you get is a damp squib. Long Bailey has tried to cover all bases and alienate none. We get references to an undefined “progressive patriotism”, alongside “pride”, “dignity”, “common purpose” and “pluralism”. This is like an abstracted version of the Labour manifesto – whatever buzzword you want, it’s there. If this is the kind of hard thinking Labour intends to do between now and the next election, we may be in for a long five years. What does “progressive patriotism” actually mean? I’m proud of the working-class history in this country that encompasses the General Strike and the NHS. I’m not proud of the country that carried out the Bloody Sunday killings and invaded Iraq. I don’t believe it helps us develop a progressive working-class politics to seek to obfuscate over this. Does the notion of “progressive patriotism” make it easier or harder to separate these histories out? In the end, isn’t the dismal key to this statement the line “Over the next few years, our task is to rebuild the broad base of support that will get us into government”? Doesn’t this just mean that the inevitable struggles for day-to-day survival under Johnson should be subordinated to delivering up a Labour government? Isn’t the lesson that Labour needs to learn exactly the opposite of this – that unless it somehow becomes part of the means of defence of working-class life, within real communities, it will remain irrelevant?Nick MossLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition