Donations began arriving at Lucknow Memorial Hall, on the outskirts of Bairnsdale, at 1pm on Tuesday. Within 24 hours a second donation point had been set up at Lucknow primary school, because the hall was full. Clothes are stacked on three trestle tables in the centre of the hall, blankets are lined up on the floor, and food – staples such as cereal and long-life milk – are against one long wall. “This is all social media,” Wendy McPhan says. She made a Facebook post on Tuesday inquiring if there was anything she could do locally to help victims of the devastating bushfires, that have destroyed more than 200 homes and are still burning out of control in East Gippsland and southern NSW. Suddenly she had donations arriving from Melbourne, 280km away. On the heels of the donations came those who had lost everything, but were reluctant to say they needed help. People are proud in Gippsland, McPhan says. “We had a couple with three kids here, and he [the father] started crying,” she says. “I said, ‘here’s a $300 voucher for Woolies,’ and he said ‘no, I can’t take that, there’s people worse off.’ “I said: ‘Mate, you have lost everything. You have lost your house. There is no one worse off.’” The vouchers and cash donations go into McPhan’s handbag, to be distributed to those worst affected. While we speak, a woman walks over and hands her a $50 supermarket voucher, with another to be given directly to a woman who is gently weeping on the shoulder of one of the volunteers. “I might be back on Saturday to get it back,” the woman with the voucher says. “I am at Sarsfield – we might lose the lot.” The Barmouth Spur fire is only 10km north of the hall, at Mount Taylor and Sarsfield. Nineteen structures, including about a dozen houses, have been confirmed destroyed at Sarsfield. With hot conditions and a northerly wind forecast again for Saturday, the donation centre may have to move. Many of those who have lost everything are single men who are reluctant to accept the assistance they desperately need. A man whose house burned down at Buchan South arrived at the hall and quietly told a volunteer that no one had come looking for him. He accepted a hug and some food while helping to carry boxes: for those reluctant to seek help, it is easier to be able to give help at the same time. Volunteers are gently ensuring that everyone who accesses the donated goods also registers with emergency services. Local MP Tim Bull has promised to organise a truck to send donations 230km east to Mallacoota as soon as the Princes Highway is opened. That is expected to take days. The Australian Defence Force has been deployed to attempt to evacuate residents from isolated communities by air or sea, and drop off supplies. A ship with supplies for two weeks – 1.6 tonnes of water, food, and 30,000 litres of fuel – has already left Melbourne. Further up the east coast, in New South Wales, locals and tourists are queuing for the supermarket to get basic supplies, and queuing for a payphone that, before the mobile phone towers ran out of both power and batteries, many would have considered obsolete. At Moruya, the IGA had to be barricaded to prevent people from looting. The supermarket in Narooma has been able to open thanks to a generator loaned from the fish shop. Locals and tourists lining up for groceries and booze @abcnews pic.twitter.com/rASDe4xv6A Mobile phone outages across the south coast means people are lining up for a more old fashioned way of communicating ⁦@abcnews⁩ ⁦@ABCemergency⁩ pic.twitter.com/1snISdR9ej Some roads out of the fire-affected region in NSW opened on Wednesday, but some towns had run out of fuel. Many who wish to leave do not have enough in the tank to reach the next petrol station, and to drive in an area with active bushfires without a full tank is to risk getting stuck in an inferno. At Batemans Bay, petrol stations on the Princes Highway are either closed, or only accepting cash, because EFTPOS machines are down. But some ATMs are also down, making it impossible to get cash. People in some parts of the South Coast so completely cut off. No power, no internet, no phone service, no shops open. Massive diesel shortage, other fuel is scarce. Smoke cloaking the landscape. Fire reached the sand dunes here in Broulee. pic.twitter.com/xzIWnyMX7n Power remains cut to much of East Gippland and the far south coast of NSW. Gippsland Water were working on Tuesday to restore generator power to ensure the water would come back on, but the work is slow and made slower by the constant use of sprinklers by those still under direct fire threat. At Cann River, 50km west of Mallacoota, about 100 people are sheltering in the school and awaiting the arrival of a fire burning towards them from Goongerah. Local businesses are providing food for everyone, a Cann River local told the ABC, and they are all sharing water, but both electricity and mobile phone signal are patchy. They are cut off, as is the town of Buchan. A fire that started east of Cann River burned through Mallacoota on Tuesday night, destroying dozens of houses and leaving that town cut off as well. At Lake Tyers, an Aboriginal community about 25 minutes drive east of Lakes Entrance, the water ran out at 11am. Charmaine Sellings, who is both a paramedic and fire chief for the Gunai/Kurnai community, says she will have to fill the slip-on fire fighting unit from her daughter’s pool before the northerly wind and high temperatures return on Saturday. That small firefighting tank, which sits on the back of her ute, is the only appliance to protect a community of more than 40 people, many of whom are elderly and have respiratory problems. “At the moment there’s a few houses out there without electricity, and as you can see we have just run out of water in the tanks,” Sellings says. “I am getting no information – the last visitor we had with fire information was on Sunday.” Outside the community health centre, which has become the evacuation centre, a trailer full of canoes stands ready should the fire, which reached Nowa Nowa, 12km due north through thick and “very dry” forest, reach the edge of the oval on Saturday. “We have got the boats out because we can accommodate at least 20 people, with 20 life jackets, if we have to get to the water,” community member Kerry Tregonning says.