My partner is desperate to get a male black cat, but I think our one-bedroom flat is too small. We looked after a friend’s cat for a couple of weeks and, while it was lovely (he was great company, made the place feel more homely and offered us great Instagram content), I did have reservations – mostly that the litter tray took up space, sometimes gave off strong smells and I had to frequently vacuum up his hair. I’m worried that having a cat permanently would leave my clean and tidy flat in chaos. If we lived in a larger place I’d be more inclined to get one, but we’ve only just moved into the flat, which we love and have no desire to move any time soon (we probably couldn’t afford somewhere bigger in the area anyway). I found myself browsing cat adoption websites during lunch and was considering going to meet a nine-year-old black cat called Eugene, but when I clicked back on the site days later he had thankfully already found a new home. I wish him all the best. Basically, I think I want a cat too, but I just don’t think we have the space. What do I do? • When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who wrote to Private Lives asking for help and may well view your comments here. Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed. • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site. • If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns. • All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms.