Saracens will be relegated from the Premiership at the end of the season following a fourth salary cap breach. The club, which in November was fined more than £5m and docked 35 Premiership points for exceeding the cap in the previous three seasons, accepted it would not come in within the £7m cap at the end of the season. Under the salary cap regulations, breaches committed after the start of a season are punished the following campaign but Saracens, after talks with Premiership Rugby, decided to be relegated this season rather than wait a year. “Premiership Rugby is prepared to take strong action to enforce the regulations governing fair competition between our clubs,” said the organisation’s chief executive, Darren Childs. “At the conclusion of dialogue with Saracens about their compliance with the salary cap regulations, it has been decided that Saracens will be relegated at the end of this season. “At the same as enforcing the existing regulations, we want to ensure a level playing field for all clubs in the future, which is why we have asked Lord Myners to carry out an independently-led review of the cap. As part of this process, we will soon be announcing an open consultation so that everyone involved in the game has the opportunity to contribute to its future. “The actions that we have taken – dealing with breaches of the current regulations and reviewing the system for the future – will help us to build a stronger league and uphold the confidence of supporters.” Saracens will compete in Gallagher Premiership Rugby through to the end of the 2019-20 season and even though there is no salary cap in the Championship, they will have to present their books for examination before being allowed back in the Premiership. Neil Golding, chairman of Saracens, said: “I acknowledge the club has made errors in the past and we unreservedly apologise for those mistakes. I and the rest of the Board are committed to overseeing stringent new governance measures to ensure regulatory compliance going forward.’’