Reading Korean author Bae Suah’s Untold Night and Day feels like a tumble into a surrealist painting. Just as you think you’ve found your footing, time melts away and the line between reality and dreams becomes fluid. As an exploration of identity, communication and the worlds that might exist beyond our own, it is somewhat fitting that Bae and I are talking to one another via an interpreter, on different continents, across time zones. The novel tells the story of parallel lives that unfold over a day and a night in the sweat-trickling heat of Seoul’s summer. At the end of her final shift at an audio theatre for the blind, 28-year-old Ayami – who Bae describes as having one foot in reality, “the other in mid-air” – walks the streets with her former boss searching for a missing friend. The following day she acts as a guide for a visiting German detective novelist called Wolfi. It’s not long before reality begins to unravel, leading the reader into a warren of cityscapes and dreams peopled with mysterious characters and fantastical imagery. Just as Wolfi struggles – “Don’t speak so quickly. Don’t say so many things all at once, and don’t use too much irony. Otherwise I won’t understand a word,” he begs Ayami – we have to try to keep up, too. Untold Night and Day was originally published in Korea in 2013. Seven years on, it is Bae’s first book to be released in the UK, translated by Deborah Smith, the Man Booker International prize-winning translator of Han Kang’s The Vegetarian. “I didn’t grow up dreaming of becoming a writer,” says Bae, at home in Ilsan, an hour’s drive from Seoul. Instead, she studied chemistry at university. “I was practising my typing and that was when I wrote my first short story. It was an accident.” If only all accidents were so fruitful. Since 1993, Bae, now 55, has published several short-story collections and more than a dozen novels. She also translates texts from German to Korean, another happy accident – this one by way of an 11-month stint in Berlin. “I didn’t intend to learn German,” she says. “I just needed some time away. But a couple of months in I became bored so I started to learn. I enjoyed it because it meant I could read books that I was enchanted by, and then experience them as different books in my native language.” When I first started writing I wasn’t well-prepared and, even now, I don’t think I write really good sentences For a decade, Bae has divided her time between Korea – where she focuses on her work as a translator – and Germany, where she wrote Untold Night and Day. “At the time, I missed home and was longing for something familiar,” she says; for a moment it is unclear if she means Korea or Germany. She says she has mixed feelings towards her birth country. “After I came back from Berlin, I began to think of it more as my home town, but not somewhere warm and cosy. Rather, I think of Seoul in the same way I think of my name – I didn’t choose it, but it’s mine.” Repetition is a hallmark of her storytelling and it crops up often in Untold Night and Day. As I read it, I experienced a strong sense of déjà vu before realising that I was, in fact, reading repeated phrases: that summer skirt that “flops like an old dishcloth” sounds familiar, I thought, as do those eye sockets “like sunken caves”. The effect is a narrative circularity that’s both liberating – an escape from progressive linearity – and stifling: where does this fever dream end? When I ask Bae if it’s her intention to disorient the reader, she laughs: “Yes.” To a westerner, the “Koreanness” of Untold Night and Day is ever-present. Seoul is brought to life, with its elevated highways, narrow alleyways and blazing heat. The novel is feathered with military imagery – “gunmetal clouds” and “shadow soldiers” – that reminds us of the northern half of the peninsula. And while showing Wolfi around Seoul for the first time, Ayami takes him to Burger King – which Wolfi grumbles about, expecting more exotic fare after travelling across the world. I wonder if Bae expects foreign readers to approach her text with certain cultural expectations, and whether moments like this are a sly dig. “It can’t have been my intention because, when I was writing this novel, I never imagined that it would be translated into other languages,” she says. She does add, however, that she has experienced this kind of thing before – “especially with travellers”. Her style has in the past been condemned as “un-Korean”. Smith was first attracted to Bae’s writing when she read a review accusing Bae of “doing violence to the Korean language” in her 2005 novel A Greater Music. (And because Bae was also a translator, “of the kinds of authors whose style I enjoyed”, says Smith.) Bae suspects that such criticism may have something to do with her use of lengthy sentences or her predilection for repetition. Critics complained A Greater Music read like it had been translated from German – a skill that its protagonist, a Korean writer living in Berlin, is attempting to master in her language classes. “Bae Suah is not ‘un-Korean’, but she is a decidedly ‘non-national’ writer,” Smith writes in the translator’s note. “For one, she is also well known as a translator, figures whose loyalty is often questioned. Bae translates from German, but frequently the texts she works from are themselves translations of non-German sources, by other distinctively non-national writers.” For her part, Bae seems distinctly unbothered. “It’s because I am not a writer who writes in fine and beautiful Korean,” she says. “When I first started writing I wasn’t well prepared and, even now, I don’t think I write really good sentences – but lately people have been less critical.” • Untold Night and Day by Bae Suah, translated by Deborah Smith, is published by Jonathan Cape. To order a copy, go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on orders over £15.