Scout leader extraordinaire Bear Grylls is back to ferry another series of celebs through camera-filled wildernesses, beginning this season with Captain Marvel actor Brie Larson. Brie and Bear are in the seemingly idyllic Gulf of Panama, hacking their way through a mangrove swamp on a remote island to make it to their helicopter ride out. Yes, the premise is entirely contrived, and their encounter with a crocodile is a little too Fort Boyard, but Larson acts the part superbly. Ammar Kalia The lively cosmic locum touches down near Niagara Falls in 1903 and meets a fellow eccentric beloved by geeks: Nikola Tesla (Goran Višnjić). But something is amiss with the great inventor’s generator plant. Could it be industrial espionage initiated by rival Thomas Edison (Robert Glenister)? Graeme Virtue Take the slow train (for the next two-and-a-half hours) from Auckland to New Zealand’s deep south as this doc peacefully meanders through the lush Tolkienesque landscape, from rolling green to snow-capped peaks and giant lakes. A peaceful antidote to the January gloom. AK The trial of the decade begins at the Old Bailey, but it’s Stephen Ward (James Norton) who’s in the dock. Appearing for the prosecution gives Mandy (Ellie Bamber) a chance to shine, and by now we know Amanda Coe’s script can refresh even the most famous lines. Altogether now: “Well, he would, wouldn’t he?” Ellen E Jones The physical and psychological torment of this annual special forces hazing steps up a notch. Tonight, the most agonising stage of the process begins as recruits take on leadership roles and face the scrutiny of their peers. Can Oliver overcome his lack of confidence? Will Kirsty win the acceptance of her team? Phil Harrison The party season begins again on Ibiza, and head rep David is back to greet a new set of revellers and put his team through their paces. This week, the reps cross the romantic line with their guests on a night out, while Jordan has a new role as guest satisfaction manager, making sure the fishbowls keep on flowing. AK Son of Saul, 11pm, BBC Two Hungarian director László Nemes’s debut is an unflinching account of the horrors of the Auschwitz-Birkenau death camp. Focusing tightly on the haunted features of inmate Saul, hanging on to a vestige of humanity by trying to arrange the burial of a boy he believes to be his son, it’s a stunning experience. Paul Howlett Snooker: The Masters 1pm, BBC Two. The opening eight frames of the final at Alexandra Palace. Premier League Football: Burnley v Leicester City 1pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Leicester play away at Turf Moor. Premier League Football: Liverpool v Manchester United 4pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The rivals meet for the second time this season.