Flybe, Europe’s largest regional airline, is scrambling to stave off a collapse that would put 2,000 jobs at risk. The airline remained tight-lipped in the face of calls from unions for urgent answers after reports that it was seeking a potential government bailout to keep operating after rising losses. Flybe is the main operator of UK domestic flights, flying 8.5 million passengers each year to 170 European destinations. It has long struggled to balance the books and successive plans to revitalise and streamline its operations have only just kept it airborne. Last February, the airline was bought by a consortium led by Virgin Atlantic. Connect Airways, which consists of Virgin Atlantic, Stobart Air and Cyrus Capital, paid £2.2m for Flybe’s assets and operations. Flybe completed the sale of its assets to the group in the deal worth only 1p per share after poor financial results. According to Sky News, the carrier had been holding talks with the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy and the Department for Transport on whether the government could provide or facilitate any emergency financing. A Flybe spokeswoman said: “Flybe continues to focus on providing great service and connectivity for our customers, to ensure that they can continue to travel as planned. “We don’t comment on rumour or speculation.” Spokesmen for the two government departments issued the same statement, saying: “We do not comment on speculation or the financial affairs of private companies.” Virgin Atlantic has yet to respond to requests for a comment. The airline led last year’s deal so Flybe could feed more domestic passengers to connect with Virgin’s long-haul operation at Heathrow. The failure of Flybe, even before its rebranding as Virgin Connect is complete, would put Virgin’s wider expansion plans at Heathrow in question. Flybe’s fleet of mainly 80-seat planes provide fast links between parts of the UK where road and rail alternatives are slow, or unavailable – not least Northern Ireland to the mainland. One key route, London to Newquay, relies on state subsidy. However, the Exeter-based firm’s focus on domestic routes, many with direct rail services – such as Manchester-Glasgow or Birmingham-Edinburgh – also puts it at the potential sharp end of any rising “flygskam” or flight-shaming trend. Improved journey times and reliability of new trains on the Great Western Railway from Exeter to London have also raised competition. Brian Strutton, the general secretary of the pilots’ union Balpa, said: “I am appalled that once again the future of a major UK airline and hundreds of jobs is being discussed in secret with no input from employees or their representatives. “This is an appalling state of affairs and we demand that the owners of Flybe – Virgin, Stobart and Cyrus – and the government departments involved stop hiding and talk to us about Flybe.” Unite, the UK’s largest union, said it was seeking an urgent meeting with the company. Unite’s assistant general secretary for transport, Diana Holland, said: “The government must demonstrate that it has learned the lessons from the collapse of Monarch, which it failed to apply during the collapse of Thomas Cook.” Prospect said the reports were very troubling. Tony Bell, the national secretary, said: “As the main union at Flybe, Prospect will seek immediate talks with the company to clarify the situation. Flybe provides much-needed connectivity to many of our smaller and regional airports – it is important that that connectivity, and the skilled jobs it implies, is maintained.” The Exeter MP, Ben Bradshaw, called on the government to help Flybe obtain the financial help it needs to keep running. He told Devon Live: “The priority must be to secure Flybe’s long-term future by restoring profitability. The airline provides valuable connectivity throughout the UK, vital for the regions, including our own, as well as good, skilled jobs and training locally.” The St Austell and Newquay MP, Steve Double, said it was “very concerning news”, adding: “Flybe is essential to Cornwall and many regional airports.”