Jennifer Henley (Letters, 8 January) doesn’t need Gareth Malone to enjoy the benefits of singing with others – she can just join a Tuneless Choir. They started in Nottingham but now have choirs all over the country with at least two in London. After three years, I still can’t sing in tune but singing with others similarly afflicted is pure joy. We tunelessly sing our hearts out from Abba to Wham, by way of Elvis, Frank Sinatra and Queen and it sounds awful but we don’t care. I’m looking forward to the Tuneless Choir big weekend in February when 200 of us will sing badly together.Bridget CuthbertsonHexham, Northumberland • I would suggest that Jennifer Henley joins a ukulele group. I tell my group of players that if they are unable to play the right chord they just sing louder, and if they are unable to sing, they just play louder. Apart from playing more for our own fun than anyone else’s, ukes are about the easiest instrument to play, good to sing with, and great for leading community singing. Jenny BraithwaiteFaringdon, Oxfordshire • Singing in tune comes naturally to some people; others have to learn how to do it. It needs motivation, practice and friendly encouragement. Don’t let anyone tell you that you can’t sing. Everyone can sing. Everyone has a voice.Lucy QuinnWallingford, Oxfordshire • Don’t give up hope, Jennifer! Find a group like the Greenacres Friendship Choir in Oldham. I can’t sing, but I enjoy making a noise with others at this friendly group. We are invited to sing at old people’s homes and we have a wonderful time. It’s also a great way of getting out of your home and making new friends. At present we meet on Tuesday mornings and we are also thinking of setting up an evening group.Stuart PaulleyOldham, Greater Manchester • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition