On-screen sex ed is booming, with pop culture stepping in to teach the birds, the bees and, well, blue waffle. Besides Netflix’s Big Mouth, a cartoon series about how puberty upends the lives of a bunch of 13-year-olds, the biggest hit is the appropriately named Sex Education, the warm, ribald and hugely entertaining drama about a teenage boy giving sex therapy to his classmates which tackles the (t)horny issues schools are failing to teach. Given that a 2017 report by the Terrence Higgins Trust found half of young people rated their schools’ relationships and sex education (RSE) as either poor or terrible, the popularity of these shows is hardly surprising. But what do teens really think of them? Is TV providing better advice than most schools? Pia, 16, from Kent, says they “answered some of my weird questions about sex”. She loves that they “discuss actual sex itself – something many worry about but are too embarrassed to ask about.” Unlike traditional RSE, which is usually taught by a teacher who emanates “Please Don’t Make Me Say The Word Vagina” energy, most of the teaching on screen happens between peers. This opens up the conversation, so advice can be delivered in a frank way rather than seeming clinical and removed. In Sex Education, hesitant student Anwar seeks advice on anal douching from fellow pupil Rahim, explaining that he can’t ask his boyfriend as “it’s embarrassing”. “If you’re not ready to talk about douching with your boyfriend, you’re definitely not ready to have his cock in your arse,” shoots back Rahim, in a conversation in which no detail is too gross or shameful. Dot, 17 from Leeds, highlights the tendency to segregate pupils by gender for RSE, noting that “even at the age of 11, I was confused why boys didn’t need to know about cervixes and fallopian tubes: how do you expect them to be understanding when they don’t even know what the word ‘menstruation’ means?” In both Big Mouth and Sex Education, equal attention is given to characters who are diverse in race, sexuality, gender and background, creating a dynamic where no one form of puberty is treated as default. Eva, 17 from Birmingham, feels that “the complete variety of characters implies that everyone tackles personal issues differently.” Indeed, much of the humour comes from moments of discovery about fellow pupils: in Big Mouth, the revelation that “girls get horny, too” makes the boys’ heads explode. Occasionally, this television is straightforwardly educational. Sex Education includes everything from chlamydia myth-busting (“You cannot catch an STI from a pitch whistle!”) to lectures on lube (“You should always use a water-based lubricant”). But the majority of lessons come courtesy of empathetic and nuanced explorations of the characters’ lives. Although virtually no sexual stone is left unturned (asexuality, pansexuality, bisexuality, sexual assault, internalised homophobia and emergency contraception are just some of the subjects explored in Sex Education’s second series) topics never feel clumsily signposted, and instead unfold in complex, non-judgmental ways. The programmes also cover taboos. Series one of Sex Education was celebrated for including a realistic portrayal of abortion, depicting the procedure step-by-step, from the waiting room to the recovery room, in a tone that was neither sensational nor melodramatic. Ciara, 18 from Manchester, says this was the storyline she “found most moving”, especially when RSE lessons on abortion tend to “play on tropes of regret”. Crucially, the shows give storylines a sense of proportion. Whereas Isaac, 17 from Kent, feels that pupils “are only ever told of the horror stories in RSE”, Sex Education quietly reaffirms the notion that anything, no matter how embarrassing or complicated, can be resolved, usually by talking to someone. Sexpression, a charity that works to empower young people by teaching informal and comprehensive RSE lessons in secondary schools, believes the popularity of sex education on TV demonstrates that teenagers “are in need of a source to dispel myths around sex, reinforce truths, and allow for the empowerment of their bodily autonomy and decision-making”. It adds that TV shows: “may present some clarity to [young people] in a world where there is a plethora of accessible information which can be true, false, misleading, or accurate.” A key plot-point in Sex Education’s second series is the school’s decision to rewrite its sex education curriculum, prompting a debate between staff and pupils about how teenagers are meant to responsibly seek sexual advice when the school fails to provide it. While ostensibly the question relates to the ethics of a teenager running a sex clinic, it also suggests the show’s awareness about the relationship between entertainment and RSE. Netflix’s freedom as an entertainment company may allow them to circumnavigate real-world debate, but this shouldn’t let schools off the hook. These shows should illuminate the shortcomings of the current curriculum – not be a wholesale replacement of it. With Scotland voting to embed LGBTI rights into the school curriculum, and RSE becoming mandatory in all English secondary schools as of September 2020, including teaching on sexual orientation and gender identity, hopefully RSE is set to improve. Ciara believes pop culture “should never be an alternative to well-taught and serious conversations that are seriously lacking in our education system”. Pia hopes RSE will be overhauled so students “don’t have to watch shows like this in order to teach themselves what schools have failed to teach them”. Instead of replacing RSE, Dot believes TV can help viewers “to be more open and accepting of the embarrassing and unspoken aspects of sex” – whether that’s anal douching or worrying you caught an STI from a whistle.