The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, has named impeachment managers to make the case against Donald Trump during his trial in the Senate. The managers will appear in person in the Senate to begin Trump’s prosecution. The outcome of the case could rely on their ability to persuade moderate Republicans to go along with the Democratic minority on questions such as calling witnesses or obtaining emails and other documents that the White House has so far blocked. The named House managers are: Thanks in part to Trump’s impassioned attacks on him on Twitter, Schiff, 59, a 20-year veteran of Congress from California, may be the most recognizable name in the impeachment inquiry. A former federal prosecutor, Schiff chairs the House intelligence committee, which Pelosi selected to lead the impeachment investigation. Her selection was a tribute to Schiff, who was praised for the precision and speed with which the committee gathered evidence against Trump, organized and conducted public hearings and filed its report. Schiff, whose sharp summaries at the end of each day of public hearings were widely praised, is seen by Democrats as the member of Congress most capable of explaining what Trump did and why it was wrong. As chair of the judiciary committee, Nadler, 72, from New York, took over the impeachment process from Schiff, organizing witness testimony about the gravity of Trump’s alleged misconduct and drafting the two articles of impeachment. Nadler has been a member of Congress since the early 1990s, but his adversarial relationship with Trump goes back even further than that, to a 1980s-era dispute over a failed real estate deal in Manhattan when Trump was an up-and-coming developer and Nadler was a member of the New York state assembly. Nadler has come in for his own share of calumny from Trump’s Twitter feed. A close ally of Pelosi’s from California, Lofgren, 72, is a senior judiciary committee member and a trained lawyer with 25 years experience in Congress. She is also the only member of Congress to have participated in all three modern impeachment processes, first as an aide to the judiciary committee during hearings against Richard Nixon; then as a committee member who voted “no” against articles of impeachment charging Bill Clinton; and now as an impeachment manager. Colleagues see her as a direct communicator and a credible moderate voice. The chairman of the House Democratic caucus, Jeffries, 49, has represented a New York City district spanning Brooklyn and Queens for eight years in Congress. In addition to his perch on the judiciary committee, Jeffries has been a key proponent of the case against Trump in caucus meetings and a strong anti-Trump voice in the media. Pelosi introduced him as “an accomplished litigator in private practice before running for elected office”. Having first been elected to Congress in 2016, Demings, 62, has significantly less Capitol Hill experience than the other managers – but significantly more firsthand criminal justice experience, as a former police chief in Orlando, Florida. The Florida native is a member of both the intelligence and judiciary committees and is seen as capable of explaining the case against Trump in the language of everyday crime and punishment. She is one the two first women in US history to serve as an impeachment manager. A four-term congresswoman from Texas, Garcia, 69, sits on the judiciary committee and formerly was a presiding judge in the Houston municipal system. Pelosi praised her as “the first Hispanic and first woman to be elected in her own right” to a county judicial post. She was also the first Latina elected to Congress from Texas, alongside Veronica Escobar. A first-term member of Congress from Colorado, Crow is a moderate Democrat from a swing district who was one of the last Democrats to throw his support behind Trump’s impeachment. He sits on neither the judiciary nor intelligence committee. But the decision by Crow, 40, a former US Army Ranger with deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan, to back impeachment is just the kind of profile in political courage that Pelosi has been seeking to highlight in her caucus. She called him “a respected litigator in private practice in Colorado”.