By the time Roger Federer stood to face the crowd after his frenzied four-hour 4-6, 7-6, 6-4, 4-6, 7-6 (8) victory over John Millman, he looked frazzled. His face was flushed, his hair was a mess and as he was beckoned to speak to the adoring crowd about his brush with defeat, he stumbled over his words. “Oh God, that was tough,” he said. “Thank God it’s a super tiebreaker otherwise I would have lost this one. Ah. Where to start? I think John played a great match. He might as well have been here as well doing the interview.” Friday’s mania had already seen Serena Williams lose to Wang Qiang, Naomi Osaka toppled by 15-year-old Coco Gauff and Caroline Wozniacki compete in her last match, and Millman very nearly was the man conducting the interview at the end. The only other time Millman and Federer met at a grand slam, Millman had produced a stunning upset in the suffocating humidity of the 2018 US Open. Millman stepped on his home court believing he could repeat the result and for much of the match he outplayed Federer from the baseline. As Millman thrived, Federer relied heavily on his serve and he desperately struggled to find the court with routine groundstrokes. In the first four sets he sprayed 41 forehand unforced errors to just 26 point-ending winners and when his forehand was not haemorrhaging errors, he was passive and cagey, allowing the Australian to dominate the exchanges. Even after Federer secured a two sets to one lead, he never seemed comfortable. He spent much of the match flitting through his endless arsenal of shots, trying to figure out the correct way to approach the Australian. At times he hugged the baseline or chased the net, at other times he more closely resembled Rafael Nadal with all the spin he attempted. During one game he even returned a second serve from metres behind the baseline. “It’s tactical. I was really trying to figure things out with John,” Federer told Eurosport. “It took me a long time – forever. The entire game, exactly how to return him, how to play him from the baseline, how much to come up to the net. Conditions were slow sometimes when the balls fluff up, so I tried to play with spin and that wasn’t working. I tried with the slice, that wasn’t really working. After just under four bruising hours of play, the match appeared to be heading the way of Millman as he elevated his game with spectacular passing shots to build a 8-4 lead in the final-set super tiebreak. Federer responded with an astounding sequence. He calmly rolled through six points in a row, outlasting Millman in long rallies, drawing him on to the net and then having the wherewithal to finish with the shot that had betrayed him for so much of the match: a simple forehand winner. “Bit of luck maybe … I had to stay focused, make the right decision. He was doing all that stuff in the beginning of the breaker, I thought: ‘OK, I guess I tried. I didn’t play too bad after all.’ I was getting ready to explain myself in the press conference.” Federer’s victory marked his 100th win at the Australian Open and it was a different performance to the tennis that characterised his early years of success. Across his four hours on court, there was very little of the elegance and effortlessness his game has become synonymous with. Instead was visibly imbuing every point with his maximum effort, pushing himself to the limit and leaving no stone unturned. It reflected the player he has become and why he continues to achieve success so many years later: “It’s all grit,” he said. In other men’s results, the sixth seed Stefanos Tsitsipas was upset 7-5, 6-4, 7-6 (2) by 32nd seed Milos Raonic, the 2018 finalist Marin Cilic ousted ninth seed Roberto Bautista Agut 6-7 (3) 6-4 6-0, 5-7, 6-3 and Novak Djokovic eased into the fourth round with a 6-3, 6-2, 6-2 win over Yoshihito Nishioka.