West Ham have asked about the possibility of a loan deal for Tottenham’s Kyle Walker-Peters and are in advanced talks with Slavia Prague over a deal for the Czech Republic midfielder Tomas Soucek. David Moyes knows that West Ham’s Premier League status is likely to depend on how many players arrive before the transfer window shuts on Friday and he wants a right-back, a central midfielder and a forward. The club are scouring the market for reinforcements and have inquired about signing Walker-Peters on loan. The 22-year-old, who has been targeted by Crystal Palace and Southampton, could fill in for Ryan Fredericks, who is not expected to return from a hamstring injury until the end of February. The 35-year-old Pablo Zabaleta has deputised for Fredericks in recent weeks while West Ham failed with a £12m offer for Nottingham Forest’s right-back Matty Cash. West Ham’s problems increased when they lost to a shadow West Bromwich Albion side in the FA Cup last Saturday. Only goal difference is keeping them out of the bottom three before they host Liverpool on Wednesday and Brighton on Saturday. The pressure is increasing on the club’s owners, David Sullivan and David Gold, and West Ham’s dismal performance against West Brom exposed glaring weaknesses within their squad. Carlos Sánchez toiled after being handed a rare start in central midfield and West Ham are hopeful of clinching a deal to sign Soucek. Moyes wants greater presence in midfield and Soucek, who has scored 10 goals this season, appears to fit the bill. The 24-year-old would be capable of slotting in alongside Declan Rice and West Ham are poised to raise their initial bid of €15m (£12.7m) for the Czech international, who is valued at €20m by his club. West Ham have also targeted Ronaldo Vieira but feel the Sampdoria midfielder is too expensive, and their interest in the CSKA Moscow forward Fyodor Chalov has cooled. Meanwhile West Ham aim to find a buyer in Spain for Sánchez, who was substituted at half-time against West Brom.