Deaths linked to benefit cuts are symptomatic of a broken system. The inquest into the death of Errol Graham suggested that the removal of benefits by the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP), despite his long history of mental health problems, may have contributed to his death. In response, the DWP described it as “a tragic, complex case”. I have no doubt that Errol’s life, and the circumstances that led to his death, involved many complex factors – needing to jump through DWP hoops to keep his benefits should not have been one of them. The DWP is consistently failing to properly protect vulnerable people like Errol Graham. From 2016, I spent 18 months on secondment at DWP advising the department on mental health, having spent many years before that trying to influence it from the outside for the charity Mind. I don’t think the civil servants I worked with are malicious, or unshaken by stories like Errol’s. But by the end of my time there I had concluded that the DWP was institutionally and culturally incapable of properly supporting ill and disabled people, and I called for the department to be broken up. A fundamental problem with the DWP is that it sees the people it supports primarily as “benefit claimants” and therefore as a cost to the system. As a result, “protecting the public purse” is as much, if not more, of a priority than protecting people against destitution. If someone stops claiming a benefit, it is essentially seen as a positive outcome, despite little effort being made to keep track of what happens to that person next. The benefits system places the onus of responsibility on ill and disabled people to continually prove that they are worthy recipients of financial support, rather than the onus being on the DWP to prove that people no longer needed this support. If this was the case, they wouldn’t be able to point to someone’s lack of engagement (often due to them being unwell) as the basis for cutting off the benefits they rely on. Of course, there has always been a tension within the welfare state between ensuring people are supported and rationing funds to “protect the integrity of the system”. But over the last decade, and particularly during Iain Duncan Smith’s reign at the DWP, there was a concerted political effort to both focus attention on the cost of benefit fraud and question the legitimacy of disability benefits and the people who receive them. This culture of suspicion and the narrative of reining in a bloated welfare budget has perhaps made it easier for both DWP staff and the public to stomach the harsh impact of the cuts and “reforms” implemented during this period. The parallels with the Windrush scandal are not hard to draw: a “hostile environment” for a marginalised group is tolerated because of an orchestrated effort to undermine that group’s status. However, stories like Errol’s and the many before him haven’t triggered the kind of public backlash we saw when the full impact of Windrush was revealed. This may be due to the “drip, drip” effect of individual examples of a failing safety net, leading to a weary public acceptance of tragedy. Or it could be that there hasn’t been a comparable exposure of clear political wrongdoing, of the kind that brought down Amber Rudd as home secretary. Whatever the reason, the lack of public pressure has allowed the DWP to continue to operate a disability benefits system that not only fails to properly support people but often actively makes their lives more difficult. Across the country, many local authorities, health services and charities do good work trying to help ill and disabled people lead fulfilling and independent lives. Frontline staff in these organisations will tell you that they have to spend a lot of their time helping people negotiate the benefits system, or dealing with the consequences of the pressure and scrutiny people face to retain their benefits. The DWP sits firmly outside these local “ecosystems” of support, dictating rules and processes from Whitehall that people must comply with, despite the abject failure of these policies to achieve their stated objective of moving more ill and disabled people into work. This failure is in large part down to the complete lack of trust between ill and disabled people and the DWP, in both directions. People need to feel protected and empowered in order to make progress toward being more independent. Only a fundamental overhaul that returns trust and power to ill and disabled people can create a system that not only protects against destitution but supports people to flourish. • Tom Pollard is a policy expert on mental health and the benefit system