‘There was nothing special about us,” says Tim Carter. “There was nothing unspecial about us.” Carter is a survivor of the 1978 Jonestown massacre. He appears with a handful of others in Shan Nicholson’s two-part Storyville documentary Jonestown: Terror in the Jungle (BBC4). It was first shown in the US two years ago, on the 40th anniversary of the deaths of more than 900 people in the Peoples Temple in Guyana. Headed by the Rev Jim Jones, who ingested potassium cyanide in an act of what he called “revolutionary suicide”, it was, until 9/11, the largest single loss of American life by deliberate act. Whether you call it mass suicide, suicide-murder or simply mass murder probably depends on how much you already know. Outside the US, many of us only know of it through the phrase “drinking the Kool-Aid” (the cyanide was delivered in soft drinks, actually Flavor Aid) as a synonym for being brainwashed or believing in something bizarre. It conjures a common conception of those who died as a homogenous group of gullible fools. Carter, who lost his wife and son in the compound’s pavilion, objects deeply to the way the massacre has been simplified and reduced. Nicholson’s film should bring some comfort: its grave and careful tracing of how Jones and his followers came to be where they were and do what they did restores much of what has been lost in cultural translation. Although we open with some of the extraordinary, horrific footage from the moment of discovery in the Jonestown compound, the film’s focus quickly shifts to and largely stays on the history of the Peoples Temple, its followers’ motivations and their leader’s gradual transformation from charismatic preacher to crazed despot. Jones founded what would become known as the Peoples Temple in 1955, when he was just 25. It was the first desegregated church in Indiana. His pro-integrationist and civil rights stance surely helped attract black followers and white idealists to his cause in greater numbers than perhaps anything else, though the film doesn’t make much of this point, nor interrogate too closely how genuine or calculated a position it was by Jones. His later claims to socialism are treated with more scepticism. Perhaps this is overthinking things, but the lack of examination of his racial progressivism feels strange in such an otherwise detailed portrait of events. You wonder if it’s because Good Man Gone Bad makes for a better narrative than On the Make From the Beginning and Just Got Worse. But perhaps Jones and his origins are slightly glossed over simply because there is so much to be heard from the survivors – including two of Jones’s sons, Jim and Stephan – who, 40 years on, are only just at peace with their experiences. Their testimonies are spare, direct and all the more harrowing for that. Carter was seeking solace after the horrors of Vietnam, others were fleeing unhappy childhoods and other traumas. Some simply believed in Jones’s promise of a better world. They talk about how intensely persuasive he was, and their accounts are interspersed with the plentiful audio footage that exists from all stages of the evolution of the Temple and its leader. It leaves you free to ponder how what sounded like sanctuary to many sounds only like aggression and a kind of terrifying certainty now. Is that the benefit of hindsight alone? Or proof that you hear what you need to hear? These up-close-and-personal descriptions of life under a power-hungry, drug-addicted narcissistic leader exerting increasingly brutal physical and mental control over his followers are given context by Jeff Guinn, on whose book, The Road to Jonestown, the film is based. Nothing is sensationalised, but the details quietly and relentlessly build into an ever more dreadful threat. By the day of the massacre, which began with the murder of Senator Leo Ryan who had flown out to investigate Jonestown after former members went public with their concerns that people were effectively being held against their will, it feels like an organic, inevitable ending. Not the demise of fools, but of frightened people, coerced and controlled for years, surrounded by armed guards instructed to shoot them if they fled, drinking Flavor Aid or forcibly injected with it if they refused. It was a film about ordinary people’s capacity for faith, for hope, for denial and for exploitation by those with an extraordinary capacity for harm. Would that we were in a position to take no lesson from it at all.