Simon Jenkins writes about booming cathedrals and failing parish churches (To survive, our churches need to learn from cathedrals, Journal, 27 December). The Church of England’s rural mission is doomed to failure, as forecast by Dr Robert Barlow’s report published in 2018 in Rural Theology. He described country parish church service arrangements as a “complex railway timetable” of rotating services between various buildings. His conclusion was that “each congregation wants the place/community where its members have encountered God to be its own expression of Christian life”. Congregations do not wish to be peripatetic, but rather exist as their own village’s body of Christ. I suggest that the only solution is to revert to holding a service at the same hour each Sunday. Clergy may rarely be there but the laity could hold a liturgy of the word and administer the blessed sacrament from the tabernacle. This would be a revolution, but a carefully managed empowering of people in the pews could be good for growing their faith, mission and the church building.Leigh HattsBournemouth, Dorset • Like Simon Jenkins, I am a church-lover but not a church-goer. At a recent conference called The Art of the Lost at Canterbury cathedral, I discussed a series of ecclesiastical textiles designed by major gothic revival architects. They were made for the churches they built in the late 19th century in Leek, north Staffordshire. These ritualistic items were made from richly embroidered silks, embellished with patterns, threads and dyes from India. Ongoing post-doctoral research has revived an interest in these beautiful things. They were created by highly skilled men and women of the local community. The same craft workers, as members of congregations, helped to fund the costly materials. They were available for all to enjoy on a daily basis alongside wall paintings, stone carvings and stained glass windows made by the finest designers and makers of the era. Some of the textiles are now resting so are literally “not in service”. A number of churches display their Leek embroideries, which attract many visitors. They are a source of surprise when their histories are revealed. Many are now over 100 years old and in need of conservation but parish churches will need help to afford this. Decisions need to be made over which of these items can be saved, as not all are viable in the long term. As so many churches are closing, surely it is the responsibility of many of us to ensure the survival of the diverse histories embedded in these pieces.Dr Brenda King(Chair, the Textile Society), Bollington, Cheshire • Simon Jenkins writes that some former churches are already branching out as new venues, adding that “none to the best of my knowledge is a pub”. He should come back to Chichester some time, where we do have one (conveniently opposite the cathedral with its stunning collection of both permanent and temporary art installations). Two former churches also operate as offices, one as a bookshop, one as an art gallery, one as a recitals venue, and one (roofless) as a garden. Perhaps what is needed is a survey by Historic England or another august body of the current state of play across England?Greg and Katherine SlayChichester, West Sussex • I agree with Simon Jenkins that churches need to learn from cathedrals by being places where “we don’t bang on about God”. But his analysis of the problem is not entirely correct, and his proposed solution contradicts his own argument. He says: “A quarter of the 15,000 Anglican parish churches now have fewer than 16 worshippers.” But this means that three-quarters have more than that number. In one of the rural churches under my care, the average congregation of 9-12 represents about 10% of the population of the parish. Small can be beautiful; a satsuma is not a failed orange. He argues that “most English cathedrals are doing fine”, in part because they offer “vicarious religion”. He concludes that churches must “move into the control of parochial councils, trusts or social enterprises” and “have a primarily secular future”. But cathedrals are attractive in the way he describes precisely because they remain, primarily, places of worship. Simon Jenkins should let go of the simplistic idea that the problems facing parish churches can be solved by off-loading their care on to secular bodies. He needs to learn from examples of good practice at parish level, where the church council works with other bodies, both to retain the church’s primary function as a place of worship, and to diversify its use for the wider community.The Rev Canon Dr Rob KelseyNorham, Northumberland • In Simon Jenkins’s article the word “church” is used only to mean a building. In the New Testament the word ekklesia (translated “church”) is a body of people who follow Jesus. Over the centuries, the authorities of churches have limited their membership to those who are “orthodox”, that is, those who commit to the “right” set of beliefs about God, Jesus, the organisation of the church, and so on. I believe that this has been a big mistake, and we should pay more attention to orthopraxis – a lifestyle that reflects what Jesus taught about loving our neighbours. Simon calls for local church buildings to be used as centres of their communities, more flexibly and with fewer restrictions. I agree, but they will only survive if the building houses a lively church, which reflects the key messages of the Gospel and of Jesus, who came to bring good news to the poor, release for the prisoners, healing for the sick and freedom for the oppressed (Luke 4:18 quoting Isaiah 61:1). Our church communities must welcome anyone who is inspired by these values, whether or not they can endorse all the doctrines that have been developed over the centuries. Personally I can accept almost all of them, but we should embrace others joyfully.Robert DimmickCaversham, Reading • Like Simon Jenkins, I am not a churchgoer. As a rambler, I have a different experience of the Anglican real estate, frequently eating sandwiches with friends in the porch of isolated churches that provide a haven for weary walkers. Often there is a prominent sign encouraging visitors to come on in to take a look around, with believers and non-believers equally intrigued by the building and the stories it tells of the locality. Should Simon venture out of bigger settlements he would see the church as a focus for decidedly non-religious activities: just a couple of weeks ago a group of us stumbled on a church running a craft fair – on a Sunday morning; and I have also attended many decidedly secular folk music gigs in churches.Les BrightExeter, Devon • “The church has become home to the flower-arranging few” (Editorial, 30 December) is a lazy comment unworthy of a newspaper which counts honesty and fairness among its values. Inspired by their faith, churches support and run a wide range of social action projects that serve the most vulnerable in society, including food banks, language classes, debt counselling and lunch clubs. Church congregations are taking action to help those impacted by changes in state funding and their work is increasingly valued by overstretched local authorities. Instead of relying on outdated stereotypes, please reflect the true picture and offer some encouragement to those doing their best to help people in dire need.Judith DignumBraintree, Essex • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition