Could Joe Denly become a throwback who reminds us of Ken Barrington or Bob Barber? No, this is not to burden him with being the great Mr Reliable in the middle order like Barrington (who averaged 58 with the bat for England) or another Barber blasting boundaries at the start of the innings in the 1960s while Geoffrey Boycott took the more discreet route. Instead this is a reference to Denly, the bowler. There was once a tradition of English batsmen propelling leg-spin effectively enough to have an occasional impact on a Test match – especially overseas. Barrington took 29 wickets in his 82 Tests, Barber 42 in 28. Others were less successful; Keith Fletcher would bowl a few wrist-spinners and mustered two Test wickets. More recently Mike Atherton, who took quite a few wickets for Lancashire in his early days, also finished with two in Test cricket, though initially there were hopes he would take many more. So can Denly be more of a Barrington or Barber than a Fletcher or Atherton in this department? Until the match in Cape Town there was little scope for optimism (though it is worthy of note that Denly takes his first-class wickets far more cheaply than Mason Crane, one of England’s recent specialist wrist-spinners). At Newlands Denly took two important wickets, those of Dean Elgar and Quinton de Kock, his first for England after 12 Tests. It was a relief for him to break his duck. “It’s nice to be able to chip in here and there with a few overs and pick up wickets like I did in that second innings. That second one probably isn’t one you dream of taking but De Kock is a fine player so I don’t really care how I get him out as long as he’s out [De Kock was caught off a long hop]. I like to consider myself more than a part-timer,” says Denly, who is not a boastful man. “I feel I have something to offer in both the red-ball and white-ball games. Certainly, on day five pitches when there is a lot of rough outside the off stump to the left-handers I can play a part.” Which is what happened in Cape Town. However, he recognises his primary role is to score runs and here he is progressing – slowly. Remarkably he has failed to reach double figures only three times in his 23 Test innings, but there have been only three scores in excess of 53 – and, so far, no hundreds. “Certainly, I’m becoming more confident with each game I play, each knock I have. It is frustrating that I haven’t kicked on to get that really big score but I really believe it is just a matter of time if I keep doing the things I’ve been doing, which is being solid up front and building partnerships to allow these guys in the middle order to come in and play the way they can play.” For the moment Denly, an engaging late developer at 33, is doing enough to justify his place in the side as a top-order batsman despite the shortage of really substantial scores; he will be playing at Port Elizabeth on Thursday and is currently inked in to go to Sri Lanka. So there is scope for a few more bonus Test wickets along the way. South Africa have named an unchanged squad, meaning they miss their transformation target – six players of colour including two black Africans – for the third Test in a row.