If a transfer window can slam shut then it can also spring open. There’s no such thing as New Year’s Day signalling a dry January in the heady world of football transfers. This is where the party starts for 31 days of signing-on fees, yellow tickers and term sheets with agents and ITKs hammering the WhatsApp like thunder. Now that the revoking of Chelsea’s transfer ban means he is able to open Roman Abramovich’s cheque book, Frank Lampard fancies rolling back the years to the club’s glory days and spending like Viv Nicholson. Frank sees Moussa Dembélé – once of Fulham and Celtic, now of Lyon – as a potential new Didier Drogba, which may be bad news for Tammy Abraham. Another option as a forward is the CSKA Moscow striker Fyodor Chalov who would cost around £20m. Meanwhile, Olivier Giroud’s desire for first-team football before Euro 2020 and Wilfried Zaha’s permanent state of being the subject of transfer speculation has led to talk of some kind of swap deal, with the Frenchman heading to Crystal Palace and Zaha joining Frank’s entertainers on London’s fashionable Kings Road. Also for the Chelsea off may be Emerson Palmieri, who is wanted by Antonio Conte at Internazionale. And on the opposite side of the defence, Chelsea are willing to pay £30m to sign Ricardo Pereira from Leicester, with Tottenham also interested. Emerson’s availability may be a prelude to Chelsea showing serious interest in Ben Chilwell, though Manchester City’s long-term courting of the Leicester left-back remains undiminished in its ardour. This January could see the opening skirmishes of a running battle between José Mourinho and Daniel Levy over transfer policy, and the Tottenham manager wants three players to come in. Firstly, a centre-half: that may be one of Bournemouth’s Nathan Aké or West Ham’s Issa Diop. Next, Serge Aurier’s ears may be burning with the suggestion that a right-back is being targeted: Napoli’s Elseid Hysaj and Marseille’s Hiroki Sakai are two names in the offing beyond Pereira. And, with Christian Eriksen entering the limbo of being able to sign a contract with a new club from 1 January, an attacking midfielder is desired. Gremio’s Everton Soares fits that bill. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, who seems set to be a mainstay of these pages for a while to come, has been linked with Barcelona while Inter and Conte also want him. Meanwhile, Granit Xhaka’s loan move to Hertha Berlin from Arsenal – with a view to a permanent move – is set to be done imminently, even if Mikel Arteta retains an admiration for the Swiss firebrand. This may not be one for this month, but links continue to grow between Manchester United and Jude Bellingham, Birmingham City’s best 16-year-old since Trevor Francis was bashing them in at St Andrew’s back in 1970. “The club hasn’t mentioned anything to me about Jude Bellingham,” said the Blues manager, Pep Clotet, before his team’s match with Wigan but it seems more than likely that a Premier League fanbase will be belting out Hey Jude in Bellingham’s honour by the start of the 2020-21 season. The best news for United is that young Jude is not yet a Mino Raiola client or related to a former Manchester City player. Or at least as far as anyone knows. Elsewhere in the Championship, Cameron Carter-Vickers is set to return to parent club Tottenham from his loan at Stoke, where he has not been getting on the field in the past month, and be sent straight out on another loan, to Derby.