This was an FA Cup tie that involved a genuine shock and a commanding display by England’s record goalscorer on his second appearance for a Championship club but, ultimately, it will be remembered for a potentially pivotal moment in the use of VAR in this country. A little over an hour had been played and Derby were leading through Chris Martin’s goal on 32 minutes when a melee broke out. It was sparked by a tussle between Luka Milivojevic and Tom Huddlestone that resulted in both players being booked by the referee, Michael Oliver. That appeared that but then, suddenly, everyone in the ground was being informed that a VAR check was taking place for a possible red card. It took an age, during which replays showed that Milivojevic was the man who could be in trouble given he thrust his head towards Huddlestone having already twice kicked out at the midfielder. More time passed, leading to the now common growing of frustration among spectators, and then it happened, that most uncommon of sights – the referee checking the pitchside monitor. Oliver ran over, took a look at the screen and decided that, yes, Milivojevic deserved to be sent-off. A red card was shown and the hosts were now not only losing but also down to 10 men. Palace never recovered, their momentum resulting from an aggressive start to the second half well and truly checked, while more broadly there was an immediate sense that something significant had occurred in regards to the issue that has sparked debate and split opinion like no other this season. It is fair to say that the introduction of VAR to the Premier League has been controversial and one of the reasons for that has been the refusal of referees to use the monitors that are in place at all grounds, which had stemmed from the PGMOL, the body in charge of top-flight officials, actively discouraging them from doing so. But as one bewildering VAR-related call has followed another, so the calls for the monitors to be used have increased. It took an FA Cup third-round weekend finally for that to occur and no doubt many will praise Oliver for his decision to go against protocol. He is not the first to do so – Craig Pawson also used the pitchside monitor during Liverpool’s fourth-round tie with West Bromwich Albion in January 2018, but this was the first time it has occurred since VAR was formally introduced and that the correct call was made after the referee made the proactive step to check the incident in question for himself was as refreshing as it was reassuring. It will now be intriguing to see if other referees follow Oliver’s lead and also how the PGMOL reacts to what took place here. That is for the future and what the manner of Milivojevic’s sending-off should not do is completely overshadow Derby’s triumph. The team that sits 17th in the Championship not only beat the one that sits ninth in the Premier League but did so after manager Phillip Cocu made nine changes to the side that beat Barnsley 2-1 in midweek. One of the players that kept his place was Wayne Rooney and his display was ultimately a key reason for why the visitors find themselves in Monday’s fourth-round draw. Having played at the tip of a midfield diamond against Barnsley, on what was his debut for Derby, the 34-year-old featured in a deeper midfield role here and one that allowed him to dictated proceedings and cut Palace open with a number of perfectly-weighted passes. “He did very good,” said Cocu, having praised his team as a whole for playing with “bravery and courage [in possession]”. Derby displayed those traits during the first half in particular, while there was real quality to the manner of their goal, involving as it did an excellent cross by Jayden Bogle that was turned in by Martin at the back post with a smart finish with the outside of his right boot. Having increased the tempo after becoming somewhat passive as the first half wore on, Palace came close to equalising in the second half through chances created by James McCarthy and Connor Wickham, but then came Milivojevic’s dismissal. It was a game-changer in more ways than one. All in all, it was a day to forget for Roy Hodgson, especially given the injuries to Max Meyer and Jaïro Riedewald that makes it 11 Palace players who are now potentially out of Arsenal’s visit here on Saturday. And asked about the intervention of VAR, the Palace manager was particularly dissatisfied. “If it’s going to be the referee’s decision that counts, why are you going to bother with the VAR people sitting there in Stockley Park?” he said. “Make up your mind.”