Whether it is reasonable to sign up for Rafael Nadal’s repeated assertion that he does not lose sleep over passing Roger Federer’s record of 20 majors, it is easier to accept that Melbourne is the place where the Spaniard who is parked on 19 grand slam titles – 12 of them on clay – will find it hardest to do exactly that. Nadal has won one Australian Open title, in a five-set epic against a prime Federer in 2009, and lost in four other finals: once against Federer, twice to Novak Djokovic, and in 2014 when Stan Wawrinka broke a career 12-0 duck against him to win the first of his three major titles and then show Melbourne that the Swiss know how to have a good time. On day two of the first grand slam tournament this season, Nadal could hardly have been more at ease in gliding into a second-round meeting with the Argentinian Federico Delbonis. The Spaniard managed a two-hour workout – 6-2, 6-3, 6-0 – against another South American clay-courter, Bolivia’s Hugo Dellien, who looked like a fish who had landed on a riverbank. There are not many windows left for any of the Big Three in this race to the end of the rainbow. Could Nadal – overwhelmed in the final last year by Djokovic – yet get his hands on the pot of gold? He demurred, as he often does. “I don’t care about 20 or 15 or 16,” he said. “I just care about enjoying my tennis. It is not, like, 20 is the number that I need to reach. If I reach 20, fantastic. If I reach 21, better. If I reach 19, super happy about all the things that I did in my tennis career, no? “Honestly, it is something I don’t really think about. I won the US Open a few months ago, and I was super happy in that moment. I want to do it the best way possible because that’s what I am doing since the beginning of my life almost.” On the first Melbourne day under truly clear blue skies in many weeks, Roberto Bautista Agut, who beat Andy Murray in the first round last year, won in straight sets against Feliciano López, Murray’s doubles partner in his comeback victory at Queen’s Club. There is no escaping history in tennis. The Spaniard next plays the American wildcard Michael Mmoh, who beat Agut’s stylish compatriot Pablo Andújar in less than two hours. Daniil Medvedev, the sport’s timebomb of late, recovered from a mid-match dip to beat Frances Tiafoe in four; Nick Kyrgios is through (a great relief to the organisers and various licensed premises around Melbourne). So, too, are Gaël Monfils and David Goffin. Also into the next round among the main contenders, with varying degrees of conviction, are Wawrinka, Dominic Thiem, Fabio Fognini, the eternally overlooked Marin Cilic, and the dangerous Russians Karen Khachanov and Andrey Rublev. There are a few long shots worth watching, as well: the highly regarded young Italian Jannik Sinner, Australia’s Alexei Popyrin, the mercurial Latvian qualifier Ernests Gulbis, who upset the rising Canadian Félix Auger-Aliassime, and the Japanese wildcard Tatsuma Ito, who puts his feet to the fire against Djokovic.