If you think remain is a lost cause, you should try republicanism. Anyone who ever believed the Windsors might be easily prised from the public imagination, that Britons would be relaxed about dumping the royal family in favour of an elected head of state, has surely been divested of that delusion this week. Since Wednesday’s announcement that Prince Harry and Meghan plan to “step back” from frontline royal duties, the media coverage has been wall-to-wall – you had to reach page 17 of Friday’s Daily Mail to read about anything else – and it’s been a staple of conversation across the country. Remember, this is a move that has no constitutional implications, involving a man who is only sixth in line to the throne. And yet it has swept aside almost every other concern. On Thursday, for instance, the bill withdrawing Britain from the EU was passed in the Commons with a majority of 99. You might have missed it because, in contrast with last year’s knife-edge, late-night votes – John Bercow screaming “Division!” and the Parliament Channel notching up record ratings – this one barely got a mention. I don’t pick that example at random. Part of the appeal of the Tories’ election-winning slogan of “Get Brexit Done” was the promise that we could, at last, talk about something else. Some hoped that would mean a serious, long-overdue focus on, say, the climate crisis. Instead, after last week’s fears that an assassination ordered by Donald Trump might spark world war three, the Brexit vacuum has been filled with Megxit. I suspect this is, in part, a reaction to a year in which the country felt constantly on the verge of a nervous breakdown, watching as high-stakes decisions about the nation’s future were taken – or, more often, delayed – by razor-thin margins in a hung parliament. Both leavers and remainers felt that at any moment they were about to lose something precious. After all that, it’s a relief to obsess over something which not even the most heated combatants on either side pretend will shape Britain’s destiny. The Megxit story has been like one of those weeks when sport is on the front page: it offers a break from existential angst. All this represents a double warning to advocates of a republic. First, after Brexit, the last thing anyone will want is the promise of, or even a debate on, more constitutional upheaval. Riding alongside “Get Brexit Done” was the Tory claim that a Labour government would mean two referendums, one on Europe and a second on Scottish independence. The Conservatives intuited that a big chunk of the public longed for a period in which politics would leave them alone, and for something like a resumption of normality. (It’s why the promise of “radical change” is not always an automatic vote-winner.) Of course this is spectacular hypocrisy on the Tories’ part, since it was they who inflicted the Brexit crisis on us in the first place, an upheaval that will not end on 31 January but drag on and on. But it does point to what is the monarchists’ strongest card, one that my own first forays into republicanism badly underestimated: the simple, small-c conservative comfort of continuity with the past. The second warning for republicans is that, once we’ve left the EU, Britons will hold even tighter to those things that are uniquely or peculiarly British. Some on the left might wish that would mean no more than the NHS; but as this week has shown yet again, for many millions it also means the royal family. Plenty of reformers like to dismiss such sentiments, grandly waving aside the monarchy as a glorified soap opera. That disdain is a mistake – misunderstanding the appeal, and perhaps the function, of both the monarchy and soap opera. For these are both dramas played out over many decades, involving a reassuringly stable cast, combining old stalwarts, often under the watchful eye of a formidable matriarch, with glamorous new additions, and which focus on the life cycle events of birth, marriage and death. That focus is not trivial. Soap often prompts public discussions of topics that might otherwise be mentioned only in whispers, from that first lesbian kiss in Brookside to sexual abuse within the family in EastEnders to the coercive control storyline in the Archers. Immerse yourself in the Megxit coverage and you’ll see a debate about racism and media double standards along with a fascinating glimpse into the current clash of generations. In the Mail, Richard Littlejohn slammed Harry and Meghan for their “self-centred snowflakery” and “endless moaning about ‘mental health issues’”, while the Telegraph’s Allison Pearson feared the couple’s decision “smacks of millennial self-absorption, of values that prize identity, expression of emotion and personal happiness above all else”. There is indeed a generational aspect to today’s culture wars – OK Boomer v the Great Awokening – and the royal ructions have dramatised it as vividly as any TV soap. The irony is that the Windsors have recently reversed the usual direction of travel and have now moved from real life into TV drama – thanks to The Crown, which has offered the monarchy an opportunity denied its rival soaps. Viewers who might only ever have known the current crop of characters can now see their backstories unfold, as they are simultaneously granted a look at the older generation in their prime. The Crown has served as a lavishly produced, three-series-long “Previously on…” segment for the latest evening news. With Coronation Street, only longtime viewers can fully grasp the connection between Peter Barlow’s multiple affairs and the serial infidelities of his father, Ken. Now, thanks to The Crown, we can all hear the echo in a Windsor yearning to break free from the royal straitjacket to be with the (American, divorced) woman he loves. With the royals as with soap, this is drama that unfolds over decades, with dilemmas and personality traits passed down the generations. As the Israeli writer Amos Oz used to say of his relationship with his fellow kibbutzniks, when it comes to us and the Windsors, we have “seen their genes at work”. In me this induces a feeling I once described as pro-Windsor republicanism: the belief that we should abolish the monarchy if not for our sake, then for theirs. The weight of the crown stoops the back of the family forced to wear it. Will the day ever come when we’ll stop asking them to perform this bizarre service for us, and choose a head of state ourselves? If this week is anything to go by, that day remains as far away as ever. • Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist