Croatia’s leftist former prime minister Zoran Milanović, who has pledged to make his nation a more tolerant place and turn the page on its wartime past, will be his country’s next president after defeating the incumbent conservative in a run-off vote. Milanović took 52.7% of the vote in Sunday’s run-off, while president Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, who had tried to unite a fractured right-wing, garnered 47.3%, according to results based on a vote count from nearly all polling stations released by the electoral commission. The second-round election was held just days after Croatia took over the European Union’s helm for a six-month period, which will be dominated by Brexit and the bloc’s enlargement. At the same time, the EU’s newest member is struggling with a mass exodus of its people, corruption and a lacklustre economy. Grabar-Kitarović campaigned on a slogan promoting the “real Croatia”, hinting that she believed the ruling conservative HDZ party that backed her was the only one that can truly represent the country. Milanović, a Social Democrat, called such statements “very dangerous” and advocated a vision of a “normal Croatia” as a liberal democracy that promoted equality for all citizens. “Four million of us ... are looking for our place in Europe which is, despite all the problems, the nicest place to live, the most peaceful project in which Croatia must find its place and interest,” Milanović told supporters in Zagreb after his victory. “Let’s be united in (our) differences,” the 53-year-old said. In the campaign Milanović stressed that the “wars are over”, referring to the 1990s independence war that remains an emotive issue. Grabar-Kitarović, 51, the country’s first female president, had tried but failed to lure back hardliners who had voted for a nationalist folk singer in the presidential election’s first round in December. She stressed unity, patriotism and references to the 1990s war in her re-election bid. Conceding defeat on Sunday evening, Grabar-Kitarović promised a “civilised transfer” of power to Milanović. She stressed that Croatia needed stability and unity as “we are the strongest when we are together”. Analysts say that Milanović, who dominated in the cities, also won thanks in part to the split among the rightwingers. The election was viewed as a key test for the ruling HDZ party of moderate prime minister Andrej Plenković, ahead of parliamentary elections later this year. Grabar-Kitarović’s loss was seen as a heavy blow. Political analyst Tihomir Cipek said the result would weaken the HDZ party and harm Plenković’s reputation, The prime minister is also facing the discontent of hardliners within the HDZ over his moderate policies. Grabar-Kitarović presented herself as a “woman of the people” with humble farming roots. She is well known for stunts such as singing in public, which her critics deride as embarrassing. She also came under fire for downplaying the crimes committed by Croatia’s second world war pro-Nazi regime. Milanović, who was prime minister from 2011 to 2016 and whose government failed to push through much-needed reforms, was seeking to make a political comeback and throw off a reputation as arrogant and elitist. He will now take office during a Croatian EU presidency in which four main issues are likely to dominate: the bloc’s relationship with the UK after Brexit; the membership bids of Western Balkan states; climate change; and the bloc’s budget framework for the next decade. Croatia joined the EU in 2013, but its economy, strongly relying on tourism, remains one of the bloc’s weakest. The EU’s open borders have accelerated the exodus of its people, seeking better pay in wealthier member states. Many emigrants also cite corruption, nepotism and poor public services as reasons for leaving. “Politicians are wrangling about the past and insignificant issues while my generation is leaving,” said Maja Marić, a 20-year-old economics student. She said she voted for a “lesser evil”.