Sheri Koones, author of Downsize: Living Large in a Small House, recently suggested renaming the downsizing trend “right-sizing”. Koones draws on her experience of relocating from a 6,800 sq ft house to a 1,400 sq ft one, and suggests that “the key is to have a home that is efficiently designed, both in terms of energy use and space”. Of all the annoying lifestyle trends, downsizing is the biggest smack in the face for anyone in the private-renting trap. Shoebox-sized, sub-par rental accommodation is the norm in London, while nationwide studies show that homes are getting smaller. Younger adults who have managed to get on the housing ladder know all about the shortage of affordable, spacious accommodation. As with the new fashion for a sort of capitalist-sanctioned minimalism, the downsizing trend emphasises the growing divide between the haves and have-nots. There are those who actively choose not to consume, and those who have little choice. The former are free to embrace a trend that comes ready-packaged with the sanctimonious status symbol of living frugally; the latter are simply poor. Contrast stylish bare white walls and furniture-less rooms so beautifully satirised by Absolutely Fabulous in the scene where Patsy and Edina struggle to locate the door, with damp, cold rooms containing solitary mattresses that are the reality for many children living in poverty. The rise of co-living spaces in cities tries to reframe shoebox-living as an aspirational lifestyle choice. These buildings come equipped with spas and gyms and “breakout areas” – the dystopian phrasing of the latter says it all. They are essentially halls of residence for young professionals who can’t afford their own place. To millions, downsizing is an activity undertaken by your friends’ baby-boomer parents – often, to free up cash to help their offspring. A nice leg-up if you can get it. Good for them, but to everyone else it just sounds like a humblebrag about how you are struggling to cope with so many bedrooms. So maybe think twice before you go around raving about the simplicity of pocket-size living, especially if a young person you know and love has been in a converted garage for the past two years.