It had almost become a tradition. For the past decade, Facebook employees and tech journalists closely monitored Mark Zuckerberg’s Facebook profile at the start of January for signs of the CEO’s annual personal challenge. Zuckerberg’s goals have ranged from traditional new year’s resolutions like running, learning a new language or eating more vegetables to broader efforts veering on the political that fueled speculation he might one day run for office. This year, however, Zuckerberg took the long view, revealing a number of tech-related goals for the next decade. The tech executive said in a post on his personal Facebook profile on Thursday that he would seek to spearhead “new forms of governance”, develop “the next computing platform”, and build “a new private social platform”. Zuckerberg’s annual goals had become a key part of his public brand in recent years. In 2011, he made his challenge to only eat meat he killed himself. In 2015, he programmed his own personal robotic assistant. In 2017, however, after the election of Donald Trump, Zuckerberg embarked on an ambitious plan to meet everyday Americans across the country, posting photos along the way. Now he said he wants to think more long-term with his goals. “Rather than having year-to-year challenges, I’ve tried to think about what I hope the world and my life will look in 2030 so I can make sure I’m focusing on those things”, Zuckerberg said in his post. Zuckerberg touted a goal of a “new private social platform”, focusing on private interactions on networks to “help us reconstruct all kinds of smaller communities to give us that sense of intimacy again”. Facebook has increasingly emphasized that its goal is to “bring the world closer together”, focusing on private groups amid growing privacy concerns. In the post, he also looked forward to “the next computing platform” to take over the mobile phone, referencing the promise of augmented and virtual reality and their ability to enable “the feeling that you’re right there with another person or in another place”. “Instead of having devices that take us away from the people around us, the next platform will help us be more present with each other and will help the technology get out of the way,” Zuckerberg said in his prediction. Facebook has invested heavily in artificial intelligence in recent years. In a clear reference to Facebook’s ambitions for digital currency projects, Zuckerberg said he hoped to focus on “decentralizing opportunity” by 2030. He noted that small businesses and entrepreneurs use Facebook to reach customers and that Facebook seeks to “build the commerce and payments tools so that every small business has easy access to the same technology that previously only big companies have had”. Libra, Facebook’s cryptocurrency, was announced in 2019 and is slated to launch in 2020, but it has faced fierce backlash from Congress. Zuckerberg also said he planned to focus more on funding and giving a platform to young people through his Chan Zuckerberg Initiative. Zuckerberg claimed to want “new forms of governance” in the next decade, falling back on a criticism he has made frequently in the past year that technology companies should not be making so many decisions regarding technology. “Platforms like Facebook have to make tradeoffs on social values we all hold dear – like between free expression and safety, or between privacy and law enforcement, or between creating open systems and locking down data and access,” he said. “It’s rare that there’s ever a clear ‘right’ answer.”