Cooking with others has the reputation of being fun. Often it is not. Tempers, along with saucepans, boil over as your flatmate strays for the umpteenth time on to your side of the cramped workspace. Or as you question whether you can really spend the rest of your life with a partner who has such poor knife technique. Nevertheless, with both Valentine’s Day and pancake day approaching, not to mention the excess of dark winter nights that leave us needing cheering up with dinner parties, there is no getting away from group cooking. We asked some experts – and keen home cooks – how to make the best of it. Definitely not, says teacher Imy McNicholas. “I don’t find cooking in a group at all fun. It can be quite tense and passive aggressive as everyone has different ideas about how things are done.” She refuses to cook with her husband, aware that her “perfectionist attitude” spells disaster for romance. “I once had a full-blown row with an ex about caramelising onions, which led to me fleeing the house, incandescent with rage.” She is also locked in an ugly, longstanding argument with her best friend about the optimum cooking time for butternut squash. Nonetheless, there are plenty of superhumans who not only manage to cook with others without arguing but actually relish it. Itamar Srulovich runs the Honey & Co group of restaurants with his wife, Sarit Packer, which means he built a career through collaborating with his partner in the kitchen. “Cooking is about bringing people together, so why not start at the source?” he says. And Frankie Lewis, a manager in a data-science company who cooks with her fiance, points out that help can be particularly useful “if you are making a more complicated dish”. You can even make it into a game, says Luca Dusi of east London wine bar Passione Vino. He is originally from the north of Italy, while his wife hails from the south. Their favourite Italian cooking show ended each episode with a cook-off between dishes from their respective regions, and they mimicked the contest at home. “We basically cooked two different pastas for the same dinner just for the two of us. And we were giving each other notes and scores.” Just be ready to concede defeat if you take this path. “I must admit she won,” he says, a note of resentment in his voice. At best, cooking with others is efficient and companionable: a chance to simultaneously minimise your to-do list and squabble good-naturedly with your loved ones about the best Nina Simone song. (Yes, hers is the ultimate kitchen background music. There shall be no further debate here.) At worst, it is the road to realising you are the sort of person who cares about how others crush garlic. My boyfriend is regularly enraged by what he brands as my woeful inability to dice vegetables into perfectly even cubes, and what I call having a life. Meanwhile, Dusi is driven “nuts” by his wife’s meticulous approach to quantities. “When I open the fridge and I see, like, a fifth of an onion being carefully wrapped in clingfilm, I say: ‘What the hell is this?’ and she says, ‘Well, you know, I used enough for the recipe.’” Try to remember that working as a team means you can make up for one another’s weak points – along with maximising your skillset. After a “very competitive” joint attempt at making an Ottolenghi sponge for a street bake-off, teacher Avi Leigh Bader realised that blending her presentation skills with her husband’s command of flavours gave them an edge. (They came second.) If that is impossible, enlist company, says PR Rebecca Levy. She and her boyfriend have an open-plan kitchen and living space, “so we can’t bicker in front of our guests”. You can also try to look the other way, she adds. “My trick is not to watch what he’s doing. Then there will be less chance of me criticising the way he’s chopping a carrot.” Yes, but do it in a nice way, says Peter Beecham, a retired electrician. He has only got into making food in the past decade or so. Before that, his partner “had spent years cooking and getting no thanks for it”. Did she take revenge by pointing out his mistakes? “She’d never say: ‘You’ve made a complete pig’s ear of this.’ She’d just say: ‘Ooh, maybe you shouldn’t have cooked that quite so long; it would be better if you did it a bit less.’” However, McNicholas tries to bite her tongue before offering unsolicited advice, believing it is “intensely annoying and often rude”. Srulovich is of a similar mind: “The deal is this: if you criticise someone’s cooking or cooking habits, you may as well do it yourself. When this is your outlook, you find yourself a lot less critical.” Often, this happens naturally, says Beecham, who frequently acts as his partner’s dogsbody, “so when the meal is ready, there’s not thousands of dirty bowls all over the place. I’ve cleaned them all.” Seeing as he is retired and his partner is not, he reckons it is fair that he gets the less glamorous tasks: “That’s my job, in a way.” But what about when neither of you is willing to take a back seat? “We both try to be in control,” says Dusi; he and his wife have fallen out “many times” in the kitchen. McNicholas is also aware of the peril of combining two alpha cooks. “The worst cooking tiffs I’ve had, and I’ve had many, are probably with my dad. We have exactly the same nature when it comes to cooking: passionate and pedantic, which is an absolute recipe for disaster.” No matter how hard you find it, most people seem to agree that it is best to establish some sort of hierarchy – or at least to define who is doing which tasks. “Sadly, the kitchen is not a democracy. Someone needs to be in charge or all hell will break loose,” says Srulovich. “Have a clear understanding of what’s cooking, allocate the jobs well and make sure everyone knows what they are working towards.” If all else fails, solicitor Kate Ashworth has a handy rule of thumb: “You are head chef in your own kitchen, sous chef in anyone else’s kitchen.” Anything that benefits from a spare pair of hands. Ashworth suggests homemade pasta, while Srulovich points out: “Things that need constant stirring, like polenta, can become less painful when someone is there to tag-team you.” Lasagne is a popular suggestion. It is the cheat’s version of group cooking, says Dusi. People can work on the white sauce, ragu and pasta individually “and then at the end you can add the three things together and create this beautiful dish”. Frankie Lewis backs it for a different reason. “Grating the cheese is the best activity,” she says. “You get to shove handfuls of it into your mouth while the other person is focused on the bechamel.”