England have suffered a blow ahead of their Six Nations clash with France after Anthony Watson was ruled out with a calf problem. Watson would have started Sunday’s showdown in Paris on the wing or at full-back but will miss the opener because of the injury sustained before joining up with the squad for their Portugal training camp. The setback means either Ollie Thorley or George Furbank will make their debut as a starter with the other either on the bench or being dropped from the matchday 23 altogether. In other news Luke Cowan-Dickie, who returned to England for family reasons on Tuesday evening, will rejoin the squad in Paris on Friday with Jack Singleton standing down from his earlier call up. Meanwhile, uncapped pair Anthony Bouthier and Mohamed Haouas will start for France as Les Bleus hope for a renaissance under new coach Fabien Galthié. Full-back Bouthier will have to deal with England’s kicking game and prop Haouas will be tested by the pack of the World Cup runners-up in a much awaited ‘Crunch’ at the Stade de France. The starting XV has an average of less than 15 caps per player, although eight of them started the 2019 World Cup quarter-final game against Wales. Romain Ntamack will be at at fly-half fand he joins Antonie Dupont at half-back after edging Matthieu Jalibert for the role of conductor in chief. Openside Charles Ollivon captains the first team. France’s dangerman is expected to be outside centre Virimi Vakatawa, who has been in devastating form for Racing 92 this season. France have not won the Six Nations since 2010. 15-Anthony Bouthier, 14-Teddy Thomas, 13-Virimi Vakatawa, 12-Gael Fickou, 11-Damian Penaud, 10-Romain Ntamack, 9-Anthony Dupont, 8-Gregory Alldritt, 7-Charles Ollivon (captain), 6-Francois Cros, 5-Paul Willemse, 4-Bernard Le Roux, 3-Mohamed Haouas, 2-Julien Marchand, 1-Cyril Baille Replacements: 16-Peato Mauvaka, 17-Jefferson Poirot, 18-Demba Bamba, 19-Boris Palu, 20-Cameron Woki, 21-Baptiste Serin, 22-Matthieu Jalibert, 23-Vincent Rattez