The WildernessA former Obama speechwriter and co-host of podcast Pod Save America, Jon Favreau is the voice of reason when it comes to US politics. In his new podcast he asks what it will take to defeat Donald Trump in the next election. And he’s going to find answers by getting out and talking to strategists, voters and campaigners, rather than relying on a breezy “Twitter take”. Along the way, he investigates the Blue Wave and speaks to grassroots groups trying to change the way Pennsylvania votes. Hannah Verdier Money 101 Twenty-two-year-old podcast producer Bea Duncan hasn’t started paying her student loan back yet and is a self-confessed money novice. Who better, then, to helm this millennial-focused finance pod, which tackles everything from what to do if you’re a struggling student to an introduction to the world of investment, and how to avoid peer pressure. Not one for seasoned savers, this really is a 101 guide. But with parents, schools and universities often unable to offer advice, it is likely to aid those feeling adrift. Hannah J Davies Chosen by Max Sanderson New years are about new beginnings. Or, in my case, revisiting old beginnings. On Being with Krista Tippett is certainly one of those – a soul-searching staple in my audio diet since very early on. Listening to a recent episode with the “linguist of landscape” Robert MacFarlane, I’m reminded why. Format-wise, it’s nothing more than a simple interview with a bit of music here and there. But the real beauty of this podcast - which attempts to answer the simple question of what makes us human - is the interviewees they manage to get, from therapist Esther Perel and cellist Yo Yo Ma to philosopher Alain de Botton and anthropologist Helen Fisher. Not to mention the way in which journalist and podcaster Tippett manages to make these great minds open up. An evidently extensive research period leads to new takes on old ideas and often means the individual in the hot seat learns something new about themselves. And that Proustian revelation makes for damn good audio. Taylor Lorenz of the New York Times has written about the growing numbers of online groups for podcast fans, who are creating their own comments sections and even creating real-life communities. Incidentally, the NYT also has its own podcast community on Facebook. Why not try: Your Broccoli Weekly | Stephen Fry’s 7 Deadly Sins | Almost Famous