Sir David Attenborough will address members of the public who are taking part in the UK’s first climate assembly this weekend. The TV presenter and naturalist will appear in Birmingham, where the 110 members are meeting to address how to reduce emissions to zero by 2050, to thank them for taking part. “I am grateful to the 110 people from all corners of the United Kingdom who are giving up their weekends to take part in this very important discussion,” Attenborough said. “These people have been picked to represent our population as a whole, they come from all walks of life, and together they will deliberate carefully on behalf of us all. We should listen closely to their recommendations.” The climate assembly has been set up along the lines of the citizens’ assembly in France, instituted by the president, Emmanuel Macron. The assembly was selected to be a representative sample of the population after a mail-out to 30,000 people chosen at random. About 2,000 people responded saying they wanted to be considered for the assembly, and the 110 members were picked by computer. The UK climate assembly differs from the French model in that it was commissioned by six select committees, rather than by the prime minister. Its views, which will be produced in a report in the spring, will be considered by the select committees but there is no guarantee the government will take up any of the proposals. The assembly will meet for four weekends this spring. On the third weekend it will begin making decisions about ways to meet the net-zero target. Prominent business, faith and civil society leaders from across the UK have sent messages of support to the assembly. Prof Lord Krebs, a former member of the climate change committee, said: “Climate change is the defining issue of our time. Without action now, we will leave an uninhabitable planet for our children and their children. “The climate assembly will play a key role in helping to inform all who need to take action: individuals, businesses, local government and community groups and, crucially, central government.”