“So what do you know about Silo?” asks our server, crouching down by the table. She pauses like a school teacher waiting for me to fill in the gap. I say nothing, being not in the mood for a test. She changes tack: “Do you know about our concept?” “Yes,” I reply. “And how did you find out?” she asks. “From a magazine,” I say with my lips tight around my teeth. The real answer is that Silo has been so loud, righteous and holy in the run-up to its London opening that anyone with even a smattering of curiosity in the food scene is aware that it’s here. Chef Douglas McMaster and his disciples are, they say, “providing quality through purity” in Hackney Wick with a zero-waste restaurant that serves a six-course tasting menu. The details of dinner are beamed across an entire wall via projector, so saving on paper menus: blood radish cannelloni, charred red artichokes in blue cheese sauce, braised Friesian cow, squash, potato and pumpkin ice-cream … “We don’t do à la carte, so we can control what we need,” our server explains, and then proceeds to explain many other things on top, despite me having not asked any questions. Silo sits in a large, gorgeously lit loft with a large sit-up bar and about 10 tables, and is upstairs from Crate Brewery, where, for reference, you can get a decent pizza and a beer, and no one tells you anything at all. Up at Silo, meanwhile, loud hip-hop, jazz and spoken-word poetry plays over doubtlessly ethically sourced speakers. Almost everything else about the place, however, feels like a 1985 Tomorrow’s World segment on “How we’ll eat out in the future”, in which Judith Hann shows us Silo’s magnetic table made out of recycled plastic packaging with the cutlery hidden within, and its aerobic digester, which is capable of turning 60kg of organic waste into compost, overnight. Mind you, I don’t have a clue what she’d make of the very burnt artichokes and the non-intervention wines that do not taste remotely of wine, yet can still get you so drunk, they’d numb the grief after all your loved ones had been squashed by a killer asteroid. It’s commonplace in the restaurant world right now to be very, very ashamed of food waste, carbon footprints and, for that matter, the ethics of experiencing luxury at all. Silo suggests that, in the future, going out for dinner will be so little fun that eating corned beef in your bunker will be a lot more entertaining anyhow. Then again, Silo is the perfect place to hold a client lunch or to take people you don’t want to talk to, so you can all coo over distracting ideas such as Empirical Spirits’ drinks at £7 a glass, which are sort-of-cocktails but served as wine and made with a liquid that’s not based on any known spirit. I think the technical term for this kind of thing used to be “moonshine”. With every course, a server arrives, calls you “folks”, kneels down, proffers a tiny sliver of radish with a small fart of hemp cheese goo inside, before talking you through the lifespan of the radish and the seasonings and the puddle of glop in which it sits and all the minuscule stages of its cooking process, plus the flavour notes of which you need to be aware. If you’re in the mood for this kind of thing, you’ll love the place. Two charred artichokes – and by charred, I mean they resembled something you’d find in the remains of your house after a fire – sit in a Stichelton cheese sauce with a vividly red ruby kraut. They’ve been caramelised over fire before being plunged into coals to get that blackened exterior. The small amount of flesh inside is sweet and fudgy, but the skin is bitter and tastes, unsurprisingly, of fire. The small piece of braised Friesian bull is delivered with a soliloquy on its various life stages, its noble death, and the machine Doug owns that turns an unappetising cut into something edible. It’s a piece of meat extracted from between the ribs, and comes from a wing of the dairy industry that’s not usually consumed – enjoy the course. A tiny suggestion of pumpkin ice-cream is, however, delicious. There are chefs all over Britain, in rural pubs and tiny cafes, who are making a stiff effort to grow their own vegetables, source kindly, re-use and recycle, and who love the planet, but they’re doing so with a fraction of the fuss and po-facedness of Silo. I’ve seen the future of sustainable fine dining: I think many of us may well decide to stay at home. • Silo Unit 7, Queens Yard, London E9, 020-7993 8155. Open dinner, Tues-Sat, 6-10pm; brunch, Sat & Sun, 11am-3pm. Dinner £50 a head six-course tasting menu only; brunch from £7.50 a plate, both plus drinks and service. Food 3/10 Atmosphere 3/10 Service 3/10 • This article was edited on 17 January 2020. An earlier version listed the wrong London postcode in the headline.