Defi Du Seuil received what may be the ultimate compliment from Barry Geraghty who, unprompted, compared the horse to Moscow Flyer in the winner’s enclosure here. “Dazzling and breathtaking” was the jockey’s elated verdict after the pair kept their faultless season rolling with victory in the Clarence House Chase and Defi Du Seuil is now clear favourite for the Queen Mother Champion Chase. “I love riding him,” Geraghty said, pouring sincerity into an oft-used phrase with a lot of emphasis on the word “love”. “He’s not the biggest in the world but he has so much scope and just, he’s up for it. And that’s what you love with good two-mile chasers. Moscow Flyer wasn’t the biggest or the flashiest but he was up for it. And this lad is up for it.” A new generation of racing fans has come along since Moscow Flyer last won a race 15 years ago, so perhaps the significance of that reference is missed by some. Asked to name the best two-miler Geraghty has ridden, many would name Sprinter Sacre, but Moscow Flyer gave him his first Cheltenham Festival success, in the Arkle of 2002, and for years it seemed the popular Irish horse was unbeatable, so long as the fences didn’t get in the way. Defi Du Seuil is not there yet but he looks better with every race. There was just a neck in it at the line when Un De Sceaux rallied at him in the Tingle Creek last month but the margin this time was almost three lengths and the race was essentially over as a contest about two strides after the second-last, when Geraghty asked and his mount answered, shooting effortlessly into a clear lead. What is the form worth? One could fret about that, since Un De Sceaux is surely past his best at the age of 12 and the 143-rated Marracudja was just five lengths behind him. And Willie Mullins, trainer of the runner-up, evidently wanted to run the race again. “I was disappointed,” he said. “I thought the winner had improved hugely but I was disappointed in my fella. I don’t think we went fast enough.” Over in the winner’s enclosure, Philip Hobbs was naturally in another mood entirely, his eyes red-rimmed by the emotion of the moment. “I’m just surprised, very surprised, by how easy he did it,” said the Minehead trainer. “I couldn’t imagine he would go and beat Un De Sceaux as easily as he did. He’s won seven Grade Ones for us. No other horse we’ve had has ever done anything like that. And he’s only just turned seven.” There now remains the question of which race to shoot for at the Cheltenham Festival in March, bearing in mind that Defi Du Seuil won over two miles and five furlongs there last year. For that reason, he was expected to be a Ryanair horse this term but he has proved so electric over the minimum distance that he is now just 2-1 with most firms for the Champion Chase. Surely no owner diverts a Champion Chase favourite to another target and it is worth noting that JP McManus has yet to win the two-mile championship race. But Defi Du Seuil has not faced horses of the quality of Altior or Chacun Pour Soi this season and the Ryanair, against A Plus Tard and Min, would be easier. Meanwhile, Haydock’s Champion Hurdle Trial seems as unlikely as ever to live up to its name, Ballyandy having snatched victory in the very last stride from a paddling Pentland Hills. The winner is extremely game but you can get 33-1 about his chance in the big one at Cheltenham. For the second time this winter, Pentland Hills raced too freely and failed to get home. Perhaps the faster pace and better ground of a Champion Hurdle will show him to better advantage but he has a lot to prove now. Nicky Henderson, his trainer, professed himself “gutted”. Ayr 12.40 Zambezi Fix 1.15 Escaria Ten 1.50 Glinger Flame (nb) 2.25 Donna’s Delight 3.00 Aloomomo 3.30 Longtimesincejaspr  4.00 Sporty Yankee Wolverhampton 12.50 Nelson River (nap) 1.25 Mojambo 2.00 Prompting 2.35 Ahundrednotout 3.10 Boom The Groom 3.40 Murqaab 4.10 Henry Croft