There’s a desperation at Manchester United to return to the Fergie days and, in order to hasten the process, they’ve been linked with bringing back a 35-year-old Carlos Tevez from Boca Juniors. No news on the availability of David Bellion and Kleberson, mind. Some would say United need to get in new players whatever the cost. Ed Woodward, unfortunately for United fans, does not agree and will apparently not meet Sporting’s valuation of Bruno Fernandes. Matías Vecino will also not be arriving at Old Trafford after Internazionale batted away a loan offer for the midfielder. There is, however, no need to panic for United fans as they are said to have lined up the answer to their problems in the form of 19-year-old PSG midfielder Eric-Junior Dina Ebimbe, who is currently learning all about professional football on loan at Ligue 2 Le Havre. Chelsea’s search for a striker supposedly means they have reopened talks with Lyon about signing former Celtic frontman Moussa Dembélé as PSG’s Edinson Cavani looks a distant prospect. United are also keeping tabs on the Uruguayan who will almost certainly depart Paris this month. Due to Luis Suárez’s injury, Barcelona need a replacement and high on their list is Arsenal forward Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, who may well keen on a move to the Camp Nou. Another eyeing a flight from London to Spain is midfielder Dani Ceballos, who is said to be upset at not playing much football since arriving at Arsenal and is aiming to cut his loan deal short in order to find games elsewhere. Valencia could be one potential destination. Newcastle are getting quite exciting after securing a couple of new signings and are now focusing on acquiring Danny Rose from Spurs, who is has been looking for a way out in recent years. If the defender does depart, it would give José Mourinho a few more quid to throw at Real Sociedad in order to tempt them to sell striker Willian José, as Spurs have currently come up short in the bidding process. Things are going quite well for Liverpool at the moment, so it comes as no surprise that Jürgen Klopp has turned down Barcelona’s kind off to bring Philippe Coutinho back for a mere £91m. And Roy Hodgson is looking to China to freshen up the Crystal Palace ranks. The Eagles are in talks with Dalian Yifang over Belgian winger Yannick Carrasco.