West Ham’s attempts to sign Gedson Fernandes have stalled following the latest round of talks with Benfica over a loan deal for the Portuguese midfielder. David Moyes’s club, who reportedly face competition from his former employers Everton for the 20-year-old, want to sign Fernandes on an 18-month loan with a view to making the signing permanent. The Portugal international is expected to move this month after falling out of favour at Benfica. However, West Ham’s hopes of signing Fernandes, who can play in an advanced role in central midfield or on the right, are in doubt. While it was hoped the deal might move on Tuesday, it is understood negotiations with Benfica are yet to progress far. Sources close to the deal are sceptical about West Ham’s chances of completing the signing. Fernandes is highly rated and it is widely believed he has a good chance of ending up at a club with greater aspirations than West Ham. While he has family in London, he has been strongly linked with Lyon and Manchester United. West Ham are keen to strengthen their midfield as they look to preserve their Premier League status and their business in January would not be over if they do sign Fernandes, who is regarded as a long-term prospect rather than a player who can go straight into Moyes’s side. Moyes, who replaced Manuel Pellegrini as manager last week, has long been an admirer of Stoke City’s Joe Allen and there is interest in Genk’s Sander Berge. West Ham are also believed to have renewed their interest in Marseille’s Morgan Sanson. The club are yet to conclude the £4m signing of Darren Randolph from Middlesbrough. The goalkeeper is still negotiating personal terms before completing his return to east London. Moyes could target cover at right-back after Ryan Fredericks was ruled out for a month with a hamstring injury. Options include Liverpool’s Nathaniel Clyne, who needs a fresh start after an injury-hit spell, and Newcastle’s Javier Manquillo. There is a belief within West Ham that Joe Cole could return in a coaching role as Moyes looks to fill his backroom staff. However, it is understood that talk of a deal for Cole to return to his boyhood club being close is extremely premature.