Democrats prosecuting the case against Donald Trump warned on Tuesday that Republicans were attempting a “cover-up” of the president’s misdeeds by blocking testimony and rushing proceedings in the president’s Senate trial on two articles of impeachment. The trial opened with lawyers on both sides arguing over what the terms for proceedings should be. Adam Schiff, the lead House “manager” or prosecutor, urged senators to defy Trump’s wish for a speedy process. “The American people want a fair trial,” Schiff said. “But a great many Americans don’t believe that will happen. Let’s prove them wrong.” Trump’s defense team struck a combative posture, expressing outrage at what they said was unfair treatment of the president and accusing the House of an attack on democracy. “They’re not here to steal one election, they’re here to steal two elections,” said Pat Cipollone, the White House counsel. “They won’t tell you that, they don’t have the guts to say it directly. But that’s exactly what they’re here to do.” After debate over the rules for the trial, the sides were expected to present their cases starting on Wednesday afternoon and running into the weekend. A long shot two-thirds majority of senators present would be required to remove Trump from office. Chief Justice John Roberts gaveled the trial to order shortly after 1pm. “The Senate will convene as a court of impeachment,” Roberts said, proceeding to swear in one senator, James Inhofe of Oklahoma, who missed the group swearing-in last week. The chamber first faced the procedural hurdle of a vote on the rules, which became unexpectedly contentious after the majority leader, Mitch McConnell, advanced a resolution on Monday night that would have packed opening arguments into just two days and not automatically admitted evidence collected by the House. After the Democratic leader, Chuck Schumer, called the resolution a “national disgrace”, and moderate Republicans registered their complaints, the resolution was changed to allot an added day for arguments and to introduce House evidence by default. The White House declined to participate in the House impeachment proceedings, and Trump ordered aides not to comply. While agencies such as the state department and Office of Management and Budget defied subpoenas for documents, multiple Trump appointees appeared to testify despite the ban. But Republican aversion to using the power of the Senate to gather new evidence, including potentially crucial testimony, was affirmed in the first vote of the trial, in which a Democratic proposal to subpoena documents from the White House was defeated in a party-line vote. Republicans hold a 53-seat majority in the Senate. The opposing legal teams, seated in a cramped arrangement at tables stacked with paper at the base of the Senate rostrum, struck an immediate contrast in style and substance. While Trump’s team attacked their counterparts, the Democrats appealed to the 100 senators before them. Schiff presented video from last month of Trump saying he wanted multiple top advisers to testify. “The president has changed his tune,” Schiff said. “The bluster of wanting these witnesses to testify is over.” Pounding the lectern, Jay Sekulow, a personal lawyer for Trump and talk-radio host, blazed through a series of conservative talking points and conspiracy theories ranging in focus from special counsel Robert Mueller to former attorney general Eric Holder. “This isn’t a legal defense,” tweeted Kate Brannen, editorial director of the Just Security website. “It’s the equivalent of impeachment jazz hands.” After Cipollone delivered a terse statement declaring that “the president has done absolutely nothing wrong”, Schiff took the lectern to reprise his description of Trump’s alleged misconduct and to underscore the gravity of the moment. “You have all now sworn an oath,” Schiff told the senators. “To do impartial justice. That oath binds you. That oath supersedes all else. Nothing matters now but the oath to do impartial justices. And that oath requires a fair trial.” Trump is charged with abuse of power and obstruction of Congress, in connection with his attempts to pressure Ukraine to investigate his political rivals. In the hours before the trial began, Democrats escalated their criticism, lambasting what they called a “cover-up” and a “rigged process” designed to push key moments of the trial into the “dark of night”. McConnell’s proposal would push the critical question of whether to admit new witnesses and evidence until after House impeachment managers and Trump’s lawyers make their case and senators have an opportunity to submit questions. Schumer vowed to challenge the rules. McConnell has said he has the 51 votes needed to make his proposal binding. Democrats said they would compel the chamber to take a series of votes that could delay its passage until late on Tuesday evening. Schumer said he planned to offer amendments to fix the proposal’s “many flaws”. His first amendment would allow the Senate to subpoena the White House for documents related to charges against the president. “There is no guarantee Leader McConnell will allow these votes to take place later in the trial, so now before any resolution passes, we must do it,” he said at a press conference on Capitol Hill. If Democrats are to secure additional witnesses, they will need at least four Republicans to back them. A handful of moderates, including Susan Collins of Maine and Mitt Romney of Utah, have indicated that they could support an effort to call witnesses – but only on the timeline outlined in McConnell’s proposal. On Tuesday both indicated that they would vote against Schumer’s amendment. With the trial under way, Democrats continued to press Republicans to refuse McConnell’s terms and work with them to reach a bipartisan solution. “No jury would be asked to operate on McConnell’s absurdly compressed schedule,” said Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker. “It is obvious that no senator who votes for it is intending to truly weigh the damning evidence of the president’s attacks on our constitution.” In their legal brief submitted to the Senate on Sunday, the House managers outlined their case, alleging Trump corruptly sought foreign interference in the 2020 election by pressuring Ukraine to launch investigations into his political opponents while withholding nearly $400m in military aid and dangling a coveted White House meeting with Ukraine’s president, Volodymr Zelenskiy. Trump’s defense team dismissed both articles of impeachment but did not contest the basic facts of the case, arguing the articles were invalid because they do not allege Trump committed a specific crime, an interpretation of the powers of impeachment widely disputed by constitutional scholars.