The increasingly vexed question of whether trainers and other licence holders should enter commercial associations with betting firms seems likely to be the subject of discussions between trade bodies and the British Horseracing Authority over the days and weeks ahead, though perhaps not quite so imminently as seemed the case on Sunday morning. Rupert Arnold, the chief executive of the National Trainers Federation (NTF), seemed clear during an interview on Sky Sports Racing’s Sunday Debate programme that he expected the issue to be raised during one of the NTF’s “regular liaison meetings” with the BHA. “I am sure they [the BHA] will discuss it with us,” Arnold said, “because we have some arrangements we have come to over the last six months in the light of other things that happened last year where we have regular liaison meetings, so I’m looking forward to that discussion on Monday.” The story now, however, appears to have changed. “I regret if there was a misunderstanding about a meeting between me and the BHA today in relation to this subject,” said Arnold on Monday. “Josh Apiafi [a panellist on the programme] initiated the point by saying he had heard the BHA planned to announce changes. I was asked if I would be meeting the BHA about it and my response was intended to be a lighthearted reference to the fact that Josh appeared to know something I didn’t. “My reference to the regular liaison meetings between the NTF and the BHA was to explain why I would expect the BHA to discuss with the NTF any change of policy affecting trainers. There was no such liaison meeting planned for today.” Arnold also says the BHA has assured him “there is no plan to announce anything” with regard to the issue this week. Such deals between bookmakers and trainers or jockeys have been the subject of renewed attention following the events surrounding the eventual scratching of Nicky Henderson’s top chaser Altior from the Silviniaco Conti Chase at Kempton on Saturday, but have also attracted adverse comment in the past and seem likely to continue to do so in future. Commercial deals with betting firms can be highly lucrative, with racecourse rumour frequently suggesting some run to six figures. For instance, Henderson and Paul Nicholls, his perennial rival for the jumps trainers’ championship, give assessments of their runners’ prospects on big days to Unibet and Betfair respectively, while Ryan Moore, Aidan O’Brien’s stable jockey, also has a regular blog on Betfair during the Flat season. For the most part, their words are chosen carefully by ghost-writers, and do not encourage anyone to bet their house on (or against) one of their runners. The issue with the “schmozzle”, as Henderson put it, around Altior though, specifically concerns how a trainer in a commercial relationship with a bookmaker handles market-sensitive information. The BHA’s “Guidelines for Betting Organisations who have entered in a Commercial Arrangement with Jockeys and Trainers” seems fairly clear. “For ‘high-profile’ horses,” it says, “the appropriateness of market-sensitive information should be strongly considered before it is first made available to the public through media hosted by the betting operator (or its representatives).” A separate section headed “Perception” says that any betting firm hosting such a blog should “be mindful of perception at all times”. It goes on: “Whilst whatever content appears on media hosted by a betting operator or through a representative may be considered to be perfectly appropriate and within the Rules of Racing, do consider how it might be perceived by the betting public and other stakeholders.” And in a social media age when a tweet or meme can be around the globe in seconds, perception matters. A high-profile horse drifting from long odds-on to 5-2 while a stable companion goes headlong in the opposition direction is a terrible look, for all that the actual amount of money laid was probably minimal, bookies “refunded” what little, if anything, they had taken for Altior, and Top Notch, as it turned out, did not even make the frame. Whenever the issue is finally addressed, what needs to be juggled in any discussions between the NTF and BHA is whether the undoubted financial gain to a relatively small number of trainers and jockeys – and a less measurable benefit to the customers of certain bookies – is worth the potential damage if the punters as a whole get hold of the idea that they are being taken for a ride. When it finally arrives, it could be quite a debate. The meeting at Punchestown has been called off with the anticipated approach of Storm Brendan from the Atlantic, as its gale force winds are expected to be at their peak in County Kildare come the afternoon, but Lingfield’s card is no longer under threat and the Surrey track will stage the only jumping in Britain or Ireland. Mole Trap (2.40) could be the value bet there, having returned from 19 months on the sidelines with a gritty win at Hereford in December, while at Southwell National Anthem (12.55) is another runner with a similar profile – long absence, impressive winning return – who catches the eye. Suitcase ‘N’ Taxi (2.30) can register a fifth win of the winter over track and trip on the same card, while Kaser (6.20) is the standout bet at Wolverhampton later. Southwell 12.25 Le Manege Enchante 12.55 National Anthem (nb) 1.25 Navajo Dawn 1.55 Luck Of Clover 2.30 Suitcase ‘N’ Taxi 3.00 Break The Silence 3.35 Le Musee Lingfield 12.35 Young Lieutenant 1.05 Flaminger 1.35 Crossley Tender 2.05 Mickey Buckman 2.40 Mole Trap 3.10 High Up In The Air 3.45 Ninth Wave Wolverhampton 4.20 Dame Rapide 4.50 Fuente 5.20 Ken’s Sam’s 5.50 Raymond Tusk 6.20 Kaser (nap) 6.50 Never Alone 7.20 Beau Geste