Forget Brexit for a moment, Friday night marks the end of “dry January”. You’ll hear the clink of drinks far and wide as it’s a time for celebration for those who made it through. According to recent figures, around four-fifths of adults in England drink, and 31% of all men and 16% of all women consume more than the recommended limit of 14 units in a usual week. Campaigns such as dry January, run by the charity Alcohol Concern, have become increasingly popular. As someone who is attempting dry January for the first time, I’m counting down the hours myself. When midnight strikes I may no longer be an EU citizen but at least I’ll be able to enjoy a hearty Belgian beer. We asked Guardian readers how they have got on with their attempts at Dry January in 2020. Let us know how you fared in the comments. Oh have I missed the taste of rosé! But it’s kind of inspired me to do dry February, but maybe try something different – like give up meat for a month, or sex (god forbid). It was depressing but I also found it interesting because I learned a few things about myself, like patience and discipline. I never realised how bad alcohol is on your skin, but since I’ve cut it out I’ve got the skin of a newborn again. By having no alcohol this month I have managed to lose 8lb of weight. This hasn’t been solely down to not drinking alcohol, although it has been one of the main reasons. I saw it as a chance to reset my lifestyle a bit and get into better habits. I’ll be having a few (hundred) beers on Saturday though. I quite like experimenting with fads and seeing if they make me feel different, plus I had decided to do Veganuary as well so thought I might as well go the whole way and see if it made me into Gwyneth Paltrow. I’ve noticed that drunk people really don’t like it when you’re not drinking – I’ve had loads of people shoving beers in my face trying to force me to break dry January. It’s made me notice how embedded drinking is in social situations. Also, I’ve discovered tonic and bitters, yum. My housemate was also keen to try, so I had some solidarity there. Then late on New Year’s Day my housemate and I discovered a half-drunk bottle of prosecco in the fridge and didn’t want to waste it … so we lasted maybe 15 hours. To be honest I haven’t had more than one or two days of drinking this month, so the spirit of dry January has remained. A big benefit was being horrendously smug and holier than thou, preaching the benefits of living a clean and healthy lifestyle (while secretly consuming my weight in chocolate behind closed doors). Unfortunately I haven’t ended up saving much money. The money I would’ve spent on booze I just spent elsewhere, eg on treats to congratulate myself for doing so well with dry January. One of the benefits of dry January is feeling a lot fitter. I’ve signed up to a half-marathon, I’ve been going to the gym, I’ve been training. I’ve actually been involved in a lot more creative projects. I wanted a break and I wanted a fresh start to the new year and new decade. I felt that I’ve concentrated more on the people that I’m with, the conversation, where we are, what we’re doing, as opposed to what we’re drinking and who’s getting the next drink. My friend and I had a £20 bet on who would drink first in January. I lost. I gave up after 16 days. It was extremely difficult. Not drinking changes not only your bank account but it also changes your social atmosphere. Going out to a bar with friends and ordering a ginger beer/Diet Coke and sparkling water doesn’t quite cut it for me. I’m really looking forward to a pint of Guinness in my favourite pub. I feel I have much more energy and, as someone who suffers with mental health issues including anxiety, alcohol doesn’t help, so I’ve been feeling much more positive and settled in myself. My main takeaway is that it’s OK not to be out every weekend socialising. It’s OK to sit in with the feeling like you’re missing out on all the fun, because it’s quite important to have some quiet downtime. I’ve got a very big family on both sides and seeing them socially is a big part of how we spend time together. Every year it’s a split between me proving that I can do it and giving my liver a rest after over-indulging over Christmas. The benefits have been money, sleep and energy. You don’t realise how cheap a meal at a restaurant is until you don’t drink at one. I think by 1 January my body was crying out for a detox. I’m sure everyone says this, it’s been said a million times before, but I really do feel happiest and healthiest when everything is balanced – food, alcohol, social life and exercise. But when the clock strikes midnight tonight I’ll be treating myself to a bev. I’m very much looking forward to this 1 February. I will probably peak too soon and be in bed by nine o’clock. I think the main thing I’ll take away from this experience is that I think a little bit too much about alcohol, and more than I thought I did, and actually I don’t really need it. I think we all get our wants and our needs a little bit mixed up at times. Have you done dry January? How have you got on? Let us know in the comments.