David Tennant gets to fully flex his acting chops in this slow-burning thriller from Grantchester writer Daisy Coulam. Tennant plays Scottish GP Tom, who is placed at the centre of a murder investigation after his house burns down and his wife and young daughters are found dead – although, it soon becomes apparent, not as a result of the fire. His fellow villagers of Kirkdarroch soon start to close in on him, and Coulam’s script tests whether we should trust mob mentality or an individual’s own reasoning and responses. Ammar Kalia Robson Green and Tom Brittney return as the likable cop-and-vicar double act Geordie and Will. Unsurprisingly, Grantchester is still a dangerous place and when a student is found dead after a ball, the pair look into it. Smart investigative journalist Ellie Harding (Lauren Carse) is on the case too, so they’d better hurry up. Hannah Verdier Meet Gary (Tom Davis), Homeric hero of the London suburbs in this irresistible family sitcom. He’s a devoted husband to Terri (the riotously funny Laura Checkley), a disappointment to his dad and definitely still up for “a larf” with the building-site lads. So that’s Homeric in the Simpsons sense too, then. Ellen E Jones The Big Yin chats to BBC arts editor Will Gompertz in this special, filmed in Glasgow’s King’s Theatre where he first began performing. Connolly covers everything from his Parkinson’s diagnosis to his passion for folk music and Hollywood stardom with his signature vim. AK An uplifting documentary from environmentalist Chris Packham on his teen years as a punk, asking just how anti-establishment he can now consider himself after being awarded a CBE. Packham takes solace in the likes of Idles frontman Joe Talbot, discovering how punk lives on. AK Karl Pilkington’s alter ego falls into existential despair when Aunt Norma replaces him with a young, go-getting care worker called Ruby. Can a biscuit binge help? Or a change of direction into the world of chauffeuring? It might bring him enough money to move out of Norma’s flat for good. Ali Catterall Baby Driver, 9pm, Sony Movies Ansel Elgort is Baby, a getaway driver of such consummate skill he makes that Ryan Gosling character in Drive look like he needs L-plates. Plugged into a glorious pop soundtrack on his antique iPod, Baby provides breathtaking escapes for a heist gang managed by Kevin Spacey’s Doc – until it all goes wrong. Paul Howlett Nordic Combined skiing 12.40pm, Eurosport 2. The World Cup meeting from Val di Fiemme, Italy. Champions Cup rugby: Bath v Harlequins 7pm, BT Sport 2. From the Recreation Ground. Premier League football: Sheffield United v West Ham United 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Head-to-head at Bramall Lane.