Serena Williams raced into the final of the ASB Classic in Auckland after securing a straight-sets victory over teenager Amanda Anisimova. Williams converted all five of her break points at the New Zealand tournament to record a 6-1, 6-1 win over the 18-year-old American in just 43 minutes. The 23-time grand slam winner will meet compatriot Jessica Pegula in Sunday’s final after the American overcame Caroline Wozniacki in their last-four clash. Pegula fought from a set down to upset the number five seed and secure a 3-6 6-4 6-0 win. Madison Keys also came from a set behind to seal her place in the final of the Brisbane International. The No 8 seed knocked out former champion Petra Kvitova in Australia with a 3-6 6-2 6-3 semi-final victory. Keys will face Karolina Pliskova for the title after the number two seed came through a marathon last-four clash with Naomi Osaka. Pliskova saved a match point to take a 6-7 (10) 7-6 (3) 6-2 win in two hours and 48 minutes at the Pat Rafter Arena. At the Shenzhen Open, Ekaterina Alexandrova became the first WTA Tour champion of the new decade after she saw off Elena Rybakina. The No 5 seed took a convincing 6-2 6-4 victory to wrap up her first WTA title and extend her winning streak to 10 matches. Meanwhile, the US Open champion Bianca Andreescu has pulled out of the Australian Open due to a knee injury. The 19-year-old beat Serena Williams at Flushing Meadows in September to lift her first grand slam title. But she will not be in Melbourne for the opening grand slam of 2020 due to a problem she suffered during last year’s WTA Finals. She wrote on Twitter: “Hey guys, just wanted to give you a little update on my knee rehab after I got injured at the WTA finals in Shenzhen. My rehab is going well, I feel better and stronger every day but after discussing it with my team and following the recommendation of the doctors, the Australian Open is unfortunately too soon in my rehab process and I sadly will not be able to play in it this year. “It was a very tough decision to make as I love to play in Melbourne but I have to respect the recuperation plan for my knee and body.” Madison Keys also came from a set behind to seal her place in the final of the Brisbane International. The No 8 seed knocked out former champion Petra Kvitova in Australia with a 3-6 6-2 6-3 semi-final victory. Keys will face Karolina Pliskova for the title after the number two seed came through a marathon last-four clash with Naomi Osaka. Pliskova saved a match point to take a 6-7 (10) 7-6 (3) 6-2 win in two hours and 48 minutes at the Pat Rafter Arena. At the Shenzhen Open, Ekaterina Alexandrova became the first WTA Tour champion of the new decade after she saw off Elena Rybakina. The No 5 seed took a convincing 6-2 6-4 victory to wrap up her first WTA title and extend her winning streak to 10 matches.