A white romance novelist’s ethics complaint against the author Courtney Milan for calling her book a “racist mess” led to the censure of Milan and sparked an uproar across the publishing world. Now the novelist, Kathryn Lynn Davis, says that her original complaint about the professional harm she suffered was not accurate. In an interview with the Guardian, Davis said she was “encouraged” by the administration of Romance Writers of America (RWA), a trade association for romance writers, to file a formal complaint against Milan, an influential former board member and diversity advocate. She now feels she had been “used” to secure a political outcome that she had never intended. “They encouraged us. They wanted us very badly to file these complaints,” Davis said. The ongoing controversy has its roots in a Twitter conversation in August 2019. Milan, a New York Times bestselling author, has for years been a prominent commenter on barriers authors of color face within romance publishing and racist tropes within popular fiction. She wrote a series of tweets commenting on a sample of Davis’ 1999 historical romance novel, Somewhere Lies the Moon. The book’s heroine, like Milan, is half-Chinese, and Milan deemed the novel “a fucking racist mess”. Davis and Suzan Tisdale, another romance author and publisher who has worked with Davis, responded by filing official complaints to the RWA’s ethics committee, alleging that Milan’s tweets about racism were “cyberbullying”, and that she had caused them to lose professional opportunities. “These attacks on me have resulted in my losing a three-book contract with a publisher whom I cannot name because they fear having their own name linked with Ms Milan’s,” Davis wrote in her original complaint. At another point in her complaint, Davis referred to the lost contract as “a three-book contract that had been promised to me”. The group’s board responded by approving a harsh punishment, announcing a few days before Christmas that it would suspend Milan from the organization for a year, and permanently bar her from any leadership positions. RWA quickly revoked the punishment amid a massive backlash that saw most of the group’s board of directors step down. The allegation that Milan’s tweets had resulted in Davis’ loss of a three-book contract was shared widely, including in an email sent Monday to the RWA’s entire membership, explaining why the group’s board had originally decided to censure Milan. On Thursday, Davis, 64, clarified her discussions with the publisher, which she has declined to name. She told the Guardian that after the allegations in her original complaint to RWA were quoted in news reports, “the publisher in question is very upset”. Davis clarified that she did not have and lose a written book contract, but that a publisher had delayed further discussion of a potential contract in the wake of the controversy. In the complaint, Davis also seemed to imply that the publisher told her they were afraid of being publicly linked with Milan, but in fact the publisher “never said anything” to that effect, Davis said. Two or three days after Milan tweeted about her book, Davis said, an editor at the publishing house in question advised her that the situation would probably get worse. “I was told to apologize to Courtney [Milan] and to remove myself from the controversy, and in that way to save both my reputation and that of anyone connected to me. “I didn’t understand what I would be apologizing for unless it were for my 24-year-old book,” she said. “I did not agree with what [Milan] was saying and to apologize for something I did not agree with didn’t make sense to me.” I did not agree with what [Milan] was saying and to apologize for something I did not agree with didn’t make sense to me The editor was “not happy” with this response, Davis said, but the end of the call was not angry. In a subsequent conversation with the same editor about a week later, “it was offhandedly mentioned that discussion of the [new book] contract would have to wait until spring”, Davis said. The editor did not explicitly state there was any link between Milan’s tweets and the delay in the discussion of the contract, Davis said. Asked for comment about Davis’ new description of what had happened to her, Milan said: “I wish Kathryn Lynn Davis had taken the editor’s advice to apologize from the start. Period.” Davis now says that she never wanted Milan to be punished by the RWA. She declined to say who precisely within RWA had encouraged her to file a complaint against Milan, but said it was “the administration at RWA” and that it was “not the membership” and “not the members of the board”. “I do feel that the Romance Writers of America perhaps used Suzan Tisdale and I to accomplish something they wanted to accomplish and I was stunned when I saw the penalties. I didn’t ever expect that, and I did not want that,” Davis said. “We were used in order to make the eventual penalties happen,” she said. An RWA spokesperson said: “Ms Davis was advised on the complaint filing process by RWA staff when she requested clarification on filing procedures.” According to the organization’s internal policies, staff referred Davis’ 13-page official complaint to the Ethics panel “without editing or commentary”, spokesperson Jessie Edwards said. The attempt to punish Milan for her tweets has continued to prompt fallout for the writers’ group. On Friday, a New York literary agency announced it was severing its ties with RWA, and asking for a refund of its membership dues, writing that “a national organization should strive to support its members equally”. Many current members, including Milan, are publicly calling for a full audit of what happened within the organization, as well as the resignation of the group’s current president, Damon Suede. Meanwhile, Davis said she had decided to make some changes to the novel Milan had criticized, Somewhere Lies the Moon, and that she has republished edited ebook versions. “Some people have contacted me and have told me calmly what it was that offended them, and it was very few things, and I have corrected those things,” she said.