Much time and energy is now spent trying to court the attention of Generation Z – the “tech-innate” younger siblings of millennials. Who could have guessed that among TikTok and Juuling one would find an Australian sitcom that first aired in 2002? And yet Kath & Kim is having an undeniable moment among a generation who weren’t even born when the first episode debuted. It began in July, when all four seasons landed on Australian Netflix. In the following months, dozens of Instagram fan accounts cropped up; an iconic scene from the series – in which Kim is fired from her call centre job – became a brief TikTok sensation, and an Uber Eats ad campaign (a spoof featuring Kim Kardashian as the titular Kim, for which Kardashian was reportedly paid $2 m) went viral. So why does Kath & Kim continue to tantalise us, nearly two decades on? The simplest answer is that – even with its ill-fated American spin-off, and a lukewarm reaction to the 2012 film adaptation – the series remains one of our country’s finest comedic exports. And unlike the increasingly un-woke outputs of their contemporary Chris Lilley, Gina Riley and Jane Turner’s loving send-up of a family of Melbourne bogans has stood the test of time fairly unscathed. #kathandkim #nocontextkathandkim A post shared by  no context kath & kim (@nocontextkathandkim) on Sep 10, 2019 at 11:29pm PDT “The show was able to perfectly capture middle Australia at the turn of the millennium, so there’s a great sense of nostalgia,” says Luke, the founder of No Context Kath And Kim: a pair of Instagram and Facebook meme accounts with a combined 90,000 followers. Born in 1998, Luke – who didn’t want to give us his last name – was only four when the Kath & Kim was released. He launched the accounts in July, after bingeing all four seasons on Netflix. “It’s a period that my generation doesn’t vividly remember. It’s as if by watching the show we can familiarise ourselves with that era.” Much of this newfound appreciation for Kath & Kim is a celebration of the series’ so-bad-it’s-good attire. The show acts as a time capsule for a fashion moment most of us would rather forget: the era of Juicy Couture velour tracksuits, Ugg boots and Von Dutch trucker hats. The series aired at a time when Paris Hilton, Lindsay Lohan and Jessica Simpson were pioneering a style which stood in stark contrast to the grunge-centric minimalism of the 1990s. It was as if the millennium turned, and suddenly flaunting one’s wealth (and skin) became all the rage again – logo-mania was back, midriffs and cleavages were on display and Britney Spears was wearing “I AM THE AMERICAN DREAM” T-shirts. In her role as Kim, co-creator Gina Riley had her fair share of shiver-inducing fashion moments. “When Jane and I wrote the show, we were told, ‘Never say where you are or what era you’re in’,” she says. “And we just said, ‘Nup, we’re going to do the opposite’. We wanted to say where we were, and to dress in a way that exactly reflected that time. We wanted to be specific, not generic. And I think that somehow being so specific to that time has actually [made it] a bit timeless.” The style in Kath & Kim went beyond simple accessorising – the clothes were often the punchlines themselves. Kath’s Little Bo Peep wedding gown (“That could be theme of the wedding: mutton dressed as lamb!”); Kim’s crotch-skimming mini skirts (“Kim, you look like a bit of a fashion victim.” “Thanks Sharon, I do try.”); Kath’s split trousers (“Oh no, I just bought these lovely latte capris!”). “The costumes are, absolutely, another character in the show,” Riley says. “From the get-go we had very specific ideas about what the characters would be wearing. Kim especially had to be wearing everything off-the-rack, and completely embody what was happening at that moment. I mean, it was a gift that a low-rise bumster was around then, because you couldn’t make that up could you?” Kitty Stuckey, the series’ inimitable costume designer, was essential to bringing Riley and Turner’s characters – first devised in the 1994 sketch show Big Girl’s Blouse – to life. “Some costume gags – like Kath wearing thin white tights with a big black G string underneath – were written into the script,” she says. “But most of the other stuff was just a matter of, ‘Go out and find something funny’. What a gift as a costume designer.” Ahead of the first season, Riley, Turner and Stuckey conducted outfit research expeditions in Melbourne’s suburban shopping outlets. Everything Kim wore in the series was bought in these malls, from stores like Supre, Deborah K and Dolly Girl. “I remember we did buy a few things at a store called Gasp. I just loved that name because that’s exactly what the clothes made you do,” Stuckey laughs. Kath’s gumnut baby earrings, parrot jumpers and the like were often pillaged from thrift stores. “I liked the idea that Kath is somebody who keeps things,” Stuckey says. “If she reads in a magazine that says green is in fashion, she’ll pull out something green she bought in 1987 and wear that.” “Kitty would find the most brilliant knit or hilarious jumper,” Riley remembers. “And when she bought them in to Jane and I, we would end up in tears on the floor, laughing our heads off. It was absolute genius.” Kath Day Knight and Kim Day Craig may seem unlikely style icons for the new decade, but the nature of fashion dictates that whatever goes out of style must come back in again. In 2019, low-rise jeans, heeled thongs, visible G-strings and pedal pushers were all given the high-fashion treatment – and the 2020s may herald a full-circle moment for the worst of noughties style. So the question remains: are the inimitable ladies from Fountain Lakes aware of their clout – sartorial or otherwise – with the next generation? “I’m not on social media myself, but I have a daughter who is, so yes, I’m pretty aware,” Riley says. “Jane and I are so happy that the show resonates with the younger generation. It’s an amazing thing. So yes, I do feel the renaissance – and it feels good.”