In an upmarket London hotel lobby, Tom Davis is singing a number from The Little Mermaid. “I want to be where the people are. I want to see, want to see them dancing!” the comedian croons, curious guests looking up from expensive cappuccinos. He chuckles, reclines into a taupe sofa and reminisces. “I used to sing that when I was a drag act. It was a bit like Billy Elliot: working on a building site during the week, tight-fitting sequin dress and Disney songs at weekends.” As journeys to becoming the star of a primetime BBC One sitcom go, Davis’s is pretty unusual. King Gary, a new six-part comedy about a family striving for social acceptance, is very much rooted in the tradition of mass-appeal humour – centred on family life, trauma-free and with a distinct lack of effing and jeffing. And Davis’s warm, down-to-earth charm makes him entirely believable as the lead in the kind of sitcom that unites parents and kids on the sofa. His first foray into comedy, however, didn’t exactly scream “mainstream crowd pleaser”. It was watching Micky Flanagan doing a set of observational gags about working-class life at Bethnal Green’s Backyard Comedy Club that initially inspired Davis to step up on to the stage. He decided to try out standup, attempting some Flanagan-esque material as an escape from the monotony of life on building sites in his native Sutton. But it wasn’t long until he moved into more surreal territory, dragging up for sets that were part standup, part Disney singalong. “I was really conscious of walking onstage as a giant and a skinhead,” the 6ft 7in comic laughs, recalling his cross-dressing routine, which was initially intended to undermine his looming, masculine presence, but soon sparked a passion for character comedy. A video of sketches he recorded with his childhood friend James De Frond sufficiently impressed comedian Leigh “Bo Selecta” Francis – with whom De Frond was now working – to earn Davis a role as a goofy, grinning John Landis in the 2009 E4 spoof Michael Jackson “tribute” Cha’mone MoFo Selecta! Within a few years, he and De Frond had their own Bafta-winning BBC comedy detective series, Murder in Successville. Each week, the part-improvised show cast a different celebrity guest star as a trainee policeman who had to solve a murder plot, guided by Davis as Detective Inspector Sleet. Its setting – Successville – was a fictional town where all the local dignitaries were comic actors pretending to be famous people. Think “Adele” as the local nurse (played by Game of Thrones’s Gemma Whelan), “Len Goodman” as a politician (portrayed by Paul Whitehouse) or “Tess Daly” as drug addict (as interpreted by Rachel Parris). Guest stars such as Deborah Meaden, Lorraine Kelly and Made in Chelsea’s Jamie Laing took part never having seen a script, so when cameras started rolling, the crew genuinely had no idea what might happen next, including the possibility that the guest star might not enjoy it. (“We’re friends now, but Deborah Meaden genuinely hated it,” Davis recalls.) Core to its brilliance were Davis’s improvised and surreal comments – “I’m a crime robot who turns into a crime lorry. I am Optimus Crime!” – that often sent the cast into hysterics. “Looking back, it was such a weird show to make. We went from thinking: ‘This is crazy, we’ll never be able to pull it off’ to winning a Bafta,” smiles Davis. “The BBC took such a risk with it. And then once it was over, they went: ‘Do you want to do a sitcom now?’” Hence King Gary, Davis and De Frond’s first BBC show where they are not making it up as they go along. It isn’t the first fully scripted TV show they have created – that honour belongs to the follow-up to Successville, the overlooked spoof ITV spy series Action Team, which saw Davis lose 4st in weight training to do all his own stunts with Sylvester Stallone’s stuntman. “He was nuts,” smiles Davis. “He just kept telling me I wasn’t as cool as Sly.” It is, however, the first time he has attempted to create something that fits into a classic comedy mould – a family-friendly sitcom. Davis plays Gary King, a hapless family man who has taken over his dad’s building firm. It’s a story about everyday life in the outer London suburbs. Plots involve building-site pranks, the strain of managing a local kids’ football team and attempts at sophisticated soirees that descend into a drunken dancefloor soundtracked by early-00s chart garage. There are plenty of knowing references to the mores of that life – “It’s coming home” tattoos, holidays on the English Riviera – and it’s all done with the warmth that you’d expect given that it’s based on the world Davis grew up in. “The working class – they’re some of the greatest people in this country,” he says. “It’s important to show them positively on TV, because a lot of them feel they’re not being spoken for.” While it’s that kind of erasure from mainstream discourse that some claim led to 2016’s Brexit outcome, political tensions do not feature in King Gary. Instead, the plan is to offer “the escapism that lets people switch off for half an hour as we’re living in a pretty scary world right now”. Not that this has stopped some viewers from reading their own Brexit-based agenda into it. “When the pilot came out, some guy was tweeting that it was propaganda,” sighs Davis. “He just assumed that Gary was a Brexiteer. There are a lot of generalisations made about who people are, based on Brexit, and it’s so off.” The show also features a stellar support cast including Romesh Ranganathan and The Fast Show’s Simon Day, comic actors selected because of their upbringing in similar places to where King Gary is set, even if it is a generic depiction of the outer London boroughs. Effort was also made to avoid one-dimensional female roles, with Gary’s wife Terri (Laura Checkley) having as many goofy plotlines as her foil. “That’s my pet hate,” sighs Davis. “In recent years you see too many wives with wacky husbands that are just there to go: ‘Oh god, you’re so embarrassing!’” Dubiously written characters also saw Davis spend his early career turning down parts. “I remember going to an audition where they were like: ‘He’s a bit rude, a bit obnoxious, like builders are,’” he offers. “And I just thought: ‘Well, I was a builder. A lot of my family and my close friends are builders.’ I find that a pretty shitty generalisation.” As a result, he has had an eclectic selection of roles that have seen him branch out from just comedy. He starred as a prisoner in Paddington 2, even if the crew didn’t offer him star treatment. “When shooting would finish, me and [co-star] Jamie [Demetriou] would try to head backstage with Hugh Grant and the team would be like: “No! Extras this way!” he laughs. And after Shane Meadows became a fan of Successville, Davis ended up playing a barman in a raucous pub scene in the director’s gritty Channel 4 drama The Virtues. “We were in a real pub in Sheffield full of drunk locals and Shane said: ‘I’m just going to tell people that you’re a new barman,’” he chuckles. “At one point, I had to say to a guy: ‘That’s enough, mate’ and someone else goes: ‘Be careful of him. He’s just been to prison for stabbing his missus.’” King Gary is the first part Davis has written where he plays a relatively straight lead character who actually looks like him (“Although I did beg James to give me a wig,” he smiles). Does that feel weird? “Yeah, even playing DI Sleet in Successville, I thought: ‘You’ll never be the main man. You’ll always be the goofy big friend who farts and is awful with women.’ So to be the centre point of a BBC One sitcom is pretty incredible.” Surely he must be used to being well known by now, though? “You’d be surprised. The main reason I get stopped in the street has nothing to do with my comedy. It’s because people want a photo with someone so big.” When King Gary airs, that is likely to change – and hopefully it will let him use some underutilised skills from earlier in his career. “It would have been nice to get a call about playing Ariel in The Little Mermaid remake,” he sighs. “Or the Beast from Beauty and the Beast. One day, maybe I’ll do Disney.” Fingers crossed. It’s hardly a tall order. King Gary starts Friday 10 January, 9.30pm, BBC One