The final book by renowned chef, travel writer and television host Anthony Bourdain will be published in October, more than two years after he killed himself. World Travel: An Irreverent Guide, an illustrated collection of Bourdain’s reflections on his favourite places to visit and dine around the world, has been finished by his longtime assistant Laurie Woolever and will be published on 13 October. Alongside Bourdain’s tips on “what to eat … and, in some cases, what to avoid”, the book will also contain writing by members of his family and friends. Woolever, who worked with Bourdain for close to a decade and co-wrote Appetites with him, has already written about the emotional experience of working on the new book. “It’s been a wrenching, lurching struggle to get back to that manuscript, as I grieve the enormous loss of his kind, profane, surprising and brilliant existence,” she wrote for CNN in 2018. Announcing the book, Woolever said: “It’s been my honour and pleasure to create a book that includes stories from his loved ones and colleagues. I was lucky to work closely with Tony, and I’m so pleased to be able to share his reflections and insights about the world as he saw it in this guide.” After training at The Culinary Institute of America, Bourdain shot to fame in 2000 with his behind-the-scenes exposé of high-pressure restaurant culture, Kitchen Confidential: Adventures in the Culinary Underbelly. He later became a television host, travelling the world to make several award-winning documentary series about food and travel, including A Cook’s Tour and No Reservations. He killed himself in June 2018 while filming an episode of Anthony Bourdain: Parts Unknown in France. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.