Campaigners for the rights of British nationals in Spain have reported a rise in the number of inquiries from people rushing through plans to establish residency in the country before the Brexit “drawbridge goes up”. Sue Wilson, the founder of campaign group Bremain in Spain, says now that Brexit is “concrete and is happening” they are seeing evidence of Britons “expediting their plans” for retirement or a career move to Spain. Under the withdrawal agreement British nationals can settle in another EU member state right up to 31 December and claim lifetime rights as EU citizens. “We have people inquiring what the rules are and we are saying to people that as long as they move before 31 December they will have the same rights as those of us who are already here. It is in the withdrawal agreement,” says Wilson. “Even if you haven’t reached pension age and you have paid in for enough years to make you eligible you will have the right to an uprated pension for life under the withdrawal agreement.” Not all rights are guaranteed and the campaign group British in Europe has urged Brussels and London to secure those that have yet to be negotiated, which include freedom of movement and the right to return to the UK with an EU family member after Brexit. But the rights to study, work and retire remain for those moving before 2021. We spoke to some who have already taken the plunge. Property executive “I did a spreadsheet at 4am in the morning and concluded that we could probably go now and that’s exactly what we did,” he says. Andy and his wife sold their house and upped sticks from Manchester to Spain in October. “We had always planned to retire out here, then Brexit put that into stark relief. The way that had been implemented put the fear of God into us, really, in terms of getting out here,” says Andy. “I had the vague idea of retiring somewhere between 55 and 60. We have a strict budget and I’ll have to work but we’re glad we did it. We didn’t like the rhetoric and the type of deal people like Dominic Raab was talking about didn’t seem to stack up. There was nobody to talk to – you couldn’t ring the government and ask: ‘Is this the position? Is this cast in stone? Can we trust you?’ “We are not economic migrants. We considered Australia many years ago but in terms of employment it’s more complicated. The freedom of movement is key. You can cross a border into France, Spain without even noticing and you have the ability to work with no questions asked. That’s why we chose to become residents here. “Emotionally it’s quite difficult. The biggest step has been leaving all the friends and family and you want them here with you. Three months in there are days when you do feel homesick but there is Facetime and Skype.” But he and his wife have no regrets. “Our fear was the drawbridge would go up and the rights we had pre-Brexit wouldn’t be there.” Former NHS medical secretary Lesley and her husband Colin moved in March 2019 from Coventry, where two out of three constituencies voted leave. A former Conservative voter, she now supports the Liberal Democrats although did tactically vote Labour in the last election. “I wasn’t planning to retire for a number of years, but with Brexit looming in March 2019 we decided to make the move. We got here at the beginning of that March to make we have residency appointments booked in good time before 29 March so our rights would be secured. “I worked for the NHS for 25 years and because I moved early I’m a bit poorer but I’m happier.” She and Colin, a former HGV driver, had already downsized property when the referendum happened and had not intended to move full-time to Spain. They thought they would get a camper van and enjoy their retirement years touring Europe. But he had reached retirement age and was on his state pension, and EU reciprocal healthcare rules means he will continue to get NHS-funded care in Spain. “I’m really glad we did it but I still feel angry and sad, not so much for me but my grandchildren. My overriding feeling is that it is the young generation that will lose out. I just feel sorry for them,” says Lesley. Retried pharmaceuticals marketing executive Moved earlier than planned in February 2018 because of Brexit. “Almost two years ago I found myself in a bit of a panic because of Brexit. I felt I wanted to move to the EU and I needed to do it pretty quickly. “I spent 40 years working in pharmaceuticals and was used to looking at things 18 months, two-year windows at a time. I thought: if we don’t do this within six months, the door is going to be slammed, the drawbridge will be up.” A divorce and his age makes it difficult financially to buy a decent property where he wanted in London where his daughter is, but in Spain, where he rents an apartment for €600 (£500) a month, there are all sorts of possibilities. “Not only can I afford to rent but I can buy as well.” Former lieutenant colonel Served in the US, Canada, Sudan and Turkey, travels to Cartagena two or three times a year and has been going to Spain since he was 21.Peter had wanted to retire to Spain for some time but delayed it because his daughter was not so keen. “Then the referendum happened,” he says. He is putting his house up for sale and intends to move before the end of the transition period. “Leaving England would be a wrench. I often analyse why I feel so strongly about getting out of this country. The last sentence says it all because I didn’t say ‘why I feel so strongly about going to Spain’. The reality is that I want to leave the UK because I don’t feel I belong here any more owing to the fact that democracy has been so undermined, and since Boris Johnson has become prime minister my fears have worsened. “I often questioned whether I was just getting over-emotional because I was being deprived of something I wanted. But that is not the case. I have been angry since 24 June 2016 and nothing has happened to appease me. “Leave voters demanded 100% and it seems likely they will get their wish with a clean ‘cliff-edge’ break from the EU. What have those who voted remain been offered in return? Nothing. “When I look at the mess Brexit has created, I thought I would literally leave lock, stock and barrel and move my pension into Europe. “I’ve been an activist since 2016. I joined the Lib Dems and read the Guardian. I used to read the Daily Telegraph and for 40 years voted for the Tories. I consider myself right of centre but when I look at it I’m a social democrat. They have moved to the right and that leaves me left of centre.“This is not the same country that I was born in. It sounds overly dramatic, but I just do not feel comfortable in any way here.”