Grease-stained, patty-flipping patriarch Bob is back for a 10th season, and it’s time for an anniversary celebration with wife Linda. For once, Bob has remembered and even has a pricey gift planned, until kids Tina, Gene and Louise catch wind and things start to go awry. H Jon Benjamin and Kristen Schaal steal the show as the gravelly, nonchalant Bob and scheming Louise, and with a feature film planned for release later in the year, now is the perfect time to enter the chaotic animated world of the Belcher family. Ammar Kalia Comedian Susan Calman continues to do her best for Scottish tourism in her picturesque jaunt across the nation, this week exploring the Isle of Skye. She visits Dunvegan Castle to learn about its brutal history of clan warfare, before shearing sheep. Perfect staycation inspiration. AK There is a touch of the Mrs Brown’s Boys about this comedy, and the guffawing studio audience seem to be lapping it up. Tonight, the hapless actors are putting on a period romance that ventures across the class divide. The effects soon go wrong, though, as the set threatens to flood and a ceiling fan gets too close for comfort. Hannah Verdier Monty Don ends his three-part tour of the US with the gardens of the west coast, from the dry desertscape of Arizona to the rain-fuelled greenery of Seattle. The natural scenery varies wildly, from the Arizonan cacti to lush manicured LA gardens and Seattle’s man-made suburban tropics. AK Penultimate episode for Daisy Coulam’s dark crime thriller starring David Tennant and Matthew McNulty. In the face of new evidence, the case looks wrapped up, but a new revelation raises doubts. Meanwhile, a past conversation with Kate is uncovered. The truth behind the tragedy will touch them all. Ali Catterall The Police drummer continues his journey through the art and science of music, this week focusing on music’s capacity for storytelling. From operatic scores to film composition and field recordings, Copeland presents a compelling narrative on even the most abstract music’s emotionality. AK Lady Macbeth, 11.45pm, BBC Two William Oldroyd’s sensual first feature translates the 19th-century Russian novel Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District to windy north-east England. Florence Pugh shines as Katherine, a young woman married off to a mine owner’s bitter son who plots murderous ways to gain her freedom. Paul Howlett International Cricket: South Africa v England 7.30am, Sky Sports Main Event. First day of the final Test. League One Football: Sunderland v Doncaster Rovers 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. From the Stadium of Light. FA Cup Football: Northampton Town v Derby County 7.30pm, BT Sport 1. Coverage of the fourth-round tie at Sixfields Stadium.