Joe Root, England’s captain, has praised the mental fortitude of Ben Stokes after the all-rounder was named the International Cricket Council’s Player of the Year for 2019. Stokes became only the second England player to win the award – the Sir Garfield Sobers Trophy – outright after Jonathan Trott in 2011. Andrew Flintoff also shared it with South Africa’s Jacques Kallis in 2005. The 28-year-old was also named in the ICC’s Test and ODI teams of the year following a 12-month period that saw him produce compelling performances during England’s dramatic World Cup final win against New Zealand at Lord’s last July, and the Headingley Ashes Test, when his unbeaten 135 helped Root’s team pull off a barely-believable victory against Australia. “I think it’s hard to say any more superlatives,” said Root. “The way he’s performed all year, in all formats, it’s just been fantastic to be part of the same team. In my opinion, he’s definitely the leading player in the world at the moment.” Root pointed to the improvement in Stokes’ attitude since his involvement in the Bristol street brawl of September 2017, an incident that saw him miss the 2017-18 Ashes tour of Australia and forced him to successfully defend a charge of affray in court the following summer. “I think more than anything it’s his mental approach to the game,” he said. “I think after he had a time out of the team, since then he’s grown and grown as a senior player, as a mentor to the young guys. That’s testament to his character and how much he cares about playing for England and how much he cares about the group. And his desire to want to get better all the time.” Faf Du Plessis, the South Africa captain speaking on the eve of the Third Test in Port Elizabeth, was also full of praise for Stokes, who inspired England’s series-levelling victory in Cape Town last week. “Stokesy being named the player of the year was very well deserved,” he said. “He played the big moments really well and I think that’s when you really want to judge cricketers – when it really matters. That’s why he’s won so many games for England. Even in this series he’s played such a big role. For us he is a guy we need to try and keep quiet because he’s the sort of player that takes games away from you.” ICC Test Team of the Year M Agarwal (Ind), T Latham, (NZ), M Labuschagne (Aus), V Kohli (Ind,c), S Smith (Aus), B Stokes (Eng), BJ Watling (NZ, wkt), P Cummins (Aus), M Starc (Aus), N Wagner (NZ), N Lyon (Aus). ICC ODI Team of the Year R Sharma (Ind), S Hope (WI), V Kohli (Ind, c), B Azam (Pak), K Williamson (NZ), B Stokes (Eng), J Buttler (Eng, wkt), M Starc (Aus), T Boult (NZ), M Shami (Ind), K Yadav (Ind). M Agarwal (Ind), T Latham (NZ), M Labuschagne (Aus), V Kohli (Ind,c), S Smith (Aus), B Stokes (Eng), BJ Watling (NZ, wkt), P Cummins (Aus), M Starc (Aus), N Wagner (NZ), N Lyon (Aus). ICC ODI Team of the Year: R Sharma (Ind), S Hope (WI), V Kohli (Ind, c), B Azam (Pak), K Williamson (NZ), B Stokes (Eng), J Buttler (Eng, wkt), M Starc (Aus), T Boult (NZ), M Shami (Ind), K Yadav (Ind).