Community workers and charity organisers have defended the Duke and Duchess of Sussex after they were accused of letting the country and their family down by seeking to step back from their senior royal status. After days of criticism of Harry and Meghan, the Queen said on Monday while she would have preferred them to remain as full-time royals she was “entirely supportive” of the plan. Some members of the military hit out at Harry in particular over the weekend, accusing him of disrespect to the Queen and his former comrades, with one saying his fellow marines were “very upset, if not disgusted” with the decision. But on Monday in Nottingham, people who have worked alongside the couple on grassroots and research initiatives gave them their strong support and said they had been impressed by the extent of their commitment to their work. Marcellus Baz, a former gang member who set up a knife crime charity, Switch Up, in 2013 and hosted Harry at a gym during a visit that year said the experience had been of great value to the young people involved. “He genuinely cared about these young vulnerable people and said really nice things to them that encouraged them,” Baz said. “They are memories that have stuck with those kids and with me since then. “We had just been starting out when he came and highlighted the work that we were doing. It made a massive difference and you could really see that he was frustrated by the time restrictions that he was under.” Baz said he had posted on social media asking for friends’ thoughts on the couple’s decision to step back from royal duties. “A lot of people were saying that Kate didn’t get the same treatment as Meghan, and she [Meghan] was being treated differently and she was being hounded and persecuted. Whatever he and Meghan do next, it might give them more freedom while keeping the clout.” Dr Laura Waters, who spoke to the couple in 2017 when they visited a World Aids Day fair in Nottingham hosted by the HIV and sexual health charity Terrence Higgins Trust, said their appearance during what was their first official engagement together had been significant. “One of the biggest issues that people living with HIV have is the stigma, so you really can’t quantify the impact of having people of such a high profile embracing them and choosing the Terence Higgins Trust for their first engagement,” she said. Waters, the chair of the British HIV Association, spoke of the “huge loyalty” to them from the charities they have supported, adding: “From working in HIV I do feel very protective of them, and if I am asked about the royals I try to explain the work that he – and William – have done for normalisation and to counter stigmatisation. “There’s a sense that Harry is a normal bloke. In a way I suppose he is the most normal bloke in the royal family.” The sentiment was echoed by Henry Kulaya, a former principal of Nottingham Academy, where the royal couple met young people and mentors from a programme set up to support young people in the deprived St Ann’s area against getting involved in crime. “I met them twice with Meghan and four times with Prince Harry within the space of a year and a bit. His whole approach was very much down to earth and he really bonded with the children on each visit, when he came in with minimal security,” Kulaya said. “After that he came back with Meghan, and I think she was really enthused by the fact that this is a school with such a large proportion of children from a black and mixed-race background, and they really were enthused by her. She spoke a lot about aspirations, which was really powerful – but it was powerful just by virtue of her being seen.” Prince Harry is a patron of 14 charities and organisations, while Meghan backs four. They have said that in their new life they intend to start a “charitable entity”. The support for the couple from the charity sector is in contrast to criticism voiced by some former army figures and others who have said they have lost respect for Harry, a veteran who did two tours in Afghanistan. James Glancy, a former captain in the Special Boat Service who was elected last year as a Brexit party MEP, told the Daily Telegraph that other Royal Marines were “very upset, if not disgusted by the disrespect to the Queen” by the couple not discussing their plans with her before making announcements. “If Harry goes down this route of semi-privatising his role I wouldn’t raise a toast to him as he wouldn’t have my respect,” he said. Derek Hunt, the father of a soldier who protected Harry in Afghanistan and later killed himself after developing post-traumatic stress disorder, told the Daily Mail the prince was “turning his back” on those he had served with. “I can’t help feeling he’s abandoning the royal family and slapping everyone in the face, including those he fought with and my son,” he said.