A quarter of a century ago, when Nigel Wray began investing in Saracens, the club played on a public recreation ground in the north London suburbs and before matches the mess from dogs that had been walked on the pitch during the week had to be cleared up. The European champions now play on a swish plastic pitch in Barnet but the whiff from the biggest scandal in English rugby history has engulfed the club. Wray has now gone, although the benefactor was in the stand at Allianz Park on Sunday behind a pair of dark glasses that could have been a disguise but were actually needed because of the strong winter sun. Their Champions Cup game against Racing 92 could have to all intents ended their season. As it is, their nervy 27-24 victory put Saracens on course for a trip to Dublin to meet Leinster, a side unbeaten this season, in the quarter-finals. It could hardly be tougher but Saracens’ troubles do not end there. Hours earlier Premiership Rugby had confirmed the club would be relegated for breaches of the salary-cap rule that the club seemed for years to think did not apply to them. Now, even in the unlikely case of them defending their European crown, Saracens will not be able to play in the Champions Cup next season. And yet at lunchtime on Sunday the main concern of their supporters seemed to be the usual thing – how to juggle armfuls of beer with the sun in their eyes. Later, as Saracens inched to victory despite playing the second half with 14 men after the sending-off of their lock Will Skelton, the mood among the watching fans, who hardly knew whether to laugh or cry, darkened. “Make no mistake, this scandal has come about because of gross mismanagement here,” said supporter Robert Johnson. “But the punishment just hasn’t been proportionate. “We have never been part of the rugby establishment. If a team like Harlequins had done what we’d done, they would never have suffered such a draconian sentence. And why did the announcement of us being relegated come at seven o’clock on the Saturday night before such a big match as this? I think it was to destabilise us. We are from a rugby wasteland in north London and there are many who would like to see us back playing on that park pitch. All this talk of a rugby community is nonsense really. “When you go to places like Gloucester and Northampton the supporters don’t give us a good reception. When this decision was made last night there would have been a lot of champagne drunk. I think this could also mean the demise of the club. There are a lot of fair-weather fans here and many won’t be back to watch us in the Championship. The players might have said they will stay but they have mortgages to pay and no one knows what the future holds.” The present did not look too rosy either as Saracens saw their early 14-0 lead evaporate. Racing were in no mood to be bit-players in English rugby’s drama and, when Virimi Vakatawa, their powerful centre who will be an enormous handful for Eddie Jones’s England side in Paris on Sunday week, scored the second of his tries before the break, Racing were back in the game. Even Owen Farrell seemed out of sorts, the fly-half’s loose pass giving the wing Louis Dupichot a gift he could not turn down. Eventually, and typically, it was Farrell who dug Saracens out of their hole with the winning penalty that silenced the little knot of French supporters in the corner. Saracens celebrated victory in their biggest game of the season so far as if they had won the European Cup again. Another supporter was more sanguine than Johnson. Bryn Preece from Abbots Langley says he will come back next season. “I’ve been coming here for 20 years since the days when we were at Vicarage Road. It’s like football was in the 50s when fans mingled. And I’m hooked.”