Edgar Allan Poe wrote a brilliantly sinister short story about a man who wakes up in the night and sees a shadow against the curtains that looks just like a knife‑wielding murderer come to kill him in his sleep. The twist: it really is a knife-wielding murderer come to kill him in his sleep. The murderer has a plan for this. He freezes, knowing his victim will convince himself he is simply looking at a shadow, that something this frightening can’t actually be happening, that your worst fears never really come true. Steadily the murderer starts to creep closer, hour after hour, a millimetre at a time. By the end of the story he’s stood over the bed as early morning light floods the room, knife raised, staring into the face of his victim, who’s too far gone by now to break the illusion or admit that death really is standing in his eyeline. I mention this because something similarly frightening and equally hard to grasp is happening in Australia, and happening in plain sight too. Imagine an area three times the size of Yorkshire on fire. This is the scale of the disaster in New South Wales. Homes have been lost. Half a billion animals have been killed. New Zealand’s glaciers have turned brown from the smoke 2,000 miles away. All this in a country experiencing its hottest recorded summer, where the disaster minister “doesn’t have an opinion” on whether man-made climate change really exists, even as the horizon burns behind him. How close does it have to get? How far does that shadow need to creep? How long before we admit that death is now in the room? These are not the observations of a renowned climate activist. They are simply the facts, albeit facts that are still hard to grasp for those of us whose brains work slowly, whose concerns remain – let’s face it – essentially solipsistic. It is perhaps a question of scale, of finding a way to respond that isn’t simply panic or despair. With this in mind here’s another aspect, a detail that has been reported insistently this week in the background of all this macro-destruction and terror. There is now a clear and obvious danger this might start affecting the cricket. For those who think it’s frivolous to be concerned with cricket right now, to worry about disruption to cricket caused by symptoms of the impending apocalypse: stick around. Take, as they say in America, a step back. Because details are important here. Grade and Shield cricket has already been affected. Last month a Big Bash game in Canberra was abandoned due to smoke over the Manuka Oval, a ground that is already hotter than the exposed reactor core at Chernobyl on any given summer’s day. Right now there are fears the third Test between Australia and New Zealand at the SCG might be threatened, with temperatures due to hit 45C on Saturday afternoon and a suggestion play may be halted if the air quality index rises above a reading of 150. “This is a challenge on two metrics: visibility and breathing,” a Cricket Australia spokesperson has said. And he’s right. Those are two very important metrics. At which point it is tempting to write a classic sport-style column about this. The standard form is to declare that sport really must do something, that sport must set an example, carry the message, become a model of sustainability. Presumably it was once credible to talk like this, to suggest professional sport might be some kind of force for collectivism and universal good. It might even have been true. It isn’t true now. Let’s face it, Big Sport simply isn’t concerned with issues like this. There are nice people and nice gestures within it. Various Aussie cricketers have already promised help and donations. Sam Stosur will give $200 to the fire relief fund for every ace she serves this summer (all the while flying around the world on the absurdly carbon-heavy tennis circuit). But in reality sport cares only about growth, profit and consumption. There will be platitudinous noises and pledges. But at the elite level sport is run, funded and used as a reputation-garnish by the world’s greatest carbon-gorgers. There will be no rainbow coalition of Fifa-ICC-IOC junketers holding hands to save the planet, not unless the people of the earth can crowdfund a sufficiently tempting “special payments” fund. So what can we do about this now? Send our love, support and hard currency to one of the relief funds, and of course to the firefighting services charged with containing the revenge of nature. As Nathan Lyon said this week: “We just play a game, the real heroes are the firefighters out there fighting fires” – which is of course arguable from the GOAT. How many firefighters have taken a Test seven-for? How many firefighters have chased down a score on a crumbling Dubai deck in front of 300 Pakistani taxi drivers? But you can and should still give to them here. As for sport, it is still pretty useful as a way of shining some light. For one thing, here we are talking about climate emergency and destruction of the natural world because the Test match might be affected. There are details here you can grasp. That thing you love is in peril. Plus there is something painful and indeed strangely beautiful in the fact cricket is caught up in this, if only because cricket is so vital to the way Australia perceives itself: those dreamy white figures out there in all that pastoral green, a vision of Australia’s own youth and strength and righteousness. For now that great outdoors has become strange, licked by flames and fogged with smoke. The shadow is beginning to clarify. One thing is certain. We will, from here, have a front-row seat.