The Duke and Duchess of Sussex were forced to sacrifice their royal roles for “complete and absolute” freedom from Buckingham Palace financial scrutiny over commercial deals after being told they could not have it both ways. Prince Harry is preparing to fly out to Canada to join Meghan, and the couple’s son Archie, as they begin independent lives free from any financial oversight from the royal family. During 10 days of “intense” talks between royals and aides after Harry and Meghan’s bombshell announcement, the issue causing the “angst” was how they could embark on commercial enterprises in order to become “financially independent”, it is understood. Netflix is among global companies already eyeing them up. The streaming giant’s chief content officer, Ted Sarandos, said of working with the couple: “Who wouldn’t be interested? Yes, sure.” Their soon-to-be new status as non-working royals could see them following the example of former US first couple, Barack and Michelle Obama, who agreed a production deal with Netflix to make TV and film projects. The couple were unwilling to subject themselves to any financial scrutiny or review in future contracts they struck. The trade-off was they could not use their HRH styles, though they retain them. In another blow they will no longer be able to officially represent the Queen, which they had hoped to continue to do on occasions. That was the “roadmap and vision they would have liked”, according to one source. But the Queen prevailed. The couple was told “You can’t have it both ways” and they chose not to be constrained “by some sort of review process “ by the institution on contracts they signed. As questions over their future remain, Meghan’s estranged father, Thomas Markle, has been outspoken in his criticism. Speaking to a Channel 5 documentary, yet to be aired, he said the couple was in danger of “turning into lost souls” . “They are turning it [the royal family] into Walmart with a crown on,” he said. Under the arrangement announced on Saturday their new titles will be Harry, Duke of Sussex and Meghan, Duchess of Sussex. They will repay the £2.4m public funds used to refurbish Frogmore House, their official residence in Windsor, which will largely remain empty as they spend the majority of their time in Canada. They will no longer receive public funding through the Sovereign Grant, although will remain funded privately by the Prince of Wales. They will retain their patronages, but Harry, a former soldier, will have to give up his honorary military titles, including that of captain general of the Royal Marines, passed on to him by Prince Philip. Though “required” to step down from royal duties, they will still be able to attend family occasions, such as trooping the colour. The negotiations are said to have been “friendly”, in contrast to the “hurt” and “disappointment” felt by the Queen, Charles and William over the Sussexes timing of their announcement without forewarning. As they embark on the next chapter, they are said to be “very much feeling their way”. They “understand the parameters” and there will be a period of transition to see if it can work. The commercial model has not worked in the past, most notably with the Earl and Countess of Wessex. This has caused the royal family the most “angst” because a model does not exist yet. Harry had recently been working as an executive co-producer with chat show host Oprah Winfrey on a series about mental health for Apple TV. Meghan has done a voiceover for a Disney nature film with fees going to a conservation charity. This indicates one direction they might travel in. But whether they will escape allegations of cashing in on their status is questionable. Already new video footage, showing the couple at the premiere of Disney’s Lion King in London, is circulating. It shows Harry telling the film’s director Jon Favreau that Meghan is available for voiceover work, with Meghan seemingly joking: “That’s really why we’re here – it’s the pitch.” The Queen, in her statement, acknowledged the “intense scrutiny” the couple has been subjected to. The question remains if it will be less intense in North America, where there are broader freedoms over issues such as privacy, and where use of paparazzi photographs is not constrained by the agreed stricter rules of the UK media, drawn up following the death of Diana, Princess of Wales. Mark Thompson, CEO of the New York Times, and former BBC director-general, said he believed it could be managed, especially if “you’re not saying stuff, you’re not doing the kind of things that the paparazzi and celebrity hounds find interesting, you begin to have a quieter life”.  The pair meet in London through friends and begin a relationship. News breaks that the prince and Markle are dating. Kensington Palace confirms in an unprecedented statement that they are dating. The prince attacks the media over its “abuse and harassment” of his girlfriend. Markle reportedly meets the Duchess of Cambridge and Princess Charlotte for the first time in London. The engagement looks set when Markle graces the cover of US magazine Vanity Fair and speaks openly about Harry for the first time, revealing: “We’re two people who are really happy and in love.” Markle makes her first appearance at an official engagement attended by the prince when she attends the Invictus Games opening ceremony in Toronto, Canada – although the pair sit about 18 seats apart. It emerges that the prince has taken Markle to meet his grandmother, the Queen, whose permission they need to marry. They met over afternoon tea at Buckingham Palace. The prince’s aides are reported to have been told to start planning for a royal wedding, with senior members of the royal family asked to look at their diaries to shortlist a series of suitable weekends in 2018. Clarence House announces the engagement, and the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh say they are “delighted for the couple and wish them every happiness”. The couple marry before a celebrity-studded congregation at St George's Chapel in the grounds of Windsor Castle. The couple's first child, Archie Harrison Mountbatten-Windsor, is born in London. They announce that they are to step back from life as 'senior' royals, triggering a row with Buckingham Palace. After a crisis meeting with the Queen, Prince Charles and Prince William at Sandringham, the Queen issues a statement saying the couple will have a 'transition period' before ending their royal duties. “There are plenty of cases of big movie stars who have done that,” he told The Andrew Marr Show. They could hide, and have a better chance of living a quiet life compared to “spending the entire time inside the royal system,” he said. “I kind of believe that could work for them.” The prime minister, Boris Johnson, said: “I think the whole country will want to join in wishing them the very best for the future. “As I said before … I was sure the royal family, which has been around a very long time, will find a way forward.” Buckingham Palace said in its Saturday statement of the couple that “everything they do will continue to uphold the values of Her Majesty”.