If you required any more evidence that our broken immigration system urgently needs reform, the Greater London Authority has published a troubling study by the University of Wolverhampton. It estimates that more than 332,000 children and young people (defined as 18- to 25-year-olds), 133,000 of whom live in London, are growing up in the UK without any formal immigration status. These numbers include undocumented children born in the UK to parents who are themselves undocumented, as well as those who migrated to this country at a young age, and have spent the majority of their lives here. For all of these children, the UK is their home. I am the joint chief executive of We Belong – Young Migrants Standing Up, a charity campaigning for the rights of young migrants in the UK. Many of the 1,200 young people we work with were unaware of their undocumented status up until the age of 18, when they had to provide documentation for university. With no immigration status, they are unable to live normal lives. They cannot register to vote, work, or gain access to higher education or basic services. For all the government’s rhetoric about the importance of social integration, it continues to preside over an immigration system that isolates and stigmatises migrants who have no home other than the UK. In response to the GLA’s research, a Home Office spokesperson stated that “there are a range of routes and options available for people of all ages to regularise their status”. Anyone with direct experience of the immigration process knows that such bland assurances bear no relation to the reality of a system that is lengthy and complex. When I was 18, I found out that I was undocumented after receiving a letter stating I was subject to removal Even when young migrants become aware of their lack of legal status, the Home Office’s prohibitively high fees make this difficult to remedy. Because of the length of time they have spent in the UK, and their strong ties to the country, they will normally be eligible for limited leave to remain, a “temporary” status which they must maintain for 10 years, before they can apply for permanent settlement. Since 2014, the cost of limited leave to remain has increased by 238% – up from £601 per person in 2014 to £2,033 (including a £1,000 health surcharge) in 2019. These punishingly high fees prevent many young people from regularising the status to which they are legally entitled. I was born in Jamaica, and migrated to the UK at the age of eight. I have lived here ever since. My family was proactive, and submitted all the necessary documents for settlement in 2007; five years later, the Home Office contacted us to say that it had lost all our paperwork. In 2013, when I was 18, I found out that I was undocumented after receiving a letter stating I was subject to removal. It took me six months before I could apply for some form of legal status, and even then I was able to apply only because my fees were paid by a good Samaritan. That was just the start of my battle to maintain my status, which involves having to decode complex immigration law, as lawyers are far too expensive and legal aid is not available for immigration advice. All the money I had been saving for a mortgage had to be handed over to the Home Office instead. Like many of the young people I work with at We Belong, I have entered adulthood with the burden of keeping up with ever-increasing Home Office fees. As the GLA figures show, many people who belong in the UK are forced into a legal limbo – and it is likely to get worse. The Conservative manifesto included a pledge to increase the international health surcharge (IHS) to £625 in the new government’s first 100 days. This levy is made out to be a charge on foreigners for the privilege of using the NHS while they are staying in the UK. What is less well publicised, however, is that this cost is also imposed on people like me, who have limited leave to remain, and the planned increase will add a further £562 to each application, taking the total payable to £2,595. The young people who will be affected are not “temporary migrants” or visitors to the UK, but part of the fabric of British society. One campaigner at We Belong, who is on the 10-year limited leave to remain route to settlement, says the process feels like being on probation. “All our money is tied into keeping ourselves legal. You feel you are on probation and count down the days until you will finally be known as British.” We Belong urges the government to heed the wake-up call provided by these shocking figures. We are calling for a shorter, fairer and more affordable route to settlement for people who have such strong ties to this country. Until these changes are made and a fairer immigration system is introduced, the government will be responsible for the hundreds of thousands of undocumented children and young people whose lives are blighted by Home Office policy. • Chrisann Jarrett is co-CEO of We Belong – Young Migrants Standing Up