While admiring the spirited rearguard action to save buildings (Dozens of unique theatres worth restoring at risk of being demolished, 29 January), should we not also lament the passing of regional theatre companies? These (chiefly) happy bands of players used to deliver a steady flow of entertaining and often daring theatre, and thus provided the hub of cultural, economic and community activity in their areas. There are still certain centres of excellence, such as the Crucible in Sheffield, but lack of funding has savaged options. Many smaller theatres have had to play safe with an endless round of beloved plays. Often, only a too-heavy reliance on a life-saving pantomime can balance the books. And then there is the loss of the perfect training grounds where young people especially learned their craft in the best way possible: on stage within a talented and well-directed ensemble. Can the theatre fight back? If so, how?Geoffrey BullMilborne St Andrew, Dorset • I remember as a boy, in the late 1950s, being taken on a school trip to see the Greene King brewery in Bury St Edmunds. We were shown the derelict Theatre Royal. It was used as a store for beer barrels, and was in such decay that it seemed likely it would fall down or be demolished. However, a few people, including Martin Corke, a director of the brewery, banded together and in 1965 the theatre reopened. Many thought the group’s work was a waste of time – that no one would go to the theatre in Bury. But it remains a thriving theatre, helped by the building being vested in the National Trust. The message to Burnley and the other unique theatres at risk of being demolished is to fight on. Others before you have succeeded in restoring these buildings and bringing back live entertainment. Good luck.James Collett-WhiteBedford • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition