The past week’s brouhaha over Altior turned out to have more stamina than any of the runners on show here, as Nicky Henderson declared himself furious with the way the issue had been handled by racing’s ruling body. The trainer revealed that, in trying to do the right thing, he had called the British Horseracing Authority before 9am on Tuesday to share the news with officials that he was now unlikely to run Altior in the Silviniaco Conti Chase, which had been the horse’s target. Henderson was enraged on Saturday that the BHA had failed to give him any credit for coming to them so promptly with the information, including when it issued a statement on Wednesday to the effect that it would send a vet to examine Altior. Instead, the widely held view until now has been that Henderson did not act until 11.42am on Tuesday, when he tweeted that Altior would not run, by which time the news had effectively leaked out through the betting market. Standing in the winner’s enclosure here after Burrow’s Edge had the Lanzarote, Henderson said: “I’m furious. I’ve been furious with the whole thing ... Who’s getting shot the whole time? What more could I have done that morning than ring the BHA? “Everybody’s knocking me. I couldn’t be public until I talked to the owner and I think that’s only fair game. You have to talk to your owner first before you go public. I couldn’t go public, so I rang the BHA. Have they ever mentioned that?” A BHA spokesman confirmed Henderson had been in touch over Altior first thing on Tuesday. He added: “It would not be standard practice for the BHA to proactively make public the details of confidential conversations with a trainer, particularly if those conversations related to the potential use of inside information. Kelso 12.20 Kiltealy Briggs 12.50 Aloomomo (nap) 1.25 Jabbaar 1.55 Kaizer (nb) 2.30 Mymilan 3.00 Chapel Stile 3.35 Starplex Southwell 12.40 Isobar Wind 1.15 Harrison Point 1.45 Silverturnstogold 2.20 Angel Lane 2.50 Oblate 3.25 Requited 3.55 Fivehundredmiles “Mr Henderson’s call was to let us know that he was concerned about why the horse was drifting in the market despite no decision having been made about his participation. The BHA was in regular contact with Mr Henderson from Tuesday morning onwards in relation to this, but the communication of a horse’s running plans is a matter for the trainer.” The Altior story has provoked a debate about whether market-sensitive information should be released through bookmakers, as Henderson’s full explanation was eventually published through his Unibet blog. In future such stories will be issued first to the Press Association. The public’s attention was first called to the news when there was support for his stablemate Top Notch in betting on the Silviniaco Conti. If any punters were tipped off that Altior might not turn up and tried to exploit that information by backing Top Notch, their efforts backfired as the horse was well held in third place, having cruised into contention. The race went to Frodon and Bryony Frost, enjoying their first win together since that famous day at the last Cheltenham Festival. The popular pair may have one more outing before a return to the Festival in March, when their target could be the Gold Cup itself. It has been a slightly disappointing winter for both but there have been excuses for defeats at Aintree (too much weight in a handicap) and Haydock (too much of a slog against specialist three-milers). This time, Frodon had a lot more going for him, although he did not help his cause by repeatedly jumping left at a circuit that bends to the right. “Brilliant,” was Frost’s verdict. “Textbook, wasn’t he? Yes, OK, he was jumping slightly out all the time. That was a little bit worrying while you’re out there, thinking, when he gets tired, will that happen? “But Paul [Nicholls] has got him so fit and so ready, you can ride him with your heart on your sleeve. His jumping was amazing. Home bend, I’ve just picked him up and given him a click and he’s come right underneath me. And I thought, well, they’re going to have to really stretch to get by me, especially how hard he fights. Ah, just magic. “He’s 100% right now. People are quick to doubt but you can never doubt team members, especially someone like him.”