What timing. The government forces the BBC to take an £80m chainsaw to its news programmes just as the country needs every national treasure it can muster. As Britain leaves the EU, every shred of soft power, cultural power and brain power is needed more than ever to transmit its influence. Everywhere in the world, the BBC helps get Britain it a hearing. Boris Johnson’s benches can’t bray about their patriotism unless they stand up for this best of British symbols. Sarah Sands, the editor of Radio 4’s flagship Today programme, has also announced her resignation. She is distraught at a loss of “hardworking and committed producers” working at a merciless pace for slender pay; up all night, with heavy responsibility for any slip seized on by sharks eager for BBC blood. The cuts will make BBC news more homogenised, with hubs turning out the same stories for all outlets. That’s rational, she says, in the face of government cuts, but it drains quirky individuality from programmes, sapping producers’ imaginative input. As an outsider, I would ask the government not to be too careless about the great idea behind the BBC She sees the government’s looming threat to the BBC as deadly serious. As ministers boycott the Today programme, public servants are barred from contributing to it – even politically noncontroversial experts. As an ex-editor of the Sunday Telegraph, Sands can’t be branded “BBC liberal elite”, but she says: “As an outsider who comes from Conservative-minded newspapers, I would ask the government not to be too careless about the great idea behind the BBC. It was Michael Grade who said it exists to keep the media honest.” Yes, the Today programmes often “drives people mad”, says Sands. But “the Reithian principle still glows here and I feel very protective towards it”. In an age of rage, the BBC is the most satisfying target: it’s ours, we pay for it, so how dare it not tell my truth as I see it? Cue shoes flung at the radio and TV, ever since the referendum culture wars broke out. But right now the BBC is more dangerously friendless than it has ever been, as formerly sensible people lob grenades about hypothetical better ways to finance it. The latest is the usually clever national treasure Gary Lineker, undermining the national treasure that pays him top dollar, with his cavalier remarks that the licence fee should be voluntary. He admitted he didn’t “know the logistics of how it would work”, and that “you would lose some people”. Scrambling for a solution that eluded myriad official reports, he added: “At the same time you’d up the price a bit … If you put it up you could help older people, or those that can’t afford it.” That’s about as useful an analysis as I would make on Match of the Day. It’s time the BBC toughened up and demanded loyalty. All staff, especially top talent, should get a briefing on BBC facts of life. The licence fee costs under 44p a day per household, and its news is five times more trusted than its nearest competitor, ITV. Only 5% of the fee goes on administration; all the rest is spent on programmes. Eight out of 10 children watch its high-quality children’s programming every week. Despite declining youth audiences, 89% of 16- to 34-year-olds look at the BBC online every month, as do nine out of 10 adults. Decriminalising non-payment of the licence fee would cost the corporation £200m. Free licences for the over-75s was a government obligation that George Osborne forced the BBC to take over out of political malice. Why leave the global news field to Russia’s RT, to Al Jazeera – or worse, Fox News? The BBC’s website and journalism are invaluable globally. On a bad electioneering day, Johnson threatened the BBC with abolition. Tory crocodile tears over the poor paying the licence fee are a shaming excuse from a government that deliberately leaves universal credit claimants to starve for five weeks. True, about 129,000 people are taken to court each year for not paying the fee, but only a tiny number are jailed – the wilful non-payers that judges find do have the means to pay it. The latest anti-BBC argument is that with binge-watching Netflix, Amazon and the rest, who needs an outdated national broadcaster? The answer is: because most people want British-produced programming. Because arts, music, movies, TV and video gaming are a rare booming British success and the BBC is the industry’s springboard. The director general, Tony Hall, has walked the plank to save his crew, standing down sooner than intended so the current chairman of the board can select his successor before the government installs a hostile new chair. Now the BBC needs to grow a spine, fight back, stop its own people blurting out idiocies, and summon every friend to join a fight for its future. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist