In October 2019, the NHS finally struck a deal with pharmaceutical company Vertex to provide access to the cystic fibrosis drug Orkambi. After four years of heartbreak, thousands of children and adults finally got what they had been fighting for: the chance of a longer life. While news of the announcement was quickly displaced by the election, the story behind the deal – and why Vertex capitulated – is a rich and meaningful one, and one we must take lessons from if we are to secure the future of the NHS. Despite overseeing a decade of collapsing standards of care, the Conservatives have won power with commitments to protect the NHS. But amid a growing global drug-pricing crisis, what can they learn from the Orkambi saga? Orkambi is a new drug, protected by patents, giving Vertex a monopoly for years to come. In 2018, the NHS offered £500m over five years for Orkambi, but that was not enough for the company, with Vertex’s monopoly price far in excess of what the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice), deemed to be cost-effective. As the negotiations dragged on, people waited, and more than 200 who might have benefited died without access. The NHS has significant buying power, and regularly negotiates discounts, but up against a monopolist with billions in the bank and an extraordinary tolerance for reputational damage, there was only so much it could do. Despite a spirited public campaign, the talks eventually collapsed. Health secretary Matt Hancock, or his successor, should exercise their moral obligation to protect NHS patients Faced with the terrifying prospect of losing their children to the disease, a group of families decided to change strategy. Working with Just Treatment, they took a more confrontational approach by launching a campaign to force the government to use its power to break Vertex’s monopoly through a crown use licence, so that the NHS would be free to buy cheaper versions of the drug. For those patients who needed the drug immediately, they formed a “buyers’ club”, using an exemption in patent law that permits individuals to buy the medicine. This allowed the families who could afford it, or fundraise sufficient amounts, to import generic Orkambi from Argentina at a fifth of the price. Under pressure, the government admitted it had a “moral obligation” to explore providing access to cheaper versions of the drug, and Labour committed to doing so if it won power. Confronted with the real possibility that the government might break its monopoly, the public relations disaster of desperate families flying to Argentina to keep their children alive, and with an election looming, Vertex gave in and struck a deal. The battle for Orkambi was won, but the problem is not going away. Whether it’s Trikafta, the successor drug to Orkambi, or any of the new wave of extremely expensive immunotherapy treatments for cancer, many more crucial yet overpriced drugs are coming on to the market. The country cannot be held to ransom every time the NHS needs to buy another medicine from another monopolist. The Orkambi campaign took many years and cost lives in the process. It should not have to be repeated. Instead, health secretary Matt Hancock, or his successor, should exercise their moral obligation to protect the health of NHS patients. They have the power to break medicine monopolies to rein in the greed of drug companies, and they must be prepared to use it. But rather than learn the lessons of the victory on Orkambi by moving to a more open, innovative and equitable pharmaceutical system, such as that proposed by prominent economists Joseph Stiglitz and Mariana Mazzucato, and the Labour party at the last election, the government seems all set to move in the opposite direction: a pro-industry trade policy that would make challenging drug prices much more difficult. Leaked reports of talks between the US and UK on a post-Brexit free trade agreement (FTA) confirm what we can already deduce from the ambitions of the pharmaceutical industry and US demands in past deals with other countries: the mechanisms we have in place to control NHS drug prices are at grave risk. Any trade deal, with any country, that limits the NHS’s ability to negotiate drug prices could sink it. It is vital that the Conservatives back up their rhetoric stating they’ll keep the NHS and drug pricing off the table in the talks with Trump by making this commitment legally binding. But the devil is in the detail and talks must be opened up to public and parliamentary scrutiny. Sadly, the government seems set to use its majority to shield such trade deals from MPs and the public until they’ve been signed. The NHS can only continue to deliver world-class treatment if it reforms medical innovation and shifts power away from the pharmaceutical industry and towards patients. If the Tories truly want to become the party of the NHS, as their rhetoric suggests, they must change course. • Diarmaid McDonald is the lead organiser of the campaign group Just Treatment • Achal Prabhala is the coordinator of the AccessIBSA project, which campaigns for access to medicines in India, Brazil and South Africa