The grand Portico Library stands in the heart of the city centre of my home town, Manchester, and takes its name from the building’s portico design. Founded in 1806 by a group of Manchester businessmen, it was once frequented by the likes of Elizabeth Gaskell and Emmeline Pankhurst, and stocks a treasure trove of books and archives. It is also the home of the Portico prize, which has been part of the library’s cultural activities since 1985, an award established to celebrate literature that “evokes the spirit of the north of England”. Once dubbed the “Booker of the north”, the biennial prize accepts submissions across all formats including fiction, nonfiction and poetry, and awards £10,000 to an overall winner (to be announced on 23 January), while shortlisted authors are rewarded with honorary Portico Library membership. Previous winners include Anthony Burgess, Jenny Uglow and Sarah Hall. This year a welcome spotlight fell on dynamic small presses and independent publishers, with 10 such publishers making the 17-strong longlist. Why is the Portico prize necessary? “So many reasons,” says CEO and chief librarian Thom Keep. “There’s been a definite problem in the London-centric nature of the [publishing] industry and we’re still in that rut. Politically it’s never been more the case – there’s a fundamental disconnect with the north.” It’s a way of looking at the world from an outsider’s view that’s not smug and complacent. A scepticism and humour and grit Lancashire-born author and broadcaster Stuart Maconie highlights Britain’s “very unequal playing field” in his book Long Road from Jarrow: A Journey Through Britain Then and Now, which was longlisted for last year’s Portico prize. “It was like walking from one Britain into another,” he says now, “from an affluent to an abandoned one.” One of the 2020 prize’s shortlisted authors, Ray Robinson, says that there’s a “blatant” north-south divide, “but there’s also a Lancashire-Yorkshire divide. A Manchester-Salford divide. A Liverpool-Wirral divide. A Tyneside-Wearside divide. We live in a disunited kingdom with two Englands of unequal partnership.” This year the prize has been relaunched after a hiatus in 2017 for funding reasons. To celebrate its return, a series of events, Rewriting the North, has been exploring notions of northernness and challenging stereotypes. These themes have particular personal resonance. I have just written a book, I Belong Here: A Journey Along the Backbone of Britain (published later this year by Indigo Press), a response to being the victim of a race-hate crime on a train journey from Liverpool to Newcastle, and I was invited to read at one of the events – Nature, Identity and the City – beneath the Portico library’s huge glass-domed ceiling. The man who racially abused me on the train told me to go back to where I’m from and in the book, I do – I’m from the north – and chronicle my walking adventure over the Pennines, known as the backbone of Britain through both urban and natural landscapes. During the reading, under an engraved Victorian sign that read “Polite Literature”, I recounted how my abuser called me a “Paki cunt” and asked if I had a British passport – there’s no putting a polite veneer on such an experience. I would like my book to start a wider movement to do with place, storytelling and belonging and because of that I’m seeking sponsors to found the I Belong Here foundation in Manchester, in order to transform my experience of hate into one of hope. I want to encourage marginalised groups to share their stories, and help breach the gulf between inner-cities and natural landscapes. Not only is there a north-south divide, there is vast inequality within the north itself, including between urban areas and the countryside. As the writer Robert Macfarlane told me: “to have a project which intends to give people the confidence to say not only ‘I am a writer’ but also ‘I belong here’ … and then seek to bring people from minority communities out into nature, well, this is the real work.” Looking to the future, Portico’s Thom Keep is optimistic, citing such hopeful signs as Manchester becoming a Unesco City of Literature and the success of northern publishers such as Comma Press and Bluemoose. Everyone I spoke to agreed there needs to be systemic change to balance the unequal power structures that hinder regional talent from finding an outlet, that more and diverse voices from this fine region deserve to be heard in the world of writing and publishing. I put some of the questions raised here to the Portico prize’s six shortlisted authors… To find out more about the I Belong Here Foundation go to www.anitasethi.com/i-belong-here Shortlisted for Black Teeth and a Brilliant Smile (Fleet) Adelle Stripe was born in 1976 and grew up in Tadcaster, North Yorkshire, and now lives in the Calder Valley, West Yorkshire. She is the author of three collections of poetry. The most recent, Dark Corners of the Land, was 3:AM Magazine’s poetry book of the year. Her debut novel, Black Teeth and a Brilliant Smile, was inspired by the life and work of the playwright Andrea Dunbar, best known for her black comedy Rita, Sue and Bob Too, who tragically died of a brain haemorrhage in 1990 aged 29. It is set against the backdrop of the Buttershaw estate in Bradford during the Thatcher era. What compelled you to write Black Teeth and a Brilliant Smile?I was a fan of Andrea Dunbar as a teenager and had some misguided notion about becoming a playwright one day. I wanted to know more about who Andrea was and where her work came from. I felt that she was an important person in the history of northern culture, who deserved to have a book written about her. That book didn’t exist, I wanted to read it, so I wrote it myself. What for you is the “spirit of the north”?There’s a distinctive character – one of stubbornness, resilience and black humour. How has that spirit influenced your work?Certainly the tone and dialect in my writing captures some of those aspects, but I also think Andrea Dunbar’s personality embodied them. Who for you are the great northern writers?Pat Barker, Gordon Burn, Hilary Mantel, Ted Hughes. What books did you love as a child?My parents weren’t readers, but they had a comprehensive record collection and I will always consider music to be my first love. I learned so much from listening to songs or the wild stories of my grandparents. That was just as important as reading. I was an only child until the age of nine, so books were a way to escape from the world outside, which I often struggled to make sense of. I remember being captivated by The Secret Garden [by Frances Hodgson Burnett], George’s Marvellous Medicine [Roald Dahl], Call of the Wild [Jack London], Grimm’s Fairy Tales and What Katy Did. As a teenager, Hanif Kureishi’s The Buddha of Suburbia was an epiphany of sorts. I read that friends jokingly refer to you and your partner, Ben Myers, as “Ted and Sylvia”. What is it like living with another writer, who is also shortlisted for the Portico prize?Well it’s nothing like the symbiotic relationship of Hughes and Plath. I don’t read any of Ben’s work until a galley copy appears, as I feel that would be a step too far. We discuss concepts, characters and plot during the composing stage, but beyond that, there’s no interference. It’s the most diplomatic way of living with each other. We share an office in the attic, with a partition wall. Of course I am delighted that Under the Rock is shortlisted. It’s a novelty for both of us be on there together. Do you feel there’s a “north-south divide”?Yes. I spent 10 years living in London (and still love the dirty old town), but there’s a huge cultural and economic divide between the two. What are your views on the “northern powerhouse”?We have had so many empty promises made by various governments that I don’t believe a word of any of it these days. Boris is promising a reward now the north has voted Tory, but I doubt any of it will materialise. Politicians are prize bullshitters. Is the north like a different country?This is the north and we do what we want. It certainly feels like we are a completely different country from London, no doubt about that. Have you found that people have stereotypes about the north? There’s still a perception of the north being all council estates or pit villages, when in reality it’s a diverse area, with distinctive character and landscape from town to town. The nuance is often lost in translation. I don’t think enough books about the north are being published, so it made sense to set my work here, as we are completely underrepresented in the publishing industry. I hope the Portico prize will change that. Do you feel that the character of the north is changing? I don’t think anything will change up here. We’ll be used, rejected and forgotten about like we always have been. Central government is no friend of ours. The Smiths or the Stone Roses?It has to be the Smiths – they were my favourite band as a teenager. I’m so disappointed in what he who shall not be named has turned into. I’m devastated and heartbroken that it turned out this way. But I still have loyalty to Johnny Marr. One of the reasons I became a writer is because of the Smiths. I started reading Oscar Wilde and Shelagh Delaney because of them. Lowry or Hockney? Hockney, for his Wolds landscapes and dreamy California swimming pools. Only a Bradfordian would appreciate the sunlight in such a way. • Black Teeth and a Brilliant Smile by Adelle Stripe is published by Fleet (£8.99). To buy it for £7.91 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-31763837 Shortlisted for Under the Rock: The Poetry of a Place (Elliott & Thompson) Benjamin Myers was born in Durham in 1976 and lives in Yorkshire’s Upper Calder Valley with his partner, Adelle Stripe. His novels include: The Gallows Pole (2017), which received the Roger Deakin award and was shortlisted for the Walter Scott prize; Turning Blue (2016); Beastings (2014), which won the Portico prize, and the Northern Writers’ award; Pig Iron (2012), which won the inaugural Gordon Burn prize; and Richard (2010), a Sunday Times book of the year. His most recent book, Under the Rock, is an exploration of Scout Rock in West Yorkshire. Why did you become a writer?I am compelled by an overwhelming fear of having to live in the real world. So long as I am writing books, I can at least exist with one foot in a kingdom entirely of my own making. Under the Rock is an attempt to peel back the layers of history to see what squirms beneath the topsoil. Where did you grow up?In the suburbs of Durham city. My parents were both teachers so there were books in the house. Because I’m northern, the assumption is that I’m working-class and from somewhere like Coronation Street. It’s not the case. People think the north is a homogenous entity, when actually it’s a rich and varied place – in culture, landscape, language, industry and politics. There are 20 million norths. What for you is the “spirit of the north”?A combination of gallows humour, friendliness to outsiders, absurdism, hard work and a rebel streak born out of the knowledge that all major investment has – and always will – go to London and the south-east. So we get on with things and create our own culture. How has that spirit influenced your work?Almost all of my books are concerned with the collective telling of an alternative history of the north of England that hopefully dispels many of the stereotypes that exist, chief among them being that people here are somehow lesser or uncultured. Has the north shaped your style, with regard to dialect and form?I’m fascinated with dialect, the fluidity of language and the poetry of the landscape, and explore that fascination in everything I write. Who for you are the great northern writers? The Venerable Bede, Alcuin of York, William Wordsworth, Thomas De Quincey, Ted Hughes, Pat Barker, Gordon Burn, Shelagh Delaney, Alan Garner, Ted Lewis, Malcolm Lowry, WH Auden, David Peace, Alan Bennett, John Godber, Beryl Bainbridge, Andrea Dunbar, Sid Chaplin, Kay Mellor, David Storey, Keith Waterhouse, Tony Harrison. I could go on… Did you encounter any barriers to being published?All my novels have been turned down by all the major publishing houses at some point or another. I’ve had a couple of publishers say, “We’ve done some northern novels and they didn’t sell so we don’t want another one.” You have to fight for it. My partner, Adelle, says I’m like a Yorkshire terrier. I latch on to something and won’t let go. It made me more determined. I’m also a fortysomething white male so I’m not complaining about being discriminated against. In many ways I’ve been lucky as I’ve had support from indie publishers. You won the Portico prize in 2015 for your novel Beastings. What does being shortlisted again mean for you?It’s fantastic. Being published always feels like a small victory; being read and recognised an even greater one. Do you feel that the character of the north is changing - and how do you predict it will transform further - in today’s political era?It is transforming daily – currently for the worse. Many ex-mining villages in my homeland of Durham have just voted for the Conservative government. Recent history has been forgotten because it is not taught in schools and consequently an entire generation of disenfranchised miners and shipbuilders have been forgotten about. Battles literally fought in our lifetime are now rendered meaningless; the 1980s might as well be as distant as the 1780s. I believe it to be part of a wider collective mental breakdown of the national psyche. Sadly I think it will get worse before it gets better. The Stone Roses or the Smiths?Happy Mondays, any day. The Peak District or the Lake District? The Lakes. I was dragged up Helvellyn from the age of four, and now keep returning every year. I know the fells around Ullswater well – my novel Beastings is set there. Lowry or Hockney?David Hockney. I especially loved his Arrival of Spring series of iPad drawings from 2011. I’ve been to see that exhibition three or four times. • Under the Rock by Benjamin Myers is published by Elliott & Thompson (£9.99). To order it for £8.79 go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15 Shortlisted for The Boy With the Perpetual Nervousness (Picador) Graham Caveney, who was born 1964, grew up in Accrington, Lancashire, and has published four books: Shopping in Space: Essays on Blank American Fiction (1992; with Elizabeth Young); biographies of William Burroughs (The Priest, They Called Him, 1997) and Allen Ginsberg (Screaming with Joy, 1999). His most recent book, The Boy With the Perpetual Nervousness (2017) is a memoir about growing up in the north of England during the 1970s and his experience of sexual abuse by a Catholic priest. How did The Boy With the Perpetual Nervousness come about?I’ve been writing this book for more than 30 years. However, I had to wait until my parents had died before I could publish. They were traditional northern Catholics. My mum was delighted when I passed my 11-plus and with my dad you just didn’t talk about your inner life at all, let alone grooming and abuse. It would have been difficult to square an honest account with my parents. Tell us about  your childhood.I was born in ’64. My first memory was of the moon landings. I was sat on my grandad’s knee in Accrington, and he pointed at the telly and said: “This is the future.” There was a real sense that everything was going to get better and that the future was bright and shiny. Have you encountered stereotypes about the north? When I went to university at Warwick, people would do parodies of my accent, using “Ey up” and whippets, and wonder why I didn’t fall about laughing. Writing can be a way of wrongfooting people about such stereotypes. What for you is the “spirit of the north”?A huge question – I have whole sections of the book dedicated to answering that. It’s something about resilience, conviviality, humour and community. At the same time those qualities coexist with other less heroic qualities: suspicion of change, nostalgia, sentimentality. The fascinating thing is that these two sets of attributes both occupy the same notional space. That is one of the things that interests me as a writer. I wanted to write from within these contradictions or ambivalence. To write with humour about the most desperate situations, uncover the farcical aspects as well as the tragic. The north has given me a relish of language. I adore the rhythms of Lancastrian speech, the use of understatement, their refusal to be impressed. The “It’ll be reet” riff in my book is just one example. What writers have inspired you, from the north or elsewhere?As a teenager I was more inspired by the music writers of the NME – people like Paul Morley and Ian Penman. Then I discovered American fiction and a whole universe opened up. Lorrie Moore, Anne Tyler, Joan Didion: writers whose every sentence carries. Is the north a different country? Existentially, it is a whole other way of being, with its own priorities and perspectives. Politically, the north has been criminally underfunded right across the board – transport, NHS, arts, housing. What does being shortlisted for this prize mean for you?It is beyond my wildest dreams. I am chuffed as the book didn’t do well commercially although it did critically. I think people have certain assumptions about my book – that it is going to be dark and distressing. It is also a comedy, about class and food and music and books. The Smiths or Stone Roses?The Smiths. I bought the Smiths’ first album in my first year at university and it echoed throughout campus and spoke directly to my inner landscape as did the following three albums. I know Morrissey’s ended up a total arsehole though. Elizabeth Gaskell or Charlotte Brontë?It’s got to be Mrs G although I have a very soft spot for Anne. The Peak District or Lake District?I go through the Peaks on my way to see my beloved girlfriend, Emma, in Manchester and so they always make my heart sing. Lowry or Hockney?Hockney. No hesitation. I can’t look at a Lowry without hearing that endlessly annoying earworm Matchstalk Men song… My loss, I’m sure. • The Boy with the Perpetual Nervousness by Graham Caveney is published by Picador (£9.99). To buy it for £8.79, go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on orders over £15 Shortlisted for Saltwater (Sceptre) Jessica Andrews was born in 1992. She grew up in Sunderland and has spent time living in Santa Cruz, Paris, Donegal, Barcelona and London. She teaches literature and creative writing classes and co-runs the literary magazine the Grapevine, which aims to give a platform to underrepresented writers. Her first novel, Saltwater, was published last year. Where did the idea for Saltwater come from?It grew out of the tender, burning feeling I have when I think of my mam and my female friends and the ways in which they have not been protected on a systemic level thanks to the patriarchal structure of relationships. What for you is the “spirit of the north”?A joy in spite of everything. It comes from a life lived close to an edge and it’s that Saturday night feeling out on the streets, everyone dressed up and smelling of too much perfume, a kind of wild possibility. It’s the spirit of “Fuck it” and having a good time. How has that spirit influenced your work?My protagonist, Lucy, is desperate to move away from her home in Sunderland, to somewhere new and glittering, and it is only when she leaves and feels her identity fracture that she understands the value of the place she was running away from. She carries “the north” inside of her and later, when things are difficult for her, she remembers, “I am tough as anything.” What writers have inspired you, from the north or elsewhere?When I was growing up, music was probably my biggest influence. I learned a lot about northern poetry through Jarvis Cocker, Alex Turner and Tim Booth. Did you encounter any barriers to being published?It’s incredibly difficult for working-class writers to find the time and space in which to write. I did an MA in creative writing, using the small savings my grandad left when he died. To write my novel, I moved to Donegal and lived in my grandad’s empty house so that I wouldn’t have to work to pay rent. Those were of course privileges but it was tough. I think the biggest problem is a lack of self-worth. How can you believe your writing is any good if people treat you as if you were worthless? Do you feel a north-south divide?Yes – definitely economically but also culturally. I always love the journey home to Bishop Auckland, where my family live now. I like arriving late and having to get the last bus back from Durham, known as “the party bus”, because everyone gets on it after the pub. What are your views on the so-called northern powerhouse?It is difficult to believe in it when the crushing effects of austerity are everywhere. In the current political climate, it feels like a clever piece of jargon rather than a true vehicle for change. What does being shortlisted for this prize mean for you?Validation that working-class lives are full of poetry and power. Do you feel that the character of the north is changing?It seems there’s a shift in northern identity; people no longer have that proud industrial identity because those kinds of jobs no longer exist and they don’t belong to unions any more. People are increasingly atomised and I think it’s vitally important that working-class communities come together in solidarity to fight for our hospitals, our schools, our jobs, our libraries and our hope. We last spoke in May 2019. How’s your year been as a published author?It’s been exciting and validating, particularly when young working-class women come up to me at events and say this book really means a lot to them. You have a story out this month in The Book of Newcastle anthology…Yes, in that I really wanted to explore female friendship and the emotional complexities if you move away from your home town and feel you’re betraying friends. The Stone Roses or the Smiths?100% the Smiths. The Peak District or the Lake District?The Lake District, but only because it is closer to the sea. Lowry or Hockney?Lowry! • Saltwater by Jessica Andrews is published by Sceptre (£16.99). To buy it for £14.95, go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on orders over £15 Shortlisted for Ironopolis Glen James Brown was born in County Durham in 1982, studied English at Leeds Beckett University and gained an MA in creative writing at the University of Chichester, where he won the Kate Betts Memorial award. Ironopolis is his first novel. He lives in Manchester. What inspired you to write your book?I grew up on a housing estate in County Durham and I am passionate about their importance and angry about how they’re stigmatised. I wanted to understand how they had gone from being respectable homes for a third of the population to being a byword for deprivation and poverty. That led me to the issue of how social housing has been betrayed by successive governments since the 1970s. I was enraged and that anger shaped the book. What for you is the “spirit of the north”?Historically, the north’s history has often been one of economic hardship and adversity, but in many ways what I’m attracted to is a lot more intimate than that. There’s also so much beauty in the north. At some point, everybody has to think about themselves in relation to where they come from, to define with or against the collective narrative. There isn’t one “north” – there are as many norths as there are people living there. How has that spirit influenced your work in terms of content?For this book, in every way. Ironopolis is set on Teesside and I wanted to dig into the folklore, which might be as deep as you can get into a place. A main character in the book is a river witch called Peg Powler, who lives in the Tees. As a literal spirit of the north, I thought setting her loose on an about-to-be-bulldozed housing estate might be an interesting way to say the things I wanted to say about the line between people and place and how that’s currently under threat. It’s better coming from her – she’s got a much bigger reputation around those parts than I do. Has the north influenced your style in terms of dialect and form?So much. I could hear the characters in the book speaking as I wrote, the cadence and swing of their accents and speech patterns. Who are the great northern writers?Sid Chaplin was a trailblazer; born into a Durham mining family during the first world war. The sheer bloody-mindedness he must have had to claw himself out of the pits and into writing novels and newspaper columns can’t be easily dismissed. Did you encounter any barriers to getting published?The book took a long time to sell – which was unfun – but whether or not that was because I was writing a 550-page, structurally atypical novel about magic-realist housing estates in Middlesbrough, I couldn’t tell you. Even now, I have serious impostor syndrome. I’m from an unassuming, working-class background in the north-east and when I was younger the publishing world wasn’t even a speck on the horizon. What are your views on the “northern powerhouse”?A hollow bit of sloganeering on the part of a government that, for all its bluster about the north being able to take on the world, for all the stage-managed photo-ops of Gideon and Boris in their hard hats and hi-vis, has ripped the guts out of countless communities via a decade of austerity. What does being shortlisted for this prize mean for you?For someone like me with an independent publisher, to be on a shortlist like this means so much. Writing can be very lonely. You’re sinking years of your life into something maybe only your mam is ever going to read (and maybe not even that if she’s got a lot on). Writing can be so liberating, but publishing is a wasp’s nest of doubt and anxiety. That goes double for a debut. Do you feel that the character of the north is changing – and how do you predict it will transform further – in the political era in which we are living?Identity is bound up in stability: stable jobs, stable homes, stable communities. But that is changing, as in other places, with the rise of zero-hours work, short-term tenancies and a slashed welfare system. The result is that everything becomes transitory. This fracturing is mirrored in our politics. The old 20th-century narratives might be done. We’ve got ex-miners voting Tory now, so all bets are off. The Peak District or the Lakes?I love them both. Lowry or Hockney?Hockney, for the colour … though neither of them does much for me, to be honest. • Ironopolis by Glen James Brown is published by Parthian (£9.99). To order a copy for £8.79 go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15 Shortlisted for The Mating Habits of Stags (Lightning Books) Ray Robinson was born in 1971 North Yorkshire, and his debut novel, Electricity (2006), was shortlisted for the James Tait Black memorial prize and the Authors’ Club best first novel award. The screen version premiered at the BFI London film festival and won best screenplay at the National film awards. His other novels are The Man Without (2008), Forgetting Zoë (2010) and Jawbone Lake (2014). Forgetting Zoë was a winner of the inaugural Jerwood fiction uncovered prize. He also wrote the short film Edith, on which his latest novel is based. How did your latest book come about?I’d been obsessing over the true story of Barry Prudom’s time hiding out in Dalby Forest near Scarborough after spree-killing three people in the early 1980s. He managed to evade a massive police search for 18 days by going to ground and relying on his survival skills. I guess I was curious about his self-constructed mythology. What had brought him to this point? What could make someone cross into the realm of criminal violence? Mixed into this was a short story I’d been tinkering with for a few years about an ageing man’s secrets about the legitimacy of his son. This short story eventually became the screenplay for the short film Edith. When I put the two ideas together, The Mating Habits of Stags was the result. Added to this are my childhood memories of my grandfather. What for you is the “spirit of the north”?Being friendly but bloody-minded. As George Orwell said: “The northerner has grit, he is grim, dour, plucky, warm-hearted and democratic.” Has the north influenced your style in terms of dialect and form?Jake’s sections of the book are littered with the Yorkshire Dales’ Old Norse dialect. [Jake is the novel’s protagonist, a former farmhand and widower in his 70s]. My grandparents’ generation were the last to speak the dialect in any meaningful way, and that’s why the Sheila sections of the book are mostly free of Norse. [Sheila, a main character, is Jake’s friend.] Instead, the dialect is just general North Riding (clashy, snicket, sneck, howay, addle, neb, apeth, etc). I chose not to represent the dialect phonetically as it’s just plain daft, but “summat” strays so wildly from “something” aurally, as does “thissen” (yourself) that I felt it necessary to include the phonetic spellings. Also, there are quite a few traditional Yorkshire folk songs throughout the book and these had to remain phonetic because otherwise they wouldn’t scan or rhyme. Who for you are the great northern writers?The two that have most influenced me are Pat Barker and Niall Griffiths. What books did you love  as a child?I didn’t read a book until I was 18, but I come from a family of inveterate bullshitters so I guess you could say I was immersed in a strong tradition of oral storytelling from an early age. Do you feel there’s a north-south divide?Yes, and a blatant one at that. But there’s also a Lancashire-Yorkshire divide. A Manchester-Salford divide. A Liverpool-Wirral divide. A Tyneside-Wearside divide. We live in a disunited kingdom with two Englands of unequal partnership. What are your views on the “northern powerhouse”?I think Westminster is just blowing rainbows up our arse. Is the north a different country?If you class a region comprising a people with common and distinctive attributes occupying a more or less definite territory, then yes. But the north is so diverse in every aspect that the only thing that really unites us is a strong aversion to the south. If you mean how do northerners view themselves in the context of England, then you’re asking how and why such a diverse and populous region has been excluded and shat upon by Westminster since the dark days Thatcher stuck the boot in. What does being shortlisted for this prize mean for you?I think the Portico is one of the few prizes that’s actually worth its salt. Prizes like this one give readers a chance to discover voices that might otherwise never be heard among all the bombast of bestsellers. It also means Waterstones might start bloody stocking it! Elizabeth Gaskell or Charlotte Brontë?Emily all the way. Lowry or Hockney?I’ve always found Hockney a bit “meh”, if I’m honest. But Lowry’s seascapes are haunting and sublime (and there isn’t a bloody matchstalk man in sight). The Peak District or the Lake District?That’s a tricky one. I used to live in the Peaks and grew up not far away from the Lakes so both are special places to me, but I think the Lake District is a victim of its own beauty and the traffic such a ball-ache, so I’ll have to say the Peaks.