Saturday 12.31pm Venue St Andrew’sReferee Oliver Langford Odds H 6-5, A 2-1, D 9-4 For the hosts, the FA Cup arrives just as their season is beginning to be dominated by more ominous concerns: the permanent appointment of Pep Clotet at the start of December precipitated a six-game winless run that has left them facing the prospect of third-tier football for the first time in 25 years. The Spaniard may well rest regulars against a Blackburn side whose own poor form continued with a defeat at Nottingham Forest on New Year’s Day, and for whom Lewis Holtby and Ryan Nyambe face late fitness tests. Alex Hess Saturday 12.31pm Venue Ashton GateReferee John Busby Odds H 3-4, A 4-1, D 3-1 Two mid-table sides a division apart meet at Ashton Gate, but this might not be the home banker it looks on paper. City have lost three of their last four home games as their promotion charge has faltered, while Shrewsbury won at Stoke last year before running Wolves close in the fourth round. One player who will be watching with interest is Bristol City goalkeeper Max O’Leary, who has impressed on loan in Shropshire but will not feature on Saturday ahead of a possible recall. Niall McVeigh Saturday 12.31pm Venue Turf MoorReferee Robert Jones Odds H 1-2, A 11-2, D 7-2 Peterborough think they will be facing a shadow Burnley side when they turn up for an early kick-off at Turf Moor, and they might be right. The FA Cup has come at an awkward time for the Clarets, who have lost six of their last eight league games, are only four points above the relegation zone and face Chelsea, Leicester, Manchester United and Arsenal when the Premier League resumes. Sean Dyche will still try to pick a side capable of winning the tie against League One’s top scorers, but anything could happen. Paul Wilson Saturday 12.31pm Venue The DenReferee Tony Harrington Odds H 2-5, A 6-1, D 7-2 Last season these clubs showcased the varying effects a cup run can have on league form. Millwall became embroiled in a relegation fight despite coming within a penalty shootout of the semi-finals, while Newport’s unlikely march to the fifth round began a run that very nearly ended in promotion. The visitors could do with something similar this year, with their last league win having come in October. Millwall, meanwhile, are in with a chance of top-flight football for the first time in three decades – so expect Gary Rowett to shuffle his pack here. Alex Hess Saturday 12.31pm BT Sport 1 Venue Crown Oil ArenaReferee David Coote Odds H 7-2, A 3-4, D 3-1 Newcastle’s appalling cup record during the Mike Ashley era – six FA Cup ties won in 12 years of his ownership – dictates that struggling League One Rochdale kick off with the better recent record in this competition. Steve Bruce has pledged to “take the FA Cup seriously” but Newcastle’s manager travels to Spotland without eight injured first-team regulars as his squad nurses a rash of soft tissue damage. The one bright spot for Bruce is that Matt Ritchie, sidelined by ankle trouble since August, could be fit enough to make the bench. Louise Taylor Saturday 12.31pm Venue New York StadiumReferee Anthony Backhouse Odds H 8-5, A 6-4, D 5-2 Paul Warne’s side are second in League One but cannot be accused of taking the FA Cup lightly, rallying from 3-0 down to beat non-league Solihull Moors 4-3 in the last round. Their reward is a Yorkshire derby where they may fancy their chances, despite Hull’s own recent resurgence in the Championship. Freddie Ladapo is the Millers’ danger man with 12 goals in all competitions this season, while Hull manager Grant McCann may opt to keep star man Jarrod Bowen out of the spotlight with the transfer window now open. Niall McVeigh Saturday 3.01pm Venue Griffin ParkReferee Keith Stroud Odds H 4-6, A 7-2, D 11-4 These two sides are at opposite ends of the Championship table, with Brentford chasing a first promotion to the top flight for 85 years, and Michael O’Neill’s Stoke desperate to avoid slipping into the third tier. The league is the clear priority for both sides, but free-scoring Brentford forward Ollie Watkins insists that “a Cup run will be nice. People will definitely fear us if they get drawn against us.” Niall McVeigh Saturday 3.01pm Venue Amex StadiumReferee Andre Marriner Odds H 4-5, A 7-2, D 11-4 With Brighton neither in serious jeopardy nor having much hope of Europe, the FA Cup would seem the most obvious place for Graham Potter to focus his resources in his increasingly impressive inaugural season. Alireza Jahanbakhsh should keep his place after two goals in two games. If Glenn Murray is handed a rare start it may prove to be his farewell, with Potter having hinted at a January departure. For the Owls, top scorer Steven Fletcher is back in contention after illness, while midfield pair Liam Palmer and Massimo Luongo could also return. Alex Hess Saturday 3.01pm Venue Cardiff City StadiumReferee Geoff Eltringham Odds H 1-3, A 9-1, D 4-1 Both sides go into this tie on the back of hammerings, Cardiff losing 6-1 at QPR and Carlisle 4-1 at Crewe. Cardiff manager Neil Harris is demanding a reaction from his players, saying: “what I can promise the fan base, it won’t happen again under me. Wednesday’s blip aside, Harris has improved Cardiff since replacing Neil Warnock in November. His side are strong favourites against a Carlisle team who are fourth from bottom of League Two and also led by a new manager in Chris Beech. Tom Davies Saturday 3.01pm Venue Craven CottageReferee Craig Pawson Odds H 6-5, A 11-4, D 11-5 Aston Villa lost their first-choice goalkeeper and centre-forward in the victory over Burnley, so will be keen to avoid more injury woe as they battle to stay in the Premier League. Villa could pick fourth-choice goalkeeper Lovre Kalinic ahead of Ørjan Nyland, with Jed Steer joining Tom Heaton on the treatment table. Dean Smith looks set to continue with the back three which worked well at Turf Moor, while Fulham’s own injury list means the promotion-chasers cannot carry out too much rotation as they seek a morale-boosting FA Cup scalp. Will Unwin Saturday 3.01pm Venue Kassam StadiumReferee Michael Salisbury Odds H 1-3, A 7-1, D 4-1 Hartlepool have had little to cheer in the past few years – sliding out of the Football League in 2017 and toiling in the bottom half of the National League ever since – so an FA Cup day out might come as some respite. Oxford are having an excellent season though: firmly in the promotion race, they also reached the quarter-finals of the Carabao Cup. Pools travel to the Kassam Stadium on the back of a poor Christmas in which they took only one point from three games. Their manager, Dave Challinor, has an aptitude for the big occasion, however, having taken Fylde to a Wembley triumph in last year’s FA Trophy. Tom Davies Saturday 3.01pm Venue DeepdaleReferee Martin Atkinson Odds H 6-5, A 2-1, D 5-2 Alex Neil will relish the arrival of his former club and the chance for a break from a disappointing league run. Fringe players, such as midfield summer signing Tom Bayliss, will be given their chance to impress as Neil seeks a return to form at Deepdale after the home defeat to Middlesbrough. Daniel Farke has said Norwich need a “miracle” to stay in the Premier League but is still expected to make wholesale changes here. Tony Paley Saturday 3.01 pm Venue Madejski StadiumReferee John Brooks Odds H 4-5, A 7-2, D 3-1 Simon Grayson’s Tangerines strap in for the 476-mile round trip to Berkshire where underwhelming form and tough opposition conspire against their hopes of making the fourth round for the first time in three years. The 1953 Cup winners are winless in their past five League One matches, while four straight wins have seen Mark Bowen’s hosts surge clear of the Championship relegation battle. Semi-finalists five years ago, Reading lack a forward to match Blackpool’s 14-goal finisher Armand Gnanduillet, but have conceded just once in their past five games. Stuart Goodwin Saturday 3.01pm Venue St Mary’s StadiumReferee Tim Robinson Odds H 1-2, A 13-2, D 7-2 Ralph Hasenhüttl has dug his team out of relegation trouble, winning 10 points out of the last 12, but the Southampton manager insists the FA Cup is no distraction: “we want to take this challenge very seriously. Last season we lost in the third round and we want to do better”. The hosts should be confident of doing so against Danny Cowley’s inconsistent side, who have relegation worries of their own. Hasenhüttl looks set to hand Che Adams a rare start after ruling out a January loan for the misfiring forward. Niall McVeigh Saturday 3.01pmVenue Vicarage RoadReferee Graham Scott Odds H 2-9, A 11-1, D 5-1 Nigel Pearson will surely rotate his team after a hectic Christmas schedule where Watford picked up three wins and a draw, which may mean a debut for new Brazilian attacking recruit João Pedro. Premier League survival is unquestionably Pearson’s priority, but keeping that winning run going should be achievable even for a second-string side against League One strugglers Tranmere. One man the hosts must watch carefully is Morgan Ferrier; the former Watford youth player has four goals in the Cup this season. Niall McVeigh Saturday 5.31pm Venue Vitality StadiumReferee Darren England Odds H 4-9, A 7-1, D 4-1 Two teams bereft of form collide, with both perhaps wishing they had the weekend off instead. Saturday’s meeting does offer both sides the chance to end terrible runs, with the hosts winless at home since 2 November and Luton without an away win since September. Eddie Howe is likely to rest key players with Bournemouth in the Premier League relegation zone. Graeme Jones’ side, and top scorer James Collins in particular, may fancy their chances of an upset when the team sheets are published. Stuart Goodwin Saturday 5.31pm Venue Highbury StadiumReferee Marc Edwards Odds H 6-5, A 2-1, D 5-2 Portsmouth are two-time FA Cup winners, while Fleetwood have never reached the fourth round. Despite that, Joey Barton’s side will start as favourites against their League One play-off rivals, after just one defeat in their last 11 matches across all competitions. Pompey fans could be forgiven for forgoing the 600-mile round trip to the Lancashire coast for a teatime kick-off – although on their last visit to Highbury, they recorded a 5-2 win. Niall McVeigh Saturday 5.31pm Venue King Power StadiumReferee Simon Hooper Odds H 1-10, A 22-1, D 8-1 Writing off a cup competition would contradict the winning culture that Brendan Rodgers is trying to foster at Leicester, so he will deploy a line-up that is expected to dispose of Championship strugglers Wigan. Fringe players such as defender Filip Benkovic are likely to be given rare opportunities to impress, against a side who won at Birmingham on New Year’s Day to end a 13-match winless streak, but will have a job on their hands to progress here. Paul Doyle Saturday 5.31pm Venue Etihad StadiumReferee Lee Mason Odds H 1-16, A 45-1 D 20-1 The holders’ defence begins against a Port Vale side who are 10th in League Two and whose striker, Tom Pope, tweeted in summer he’d “love” to face John Stones along with other, more colourful comments about Manchester City’s centre-back. Vale’s captain may get his chance to take on Stones, but it would rank among the competition’s all-time shocks should his team somehow win here – they are available at 45-1 to do so. Jamie Jackson Saturday 5.31pm Venue Molineux BT Sport 1Referee Paul Tierney Odds H 7-5, A 2-1, D 9-4 Wolves dumped United out at the quarter-final stage last season and will be confident of doing the same again. Ole Gunnar Solskjær had to send home Jesse Lingard and Anthony Martial on Friday due to illness, leaving him light of options in the final third. Nuno Espírito Santo has his own striking problems with Diogo Jota ruled out, and Patrick Cutrone set to feature. Injuries aside, both sides will make changes ahead of their involvement in the Europa League knockout stages. Will Unwin Sunday 2.01pm Venue Memorial StadiumReferee Gavin Ward Odds H 9-5, A 5-4, D 5-2 This should be a lively battle between two promotion-chasing League One sides in contrasting form. Rovers, who haven’t been past the third round since their memorable run to the quarter-finals in 2007-08, come into the game having picked up two points and scored one goal in four matches. Coventry have won three on the bounce, with striker Matt Godden having scored back-to-back hat-tricks. John Ashdown Sunday 2.01pm Venue Pirelli StadiumReferee Jeremy Simpson Odds H 1-2, A 5-1, D 3-1 The Cobblers have been past the third round just once in 30 years (in 2003-04) but they still have a better record than Burton, who have reached the fourth round only once in their entire history. Albion have every chance here though – they have lost once at home in the league since August, while Northampton’s League Two promotion push has been hampered by their indifferent away form. John Ashdown Sunday 2.01pm Venue The ValleyReferee David Webb Odds H 4-1, A 4-6, D 3-1 With East Street Investments completing their takeover of Charlton this week, there is finally some positivity at The Valley – although Thursday’s defeat at Swansea was a reminder that Championship survival remains the priority this season. The Addicks manager, Lee Bowyer, says he will not make wholesale changes for the match against another team whose focus may be elsewhere. West Brom are currently second in the table and on course for a return to the Premier League under Slaven Bilic. Will Unwin Sunday 2.01pm Venue Stamford BridgeReferee Peter Bankes Odds H 2-11, A 18-1, D 7-1 A bug has swept through Chelsea before Sunday’s game, and even Frank Lampard has been struck down – the manager left the pre-match media duties to his assistant, Jody Morris. Lampard should be on the touchline on Sunday afternoon and he will want to see a ruthless performance from his inconsistent team, who have lost their last three home games in the league. Forest, fourth in the Championship, will hope to see heavy rotation from Chelsea as they bid to avoid a second straight third-round exit at the Bridge. Jacob Steinberg Sunday 2.01pm Venue Alexandra StadiumReferee James Linington Odds H 9-5, A 7-5, D 12-5 This is a League Two v Championship cup tie that could well be a League One fixture next season. It could also prove an awkward assignment for second-tier Barnsley, who have at least given themselves a shot at survival after a recent upturn in form. Crewe, meanwhile, have every chance of promotion out of League Two and have lost at home only once since September. John Ashdown Sunday 2.01pm Venue Selhurst ParkReferee Michael Oliver Odds H 4-6, A 4-1, D 5-2 Wayne Rooney pays a visit to his former England manager, Roy Hodgson, having given pointers – and plenty of actual pointing – towards his new midfield role in Thursday’s win over Barnsley. The Derby player-coach’s display raised questions over his ability to play twice in four days, but the rare chance to be a giant killer may prove hard to resist. Hodgson says Connor Wickham will feature, buoyed by his first league goal in more than three years, but several regulars will be rested. A third run to Wembley after defeats in 1990 and 2016 does not seem high on Hodgson’s to-do list. Stuart Goodwin Sunday 2.01pm Venue Riverside Stadium BT Sport 1Referee Stuart Attwell Odds H 9-2, A 4-7, D 3-1 Jonathan Woodgate, the Boro manager and former Spurs centre-half, had plenty of disagreements with José Mourinho’s good friend, Aitor Karanka, during his tenure at the Riverside, so the body language between the two technical areas could prove interesting. Boro enjoyed four straight wins and three clean sheets over the festive period, and will aim to darken the mood Mourinho left St Mary’s in after the New Year’s Day loss to Southampton. Louise Taylor Sunday 2.01pm Venue Kiyan Prince Foundation StadiumReferee Stephen Martin Odds H 5-4, A 9-5, D 5-2 Wednesday’s 6-1 victory over Cardiff will give QPR a confidence boost as they take on a team nine places above them in the Championship table. Mark Warburton’s side may need it. They have a bleak recent record in the competition, with last season’s run to the fifth round their first since 1997. The Swans ran eventual winners Manchester City very close in the quarter-finals last season, but Steve Cooper and his young squad will not be looking so far ahead this term, with ambitions of a top-six finish. Will Unwin Sunday 2.01pm Venue Bramall LaneReferee Jarred Gillett Odds H 1-10, A 28-1, D 7-1 This is the first time the semi-professionals of Fylde, currently embroiled in a National League relegation skirmish, have played a Premier League side. Yet with Chris Wilder having pledged to make “11 changes” in order to rest players fatigued by the Christmas schedule, a repeat of the embarrassing home defeat to Barnet last term is not out of the question. One lesser-spotted player expected to be on view for the home side is midfielder Jack Rodwell, who has agreed a short term contract with United. Louise Taylor Sunday 4.01pm Venue Anfield BBC OneReferee Jonathan Moss Odds H 4-6, A 7-2, D 3-1 With Jürgen Klopp looking to sustain momentum and Carlo Ancelotti trying to generate it, both managers kept rotation to a minimum during the festive programme. This fixture will probably be where the changes come, with new signing Takumi Minamino likely to be among the “fresh legs” promised by Klopp. Dominic Calvert-Lewin, who started all nine of his side’s games in December, may get a rest with Moise Kean stepping in. Everton’s last win at Anfield came in September 1999 – five months before the Italian forward was born. Alex Hess Sunday 6.16pm Venue Priestfield BT Sport 1 Referee Andrew Madley Odds H 9-2, A 3-5, D 3-1 West Ham have made a perfect start to the second coming of David Moyes, thrashing Bournemouth on New Year’s Day, and they will be keen to keep spirits high here. Moyes could do with a good FA Cup run, after Manuel Pellegrini suffered a couple of memorable humiliations against lower league opponents. The Hammers were dumped out of the competition by Wimbledon last year, and thumped 4-0 by Oxford in the Carabao Cup earlier this season. Jacob Steinberg Monday 7.56pm Venue Emirates Stadium BBC OneReferee Anthony Taylor Odds H4-6, A 4-1, D 3-1 Mikel Arteta knows first-hand the joys of being an FA Cup winner with Arsenal and is hoping to repeat the trick from the dugout. “We have to be challenging for the cups,” he said this week, and he hopes to field a strong side against Leeds in an attempt to perpetuate the good feeling around the club. There is only limited scope for rotation given a lengthy injury list, although Dani Ceballos could return. Whatever side Arteta puts out, Marcelo Bielsa’s Championship leaders will fancy their chances of springing a surprise. Nick Ames