Max Verstappen has extended his contract with the Red Bull Formula One team until the end of 2023. The Dutchman has made the long-term commitment to his team despite speculation that he might replace Lewis Hamilton at Mercedes, should the British driver switch to Ferrari at the end of 2020. The 22-year-old Verstappen is entering his sixth season in F1 this year. Both his and Hamilton’s contracts were set to run only until the end of 2020, with a wide-ranging set of new regulations to be implemented in 2021. Speculation that Hamilton may choose to see out his career at Ferrari has abounded since it was revealed that he had met with senior figures at the Scuderia last season. Verstappen, who has eight grand prix wins and is one of the most talented drivers on the grid, had been mooted as a replacement for the six-times world champion at Mercedes. However, after finishing a career-best third in the championship last year, including three victories, Verstappen has opted to stay with Red Bull. The team took him on in 2014 as part of their junior programme and he was given a full drive in 2015 with sister squad Toro Rosso. In 2016 he was promoted mid-season to Red Bull, winning the Spanish Grand Prix on his debut for the team. “I am really happy to have extended my partnership with the team,” he said. “Red Bull believed in me and gave me the opportunity to start in Formula One which I have always been very grateful for.” His decision is a strong vote of confidence for engine supplier Honda, who struggled on their return to F1 in 2015 but proved to have made major steps closer to Mercedes and Ferrari last season. Verstappen had previously suggested he might delay agreeing a new deal until after seeing how well the chassis and engine performed in 2020. “Honda coming onboard and the progress we have made over the last 12 months gives me even more motivation and the belief that we can win together,” he said. “I respect the way Red Bull and Honda work together and from all sides everyone is doing what they can to succeed. I want to win with Red Bull and our goal is of course to fight for a world championship together.” In December Charles Leclerc agreed a contract extension with Ferrari, ensuring that both of the most promising talents in F1 are already settled for the foreseeable future. Verstappen has yet to enjoy the machinery to challenge for a title but must be optimistic that Red Bull and Honda will emerge strongly once the new regulations come into effect. The team principal Christian Horner acknowledged that Red Bull were very much looking forward to the future. “With the challenge of the 2021 regulation changes on the horizon, continuity in as many areas as possible is key,” he said. “Max has proven what an asset he is to the team, he truly believes in the partnership we have forged with our engine supplier Honda, and we are delighted to have extended our relationship with him.” Williams have confirmed that Britain’s Jamie Chadwick will continue with the team as a development driver in 2020. The 21-year-old was the inaugural winner of the all-female W Series championship last season and taken on by Williams as part of their driver academy. This year she will continue to work with the team closely, including extended running in their simulator programme and defends her W Series title when the new season begins in St Petersburg, Russia, on 29 May.