What were you hoping for?The love of my life. Failing that, good food and good company. First impressions?An impressive beard. What did you talk about?Work, holidays, yoga, snowboarding, Rob’s voluntary work, politics (unfortunately), going out and dating in London. Any awkward moments?The staff at the restaurant brought some complementary dishes for us to try. Rob is vegetarian, so I ended up eating more than my fair share. Good table manners?Very good. Best thing about Rob?He was good company and easy to talk to. There were no awkward silences. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes. Describe Rob in three words?Warm, calm, kind. What do you think he made of you?Hopefully, he thought I was good company and worth coming out on a Sunday night for. Did you go on somewhere?It was a Sunday evening, so we were both happy to call it a night after the meal. And... did you kiss?No. We hugged and said our goodbyes. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Although we had similar political leanings, politics is rarely a good topic of conversation on a first date. Marks out of 10?7. Would you meet again?I would as friends. Rob said he might come to check out my ice-cream shop. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?A stress-free evening with someone who was easy to be around. First impressions?He was incredibly beautiful. Like a model. Totally stunning. What did you talk about?His ice-cream shop, Wales and Scotland (our respective places of origin). Any awkward moments?I rarely drink, but for some reason I said yes to every alcoholic drink that night. I hope it didn’t show too much. Good table manners?To be honest, I was more interested in looking at his face and his arms. Best thing about Gavin?He was the full package. Handsome, lovely figure, great smell. And he shows genuine interest in other people. Would you introduce him to your friends?Of course. Describe Gavin in three wordsInteresting, humble, gorgeous. What do you think he made of you?I think he thought I was a nice and well-meaning person. Did you go on somewhere?No. And... did you kiss?I would have quite happily spent the evening kissing him, but I didn’t feel the date was going in that direction. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I would have made myself more presentable. Marks out of 10?10. Would you meet again?Perhaps I’ll go to his shop to buy some ice-cream. • Gavin and Rob ate at Barboun, Shoreditch, London E1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone likeminded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com