The fatal shooting of two Eritrean men in Libya has raised concerns about overcrowding in UN facilities for refugees there. The pair were reportedly killed in Tripoli last Thursday, days after the UN refugee agency had pressed them to leave a so-called gathering and departure facility (GDF). The UN set up the GDFs in 2018 as an “alternative to detention”, but when the numbers of refugees being assigned to them increased, the UN began offering money to new arrivals to encourage them to either go home or find accommodation elsewhere. In practice, many refugees use the money to rent a house in Libya and then depart by boat. The two Eritrean refugees who were killed were among those who had accepted the money and left. GDFs are intended to house refugees until they are resettled elsewhere or repatriated. Unlike detention centres, refugees can leave the GDFs voluntarily. Libyan detention centres are nominally overseen by the UN-recognised government in Tripoli and are often run by officials involved in human trafficking. According to the UNHCR, in November the GDF facility was housing nearly 1,200 migrants – about twice the number it was built for. The UNHCR said on Friday it was “deeply saddened” by the deaths of the two Eritreans. According to the New Arab, the pair were shot inside their accommodation and the circumstances were unclear. Three refugees told the Associated Press that the men were among dozens forced out of the GDF 10 days ago. In November the UN was accused of trying to starve out refugees and asylum seekers who were sheltering for safety inside one of its GDF centres in Tripoli. A group of about 400 people who had come to the Tripoli facility in October had apparently been without food for weeks. Internal documents seen by the Guardian showed that the UNHCR was planning to withdraw food from 600 other refugees and migrants in the centre. An aid worker with knowledge of the situation told the Guardian: “They are starving the population inside the [facility]. They’re just trying to starve them to motivate them to leave. It’s deliberately withholding aid to put people under pressure.” The UNHCR admittied having encouraged people to leave an overcrowded Tripoli centre but said claims it was starving asylum seekers to force them out were offensive. Separately, in August last year the UN International Organization for Migration (IOM) was the subject of a formal complaint after concerns” were raised about its treatment of Bangladeshi migrants in Tunisia. A Tunis-based NGO alleged officials and diplomats had put pressure on a group of 64 Bangladeshis to return home after weeks at sea. The Bangladeshis told the Guardian they felt pressed by the IOM to sign a voluntary return paper or risk arrest. They said diplomats from the Bangladeshi embassy had warned them that if they did not sign the voluntary return document, they would become victims of organ trafficking. The IOM has denied any pressure was applied to the migrants to return to Bangladesh. There have been other shootings of refugees or migrants in Libya recently. Alarm Phone, a hotline service for migrants in distress, reported on Saturday that a migrant had been shot by the Libyan coastguard and his body thrown into the sea. The man was among a group of 65 asylum seekers traveling on a boat that was intercepted at sea by the Libyans. Some of the 65 people reportedly refused to disembark in Tripoli. IOM has not confirmed the killing and said the man sustained wounds before departing. In September a Sudanese man was reportedly shot after resisting being taken to a detention centre. He had been among a group of 103 migrants whose boat was stopped at sea by the Libyan coastguard while attempting to cross the Mediterranean. UNHCR has been contacted for comment. Additional reporting by the Associated Press