Prep 10 minCook 25 minServes 4 5 tbsp olive oil100g kale, stalks removed and leaves roughly choppedSalt and pepper4 large slices Irish soda bread 4 eggs½ tsp ground turmeric1 small garlic clove, peeledSalted butter, for the toast1 tbsp harissa100g Greek yoghurt Put half the oil in a large, nonstick frying pan and set over a high heat. Once very hot, add the kale and a tablespoon of water, and stir-fry for three minutes, until emerald green and slightly wilted. Transfer to a bowl, season to taste and keep warm. Toast the soda bread, and return the pan to the heat with the remaining two and a half tablespoons of oil. Once very hot, fry the eggs for two to three minutes, spooning the hot oil over the whites until very crisp and golden. Tilt the pan a little so the hot oil pools to one side, add the ground turmeric and fry for 30 seconds. Remove the pan from the heat, season the eggs to taste and set aside. Rub the garlic over the toast, almost grating it into the surface, then butter the toast. Put the kale and eggs on top, with the turmeric oil drizzled over. Swirl the harissa into the yoghurt, dollop on the side and serve immediately. Prep 10 minCook 40 minMakes 8–10 portions 200g jumbo oats200g spelt flakes, or more jumbo oats, if you prefer80g shelled hemp seeds60g hazelnuts60g pumpkin seeds60g sesame seeds¼ tsp ground cinnamon1 unwaxed lemon, finely zested¼ tsp fine sea salt120ml maple syrup120ml coconut oil or sunflower oil, melted To serveMilk, yoghurt or creme fraicheFruit of your choiceMaple syrup or honey, to drizzle over Heat the oven to 160C (140C fan)/gas 3. In a large bowl, combine the oats, spelt flakes, hemp seeds, hazelnuts, pumpkin and sesame seeds, cinnamon, lemon zest and salt. Pour over the maple syrup and melted coconut or sunflower oil, and mix until everything is well coated. Divide the mixture between two baking sheets and bake for 30–40 minutes, stirring every 10 minutes or so, until golden. Remove and leave to cool completely, until crisp. Transfer to an airtight glass jar or resealable container and keep for up to two weeks. A favourite, if rather indulgent, way of serving the granola is to scatter liberally over a mound of creme fraiche, with some fruit of your choice and maple syrup. Prep 10 minCook 30 minServes 2 4 rashers bacon2 eggs Salt and pepper100ml creamUnsalted butter, to fry80g cherry tomatoes, halved2 thick slices sourdough bread1 avocado, stoned, scooped and slicedDried chilli flakes, to serve (optional)Extra-virgin olive oil, to serve Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/gas 6. Put the bacon on a baking tray and roast for 10–12 minutes, until crisp. Meanwhile, beat the eggs and cream, and season generously. Put two teaspoons of butter in a nonstick frying pan over a high heat. Add the tomatoes, season, and fry for two to three minutes, until blistered. Transfer to a bowl. Turn the heat down to medium and add another tablespoon of butter. Put the two slices of sourdough into the egg mixture, turning them over a few times so the bread absorbs the liquid. Lay the bread in the hot pan and fry for three to four minutes on each side, until golden and cooked through. Serve the French toast with the bacon, tomatoes and avocado, sprinkle with the dried chilli, and drizzle with olive oil. Prep 10 minCook 20 minServes 4 140g rolled porridge oats40g buckwheat270ml milk (dairy or non-dairy)½ tsp ground cinnamon60g unsalted butter2 apples2 tbsp demerara sugar1 handful roasted salted almonds, halvedMaple syrup, to serve Put the oats, buckwheat, 350ml water, milk and half the cinnamon in a pan and set over a medium–low heat. Simmer gently for 10–15 minutes, stirring now and again, until the porridge is thick and creamy. Add more milk if you prefer a looser consistency. Meanwhile, put the butter in a large, nonstick pan set over a medium heat. Once the butter has melted and is beginning to sizzle, add the apples in a single layer. Fry for seven to nine minutes, flipping halfway through, until the apples are golden and the butter is a nutty brown. Scatter the demerara sugar and remaining ground cinnamon over the tops of the apple wedges and cook for another minute or two, spooning the hot melted butter over the top. To serve, divide the porridge between bowls and top with the fried apples, brown butter, almonds and a drizzle of maple syrup. • Jordan Bourke’s latest book, Healthy Baking: Nourishing Breads, Wholesome Cakes, Ancient Grains and Bubbling Ferments (Orion, £20), is out now. To order a copy for £17.61, visit guardianbookshop.com