For those of us in Iraq who get the latest news from WhatsApp groups, the dawn of 3 January was filled with apprehension and fear. It felt like the huge events of the recent past: the night of the declaration of war in 2003, the news of Saddam Hussein’s arrest, the day of his execution, or the day the Iraqi military collapsed in the face of Islamic State’s occupation of Mosul. To this list we can now add: the day the Americans killed General Qassem Suleimani, commander of the Iranian Quds force, and Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis, the deputy chief of the Iraqi Popular Mobilisation Units (PMU), an umbrella group of Iran-backed militias. Everyone had heard the news before the sun had even risen, with horrific images circulating of the remains of the dead bodies. Suleimani and al-Muhandis were responsible for the brutal crackdown on demonstrations since they began in October Some speculated that the two most influential men in Iraq had been returning to Baghdad’s Green Zone to increase the pressure on parliament and the president to approve a new prime minister. Iraq has had a caretaker government since the autumn resignation of Adel Abdul Mahdi, in the wake of protests – over the economy and corruption – led by the young and poor. The purpose of this pressure would have been to appoint a pro-Iranian figure who essentially carried on the policies of Abdul Mahdi – himself accused by the Iraqi protesters of being an Iranian pawn. As a friend wrote to me, in an ironic message on WhatsApp that, out of fear, he did not post to Facebook: “The American bombing is not an attack on Iraqi sovereignty, but Iranian sovereignty. For sadly, there is no Iraqi sovereignty.” Ever since the start of operations to liberate areas under Isis control in the autumn of 2014, for which the Americans and Iranians acted in an effective alliance, it’s been an open secret that Iraq’s political scene has been completely captured by Iran. To a certain extent, this has been with the tacit acceptance of the Americans; and just as the Iranians have come to treat Iraq as a mere protectorate, so, too, has Washington. It treats Iraq as a land where it can do whatever it likes, from targeting warehouses arming the PMU last summer, and striking the Iraqi Hezbollah militia in the city of Qaim on the Iraqi-Syrian border, to the recent airstrikes. These were all unilateral acts that were not coordinated with the Iraqi security authorities, and the Iraqi government was not aware of them until hours beforehand or even afterwards. This persistent violation of sovereignty helped drive the Iraqi parliament’s resolution on Sunday, ordering all foreign troops out of the country. After the attack, the protesters in Baghdad and other cities issued statements condemning the US assassination of Suleimani and wishing mercy on the martyrs “who had a role in fighting Isis”. These statements reveal the protesters’ opposition to the US actions in Iraq. But they also point to caution regarding how the pro-Iranian armed factions that operate in Iraq might react – these are groups that originally accused the protest movements of being controlled by the US embassy in Baghdad. In contrast to the sombre and mournful reaction in Iran, some of Iraq’s Shia population do not seem to be upset by the killings of Suleimani and al-Muhandis. They, especially supporters of the demonstrations, may even be relieved. After all, these were the two men responsible for the brutal crackdown on demonstrations since they began in October. This repression has killed more than 500 peaceful protesters and wounded more than 19,000, some of whom now live with permanent disabilities. Abdul Mahdi, an intellectual who is fluent in French, ran a government that was a front for militia forces, which operate in the shadows, disregarding laws and customs. This was not a successful recipe for putting the interests of the Iraqi people first. The government has turned Iraq into a stage for regional geopolitics, rather than meeting the pressing needs of Iraqis for better public services and economic development, as well as integrating the post-2003 generation – who are now in search of work – into society. When these people took to the streets last September, Abdul Mahdi’s government responded with water cannon that fired scalding water. It removed the makeshift markets that the poor Shia neighbourhoods depend on. This fuelled widespread anger and further helped push hundreds of thousands of young people into the streets. This was not at the instigation of the US or others but because of the government’s clumsy actions; and instead of the government taking these protests seriously, it viewed them as a US-Israeli-Gulf conspiracy against Iraq and Iran, and unleashed the militia gunmen to crush them. The government and armed factions’ violent repression of Iraqi protesters was a watershed moment that completely isolated the political class from society. The protesters who continued their demonstrations have widespread support from the Iraqi Shia and Sunni communities. They continue to make their calls on social media with a hashtag that translates as: “We want a nation.” The ongoing proxy battle between the Americans and Iranians – and the emaciated state of the Iraqi government – is driving this movement for a restored nation, which will persist despite last week’s events. It is the demonstrators who represent the country’s true will, which is a desire to restore Iraq’s independence and free it from its Iranian and American captors. • Ahmed Saadawi is the author of the novel Frankenstein in Baghdad