The world champion, Magnus Carlsen, starts his 2020 campaign on Saturday when he meets his arch rival Anish Giri in the opening round at Tata Steel Wijk aan Zee, the traditional Dutch tournament which he has dominated ever since he won its C group aged 14. In his past eight Masters appearances there Carlsen has won seven times and placed second once. Carlsen and Giri have had some sharp clashes on Twitter, and a highlight of the 29-year-old Norwegian’s interview with the Guardian on Thursday was his relish in recounting how he psychologically crushed the Dutch champion when they met at Zagreb last summer. The Wijk pairings have been kind to Carlsen in his quest to set a world record streak of 111 games unbeaten, breaking Sergei Tiviakov’s mark of 110 against lesser opponents in 2004-05. He is in the top half of the draw with an extra White, and will hope for full points from some of his next opponents Yu Yangyi, Jeffery Xiong and Lucas van Foreest. Carlsen is in the best form of his career after his vintage 2019 when he won 10 elite events, was unbeaten in classical play, held three global crowns, and in his spare time briefly reached No 1 in Fantasy Premier League. The fifth round at Wijk will be player in PSV Eindhoven’s Philips Stadion. Rounds start at 1.30pm and are free and live to watch online with grandmaster and computer commentaries. Last summer, when Carlsen triumphed in Zagreb, where his game was zestful and sharp after his work with AlphaZero, he looked ready to break his own record rating of 2889 points and go for a round 2900. That proved a bridge too far and he starts the year at 2872. He will not achieve all those 28 points at Wijk but a strong performance there would set up another shot at the record in the spring. Dangers abound. Fabiano Caruana, the world No 2, chose a lower profile in 2019 but will aim at a good start to the year before the candidates in March where the American aims to qualify for a world title rematch and avenge his defeat in 2018. Wesley So, the winner at Wijk 2017 in Carlsen’s only blemish, crushed him in Oslo for the Fischer Random title. Alireza Firouzja, the 16-year-old whose world blitz game against Carlsen sparked a huge controversy, will aim to match Bobby Fischer, Boris Spassky and Carlsen himself, who all showed their world class at that age. Tata Steel Wijk is such a reliably classic fixture to launch the chess year that it is easy to forget that its future is not assured. Steel production is in severe decline in Europe, and 2019 was a poor year for Tata Steel Netherlands. In November the Indian multinational announced job cuts which may involve nearly 20% of its 9,000 Dutch workforce. China’s Ju Wenjun, 28, took a 2.5-1.5 lead on Thursday in her women’s world title defence against Russia’s Aleksandra Goryachkina, 21. Their 12-game series has a record prize fund – €500,000 – for any women’s world championship, though this is still only a fraction of what Carlsen and his challenger will earn later this year. The first half is in Shanghai, with a 7.30am start, and the second half at Vladivostok from 5.30am. For most of this century the women’s title has been decided by a 64-player knockout, leading to a rapid turnover of champions, but the format has now reverted to a candidates tournament and a title match. Nigel Short is trebling up as chairman of the appeals committee, official match commentator and Fide representative. The women’s match which would attract most interest from chess fans, between the two clearly best players of all time, has never happened except for a single game in the 2012 Gibraltar Open. Judit Polgar v Hou Yifan is the female version of Bobby Fischer v Anatoly Karpov, the legends match that never was. It could still happen if Rex Sinquefield, who organises many similar events at St Louis, gets involved. 3653 After 1...Rd6+? 2 Kc3 Qf3+ 3 Qe3 Black’s checks ran out and White won with his extra rook. Instead 1...Qf3+! wins after 2 Kc4 (2 Kc2 Re2 wins Q for R) Re4+! 3 Kc5 Qa3+! when 4 Rb4 a5 and 4 Kxc6 Qa6+ both win a rook when Black’s extra pawns decide.