Coachella, the most high-profile music festival in the US, has announced its full lineup for 2020. Political rap-rock band Rage Against the Machine headline the Friday of the two-weekend festival in April (each weekend featuring the same lineup), as part of their first tour since 2011. The band, which formed in 1991, released four albums before splitting in 2000. They re-formed in 2007, with their first concert at Coachella that year. Two years later, following a fan campaign, they scored an unlikely UK Christmas No 1 with their expletive-filled track Killing in the Name. Rage Against the Machine, who had announced their Coachella slot in November, will warm up for the festival with three US dates close to the border with Mexico: El Paso, Las Cruces and Phoenix. Weekend 1 is sold out 🌴 Register for Weekend 2 presale at https://t.co/x8PRTb12Eh. Presale starts Monday 1/6 at 12pm PT pic.twitter.com/QPRYnJVe9P Headlining on Saturday is the Atlanta rapper Travis Scott, whose three albums have all reached No 3 in the US, the second two at No 1. Scott is known for his psychedelic take on trap music and energetic live shows. Last week he released Jackboys, an EP featuring collaborations with artists from his label, Cactus Jack. Sunday’s headliner is R&B auteur Frank Ocean, playing his first live show since 2017. The high-profile slot suggests Ocean may be planning to release a new full-length project to follow his acclaimed 2016 record Blonde, named the best album of the decade by Pitchfork and the 10th best of the century by the Guardian. Ocean has released several singles since Blonde including Lens, DHL and In My Room, along with a cover of Moon River. Other artists performing at Coachella include rappers 21 Savage, DaBaby, Megan Thee Stallion and Run the Jewels; left-field pop singers Lana Del Rey, Rex Orange County and Daniel Caesar; dance music artists Calvin Harris, Flume and Disclosure; R&B singers Summer Walker, FKA twigs and Ari Lennox; and film and TV composer Danny Elfman. UK artists appearing include Thom Yorke, Marina, Lewis Capaldi, Idles, Sleaford Mods, Slowthai and Fatboy Slim. This year’s Coachella also marks the return of one of the biggest artists in K-pop: boyband Bigbang, who have been on hiatus while members G-Dragon, Taeyang and Daesung completed military service. A fourth member, Seungri, retired from the group and the entertainment industry in March 2019 after he was alleged to have arranged sex workers for clients and investors at a Seoul nightclub.