Jessica Andrews has won the £10,000 Portico prize, which goes to the book deemed to “best evoke the spirit of the north”, for her story of a girl from Sunderland who feels like an outsider when she goes to university in London. Andrews sat down to write her debut novel, Saltwater, at the age of 24, fearing that the stories of the working-class people she loved were “slipping away”. Told in fragments, exploring mother-daughter relationships and a shifting class identity, it follows Lucy as she moves south to a new life she finds overwhelming, eventually leaving London. Speaking after her win, Andrews said it felt surreal to take the £10,000 prize. “I lived for a very long time maxed out at £2,000 on my overdraft,” she said, “so if I’d known a few years ago that I was going to win a prize like this, I would probably not have been able to comprehend it.” Despite Lucy’s struggles, Andrews said she wanted the novel to include joy, and kept a note on her desk while she was working to remind her to find space for hope. “I was writing about the north-east and my northern identity,” she said, “and I wanted to write a novel with joy and light and life in it – often the north is not portrayed in that way. I wanted to think about how you carry your northern identity with you, and how [it] is inside you even if you’re not in the north – it takes root.” In the novel, Andrews describes the smell of “oil and metal, a smell that has always coated the edges of things. It is the smell of the north-east, of the factories and the warehouses, the cobbles and the terraced houses and the low, heavy skies. It is the smell of my dad at the end of the day.” And this sense of the north is fundamental to her narrator, who declares: “I am tough as anything. I have all this north deep in my soul.” Simon Savidge, who chaired the judges, said the novel showed that the spirit of the north is “not just around us, or a particular location to visit – but a place within us. “It’s something we take with us when we set out to find our space in the world,” he said, “and when we spread northern stoicism, joy, grit, humour and hope wherever we go. Saltwater celebrates all this in a powerful, provocative and poignant tale.” Saltwater beat books by authors including Benjamin Myers and Ray Robinson to win the prize, which was established in 1985 by the Portico Library in Manchester to “celebrate the strong regional and literary identity of the north”. The library’s chair, Lynne Allan, said that organisers were “more than proud” to award the prize to a remarkable debut novel that is “full of optimism … a tender tribute to women across generations and an important exploration of women’s lives today.”