Good morning, Happy New Year and welcome to the first briefing of 2020. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories to get you back into the news groove. Boris Johnson has broken his silence on the killing of Qassem Suleimani by saying that the Iranian general was a “threat to all our interests”, while Donald Trump has doubled down on his threat to strike at cultural sites if Tehran retaliates. The prime minister, who returned from his holiday in the Caribbean on Sunday, called for all sides to de-escalate tensions and is expected to discuss the Iran crisis with ministers today. Foreign secretary Dominic Raab will brief parliament on Tuesday before he meets US secretary of state Mike Pompeo in Washington later in the week. In his latest comments, the US president defended the threat he made on Sunday to attack Iranian cultural sites if Tehran struck at American targets amid growing calls for him to give more justification for the drone strike. Democratic presidential hopeful Elizabeth Warren accused the president of trying to divert attention from his upcoming impeachment trial. In the Middle East, Suleimani’s daughter told a ceremony in Tehran this morning that the families of American troops were “waiting for the death of their children”. The huge gathering in the capital comes as the regime said it would no longer abide by any of its commitments to the unravelling 2015 nuclear deal despite the pleas of European powers. Across the border, the Iraqi parliament called for the expulsion of all foreign troops based in the country as part of the anti-Islamic State international coalition. Britain has 400 military personnel in Iraq. In Kenya, three Americans have been killed after Al-Shabaab insurgents attacked a military compound. Golden night – British stars have had a night to remember at the Golden Globe awards in Hollywood. Olivia Colman won best drama actress for her portrayal of the Queen in The Crown, Brian Cox won for Succession and Phoebe Waller-Bridge won best TV comedy series and actress for Fleabag. Sam Mendes picked up from the screen talent when his first world war drama 1917 won best director and best drama film. The list of winners also included Chernobyl in the best limited TV series segment and it was a great night for Quentin Tarantino’s Once Upon A Time In Hollywood for which he claimed best comedy screenplay and Brad Pitt won best supporting comedy actor. Earlier, host Ricky Gervais ruffled feathers with his opening monologue and Billy Porter, Jennifer Lopez and Cynthia Erivo starred on the red carpet. On a more political note, Russell Crowe and Cate Blanchett used their speeches to link the Australian bushfires to the climate crisis. High pay ‘shame’ – The typical FTSE100 boss took just 33 hours to earn more than the typical worker’s annual salary, according to figures compiled by the High Pay Centre. The average boss is paid 117 times more than the median worker, the data shows, at £901.30 an hour or £3.46m a year. It means that by 5pm today the chief executives of Britain’s largest listed businesses will have made more than the national median full-time annual pay of £29,559, or about £14.37 an hour. Unions said the statistics should be a “source of national shame”. Weinstein in the dock – The long-awaited trial of film producer Harvey Weinstein is due to begin in New York today with testimony expected from two alleged victims of sexual assault. The 67-year-old denies five charges of sexual assault, including the rape of a longtime lover in 2013, in the case that helped to spark the #MeToo movement. The trial, which follows months of legal wrangling, will also hear from Sopranos actor Annabella Sciorra, who said Weinstein raped her in the early 1990s. The actor Rosanna Arquette, who said she was one of Weinstein’s victims, will be attending the trial. Anti-abortion rise – The number of anti-abortion groups on university campuses is growing as campaigners step up their efforts to recruit students to the pro-life cause. According to a study by the National Union of Students, there are now at least 14 anti-abortion societies in university students’ unions around the UK despite fierce opposition from students who are overwhelmingly pro-choice. Some student unions have been threatened with legal action if they attempt to prevent anti-abortion groups opening on campus. Rebel cause – Vegans scanning the culinary landscape for increasing choices might be deflated to learn that the new meatless offering from Burger King is cooked on the same grill as its meat products. The Rebel Whopper is instead aimed at “flexitarians”, people who eat meat but are trying to reduce their intake. Toni Vernelli, international head of communications and marketing at Veganuary, nevertheless welcomed the new product because it could “make a big difference to animals and the planet”. Ed Pilkington hears from some of the most influential journalists in the US on how hard lessons were learned after their coverage of the 2016 election. But will 2020 really be any different? Plus: Carol Anderson on voter suppression and the US election. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/01/03-63134-200106TIF_USmediab.mp3 In case your mind is drifting towards your next holiday, we’ve come up with the 20 new attractions opening across Britain in the next 12 months. They include restored Victorian treasures in Newcastle and Birmingham (the City Pool and Roundhouse respectively), a new Museum of Making in Derbyshire to celebrate the area’s industrial heritage, and the Slimbridge Wetland Centre in Gloucestershire. Family fun is promised from the summer at the Gulliver’s Valley theme park in South Yorkshire and the 1950s Americana-themed Tornado Springs park in Hampshire. In the capital, you will be able to visit the revamped Museum of the Home in Hoxton (formerly the Geffrye) while later in the year the world-renowned Fotografiska gallery opens its latest branch in Whitechapel. Teenage midfielder Curtis Jones said his stunning winner for Liverpool against Everton at Anfield in the FA Cup was beyond his wildest dreams as Jürgen Klopp savoured the triumph of a line-up packed with inexperienced players. Pablo Zabaleta’s goal for West Ham with 20 minutes left finally broke Gillingham’s resistance in their third-round match, with Pablo Fornals adding the second in a 2-0 win. Sam Kerr’s all-action Chelsea debut yielded everything but a goal as Emma Hayes’s side came from behind to beat Reading 3-1. Jimmy Anderson said the five-wicket haul that helped put England in command of the second Test against South Africa made all the pain and sacrifice of his rehabilitation worthwhile. Exeter overran London Irish 45-28 in the Premiership thanks to a first-half blitz that included four tries in 10 minutes. A “degree of frustration” is behind the decision to publish a list of allegations against the bad employment practices of some horse trainers, a racing union official has said. And Mario Ballotelli criticised Lazio fans after offensive chants towards the striker caused play to be briefly stopped on Sunday. A survey has revealed the best value commuter towns for workers in London, Manchester, Edinburgh, Bristol and Birmingham. The winners were Grays in Essex, Hindley, Dunfermline, Newport and Wolverhampton. On the markets, stocks have slipped in Asia over fears of a Middle East war. The FTSE100 is on course to shed 0.4% this morning while the pound will buy $1.308 and €1.172. There is near-unanimity on the front pages as most lead on the Iran crisis. The FT says “Iran rolls back on nuclear deal as Iraqis seek removal of US troops”, the Guardian goes with “Pressure grows on Trump to justify Suleimani killing” and the Mirror picks up the warning of an Iranian MP: “Attack the White House”. Others prefer a more domestic angle. The Mail says “PM walks tightrope on Iran”, the Times has “We will kill UK troops, warns Iran” and the Telegraph leads with “Do not dare to strike at us, Johnson warns Iran”. The Express has “Boris: we will not lament his death” and the Sun has a similar line: “No tears for a terrorist”. Only the i goes off piste with “HS2 rail budget ‘out of control’”. The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com