Simona Halep is refusing to look ahead after charging into the second week of the Australian Open as fellow top seeds tumbled out. The former finalist and reigning Wimbledon champion took just over an hour to down unseeded Kazakh Yulia Putintseva 6-1 6-4 in Saturday’s third-round encounter on Rod Laver Arena. With world No 2 Karolina Pliskova falling to Russian underdog Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova, Halep is the highest seed left on her side of the women’s draw. But the Romanian fourth seed is paying no mind to the shock third-round exit of Pliskova, nor highly-touted contenders Naomi Osaka, Serena Williams and Belinda Bencic. “I’m not focusing on other players,” Halep said. “I’m just focusing on myself. I know that this level, it is really tough every match, so we have to be 100 per cent focused for what we have to do on court. “(It) doesn’t matter who is winning, who is losing. I have just to do my job when I step on the court. It’s really tough to get match by match and to win seven matches, but I know it’s possible. So makes me feel a little bit more confident.” Runner-up to Caroline Wozniacki in 2018, Halep was pleased to advance to the fourth round at Melbourne Park for a third straight year, and insists the Wimbledon crown isn’t weighing heavily on her expectations. “It’s been a great year last year winning Wimbledon, but here it is a different tennis,” the two-time major champion said. “So I’m ready. I was ready when I came here, so I’m just enjoying every match I play. I give everything I have to win and actually I’m really, really happy that I’m in the second week now.” The gritty baseliner fell at the last-16 hurdle last year, losing a tight three-setter to Williams. She has an easier assignment on this occasion, facing Elise Mertens on Monday after Belgium’s 16th seed and 2018 semi-finalist beat American CiCi Bellis 6-1 6-7 (5) 6-0. The unseeded Garbiñe Muguruza showed she is a live contender for the title, thrashing No 5 seed Elina Svitolina 6-1, 6-2 in little over an hour. The former French Open and Wimbledon champion looked back to her best form as she set up a fourth-round meeting with either Zarina Diyas or Kiki Bertens. Svitolina’s departure means that only three of the top eight women’s seeds – Halep, Petra Kvitova and Ashleigh Barty – have reached the last 16.