At this time of the year, thoughts increasingly turn to those who are sleeping rough. Freezing temperatures and darker evenings make people who are homeless even more vulnerable than usual. Meanwhile, the recent festive holidays have filled our TV screens with idyllic images of domestic warmth – drawing an even sharper contrast between rough sleepers and those of us lucky enough to have a roof over our heads. We hear their stories thanks to the tireless work done by homeless charities to help them and highlight their plight. Many of the hurdles they face during their day-to-day lives are things the rest us take for granted. Iulian, 33I was living in a shared flat in Hounslow, working as a construction labourer, but I didn’t get paid for the work I did and I ended up on the streets. I headed into central London to try to find shelter and work. At night, I looked for somewhere safe to sleep – passages that were well-lit or places that had CCTV. It was a difficult time, it was winter and really harsh. I survived on charity food handouts. All I had was my mobile phone, which was my only lifeline. I’d been sleeping rough for a couple of months when Crisis at Christmas arranged a place for me with Caritas Anchor House, a residential skills centre in Canning Town, east London. The staff there were able to help me resettle and put my life back together. I had a case worker who worked hard with me to get all the right documentation I needed to find work. She helped me reapply for my ID, which I lost sleeping rough, and obtain a national insurance number, which took a month of chasing. I was also able to use the Caritas address and supporting statement to apply for my first bank account. Without a bank account you can’t get a proper job with a legitimate company. I found that out the hard way. They also helped me to put together a CV and arranged some new clothing for interviews. Eventually I found work through another charity called Only a Pavement Away, which helps homeless people to find jobs in hospitality. They set up an interview with the Ivy Collection. I did a trial shift with them, which went well, and I began working full-time in March. For the first six months I was a kitchen porter, but I’ve recently been promoted to the position of commis chef and I’m currently doing lots of different kitchen work, especially pastry preparation. The days can be long but it’s rewarding. I still recall the satisfaction I got looking at my balance the first time my wages went into my account. I also have a place of my own now – a houseshare in east London. My aim is to move up to sous chef next and eventually to head chef – I’m ambitious and I want to return the faith everyone has shown in me. Nick, 39About seven years ago my relationship fell apart and I lost my home in High Wycombe. I had become estranged from my family and I didn’t want to be a burden to them anyway. I was in a hole, but I remembered seeing a programme on TV about the charity Emmaus. I rang them, but the only place they had was in Leeds. They paid my train fare so I headed north. I was fortunate I still had the bank account that my parents had set me up with when I was a teenager, even if it didn’t have much left in it. It was important I kept that account clean and didn’t abuse it. I have seen people in hostels share accounts and fall out. I was asked more than once if I could have someone’s benefits paid into mine but I always said no. I didn’t want to get involved in disputes. It’s very hard to get a job without a bank account because of tax and PAYE. Having an account meant I could get myself back together eventually. Emmaus offers support if you need to establish an ID. They reapply for birth certificates and help with the paperwork to set up a bank account, using the community address. My driving licence had expired, so they helped me renew it and I started driving for them. I was also given training such as learning to repair PCs. I found a job eventually in an online retail company, working in customer service and doing deliveries thanks to the skills I learned. I’m now back working with Emmaus Leeds as a paid driver. Today I have my own flat and I’m in a better place. I’m also back in contact with my family and we’re much closer now. Emmaus helped me break the stereotype of homelessness and I now want to help it develop its social enterprise so it can be there for future generations. It’s about helping others who are in the same position I was in. AnonymousI suffered domestic abuse for several years. My husband controlled every aspect of my life. After many years I eventually found a way to leave him. I was supported by Birmingham and Solihull Women’s Aid who found me emergency temporary accommodation in a refuge. I had to start all over again with my kids – we had nothing. With staff support I applied for universal credit, but the Benefits Agency said they had to pay the money into a bank account. I thought it would be easy to open an account, however I walked with the children to three different banks, both independently and with staff support, and each bank said “No”, because they wanted the address of the refuge, but this could put me and the rest of families at risk. One bank saw me three times and gave me false hope, each time saying that they would accept. Then, in the final appointment, they said the manager had now refused because I didn’t have an address. I was so upset and frustrated. It was humiliating and again I had no control. Staff at the refuge then told me that HSBC UK had started a new way to open an account for women in refuges and we didn’t have to give the refuge address. I attended a branch far away from the shelter for security reasons. During the appointment I thought they would say no at any moment, but when they said the account was open I was so relieved. I finally had control. It was my account, I could make my own decisions, buy the kids the things they needed, without having to beg or fear his anger. HSBC UK is working with local housing and homelessness charities to provide a bank account to people without a fixed address, helping to break the cycle of financial exclusion. To find out more about this, and what else HSBC UK is doing to support local communities, visit hsbc.co.uk/togetherwethrive