The decision by Prince Harry and Meghan to distance themselves from the royal family has captured every front page today, with mentions of royal bombshells and many asking why the Queen was not consulted about the announcement. The Sun gives us the Twitter hashtag headline for the day with “Megxit”, and says the Queen is upset but princes Charles and William are “incandescent with rage”. It claims its palace bombshell as an exclusive and is practically the only paper that does not feature a picture of the couple looking happy together. Tomorrow's front page: Queen ‘deeply upset’ at Harry and Meghan’s Royal exit sparking ‘civil war’ – with Charles and Wills ‘incadescent with rage’ https://t.co/xo6t5qdpsO pic.twitter.com/ZYEfjlEmwN The Daily Mail’s poster-style front page speaks of the “Queen’s fury” at the revelation in its royal bombshell special issue. Thursday's @DailyMailUK #MailFrontPages pic.twitter.com/YyP5xiRjCG The Mirror says simply: “They didn’t even tell the Queen.” It quotes a source saying: “They are showing complete disregard for the institution.” Tomorrow's front page: They didn't even tell the Queen #tomorrowspaperstoday https://t.co/FfxLtFlgcO pic.twitter.com/mGWRZBx4gi The Guardian reports the couple are going to step back from their senior royal duties and it highlights their plans to become financially independent. Guardian front page, Thursday 9 January 2020: Harry and Meghan to ‘step back as senior royals’ pic.twitter.com/B2BM4Q4Y3z The Telegraph says: “Harry and Meghan quit the Firm” alongside a huge picture of the couple and a deep single-column story. The Matt cartoon takes a dig at the royal family more widely with a drawing of a worker at the Pizza Express at Woking hanging a sign saying: “We’re hiring ex-dukes and duchesses.” Tomorrow's @Telegraph front page:"Harry and Meghan quit the firm"#TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/W7q5Hh0Jdy The Times points to a rift in the royal family and gives its readers a catchy: “Harry and Meghan quit amid royal family split.” It says the Queen is understood to be very disappointed. TIMES: Harry and Meghan quit roles amid Palace split #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/e3W4P3KSBS The Express gives its front page to its headline: “Queen’s dismay as Harry and Meghan step back from royal life.” It reports palace courtiers are disappointed, too, and finds room for a small picture of the Queen looking unhappy. EXPRESS: Queen’s dismay as Harry and Meghan step back from Royal Life #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/1z5YiY7NG4 The i makes it all about Harry, with the headline: “Prince quits.” It says the royal family is facing its most turbulent time since the 1936 abdication. Thursday's front page: Prince quits - Harry and Meghan resign from royal duties in search for privacy #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/74rp6vBDRJ The Financial Times forgoes a picture of the couple, giving its splash to the US-Iran crisis, but gives the royals a downpage spot. “Royal couple pull out of public eye in search of financial independence” is the headline. Just published: front page of the Financial Times, UK edition, Thursday 9 January https://t.co/aM4Y8Cf7lO pic.twitter.com/Tqvn38Gl2o And an honourable mention for the New York Post, which pursued the Megxit idea and backed it up with an eye-catching vision of what “commoner” life might be like for the couple. Tomorrow's cover: What’s next for Prince Harry and Meghan Markle after royal family exit https://t.co/HFKsfoFVMM pic.twitter.com/1YmBaPN2g1