Bruno Fernandes is due to fly to England on Wednesday for a Manchester United medical after the final details of the midfielder’s transfer from Sporting Lisbon were settled. It is understood the Portugal international will cost United a basic €55m (£46.5m) plus up to €25m in add-ons and that he has agreed a contract to 2024 worth around £70,000 a week before bonuses, with the option of an extra year. Fernandes, who can also play as a No 10, has scored 14 goals in 28 games at club and international level this season. “Manchester United is delighted to announce it has reached agreement with Sporting Clube de Portugal for the transfer of Bruno Fernandes,” the club said in a statement. Tottenham Hotspur have confirmed the signing of the winger Steven Bergwijn from PSV Eindhoven on a contract to 2025. The 22-year-old will take the No 23 shirt left vacant by Christian Eriksen’s move to Internazionale. Spurs are paying €30m, plus €2m in add-ons, for Bergwijn, who has played nine times for the Netherlands. Bergwijn said: “It’s a dream, I think, for every football player to play in the Premier League: the atmosphere, the stadiums are always full … I want to score goals, give assists, play in the Champions League. Last season I loved seeing [Tottenham] beat Ajax!” Spurs have made an inquiry to Chelsea about the France striker Olivier Giroud, who has six months on his contract and wants more regular football in the countdown to Euro 2020, but it is understood the chances of a deal are slim. José Mourinho wants cover for the injured Harry Kane and has missed out on Krzysztof Piatek of Milan. Spurs wanted Piatek on loan but Milan were interested only in a permanent transfer and have accepted a €27m offer from Hertha Berlin. Tottenham have also shown an interest in Real Sociedad’s Willian José but the clubs have been a long way apart on a fee. Eriksen wrote a farewell letter to Tottenham fans on Twitter in which he said: “I have so many unbelievable memories over the last 6.5 years I was at Spurs. I enjoyed being at the training ground every day and playing games in the stadium so much, but sometimes you just want to try something new.” Sheffield United are closing in on the signing of Sander Berge from Genk for a club record fee of a minimum £25m. Negotiations between the club are ongoing with optimism on each side that the transfer will be completed. The 21-year-old Norway international is primarily a holding midfielder. It is thought Manchester United have also been monitoring Berge, who impressed Jürgen Klopp when Liverpool played Genk in the Champions League group stage this season. Crystal Palace have agreed a deal to buy Nathan Ferguson from West Brom for £4m. The 19-year-old defender has six months on his contract there. West Ham have completed the signing of the midfielder Tomas Soucek from Sparta Prague on an initial loan, with an option to make the transfer permanent in the summer. The deal is worth €20.5m, with a loan fee of €4.5m and the rest payable if the Czech Republic international stays.