The billionaire brothers have come a long way from their humble upbringing in Manchester. They grew up in what Peter Done has described as the “slums of Salford”, sleeping four siblings to a room in a two-up, two-down in Ordsall. They both left school at 15 without qualifications after working in their father’s illegal bookmaking business. They opened their first bookmaker in 1967, funded by a win on England’s World Cup victory the year before. Building their empire to the 1,650-shop network of today has not been easy. Fred Done once told of being stabbed five times by an angry punter who had lost £50 on a horse ridden by Lester Piggott. They also control the highly profitable Peninsula Business Services, which has more than 10 companies in everything from employment law to workplace health and human resources. According to the latest Sunday Times rich list, the brothers – Fred, 76, and Peter, 72, control combined investments worth more than £1.25bn, a decline of £100m on the previous year. That puts them 117th on the list and third among UK-based people who made their money from gambling. Betfred has not been in the best of financial health of late, making losses in each of the past two years. The brothers are closing shops too, after government curbs on fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs) hit revenues. But the rest of their business empire has been doing well and the brothers paid themselves a £46m dividend last year. Back in 2007, they donated £10,000 to the former Labour MP Hazel Blears, who represented their native Salford, but they appear to have drifted to the right with age. They have been much more generous donors to the Conservative party over the past few years, giving £375,000 since 2016 via their holding company Rainy City Investments. Electoral Commission records also show a non-cash donation in 2011 worth £4,680 to the Shipley MP, Philip Davies, a frequent and vociferous advocate for the gambling industry. Absolutely. The brothers have a charitable trust and Fred once donated a day of Betfred’s profits from the first day of the Cheltenham festival to the Royal Manchester children’s hospital. Another donation, to the Jessie May children’s charity, was also linked to their betting interests. They promised to give £200 for every century break played at the snooker World Championship, rounded up to £40,000.