Danny Rose is set to join Newcastle until the end of the season after Steve Bruce’s side agreed to pay Tottenham a £2m loan fee for the England defender. Rose has rarely featured for Spurs since José Mourinho succeeded Maurico Pochettino as head coach in November, having made just three Premier League starts in that time and he will now have the opportunity to stake a claim for Gareth Southgate’s Euro 2020 squad at St James’ Park. Bruce admitted last week that he was keen on bringing the 29-year-old to Tyneside after injuries to Jetro Willems and Paul Dummett ruled them both out for the rest of the season. But despite Rose stating in November that he had “no intention” of leaving Tottenham before his contract expires at the end of next season, it is understood that the deal includes an option to make his move permanent in June. “In January, you are probably going to hear something,” he said. “I’m telling you right now that I’m not going anywhere until my contract is finished. Daniel Levy told me in the summer there was no new contract for me at Tottenham, which is fine. I respect that. We move on. My contract is up in 18 months’ time and I’ll leave the football club then. People [in the media] can save their time – trying to get stuff ready for January about me being sold. Because I can tell you now: it ain’t happening. I know what people were trying to do in the summer. There were no bids – that was rubbish.” Having previously spent time on loan at Sunderland, the Doncaster-born left-back is believed to have rejected offers from Bournemouth and Watford in favour of returning to the north-east. Rose has won 29 caps for England and is likely to be in contention for a place in Southgate’s squad if he can prove his form and fitness. Last week, Mourinho rejected reports of a training ground argument after Rose was left out of the matchday squad to face Watford. “Between me and Danny, no. I don’t know what you mean by tension in the air, I don’t have any problem with him,” he said.