Everyone knows that it’s not only what you win or who you wear that counts at an awards ceremony – it’s what you say. And were there a prize for most inspiring speech at the Golden Globes, it would go straight into the hands of Michelle Williams. Her award, for playing the magisterial but overlooked dancer and choreographer Gwen Verdon in the searching eight-part drama Fosse/Verdon, was entirely deserved. It was what she said once she got up on stage, though, that really mattered. In the most acute and pointed speech of the evening, she appealed to women to vote in the forthcoming presidential election in their own self-interest. “It’s what men have been doing for years,” she said. The A-lister avoided a certain A-word, referring instead to the “choices” available to a woman in deciding when to have children and with whom. Williams, who has a daughter by the late Heath Ledger and is currently expecting a child by the director Thomas Kail, expressed her gratitude “to have lived in a moment in our society where choice exists, because as women and as girls, things can happen to our bodies that are not our choice.” Michelle Williams accepts The Golden Globe for Best Actress in a Limited Series or TV Movie. #GoldenGlobes pic.twitter.com/afS9Hkuoky It was a perfectly calibrated speech that avoided divisive words (“Trump” was another one conspicuous by its absence) and aimed instead at a sense of unity and fairness. Backstage at the post-awards press conference a male journalist opened the questioning by casting a line in the forlorn hope that it might come back with the word “abortion” attached to the end of it. “I think there was some confusion about what specifically you may have been sharing,” he told Williams, pressing her for “clarity” only to meet the cold, hard, brilliant brick wall of common sense: “Um, no, I said it as I intended to,” she said. In other words: nice try, buster. That Williams is a performer of uncommon intelligence and inventiveness will be news to no one. If you were going by Oscar nominations alone, you would have to consider her complex studies of three women enduring very different species of marital trauma in Brokeback Mountain, Blue Valentine and Manchester By the Sea as well as her accomplished portrayal of Marilyn Monroe in the otherwise mediocre My Week With Marilyn. Those with a mind to look beyond the approbation of awards bodies will find in her films with the director Kelly Reichardt (Wendy and Lucy, Meek’s Cutoff, Certain Women) yet more evidence to support the idea that she is the finest and most unshowy actor of her generation. In the matter of becoming a spokesperson for change, however, she is just getting started. At the Emmys in September, where she was also honoured for Fosse/Verdon, she chose pay parity rather than the erosion of reproductive rights as the focus of her speech. Doubtless this was a subject that would have been dear to her heart even if she had not become an unwitting embodiment of the cause. In 2017 it was revealed that her co-star in the thriller All the Money in the World, Mark Wahlberg, had trousered $1.5m for 11th-hour reshoots while she had been paid less than $1,000. (The insult was compounded by the fact that they were both represented by the same agency, William Morris Endeavor.) When the scandal broke, it transformed that movie overnight into a lightning rod for not one but two of this century’s most pressing cultural conversations: #MeToo – the reshoots had been necessitated, after all, by the removal of Kevin Spacey from the film in the wake of historical accusations of sexual assault – and the gender pay gap. It also turned Williams into a walking symbol of the sort of institutional bias that can exist even in a supposedly liberal and progressive industry. She doesn’t sound much like a victim now, though. Hollywood made the mistake of underestimating her, even as it was showering her with accolades, but after her brace of galvanising speeches Williams is a champ not a chump.