I have a Hotpoint WMBF 742 UK washing machine which is affected by the latest Whirlpool recall. I’m not impressed by the delay of months for a repair or replacement as I feel I have been sold an unsafe product. I’d like a refund to get a new machine now. That’s not what is being offered, and the company is hard to get hold of. My family is sporty and always covered in mud, so I have to use the machine. I bought it from a local independent retailer and it reassured me that the risk of a proper fire (as opposed to the door lock melting and stopping the machine working) is very small. But as I continue to use it, I worry it will invalidate the offer to repair or replace. What are my options? SM, New Mills, Derbyshire The timing of the recall of more than half a million washing machines just before Christmas could not have been worse. Once customers were able to overcome a broken website and jammed phone lines, Whirlpool provided confusing advice by telling customers their options were to unplug the machine, or to use it on a cool 20C setting. It sought to reassure customers that they will be eligible for a free like-for-like replacement or repair, regardless of whether they choose to use it or not. It says it is gearing up to offer replacement and repair appointments from Thursday 9 January, calling it “a complex operation which takes time”. However, Which? consumer rights expert Adam French warns: “The only way to remove the risk is not to use the machine, and there are reports that insurers will not cover damage from a fire that starts in one of the faulty machines. “To rub further salt into the wound, it is unclear about how long it will take to get a repair or replacement, leaving customers frustrated as they could potentially be left for months, or even years, with an unsafe machine, as owners of some of Whirlpool’s potentially dangerous dryers have found.” Which? urges Whirlpool to offer refunds for machines that could potentially put people at risk. There’s no legal obligation for it to do so, but Which? would like to see customers pushing strongly for this when the recall starts. Similarly, it says Whirlpool should reimburse any out-of-pocket expenses such as launderette bills, so keep receipts in case there’s a chance to claim. Whirlpool says: “We know just how important washing machines are, especially at this time of year, and are deeply sorry for the inconvenience and concern this recall may cause.” We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions