World leaders and Holocaust survivors have gathered at the site of the former Nazi concentration camp in Auschwitz to mark the 75th anniversary of the camp’s liberation. Two hundred survivors of the Holocaust were expected to attend, with visitors drawn from Israel, the US, Australia, Peru, Russia, Slovenia and elsewhere. As well as survivors of the camps, many bereaved relatives of those killed during the genocide were also attending. The Auschwitz concentration camp complex in south-west Poland was the site of the largest mass murder in a single location in human history. While precise numbers are still debated, according to the US Holocaust Memorial Museum, the German SS systematically killed at least 960,000 of the 1.1-1.3 million Jews deported to the camp. More people died at Auschwitz than at any other Nazi concentration camp. When the camp was liberated on 27 January 1945, Soviet troops found grisly evidence of the horror. About 7,000 starving prisoners were found alive, and millions of items of clothing that once belonged to men, women and children were discovered along with 6,350kg of human hair. In January 1942, the Nazi party had decided to roll out the “Final Solution”. Camps dedicated solely to the extermination of Jews had been created before, but this was formalised by SS Lieut-Gen Reinhard Heydrich in a speech at the Wannsee conference. The extermination camp Auschwitz II was opened in the same year. Auschwitz II had the largest prisoner population of any of the three main camps on the site. In January 1942, the first chamber using lethal Zyklon B gas was built. Four further chambers were built, and these were used for systematic genocide up until November 1944. Auschwitz was also the site of disturbing medical experimentation on Jewish and Roma prisoners, including practices such as castration and sterilisation. SS captain Dr Josef Mengele was one of the physicians practising there. More than 7,000 Nazi personnel are thought to have served at Auschwitz but only a few hundred have been prosecuted for the crimes committed there. The pursuit of justice has not ceased, with German justice officials saying in 2013 that there were 30 surviving Auschwitz officials who should face prosecution. In 2019, a former guard at Stutthof concentration camp was placed on trial. George Arnett Among politicians attending Monday’s observances at Auschwitz, which is located in southern Poland, a region under German occupation during the war, were Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and the Israeli president, Reuven Rivlin. The Polish president, Andrzej Duda, was also in attendance alongside German President Frank-Walter Steinmeier. Duda took the opportunity in his speech to recall how Poland was invaded and occupied, losing 6 million of its citizens in the war, half of them Jews. He stated that Poland fought the Germans on several fronts, warned the world in vain about the genocide of the Jews, and has for decades been a responsible custodian of Auschwitz and other sites of German war atrocities. The Polish president went on to say that distorting the history of the second world war, denying the crimes of genocide and negating the Holocaust is tantamount to desecration of the memory of the victims. “Truth about the Holocaust must not die” he insisted. The ceremony took place in a heated tent straddling the train tracks that had once transported people to their deaths. Sadiq Khan, the London mayor, was among attendees at the memorial, visiting the camp with the museum’s director, Piotr Cywiński. He viewed a plaque that includes the name of London after it recently pledged a contribution of £300,000 ($391,000) for the site’s preservation. The camp was liberated by Soviet soldiers on 27 January 1945. They found 7,000 starving prisoners alive at the camp, where the German SS systematically killed at least 960,000 Jews. Other victims included approximately 74,000 Poles, 21,000 Roma, 15,000 Soviet prisoners of war and at least 10,000 from other nationalities.