On 3 November 1965, a BBC play launched a revolution that changed TV drama for ever. It was Up the Junction, produced by Tony Garnett, who has died aged 83. The roots of TV drama were in theatre: early programmes were often a play recreated in a studio, or a script filmed on a theatre-like set. The dream of many professionals who grew up watching movies was to create a TV-cinema hybrid called “the single film”. The brilliant and transformational insight of Garnett was that fiction should aspire to match the realism and reportorial zeal of news and documentary. Up the Junction, adapted by Nell Dunn from her own short stories, was the story of a backstreet abortion (the procedure did not become legal in the UK until two years later). Crucially, though, it was not shot to look like a play, but with the cool scrutiny of a documentary. Garnett and director Ken Loach even included a straight interview with a real doctor. This confused viewers and reviewers, who complained that they thought the news had accidentally resumed during a play. But it soon became clear that this deliberate blurring was a watershed moment. A year later, their Cathy Come Home, a fictional but searingly real depiction of a young married couple who lose their home after she becomes pregnant and he loses his job, became the foundation stone of the now towering TV genre of docudrama. Its broadcast led to governmental and public anguish about the previously ignored problem of homelessness. The play is sometimes erroneously credited with the creation of the rehousing charity Shelter. That was coincidental, but the later launch of Crisis was a direct response to campaigning triggered by the play. Seen as reportorial, Garnett’s early depictions of the crises of working-class life were also, it turned out, painfully autobiographical, though this did not become known until the last decade of his life. In a Guardian interview with Maggie Brown, Garnett revealed he had been drawn to the story of Up the Junction because, in 1941, when he was a child of five in Birmingham, his mother, Ida, had died as the result of an illegal amateur termination. Under police investigation as an accessory to the crime, Tony’s father, Tom, took his own life. Friends and colleagues asked afterwards why he had “decided to reveal” the detail at that point. He insisted there had been no calculation. A journalist had asked him a straight question about his knowledge of illegal abortion, so he had given a straight answer. The reason he had never spoken about it publicly before was that no one had publicly asked him; if they had, he would have done. This incident captures, in miniature, his personality and values. When Up the Junction and Cathy Come Home appeared on TV, the long and elusive dream of a British film industry was in one of its most feverish periods, and Garnett and Loach moved to the big screen in 1969 for Kes, keeping the hyperrealistic look they had perfected in television. Subsequently, Loach became one of Britain’s most significant film directors, but, after Kes, there were a few more projects with Garnett, all controversial in some way. In 1971, the pair shot a documentary in Kenya about the work of Save the Children, which provided logistical and financial assistance for the film. But when a rough cut was screened for the charity, they were horrified by the depiction of international aid efforts as a bumbling attempt to appease post-colonial guilt. Legal threats from the charity led to the film being shelved, and it was not seen publicly until 2011, as part of a National Film Theatre season to mark Garnett’s 75th birthday. Despite that blip, Garnett remained committed to television, and the attempt to present a socialist political perspective. His work on BBC One’s Play for Today included 1977’s The Price of Coal, a remarkable two-part drama about the human cost of British mining. Directed by Loach, it presciently set out the political fault lines that would erupt in the miners’ strike of 1984. Garnett also steered on to screen, finding his wily way around wobbles and attempted blocks by BBC bosses, two major pieces by Jim Allen, a former miner who became one of TV’s most significant political dramatists. Days of Hope in 1975 followed a northern working-class family from the first world war to the General Strike of 1926. The Spongers in 1978 took its title from a tabloid newspaper smear at beneficiaries of the welfare system but, set provocatively against the background of the Queen’s silver jubilee, dared to suggest that it was the royals who fared best from state handouts. Garnett achieved another landscape-changing drama with 1978’s Law & Order, written by GF Newman, which explored crime and punishment in Britain by taking the perspectives of a copper, a criminal, a lawyer and a prisoner. The pair always maintained suspicions that they influenced the later US mega-drama Law & Order. What is unarguable is that the British series encouraged a hyper-accuracy in police procedurals that is dominant to this day. Great TV drama is often attributed to writers and directors, the role of producer being hard to see on screen. Garnett made huge artistic contributions to his projects – spending months on casting, to find actors with the desired level of realism – but a large part of his greatness was as a player of the TV system. A calm and charming man, speaking softly in a voice that never lost the Brummie hum of his childhood, he was adept at operating on a “need to know” basis, tactically omitting information executives might later wish they had known. Garnett skilfully prevented his superiors from knowing quite how brave they were being. A particular trick was to take advantage of the holidays of bosses to find a slot for especially contentious shows. Importantly, the rows over Garnett shows typically involved objection to stance – how dare they say that about the Queen/the government/a charity? – rather than accuracy. It is a measure of Garnett’s meticulousness that Days of Hope, The Spongers and The Price of Coal stood up to brutal fact-checking from detractors. Garnett also had the vital skill of self-reinvention. After a relatively fallow 1980s, he set up World Productions in 1990. Garnett was among the first in Britain to understand what had long been seen as common sense in the US – a producer has more power as an outsider selling in than as an employee of networks. The trap would have been to stick to his past signature of extreme social realism, but he was canny enough to know that TV must move with the times. His new look was a sort of glossy realism or intelligent soap, still socially accurate but visually slick. Cardiac Arrest in 1994, written by Jed Mercurio (although, as a then serving NHS doctor, under the pseudonym John McUre), captured the desperation and unwise erotic and even psychotic decisions of overworked and underpaid junior doctors. JC Wilsher’s Between the Lines in 1996 explored the then little-known system of internal police investigations units, and This Life in 1996, written by Amy Jenkins, was an intelligent, sexy, funny take on the lives of London twentysomethings. “I’m only interested in love and politics,” Garnett said in 2016, and these later works were true to that credo. Most medical, detective or domestic drama today has some debt to Cardiac Arrest, Between the Lines or This Life. Once again, Garnett had changed the game. He produced a few more shows before he retired – devoting more time to teaching, writing, being a proud father and grandfather, and indulging his lifelong dedication to Aston Villa. A public interview we did together had to be rearranged after a Villa fixture was switched. Garnett would have seen it as an almost inevitable last kick of karma that, on the day of his death, Villa were thrashed 6-1 by Manchester City. Politically, it was painful for him that Cathy Come Home never lost its relevance: 54 years on, in the year of his death, the winter streets of Britain are full of people huddled in sleeping bags. The influence of key creative figures tends to be indirect, through future stars who follow their lead. Garnett has many of those but, in his case, the inheritance is more substantial. World Productions is now one of the most powerful players in TV. Mercurio, whose career Garnett kickstarted with Cardiac Arrest, has made Bodyguard and Line of Duty with World. His work stays true to the factual accuracy of Garnett’s, though comes with a visual swagger that is cinematic rather than documentary. Those who work in TV drama more broadly, though, will always remember Garnett as a benchmark of realism, integrity, and knowing how to work the system. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.