Wayne Pivac has a mandate for change after succeeding Warren Gatland as Wales’s head coach, but where he will need to emulate his predecessor, who over 12 years transformed the side from laughing stock to, however briefly, the No 1-ranked side in the world, is in selection. Gatland invariably got the big calls right and was not slow to promote emerging players. Pivac, who in his five years with the Scarlets became renowned for encouraging his players to be bold and expansive, will sit down with his coaching team day to finalise the team for Saturday’s opener against Italy in Cardiff. He has big calls to make in a number of areas: Jonathan Davies’s injury means there is a vacancy at outside-centre, Rhys Webb’s availability turns scrum half into a three-way debate, there are three candidates to partner Alun Wyn Jones in the second row and does Taulupe Faletau’s return to fitness mean the splitting up of a back row that stood out in last year’s World Cup? Stephen Jones, who has replaced Rob Howley as Wales’s attack coach, was giving nothing away on Tuesday, befitting someone who as an outside-half was adept at stepping away from awkward challenges. The second and back row calls are for others to make, but with a prime reason for Pivac’s appointment being a desire by his employers to see a more adventurous, risk-taking approach, Jones will be involved in resolving the issues in the three-quarters. The uncapped Saracen Nick Tompkins is the only fit regular 13 in the squad, but with Louis Rees-Zammit, who turns 19 on Sunday, and Johnny McNicholl, the recently qualified New Zealander, contenders to partner Josh Adams on the wing, George North has been used in the centre in training. “We have options at 13, which is great,” said Jones. “We will have an attacking threat in that channel. George has fitted in at times in the position and he provides that. We want to be smart, getting our best runners in to the ball at the right time and in the right channels. “Louis is exciting on the ball with a huge amount of gas, a pleasure to work with. He is calm and driven to improve. He has been delivering every week for Gloucester and his presence is exciting for all of us. He is going toe-to-toe in training with some wonderful athletes.” The only clue Jones gave was by omission. When he mused on Wales’s options on the wing, he noted that McNicholl was fully fit and training well and name checked Adams and Jonah Holmes but did not mention North, saying: “We have good options.” Faletau has started three matches for Bath after a broken collarbone ruled him out of the World Cup. He was used on the bench by Wales in the 2017 Six Nations after returning from another injury and Pivac has to decide whether to drop either Aaron Wainwright or Josh Navidi. “Taulupe is world class and ready to go,” said the third member of the World Cup back row, Justin Tipuric, “but so scary are the back row options in Wales that all six of us in the squad could be injured and there would not be much of a difference when three more came in.”