Ole Gunnar Solskjær admitted to understanding the disillusionment felt by Manchester United’s supporters following the team’s insipid 2-0 defeat by Burnley. It was Burnley’s first win at Old Trafford for 58 years and home fans chanted against the club’s owners, the Glazers, and the executive vice-chairman, Ed Woodward. It was also United’s eighth league defeat of the season and Solskjær was asked how fans could be convinced United can turn their form around. “At the end you do feel disillusioned because maybe they do,” he said. “But we’ve got to stick to our values and beliefs and it’s no use feeling sorry for yourself. Go out there and have the same commitment and get ready for Sunday [in the FA Cup].” Solskjær has Scott McTominay, Paul Pogba and Marcus Rashford out injured and while the latter tweeted he will return before the end of the season, the manager admitted his squad are feeling the pace. “We’ve had X amount of games since beginning of December and they are stretched,” he said. “Some have played more than they should have and more mentally than physically they need a mid-season break [in early February]. “We need to look forward to the FA Cup [against Watford or Tranmere] when there’s a chance to get belief up. We’ve dominated Burnley but we didn’t get the first goal and that took lots of belief out of us.” Asked about the anti-Glazer and Woodward chants Solskjær said: “I’m responsible for what’s happening on the pitch and of course we’re looking to strengthen. “I can understand supporters are disappointed but there’s a way of … we need to make sure we try to help the players and the club. I think the players hear the fans when they support them and that’s helped them, so [let’s hope they] keep sticking at that.” With nine days left of the winter transfer window Solskjær added: “Hopefully we can get something over the line, these players are being stretched.” Sean Dyche was rightly proud of his players. “We’ve worked very hard to get big and historical moments,” the Burnley manager said.