It is early in the morning when the mattress shifts as my wife sits bolt upright in bed. “Oh, God,” she says. I open my eyes. She is looking at her phone. “What?” I say. She tells me she’s had a text from our neighbour. “Apparently our car is sitting in the street with all its windows open,” she says. I look at my phone. It’s not actually that early. “That can’t be good,” I say. I switch on a light and snatch some clothes off the floor. Once downstairs, I pull my boots over bare feet and step out into the bleak silence of a winter dawn, ignoring for the moment the fact that my phone says it’s 9.10. From the front door I can see our car parked a short distance down the street, with all four windows gone. As I approach it, I expect to see pebbled glass spread across the seats, but there is none. I try the passenger door handle. The car is locked. It makes no sense, I think. How do you get someone’s car window down without breaking it? Even if you could, why bother with all four? I unlock the car and, with no small measure of reluctance, sit behind the wheel. The seat is cold and damp. The interior of the car is not just undamaged, but completely undisturbed. Everything is exactly as disordered as ever, like a painstaking reconstruction. I turn the key. The car starts. I hit four buttons at once, and the four windows rise together. “That was weird,” I say to my wife when I get back inside. “You must have just left all the windows down yesterday.” “Why would I do that?” she says. “That is a question you must ask yourself,” I say. “I’m not that mad,” she says. “Not yet.” “Unless,” I say. “Did the bin men take the green waste?” she says. “I didn’t look,” I say. Later that morning, my wife goes to the supermarket, ringing the doorbell on her return. I find her with five bags of shopping on the front step. “Is there anything else in the car?” I say. “No,” she says, handing me two bags. “This is it.” “Did you remember to leave all four windows rolled down?” I say. “Shut up,” she says, walking ahead of me into the kitchen. “They didn’t take the green waste again. It might be because I put potato peelings in it.” “Why would you even do that?” I say. “It could be green waste,” she says. “They don’t know I’m not growing potatoes.” “What’s this?” I say, holding up a strange bottle. “Non-alcoholic gin,” she says. “For Dry January.” “We don’t drink gin when we drink,” I say. “I know, but it’s meant to be good,” she says. “And it costs more than gin.” “Stupid idea,” I say. “I might have one now, though.” “It’s 11,” she says. “It’s non-alcoholic,” I say. “I could have it for breakfast.” The previous day we’d spent the afternoon watching a box set, accidentally getting through six episodes on the trot. After lunch we make an attempt to polish off the rest of series one. As I sip my second fake gin, my mind begins to wander. I do not care for unresolved mystery. Halfway through episode nine, I slip my phone from my pocket and type “car morning all windows down”. I am greeted with pictures of car interiors filled with snow. The next day, we are invited out to lunch. As we leave the house, I pause on the pavement, next to the full green waste bin. “Wait,” I say. “I have something to show you.” “What?” my wife says. “Watch.” I take out my car key and hit Unlock twice, holding the button down the second time. Across the street, the car unlocks and then, after three or four seconds, all four windows roll themselves down. “It’s a thing,” I say. “A known thing. If you sit on your keys in your front room, it can happen by itself.” “I don’t keep my keys in my pocket,” she says. “I know,” I say. “But I do.”