What would it take to make our working lives better? Steve Jobs once said about work that it was our life’s mission to “do what you love”, but for most of us it is the compromise of “finding what you can put up with”. So, if most of us are never exactly going to love work, what can we do to make it a little less awful? For starters, let’s be honest about what work is like. According to the magazine Management Today, the average Briton spends 16 hours a week in meetings, hostage to the drone of people they vaguely recognise. This is why most of us have learned that to survive in the modern workplace we need to master the “I’m not listening, but want you to think I am” nod, along with the subtle art of checking WhatsApp under a notebook. We have become adept at not revealing our inner thoughts for fear of judgment. We give a performative “Yes!” when our bosses declare: “That was a good meeting.” The workplace survey expert Gallup has reported that only 8% of people in the UK are actively engaged in their jobs. Twice as many of us are classified as being “actively disengaged”, taking our unhappiness out on our job and our colleagues. We may seem to be going along with things, but inside we are seething. But there are simple steps we can take to start rebalancing this relationship with our workplace. Researchers have found that even the most miserable job can be redeemed by taking back a little control. When workplace experts study what makes a good day at work, the answers are common sense. We say we have had a satisfying time when we have “made progress in something meaningful”. For many of us, stranded in a vast, open-plan savannah, playing email Tetris, the idea of progress feels unobtainable. This may be because one of the biggest challenges for human brains is switching between activities. Various attempts to measure our attention have suggested that, when we switch tasks, it takes between eight and 20 minutes for our attention to focus fully again.This is where the author Dan Pink has a valuable tip. Pink’s approach is to do one action, his MIT (most important thing), before he does anything else. This way, if the MIT takes up to an hour of concentration, he has made progress on something before the email onslaught begins. Yes, this might be embarrassing to suggest – but if anyone laughs, point out that researchers say going for a walking meeting can be one of the easiest ways to revive your mojo. Researchers from Stanford University in California looked into whether walking could trigger creativity. The results were outstanding. Walking resulted in a significant uplift in creative thinking: 81% of participants saw their scores go up between sitting and walking. The average increase was 60%. Interestingly, walking needs to be used appropriately: it is a powerful way to liberate ideas, but it is not the most effective way to resolve complex logical puzzles. The researchers also found that the power of walking lingered after the walk. Taking a stroll before undertaking a creative task fostered a significant uplift compared with staying seated. Other research, from a paper published in 2012, said that going for a 50-minute walk in nature can have a strong effect on our ability to concentrate. Are your colleagues still sniggering? Just ignore them – safe in the knowledge that JK Rowling said night-time walks are the surest way to overcome writer’s block. British workers are well versed in eating al desko, but taking a step away from our workstations for a proper recovery more than pays its way – and not just at work. Psychologists from Baylor University in Texas found a relationship between people skipping lunch breaks and feeling exhausted at the weekend. Despite this, many of us feel a silent pressure to work through lunch. But there is good evidence that stepping away from our desks improves our work, too. Our attention is measurably worse later in the day – a 2006 study of workers at a medical centre in North Carolina found that the likelihood of a medical error occurring was four times higher at 4pm than at 9am. Our afternoon selves, rendered dopey with tiredness, simply are not as effective – and taking a break is one of the best ways to get back some of our zing. Research at Harvard University found that giving schoolchildren five-minute breaks every hour improved their results over the course of a day, whereas a lack of breaks saw their results spiral downwards (with the biggest declines among the least able pupils). If you need more persuading, think about this: skipping an hour’s lunch over the course of a year is the equivalent of five weeks’ holiday. So, make plans to meet a friend or to go to the gym – it could improve your whole week. Researchers at Harvard found that workers were crushed by the daily burden of emails and the need to be contactable at all hours. The worst afflicted were management consultants, who often checked emails if they awoke to go to the loo in the night. Modest changes, such as taking one evening a week off email, were suggested. The management consultants couldn’t quite bear this, so they devised a scheme where one person was always checking night-time emails, while the rest of their colleagues had the evening off. The participants were euphoric. The mere thought of having a night off email duty seemed to have a measurable impact on their stress levels. Bruce Daisley is the European vice-president of Twitter. His book, The Joy of Work, is published by Cornerstone. To order a copy for £17.60 (RRP £20), go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders, minimum p&p of £1.99.