Irish author Eoin Colfer mined the tropes of contemporary fantasy in his bestselling Artemis Fowl children’s books about a tweenage criminal mastermind facing off against pixies, fairies and trolls. Those adventures straddled the fantasy, science fiction and spy thriller genres to fun effect; in his first adult fantasy novel, Colfer takes on dragons. Highfire is a briskly entertaining outing centred on the curmudgeonly and slobbish Vern, last of the fire-breathing beasts of folklore. Vern – or to give him the full title he enjoyed centuries ago when dragons were a force to be reckoned with, “Wyvern, Lord Highfire” – is hiding from the modern world on a small island in the heart of the Louisiana swamps. With alligators, snakes and dense foliage protecting him from unwelcome attention, he subsists on Absolut vodka and 1980s movies (Flashdance is his favourite). Dragons in fiction tend to occupy one of three positions. They are monstrous engines of destruction, as in A Song of Ice and Fire or The Hobbit; the noble, benign creatures of Anne McCaffrey’s Pern novels; or cuddly dudes with a penchant for befriending small children, such as Pete’s Dragon in the Disney movie or excitable Edgar from last year’s John Lewis Christmas ad. Vern is closer to the size of a bear than a dinosaur, and the central plank of the book is his relationship with savvy local teenager Squib Moreau, who chances on the dragon’s lair. What could have been a fairly saccharine odd-couple, cross-generational confection, with Vern as the ultimate boomer to Squib’s Gen Z-er, becomes something more satisfying in Colfer’s deft hands. Highfire is written in the style of a neo-noirish thriller – True Detective meets Swamp Thing, told from the perspectives of Vern (who comes across like the love child of Homer Simpson and Victor Meldrew), Squib and Regence Hooke, a corrupt local cop with ambitiously crooked plans for the dragon. While the humans who populate this grittily realised world are sometimes rather too quick to accept the existence of Vern, it’s probably necessary to keep the bouncy plot moving. With this satisfying and at times hugely joyous novel, Colfer is, like his engaging scaly protagonist, cooking on gas. • David Barnett’s latest novel is Things Can Only Get Better (Trapeze). Highfire by Eoin Colfer is published by Jo Fletcher (RRP £16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.