Hailey Bieber has hit out at online trolls and said “it hurts to be torn apart on the internet”. The model and wife of Justin Bieber is frequently targeted by fans of Selena Gomez, who previously dated the Canadian pop star. Hailey Bieber has now said social media “is SUCH a breeding ground for cruelty towards each other” where people “resort to hatred”. In a lengthy post on Instagram, she wrote: “I could sit here all day and say the hate doesn’t bug me, that the words that are said don’t affect me. But NEWS FLASH: it hurts to be torn apart on the internet!!!” I would say my most favorite part of existing is human connection. I absolutely love connecting with other people, I love finding common interests between me and others, hearing people’s story, I love laughing with others, and I love crying with others. I feel so very very deeply. My heart explodes with happiness when my friends and family are happy and my heart feels crushed when they are hurting and sad. The reason I say all of this is: because I love to connect, I do my best to expose my heart which means I love freely and I empathize deeply, and because of that I also hurt very easily when I feel like people don’t see my heart and see me for who I am and the reason I’m even sharing this, is because Instagram, Twitter etc is SUCH a breeding ground for cruelty towards each other, and because people don’t take the time to connect with each other on an honest level before they resort to hatred, it starts to damage what could be really beautiful human interaction and connection. I could sit here all day and say the hate doesn’t bug me, that the words that are said don’t affect me. But NEWS FLASH: it hurts to be torn apart on the internet!!! It hurts to be compared to other human beings every single day, it hurts for people to jump to conclusions and make assumptions. It hurts to be called names, and to feel like you don’t measure up to a certain standard.. the list goes on and on. I share this only because it weighs often on my heart and because it’s important to be honest about how these things affect us mentally and emotionally. Hopefully it speaks to someone struggling with the same. with that being said Happy New Year. Let’s connect more in 2020 :) A post shared by  Hailey Baldwin Bieber (@haileybieber) on Jan 3, 2020 at 4:01pm PST Bieber, 23, married her fellow Canadian in 2018. She has previously criticised “delusional” trolls commenting on her marriage and comparing her to Gomez. In her latest Instagram post, Bieber told her 24m followers it “hurts” to be compared to other people. “It hurts to be compared to other human beings every single day, it hurts for people to jump to conclusions and make assumptions,” she said. “It hurts to be called names, and to feel like you don’t measure up to a certain standard ... the list goes on and on. “I share this only because it weighs often on my heart and because it’s important to be honest about how these things affect us mentally and emotionally. Hopefully it speaks to someone struggling with the same.” Her post comes after Justin released his first solo single in five years. Titled Yummy, it appeared to be about his wife and contained the lyrics, “I’m elated that you are my lady”. Gomez, who dated Justin on and off from 2010 until early 2018, released her own single in October. Love You to Lose Me was widely believed to be about their failed relationship.