This startling retelling of the climactic drama in Sophocles’ Theban plays is the work of a new theatre company, Holy What, which aims to produce “irreverent” productions interrogating theatrical tradition. Tucked within Sophocles’ main plotline of a sister honouring the burial of her brother is a minor one about the bond between sisters. This production, written by Lulu Raczka and directed by Ali Pidsley, strips away every element except for the bond of sisterhood. The result is irreverent in form and structure, yet simultaneously faithful in spirit. Lizzy Leech’s set comprises a circular pit filled with soil and is reminiscent of a burial ground. There is no dialogue for the first few moments, until a pop song flips on and Antigone and her sister Ismene rise up from the earth, as if from the dead. They are modern teenagers in pink, sequinned dresses and Converse trainers, dancing to Destiny’s Child and yearning to go to bars as their brothers wage war outside. Those bars and brothers are never glimpsed. What is captured so singularly and exquisitely is the intimate relationship between sisters who are teetering on the brink of womanhood. Even though they talk of men and sex, their ardour for each other seems like the central love affair, and their garrulous sex-talk is a childish performance for the amusement of the other. Annabel Baldwin as the strong, recalcitrant Antigone and Rachel Hosker as the younger, meeker Ismene are mesmerising. Antigone is still as rash as she is in the original text, and still led by duty – though here it is not divine faith but a secular sense of doing the right thing that guides her. This story is as much about Ismene’s survival, saturated with guilt and grief, as it is about Antigone’s sacrifice. The final monologue is a description of Ismene’s life after Antigone’s death, though it might be a continuation of their imaginary world and role play, even in the older sister’s absence. The contrasts between noise and silence in Kieran Lucas’s sound design are highly effective: a humming drone becomes its own doom-laden chorus, while Tim Kelly’s use of light and darkness is just as striking. There are some frustrating repetitions in Raczka’s script that verge on dreary, and the silences are sometimes too long. But the chemistry between the actors carries these moments through. Full of experiment and daring, this production takes risks that pay off in its captivating pull and shows us what fearless revisionism can do. At the New Diorama, London, until 1 February.