What is the cost of convenience? Business people may look again at their balance sheets in light of the Guardian’s revelation that an investigation found the Amazon billionaire Jeff Bezos had his mobile phone hacked after receiving a WhatsApp message apparently sent from the crown prince of Saudi Arabia’s account. For a long time, the kingdom’s piles of cash and strategic importance ensured that commercial and diplomatic partners played down its catastrophic role in the war in Yemen – spearheaded by Mohammed bin Salman himself – and human rights abuses including the arrest and alleged torture of women’s rights activists. Then, in October 2018, Jamal Khashoggi walked into the Saudi consulate in Istanbul. Within minutes, the journalist was dead. After unconvincing denials that he had been murdered, Riyadh described his killing as an unplanned rogue operation, later sentencing a number of lower-level officials to death. Suddenly people felt the need to put some distance between themselves and the kingdom, pulling out of the grand investment summit overseen by the crown prince. In June last year, the UN special rapporteur Agnès Callamard issued a report stating that there was “credible evidence” that the Saudi heir and other senior officials were liable for the killing, despite the kingdom’s denials. Now Ms Callamard and her colleague David Kaye, who cover extrajudicial killings and freedom of expression respectively, say they are gravely concerned by the information they have received regarding the possible involvement of the crown prince in surveillance of Mr Bezos, “in an effort to influence, if not silence, the Washington Post’s reporting on Saudi Arabia”. They demand an immediate investigation by the US and others. (The Saudi embassy in Washington has said it is “absurd” to suggest that the kingdom has been involved in hacking Mr Bezos’s phone.) Analysis suggests that the handset started sending vast amounts of data within hours of the businessman receiving a video file from the account of the crown prince during a WhatsApp exchange, five months before Mr Khashoggi’s death. They note that, if the analysis is correct, the case is a concrete example of the harms done by “the unconstrained marketing, sale and use of spyware”. It is not yet established whether or how the incident relates to the murder of Mr Khashoggi, a prominent and exiled critic of the Saudi government who was writing for the Washington Post, which is owned by Mr Bezos. There are many more questions to be answered. Last year the US tabloid the National Enquirer published intimate details about Mr Bezos’s private life, prompting him to hire digital forensic investigators. They concluded that the Saudis had accessed his phone and gained private information about him, though the tabloid’s owner, American Media Inc, said it was tipped off by his girlfriend’s estranged brother. The billionaire’s head of security has noted a “close relationship” between the Saudi heir and AMI’s chief executive, David Pecker – who is also a close friend of Donald Trump; the president’s loathing of the Washington Post is well known. Mr Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, was one of the attendees at last year’s Saudi investment summit. Only a year after Mr Khashoggi’s death, many of those who had pulled out of the 2018 event were present – including the interim boss of HSBC and chief executives of the asset managers Blackstone and BlackRock and of Credit Suisse. (Meanwhile, concerts by Mariah Carey and BTS, and events such as December’s Joshua-Ruiz fight have sought to improve the kingdom’s public image.) Yet many of those who have posed smilingly alongside the future king are doubtless in urgent talks with their digital security consultants. Though money and power will continue to compel, Saudi’s partners should ask themselves: with friends like these, who needs enemies?