1) Tributes have been pouring in this week for Gérard Houllier, the former Liverpool, Lyon, Aston Villa and France manager who died on Monday aged 73. And where better to start a Houllier highlights package than that thrilling 5-4 Uefa Cup final win over Alavés, the third part of Liverpool’s cup treble in 2001, following their League Cup final win over Birmingham and the Michael Owen-inspired FA Cup triumph over Arsenal. Here’s his Lyon side securing a vital victory over Marseille en route to the 2006 Ligue 1 title. And here he is in his own words on Liverpool. 2) With Donald Trump set to vacate the White House next month after four years, time to recall some other short-lived ventures of his. For two years he had a cycling race named after him. The Tour de Trump started in 1989, covering 837 miles in five eastern US states. The following year’s edition went from Wilmington, Delaware to Boston. Trump explains his motivations here, before it all went pear-shaped, Trump withdrawing his sponsorship from 1991 due to financial problems. The renamed Tour DuPont lasted until 1996. 3) Some people are on the pitch, thinking it was all over … Nearly the wildest ever play in American football, at the end of the college game between Western Michigan and Ball State. 4) Did you miss out on/not bother paying for Anthony Joshua’s world heavyweight fight with Kubrat Pulev? Here’s the full fight, some shorter highlights and, what else but Tyson Fury’s reaction? (Parental advisory: explicit lyrics.) 5) An awkward contest between skeleton and broom last weekend – it’s happened before too. 6) Zinedine Zidane, one of Houllier’s protégés from the France setup, had a remarkably good touch for a big man. "Hay jugadores, como Zidane, que siempre le encuentran a la pelota la redondez", dijo una vez el Negro Fontanarrosa. pic.twitter.com/pvERFENtEx 1) Another sporting great to leave us last week was the US decathlete Rafer Johnson. Here he is competing with his great friend and rival CK Yang in this vintage 1960 Olympics footage. 2) A football showboating showreel. 3) Peter Alliss’s comic timing. 4) If you’re going to miss, miss hard: Mark Selby gets a bit of luck on the black. 5) Some choice armchair fan anger, in Argentina and Turkey. 6) Steve Watson brings out his somersault throw-in routine again, for Peter Beardsley’s testimonial. Spotters’ badges: vsbain 67, whobroughtoranges, Crouchy1889, markucc, crumbbum, pegmiester Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.