Sam Allardyce believes Arsenal are in the thick of the relegation scrap this season, alongside his new club West Brom. The former England manager has been monitoring developments at the Emirates with some interest with Albion due to host Arsenal on 2 January. Arsenal have slipped to 15th in the Premier League after a dreadful run of form and were brutally exposed by Manchester City in their 4-1 Carabao Cup defeat on Tuesday. Asked if Mikel Arteta’s men were among West Brom’s relegation rivals, Allardyce said: “Absolutely. They haven’t won a Premier League game for almost double figures [they are winless in their last seven]. Getting beaten last night [Tuesday], even though not in the Premier League, drains the confidence of Arsenal’s players.” Arsenal’s worst start to a season since 1974 sees them just four points above the relegation zone and without a win in seven top-flight matches. Arteta admitted on Tuesday night that Arsenal were in “big trouble” if results did not start to improve. “They will be wondering what has hit them,” Allardyce added. “They will be wondering why they are down there. They will be wondering what it takes to get out of that position. I know what it takes. I hope to convince my players to respond to that. “I hope we can push at Arsenal when we play them, because they have a lack of confidence. We will try to beat them, or anybody in the bottom eight.” The 66-year-old took charge of his first match since his return to football on Sunday but saw Albion go down 3-0 at home to Aston Villa. His next game is the daunting prospect of a visit to champions Liverpool on Sunday but Allardyce was quick to point out he was the last visiting manager to taste victory at Anfield back in April 2017 when Crystal Palace won 2-1. “Let’s try as best we can. I’m not saying we’re likely to win with that record, but if we can get a result, if we miraculously get a victory Liverpool at Anfield – which could happen at any time in this league – it’ll be a wonderful achievement by the players.”