On 11 November, Midnight Cowboy and Coming Home star Jon Voight posted a video on Twitter. “This is our greatest battle since the civil war,” he said, referring to the election results. “The battle of righteousness versus Satan, yes, Satan. Because these leftists are evil, corrupt and they want to tear down this nation.” Voight’s support of President Trump has been full-throated. His video messages promote conspiracy theories about the election and use violent language. Voight is typical of celebrity Maga: from Kirstie Alley to James Woods, Trump’s Hollywood supporters regularly echo the president’s own unvarnished rhetoric. But now Trump’s term is over, how long can this cultural Infinity War last? According to Dallas Sonnier, producer of such films as Dragged Across Concrete and the upcoming Run Hide Fight, “There are more pro-Trump celebrities in Hollywood than the dogmatic gatekeepers and thought police could ever possibly imagine.” In 2016, Kelsey Grammer, star of Frasier, told Desert Island Discs that being conservative in Hollywood felt like having a “target on your back”. Indeed, the same twitchiness had caused Forrest Gump actor Gary Sinise to form The Friends of Abe group in 2004 to provide conservatives with a “safe space” in Hollywood. In fact, far from being uniformly liberal, Hollywood has provided the Republican party with President Reagan, Governor Schwarzenegger and – with IMDb credits from The Apprentice to Zoolander – even President Trump himself. But conservatives would appear to be in the minority and many claim their views are silenced by fear of repercussions. In 2017, James Woods tweeted: “While #Liberals scream about the 50’s blacklist, my #Repub actor friends are terrified of losing their ability to provide for their families.” But does this equation of “cancel culture” with the McCarthy witch-hunts ring true? In 1947, a group of screenwriters and directors refused to testify before the House Un-American Activities Committee (Huac), investigating alleged communist infiltration of the entertainment industry; the Hollywood Ten, as they became known, would be jailed for contempt of congress. This was the start of the blacklist. “The thing about a blacklist is that it is usually an under-the-table gentleman’s agreement,” says Thomas Doherty, author of Show Trial: Hollywood, Huac, and the Birth of the Blacklist. “One of the unique things about the blacklists of the Huac era was that the arrangement was so formalised and sanctioned: the MPAA declared openly that the major Hollywood studios would not hire a known communist or people who refused to cooperate with Huac. So, in that sense it was open and above board.” But Woods appears to be signalling a return of the paranoia that the McCarthy-era blacklist provoked. “If the phone doesn’t ring, is it because you signed that petition in 1938 or because you inadvertently offended the producer’s wife or because you just didn’t fit the part?” But the phone has been ringing for celebrity supporters of President Trump. No one has gone to jail – well, no actor. And as loud as the Twitterati can be, it hardly wields the same power as a congressional committee backed by the heads of the studios and the forces of the judiciary. Gina Carano might get some grief for tweeting her doubts about the outcome of the election, but Disney isn’t going to fire her from The Mandalorian. Likewise, Chris Pratt might lose a Twitter poll about everyone’s favourite Chris for his alleged pro-Trump politics, but he hasn’t had to flee to Europe to get work under an assumed name. One independent producer I spoke with told me it was the left who were more likely to be silenced. “The truth is a lot of the head honchos are conservative and Republicans. Even if they don’t love Trump, they have all the power, so it’s the people below who have to shut up.” For Glenn Kenny, film critic at the New York Times and the author of Made Men: The Story of Goodfellas, the idea that their politics has damaged their careers is risible. “Jon Voight is working relatively consistently for an 81-year-old. But, like every other Republican, Voight loooooves to complain.” Others are just not that famous to begin with. If anything, more people probably saw Charles in Charge star Scott Baio speak at the Republican convention in 2016 than watched his 2008 reality show Scott Baio is 45 … and Single. The one Maga supporter who lost her job was comedian Roseanne Barr, whose comeback show was cancelled after a racist tweet about former White House adviser Valerie Jarrett. But Barr herself apologised for her tweet, blaming Ambien for the “joke”. (This led the sleeping pill manufacturers to issue the priceless response: “Racism is not a known side effect of any Sanofi medication.”) And Barr is by no means the only Trump supporter to go off the rails, which is perhaps why mainstream conservatives never got on board the Trump train in the first place. Old school Hollywood conservatives such as Clint Eastwood and Arnold Schwarzenegger largely shunned Trump and the Friends of Abe dissolved in 2016, following disputes over endorsing Trump. This leaves Voight and his war with Satan as the current face of conservative Hollywood. Although it is not likely to win over any new converts, it is representative of the Trumpism that continues to exert a controlling influence on the American conservative movement. Sonnier believes that this will continue: “The great irony is that the disingenuous wardens of free speech who believe they’re fighting the Man by denying people the freedom to express their point of view are themselves the Man. They are operating with near-total impunity.” The culture war might indeed prove infinite.