There has been a lot of talk about what to do about the inaugural World Test Championship, which was originally established as a way of attracting casual fans to the five-day game by repackaging it in a simple, easy-to-follow format. So, let’s see how that’s going. As a result of the pandemic, standings are now being calculated on points percentage rather than points total. Australia top the table on 82.2%. New Zealand are on 62.5%, but will hit 70% if they beat Pakistan 2-0 in the series that starts on 26 December. Which means that in order to qualify for the Lord’s final in June India (currently on 75%) would need five wins from their remaining eight Tests, or four wins and three draws. Feel the simplicity. Taste the change. Greg Barclay, the new chair of the International Cricket Council, has been criticised for questioning the worth of the WTC before it has even finished. Yet one of the main issues with the WTC is that it tries to tell us something we already know. Most of the time, we have a basic intuition for who the best Test team are. Moreover, we can usually identify the rare moments when that status is being directly contested. With the greatest of respect to New Zealand, the first Test at Adelaide on Thursday is one of those occasions. New Zealand’s recent 2-0 series win against West Indies edged them above India into No 2 in the world rankings, a position owed largely to playing 10 of their past 13 series at home, but most would probably agree Australia v India is a meeting of the two best teams. Not only that: in straitened times this might just be Test cricket’s last remaining superpower clash, a fascinating duel that for all its customary home advantage – and unlike, say, the Ashes – rarely fails to deliver on its promise. The first to thing to say is that putting on any sort of international cricket these days, let alone four Tests in four different cities in front of live crowds, is a monumental undertaking: one involving months of knotty conference calls, weeks of bleak hotel confinement and a frankly unfathomable volume of antibacterial wipes. One of India’s backroom staff had to spend 24 days in hard quarantine after registering a false positive test in isolation. None of this, perhaps, constitutes genuine hardship. But it does sound like an absolute faff. Will it be worth it? Almost certainly. The white-ball games were a treat: shared three apiece, with Hardik Pandya and Steve Smith offering multiple moments of transcendence. And so to the Test series and the resumption of a rivalry that in terms of quality, entertainment value and wider resonance has a fair claim to be the most compelling in the sport today. Part of the allure is the sense of competing cultures, competing systems, competing visions of the game. For all the talk of reinvention and elite mateship, Australian cricket is more bound up in tradition than it often likes to admit. Its basic DNA – a familiar formula of hard pitches, hard cricket, bone-breaking pace and six batsmen with ticker – has remained largely unchanged for decades. By contrast, the Indian model scorns tradition, burns through its eras like paper, is too busy building the future to be worried about it. Everything here now is made to be torn down. If Australia’s cricket is based on the idea that the game remains fundamentally the same, India’s is based on the idea that it never stands still. Naturally, there are exceptions. Smith is a very Indian cricketer in that he essentially sees the game as a problem to be solved. Virat Kohli is a very Australian cricketer in that he sees it as a foe to be conquered. What strikes you above all about this rivalry is the extent it is based on mutual admiration and mutual enchantment, two parts respect to one part animal curiosity. Think Virender Sehwag earning a standing ovation from the MCG crowd after a brilliant 195 on Boxing Day 2003. Or the fondness with which Indians still recall the late Dean Jones’s epic 210 in the Chennai Test of 1986. Above all, what links both visions is romance: the idea of the cricket team as a vessel for a nation, an unbroken thread leading from the maidan and the back garden and the alleyway all the way to the Test arena. The idea that on some elemental level, cricket still matters. Let’s face it, England shook itself free of that idea some years ago: its audience dwindling, its footprint shrivelling, its playing pool increasingly drawn from a few private schools. But walk through an Australian or Indian city on the morning of a big game and cricket breathes, swirls, lives. It leaks out of car radios and shouts at you from the front pages of newspapers. Is this still true anywhere else? Perhaps in Pakistan. Perhaps in Nottingham on the first morning of an Ashes series. But the Test match as an occasion? It’s probably rarer than you think. Australia should win. They should probably win comfortably, with Smith in deity mode, with Kohli flying home after the first Test for the birth of his child, with Australia’s pace attack still formidable in home conditions, with the defeat of 2018-19 still fresh in the memory. Either way, a new and distant winter-summer is finally upon us. Cherish it, savour it. For this is about as good as it’s likely to get for a while.