There’s no denying that plants bring happiness. Their ability to imbue life into any space, deliver a sense of calm and aid in productivity make them precious, thoughtful gifts. The lush beauty of indoor plants belies their important powers. The act of caring for our green friends is a hugely therapeutic endeavour. Patiently encouraging them to thrive, championing their imperfections and accepting their occasional demise is a lesson in the wonders of nature. This connection is not to be overlooked. Cultivating an indoor garden – or sharing the gift of one – encourages a greater appreciation for the natural world and teaches us to respect and nurture the very things that keep us all alive. Revered in its native home of India, the Bengal fig – or banyan tree – is believed to be the tree under which Buddha sat to achieve enlightenment. These leafy giants are some of the largest trees in the world by area of canopy coverage and they provide great shade for other plants in their native environments. Indoors, the Ficus benghalensis ‘Audrey’ will be a little smaller and works beautifully as a statement plant in a large living area or workspace. It’s a delightful alternative to some of the better known figs. Homalomena plants were recognised in the Nasa Clean Air Study for their purification abilities, so give the gift of fresh air with the Homolomena rubescens ‘Maggie’. A tropical aroid, their glossy, heart-shaped leaves burst forth from red tinged stems. They’ll look right at home on a table or low bench, perfect for appreciating their clumping, upright nature. They enjoy bright indirect light, a moderate watering schedule and medium-to-high humidity, so instruct your recipient to regularly mist their beautiful leaves. Commonly known as the Swiss cheese plant, reflecting the graphic holes (fenestrations) in their mature leaves, the Monstera deliciosa is the most popular of the genus and for good reason. A perfect present for those new to indoor gardening, these plants are endlessly gratifying. They are low maintenance, fast growing and beautifully architectural and when placed on a plant stand they make an admirable feature in any room. In their natural environment they make use of aerial roots to clamber from the forest floor up the trunks of bigger trees, so the addition of a solid stake to their pot will encourage healthy upward growth. A relation of the more common heartleaf philodendron, this cultivar shares its trademark easy-care vibes and heart-shaped foliage but with the added pizzazz of some exceptional variegation (a much sought after colour mutation). They will tolerate a wide variety of light conditions, but to ensure fabulous leaf patterning is retained, loads of bright, indirect light is best. The cascading vines look gorgeous tumbling down a shelf. If it gets a little leggy, simply give your ‘Brasil’ a haircut. The cuttings are easily propagated in water and once roots have appeared can be inserted back into the pot or given to friends. A gift that keeps on giving. One look at those petite, graphic leaves and you will see exactly why this guy is commonly referred to as the mini monstera. Other common names include the philodendron ginny or piccolo, but all are deceiving. While they are all members of the Araceae family, Rhaphidophora tetrasperma is neither a Monstera or a Philodendron. Sophia gifted one to her parents earlier this year and it has now taken over a corner of their living room, creating a strong indoor jungle vibe by climbing its way up the wall with the help of small hooks. Lauren Camilleri and Sophia Kaplan are the authors of Plantopedia, out now from Smith Street Books.