Maggie O’Farrell, 48, was born in Coleraine, Northern Ireland and grew up in North Berwick, Scotland. She has written eight novels and one memoir. Her debut, After You’d Gone, won the 2000 Betty Trask award and her third novel, The Distance Between Us, the 2005 Somerset Maugham award. In 2010 she was awarded the Costa book award (novel) for The Hand That First Held Mine. Her most recent novel, Hamnet, won this year’s Woman’s prize for fiction and is Waterstones’ book of the year. Her latest book, Where Snow Angels Go, published last month, is her first for children. She is married to novelist William Sutcliffe and has three children. What were the inspirations behind Where Snow Angels Go?The Snow Angel was a character I had told my children about for a long time. It started when I was in the back of an ambulance with my daughter, who has fairly regular episodes of anaphylactic shock. One of the symptoms is that you get very cold and she was quite small at the time and very scared and I said: “It’s OK, don’t worry, there’s a snow angel in this ambulance and he’s wrapping his wings around you.” I’ve always loved the idea of angels. You drew too on your own experiences of childhood illness and those of your daughter…I was very like Sophie [in the book], a child who liked to take risks and the book does have elements of my childhood in it. Most obviously, she has a long illness [at the age of eight, O’Farrell missed a year’s school with encephalitis]. There are also elements of all three of my children woven in it. In all fiction there are bits you make up and bits you borrow from your own life and the lives of those around you. Were you nervous about writing children’s fiction?Very. Just because you can write a full-length grownup novel there’s no guarantee that you can transpose that ability to a children’s book. In the end it was a collaborative performance both with [illustrator] Daniela Terrazzini and my children: I would read parts of the story to them and they gave instant and very direct feedback. They were very honest and sometimes pretty brutal. When a child doesn’t like something they let you know – often by getting up and walking away. It’s been quite a year for you - Hamnet winning the Women’s prize and being named Waterstones’ book of the year…It’s been very, very strange… for a start the year feels as though it’s lasted a decade. More seriously it’s been extraordinary. I was really taken aback by winning the Women’s prize. It was quite lucky that the ceremony was on Zoom because I think if it had been a party as usual I would have been too gobsmacked to give a speech. In your memoir, I Am, I Am, I Am, you talk about your childhood stammer. Do you get nervous speaking in public?It’s not my natural environment. I had a terrible stammer through my childhood and adolescence and I still don’t feel very confident verbally. Both Hamnet and Where Snow Angels Go deal with childhood illness – is it a subject that’s particularly on your mind?It’s an interesting subject because it’s a painful subject. Losing a child is one of the most visceral fears for parents, isn’t it? I’ve always been really interested in Hamnet and why he’s so overlooked and forgotten by history. The book also brings Shakespeare’s wife to the fore...It’s not just that she is [usually] given no agency – there’s so much hostility and misogyny towards her. The narrative is that she was illiterate, that she was a peasant, that he hated her, that she forced him into marriage. I got really, really sort of angry about the way she’d been treated. People will always invoke the will [Shakespeare only left her “his second-best bed with the furniture”], but it’s a very complicated, dry document. Well, I’ll raise you the fact that when he retired, he could have lived anywhere. He was incredibly wealthy but he chose to go back and spend his retirement with her in Stratford. That doesn’t suggest to me a man who hated his wife or regretted his marriage. How is it living with someone in the same line of business?There’s a lot less you have to explain. If I go into Will’s study and he says: “I’m working. I can’t talk”, I don’t take offence. Plus, we are always each other’s first readers. He said about one of my books: “Well, it’s not bad, you have to rewrite half of it.” That was a bit of a blow. He was right – that was annoying. Your novels are all very different – are you a restless writer?I’m certainly a very restless person and probably not always that easy to live with. It’s why I’ve found lockdown quite hard. I had to keep reminding myself that we were pretty lucky because all of us and all the grandparents are healthy, touch wood. We also have a garden, which made all the difference. I can’t imagine how difficult it would be with young children if you didn’t have somewhere to run around for five minutes. What books are currently on your bedside table?I’ve recently discovered Donal Ryan. I read one book and was so excited when I looked him up and realised he’d written all these other novels. So now I’m reading my way through them. They remind me of early Edna O’Brien, but they’re still very much about modern Ireland today. What books did you love as a child?I did an awful lot of reading when I was young because I was ill in bed and there wasn’t much else to do. I loved the Moomins and The Secret Garden and Pippi Longstocking. She’s such a fantastic role model – the way in which she embraces life. Are you working on anything else?Yes, although I can’t say what it is as I don’t like to talk about it. But writing is a process. Obviously prizes are lovely to get, that knowledge that somebody, a reader or a panel or a child in a library, has responded to your work. But I think after that you just had to forget them. You have to keep doing good work.• Where Snow Angels Go by Maggie O’Farrell is published by Walker Books (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply