A man has died and the M1 has been closed southbound in Leicestershire following a collision between two lorries, causing long tailbacks. The crash happened at around 7pm on Friday evening on the southbound carriageway of the motorway, close to junction 21a at Leicester Forest East, police said in a statement. The accident caused traffic to come to a standstill and many motorists were stuck in their vehicles for hours. The incident also forced the closure of the A46 where it meets the M1 at junction 21a. The southbound carriageway will remain closed until Saturday morning as police investigators carry out an examination of the scene, police said. UPDATE: The #M1 SB at junction 22 will remain closed until Saturday morning. The trapped traffic is being turned but this is a slow process. The diversion route is A50 to the A46 and then south to re-join the M1. Please drive carefully. A 52-year-old man was pronounced dead at the scene, with no one else injured in the collision. Leicestershire police issued an appeal for witnesses to come forward. Detective constable John Borlase from Leicestershire police’s serious collision investigation unit said: “If you were in the area and saw either of the vehicles beforehand or witnessed the collision please get in touch. We are appealing for witnesses after a fatal collision involving two lorries on the M1 southbound.It happened at around 7pm yesterday (Friday 11 December) close to junction 21a at Leicester Forest East. A man, 52, was sadly pronounced dead at the scene. https://t.co/XjASfv1arz “If you have a dashcam installed in your vehicle and captured what happened we’d like to hear from you.” Anyone with any information who has not yet spoken to officers is asked to call 101 and quote incident 534 of December 11. Tailbacks caused by an earlier accident involving three cars between junction 21 at Leicester and junction 20 at Lutterworth were just beginning to ease when the incident involving the lorries took place. There were no serious injuries reported in relation to the first collision.