In June, we met the whirlwind lovers of lockdown: the single people who threw caution to the wind and jumped into new relationships as the world was shutting down around them. Some of the couples spent lockdown together despite hardly knowing each other: in one case, after just one date. Jonathan Lovett, 53, a design director from London, and his boyfriend Kit Yunes, 46, a retail manager originally from Argentina, had been a couple for just a few weeks when they moved in together on the eve of lockdown. “It could have gone horribly wrong,” says Lovett. “But being together is really easy. I think we both appreciate finding each other at this time.” When the first lockdown eased in June, both partners went back to work – and the bubble in which they had been suspended for months, getting to know each other free from distraction, burst. Their relationship, however, remains strong. “The journey from June onwards has been about establishing everyday life, and a routine,” says Lovett. “You know, all the boring bits: who’s getting dinner in and is there food in the fridge and have you cleaned the house?” Lovett tends to work late, while Yunes starts earlier and is usually home by about 5pm. This has been an issue. “I want to have dinner,” Yunes says, laughing. One advantage of their conflicting schedules, though, is that when Yunes goes to bed early – he has to wake up at 5am – Lovett gets to watch trashy TV. “Like any other couple,” says Lovett, “we argue about what to watch.” It’s not the only thing they argue about, of course. “There was a period where Jonathan was travelling again for work,” says Yunes, “and I felt a bit like I was pushed to the side. I said to him: ‘I’m not just another suitcase you have to pack. Let’s make time for one another, and have a nice drink together, before you go.’” Lovett plans to sell his flat and downsize. “He’s been including me in his plans,” says Yunes, “which I appreciate.” And Yunes is lobbying hard for a new addition to their household: a puppy. Lovett is keen in principle: “That will be another chapter for us later down the line,” he says. “I know that dream will happen.”