Over to you, then, the rest of the Premier League. On a damp day in south London Liverpool produced a performance of ruthless champion quality, swatting Crystal Palace aside and raising a thrilling reprise of last season’s steamrollering rhythms. A 7-0 (vidiprinter: seven) win left them six points clear at the top of the table, however briefly. This was a day when Liverpool simply raised themselves up to their full height against game but out-matched opponents. The scoreline was startling. The quality of the goals was something else. This was Palace’s heaviest home defeat, edging out a 6-1 to Millwall in the inter-war years. Oddly, the home players never really stopped running or became a rabble. They even played quite well in the first half. By the end, as Palace kicked off, then kicked off again, as Roy Hodgson and Ray Lewington barked unstinting encouragement in an empty, rain-lashed stadium, it felt like an act of sporting cruelty. Suddenly the Premier League table has an ominous look. It’s that time of year when a cheerful, bearded Teutonic man does the rounds, spreading joy and disappointment. This was the first of three Liverpool away games over the holiday period, a run Jürgen Klopp can now approach with that familiar sense of strength in reserve. They were ruthless in a minimal kind of way in the first half, a performance that almost resembled a mocking parody of Mourinho-style counterattack. Yeah, we can do that too. The black shirts sat deep. They had three shots on target and scored three goals. The first came a couple of minutes after the start, the third a couple of minutes before the half-time whistle. How to kill a game: part one. It was hard on Palace, who drove hard at the champions in that first period. But the difference between the teams was summed up by Sadio Mané’s goal to make it 2-0 after 35 minutes. Palace were having their best spell, creating if not chances, then an outline of chances. For all Jordan Ayew’s energy and Eberechi Eze’s cool on the ball, they seemed always to need too many touches. Not so at the other end, where Mané produced a high-speed sniper’s goal, taking the ball from Roberto Firmino, turning into space and zinging an instant low shot into the bottom-right corner. Mané saw the space, executed the finish and was already veering off punching the air before anyone in a Palace shirt could react. Liverpool had come here without a win away in the league since September, but still top of the table thanks to their princely home form. Mo Salah was rested at the start, his replacement the more studious Takumi Minamino. Naby Keïta was also back in midfield, Klopp perhaps drawn to his energy and spike against a Palace team that has provided feisty opposition. They seemed barely awake at the start as Liverpool took the lead with alarming ease after three minutes. The goal came from a moment of hustle on the left from Firmino, who put pressure on, and then robbed, Cheikhou Kouyaté. His cross was cleared. Trent Alexander-Arnold worked the ball back to Mané, whose cut back was deflected to Minamino. He jinked to make space, then shot home, low to the keeper’s right. Palace did push back. There was space to be found on Liverpool’s right flank as Eze and Ayew doubled up on Alexander-Arnold. The Liverpool FC marketing department might want to think about exploiting commercially the sheer visceral power of Jordan Henderson’s cry of “TRENT”, heard every few minutes during that early period as Liverpool’s right-back wandered a little – and surely an attractive option as either ring tone or doorbell chime. With 12 minutes gone Fabinho nipped in just in time to divert Wilf Zaha’s cross away from Ayew in front of goal. And shortly after Palace really should have scored, as Ayew surged down the vacant Liverpool left, but mistimed the cut back to Zaha. It was Palace’s last moment of near-parity. First Mané made it 2-0. Then it was 3-0 just before half-time. This was a brilliant goal, made by a sublime counterattack started and then finished by Firmino, with two moments of dreamy high-speed skill in between. Liverpool sprang forward from the right-back position. Firmino fed the ball out to Andy Robertson. His pass inside was perfectly measured for Firmino to take the ball back in his stride with an absurdly easy first touch, before rolling it in. Firmino is a wonderful, natural finisher when his confidence is high. He could be a key figure as Liverpool enter the winter slog. Henderson produced a lovely curling shot into the far corner to make it 4-0 seven minutes into the second half. Firmino finished smartly again on 68 minutes. Salah made it 6-0 from a corner, then added a fine seventh from the edge of the box. Klopp was able to take Mané off to save those precious legs for tougher engagements. Fabinho played like a brilliantly natural defensive footballer, able to cover, pass and mark in any position. Top of the table at Christmas, goal difference favourably readjusted, Liverpool are once again running this race from the front.