The English Football League laid itself open to accusations of double standards on Tuesday night after agreeing to call off Bristol Rovers’ next two games but failing to agree to a postponement with Sunderland after both League One clubs reported Covid-19 outbreaks. While Bristol Rovers had their match at Charlton on Tuesday postponed, Sunderland’s home game against AFC Wimbledon went ahead, despite Sunderland being without eight players after one tested positive for coronavirus and seven entered self-isolation. It is understood two of the self-isolating players have developed Covid symptoms. In any instance where a club seeks to call off a game on grounds of a Covid outbreak the EFL will automatically investigate to determine whether its medical protocols have been breached. Sources indicate that while Rovers were happy to agree to such an inquiry, Sunderland wanted to know what potential sanctions they might face if the AFC Wimbledon game was to be re-scheduled. Sunderland said they had “continued to follow comprehensive protocols to the letter” and were “disappointed” not to reach an accord with the EFL. The club said in a statement: “Due to the severity of the impact this [the outbreak] has had, the club explored the option of postponing the fixture in extensive dialogue with the EFL. Disappointingly, agreement could not be reached due to lack of clarity regarding potential sanctions Sunderland could face in the event the fixture was unfulfilled.” Clubs found to have breached Covid protocols could face fines and/or a points deduction. The threat of such sanctions has persuaded some EFL teams to play on with weakened teams this season, but others have been happy to submit to a formal investigation. Johnson made five changes from the side who won at Lincoln on Saturday as Sunderland drew 1-1 against Wimbledon. Sources indicated the situation at Bristol Rovers was more acute. Although the club are divulging no details, it is understood a significant number of Paul Tisdale’s players and backroom staff are either unwell or self-isolating. Rovers’ home game against Oxford on Saturday has also been postponed and the training ground is unlikely to reopen before Christmas Eve at the earliest. In a statement the EFL said: “Bristol Rovers has advised the EFL it is unable to fulfil the fixtures due to an outbreak of Covid-19, with players and first-team staff required to self-isolate in line with EFL and government guidance.” It is hoped Rovers will be able to return to action at MK Dons on Boxing Day but that fixture could come only two days after Tisdale’s squad return to full training. Rovers have now been involved in three coronavirus-induced postponements this season. In October they had a game against Accrington Stanley called off with 48 hours notice following a number of positive tests among the Accrington squad. During a press conference to preview the Charlton game on Monday, Tisdale gave no hint about the developing outbreak. It was not until lunchtime on Tuesday that the 2,000 Charlton fans expecting to attend the match learned of its suspension. Charlton have said the cost of all tickets will be refunded.