When Mapalo* left her husband, she would sit and look at herself and think: “Oh, my word, I look so normal. How can people see that I’m breaking? That I’m broken inside?” She hadn’t just left a marriage; she had also escaped with her son from an increasingly dangerous situation. Mapalo and the man who was her husband met and married in Zambia, where they were both born. Her husband’s work as an engineer took him to Abu Dhabi and then to Cardiff. When she arrived in Wales to join him, she realised he had begun to drink heavily. “He was a different man,” she says. “He was drinking three, four, bottles of whisky a day. He would start arguments from nowhere to get a reaction from me. He would get physical. I never knew what he would do because he was so drunk.” During one argument, he slammed a knife so hard into the kitchen counter it snapped in two. Terrified, Mapalo locked herself in the bathroom. As a new arrival in the UK, Mapalo didn’t know the number for the emergency services. As the arguments with her husband intensified, she asked a stranger in the street how to call the police. After the incident with the knife, she dialled 101. A policewoman visited the house and referred Mapalo to Bawso, a Wales-based charity that specialises in giving support to women from black and minority ethnic backgrounds, often migrants, who are dealing with issues such as domestic abuse, trafficking or forced marriage. Mapalo and her son got a place in a shelter. She was assigned a support worker and started therapy. Now, she is working in hospital administration, looking at ways of transferring her Zambian pharmacy qualifications to the UK, and her son has started school. But she has been thinking about other women like her: confused and scared and, because of the pandemic, stuck in situations they cannot get out of. Zaira Munsif, who manages resources in the Cardiff area for Bawso, says: “When something like Covid-19 hits, the impact is doubled or trebled when you’re a victim of abuse too. We speak to women who don’t know the rules and regulations of the country, how things are run, even how to get to the local shops. “The need for us to provide support, emotional and practical, during this pandemic period is even greater. There’s more stress. Women are spending all day with their abusers, there’s no break as there would be when someone goes to work, there are fewer places open to seek help.” Above, from top: a client of The Passage receives support; Bawso offers families a route to safety The United Nations has described domestic violence as a “shadow pandemic”, with calls to helplines and women seeking places in shelters rising globally. In the UK, calls to the National Domestic Abuse Helpline rose by 80% in June of this year. For migrant women, says Munsif, problems can be intensified as they have no legal rights to financial support from the state. Those facing domestic violence are not the only group whose issues have been exacerbated. In May, statistics showed that people in deprived areas who caught the virus were twice as likely to die as those in the wealthiest areas. Those with disabilities and long-term illness are also more likely to die as the virus disproportionally attacks people with underlying conditions. For people whose lives are already complicated, Covid-19 is another problem stacked on top of many others and often intensifies existing issues. In March, in response to the lockdown, the government moved to get homeless people off the streets. Between 1 April and 30 June, the number of households in temporary accommodation in England was up 14%. The increase was largely driven by providing rough sleepers and people who were living in shelters with emergency accommodation under the Everyone In scheme. But self-isolating wasn’t the only issue. People without permanent accommodation are more likely to suffer from respiratory diseases, more likely to have substance abuse issues, to have poor mental health and more likely to share what resources they do have with others. All of these things make them more vulnerable to Covid-19. “We’re also dealing with people who have experienced trauma, to one degree or another,” says David O’Sullivan, a manager with the London-based homelessness charity The Passage. “We’ve had to allow for that, when we talk through the new regulations.” O’Sullivan looks after a housing unit of 16 flats, occupied by single people and couples who were previously homeless. The Passage aims to work with each person, taking their varying needs into account, and keep them off the streets. It isn’t work that can stop because of a pandemic. O’Sullivan has kept things going by jugglng the staff rota, talking to each resident, and, during the lockdowns, arranging meals for those who couldn’t cook. The Passage has also made sure each resident had access to a laptop to continue their weekly sessions with a psychologist. “It’s an essential part of the service,” says O’Sullivan. “It means our residents don’t have to navigate all the difficulties they might otherwise encounter when trying to get that help.” Accessing healthcare is an issue for socially vulnerable groups, especially as more and more services move online. Lack of technology is an obvious problem, as is being able to physically get to a place if money for transport isn’t available. Fears about immigration status or being separated from children also deter people from getting the care they need. Then there’s knowledge of how the system works: for instance, explaining whom to contact is a vital part of Bawso’s service. “Signposting might be simple for us, but these things aren’t obvious to the people we work with,” says Munsif. A volunteer for The Passage packs food parcels Both Bawso and The Passage take their cues from each service user, unpicking an individual’s problems and working out how to address their needs. “It’s adult-to-adult,” says O’Sullivan. “People need to be treated with respect. You can’t just tick off each box on a plan or force people into things that won’t work for them.” It’s an approach that creates growth. Mapalo, during her time in a Bawso-run shelter, found other women were coming to her for advice. The charity gave her training in speaking to traumatised people and helped her deal with the impact of hearing other people’s stories. She now sits on its board. Mick Clarke, CEO of The Passage, says that the charity’s holistic approach “is the most valuable thing we do. Whatever circumstances you have found yourself in, however you ended up on the street, you are still you, still worth something. “The challenge is putting that sense of an individual’s worth into policy, it’s really important we bring about that kind of systemic change. If you work for a homelessness charity, or a domestic abuse charity, you know you can make changes on a micro level. What we need is change on a macro level.” These are sectors that need committed investment, in terms of time and money, from the government. “There are no quick fixes,” says Clarke. “But we know from our work that change is possible.” The one-to-one connections fostered by Bawso have been vitally important during the pandemic. Women have told case workers that they are the only person they are able to speak to. “They know their support worker is actually going to listen to them,” says Munsif. “That the support worker will be able to ask them: ‘Hey, you know, are you OK? How are you?’ So many women we work with have said to their support workers: ‘No one’s ever asked me that before.’ Shouldn’t we all have someone to say that to us and to listen to the answer?” *Mapalo’s name has been changed. To support these charities, get in touch with bawso.org.uk or passage.org.uk Inspired by what you’ve read?In these uncertain times, charities across the UK could use your support more than ever. If you’d like to find out how to volunteer and give your time to help others,visit: gov.uk/government/get-involved/take-part/volunteer. To find out more about how Barclays is supporting communities, visit: home.barclays/communityaidpackage