Donald Trump approved a wave of pre-Christmas pardons, granting clemency to a former campaign aide caught up in the Russia investigation, disgraced Republican lawmakers and several contractors convicted in a massacre in Iraq. The White House announced on Tuesday Trump has granted full pardons to 15 people and commuted all or part of the sentences of five others. The beneficiaries include George Papadopoulos, a former campaign aide who pleaded guilty to lying to federal officials as part of the investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election, and Alex van der Zwaan,  who pleaded guilty to a similar charge in the Russia investigation and is the son-in-law of the Russian billionaire German Khan. The three former Republican US representatives who were pardoned or had their sentences commuted on Tuesday were Chris Collins of New York, Duncan Hunter of California and Steve Stockman of Texas. Collins, 70, had been the first sitting member of Congress to endorse Trump’s candidacy in 2016 and was a strong defender of the president. He pleaded guilty to conspiring to commit securities fraud and making false statements to the FBI and received a full pardon. Hunter, 44, pleaded guilty in 2019 to conspiring to convert campaign funds for personal use and received a full pardon. Stockman, 64, was convicted in 2018 of misuse of charitable funds and had his sentence commuted after serving two of 10 years. Also pardoned were Nicholas Slatten, Paul Slough, Evan Liberty and Dustin Heard, former contractors at Blackwater Worldwide who were serving lengthy prison terms in connection with the killings of civilians in a 2007 massacre in Baghdad. Among those killed by the Blackwater contractors were children, including a nine-year-old, and a mother who was clutching an infant. Two former border patrol agents were also among those pardoned. Ignacio Ramos and Jose Compean were found guilty of crimes related to shooting an unarmed man who was smuggling marijuana in 2005. George W Bush commuted their sentences in 2009, but did not grant a full pardon. Trump’s use of the presidential pardon power has attracted considerable controversy, and the list of recipients on Tuesday drew strong rebuke from Democrats. “These corrupt politicians don’t deserve a pardon,” said the Democratic California representative Katie Porter. “Appalling decision by the president.” “Are you still a pro-law enforcement President after you pardon killers of a 9-year old & an 11-year old?” asked Joyce Alene, a law professor at the University of Alabama and former US attorney for the northern district of Alabama, about the decision in the contractors’ cases. Adam Schiff, the Democratic congressman who prosecuted Trump’s impeachment trial, tweeted: “Lie to cover up for the president? You get a pardon. Corrupt politician who endorsed Trump? You get a pardon. Murder innocent civilians? You get a pardon. Elect a corrupt man as president? You get a corrupt result.” While remarkable, Tuesday’s wave of decisions did not come as a surprise. In November, Trump pardoned his former national security adviser Michael Flynn, who pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI during the Russia investigation. Speculation has flourished about whom Trump may pardon next. The pardoning of Papadopoulos and Van der Zwaan may signal that more Trump associates embroiled in the matter could expect pardons, including his former aides Paul Manafort and Rick Gates. Trump’s attorney Rudy Giuliani; the WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange; and the National Security Agency whistleblower Edward Snowden are also among names commonly mentioned. “Today’s pardon helps correct the wrong that Mueller’s team inflicted on so many people,” the White House said in a statement. Papadopoulos, 33, was an adviser to Trump’s 2016 campaign. He pleaded guilty in 2017 to lying to FBI agents about the timing and significance of his contacts with people who claimed to have ties to top Russian officials. “The defendant’s crime was serious and caused damage to the government’s investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election,” a sentencing recommendation memo from the then US special counsel Mueller said. Papadopoulos served only 12 days of a 14-day sentence in federal prison, then was placed on a 12-month supervised release. It has also been reported that Trump has considered issuing a pre-emptive pardon for himself and members of his family who have worked in his White House. Pardons and other acts of clemency, often to ordinary federal prisoners, are a common feature of the end of any presidency. According to the Pew Research Center, however, Trump “has used his clemency power less often than any president in modern history”. “While rare so far,” Pew added, “Trump’s use of presidential clemency has caused controversy because of the nature of his pardons and commutations. Many of Trump’s clemency recipients have had a ‘personal or political connection to the president’, according to a July analysis by the Lawfare blog, and he has often circumvented the formal process through which clemency requests are typically considered.” Applying only to federal cases, presidential pardons do not imply innocence of the charges in hand. The Democratic senator Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut, a member of the Senate judiciary committee, said: “I doubt government contractors who slaughtered civilians or corrupt congressional cronies were what the founders had in mind when they drafted the pardon clause. “Most despicably, President Trump is twisting this presidential power to reward allies who broke the law on his behalf,” Blumenthal added. Several critics of the president also pointed out that the administration was rushing through a number of federal executions while granting pardons to allies. The administration has put 10 federal inmates to death and is scheduled to execute three more people in January, days before Joe Biden is inaugurated as the next president. The White House cited Stockman’s age and health, and that he contracted Covid-19 while in prison, as part of its reasoning behind commuting his sentence. However, nearly 6,000 people who have tested positive for the virus in federal prisons remain incarcerated, according to the Bureau of Prisons. The president commuted the sentences of three civilians, Crystal Munoz, Tynice Nichole Hall, and Judith Negron, who had been convicted on drug and fraud-related charges. He had previously granted them clemency, after the reality TV star Kim Kardashian West had advocated for them. Reuters contributed to this report.