The US recorded another 1,389 deaths from Covid-19 on Sunday, pushing the toll closer to 300,000 as hospitalisations hit new heights. At the same time, the first shipments of the Food and Drug Administration-approved Pfizer vaccine were flown out around the country. Responding to a New York Times report that senior administration staffers would be among those vaccinated first, Donald Trump rowed back, tweeting: “People working in the White House should receive the vaccine somewhat later in the programme, unless specifically necessary. I have asked that this adjustment be made.” On Monday morning, according to Johns Hopkins University, the US death toll stood at 298,939, out of a caseload of 16,241,866, itself up by 190,920 on Sunday. Deaths were down from a daily peak of more than 3,000 last week but according to the Covid Tracking Project 109,331 people were hospitalised, a record. A record 21,231 people were in intensive care. States across the US are under increasing strain, healthcare systems creaking and economies, already battered, close to damaging collapse. In California, where large parts of the state are under lockdown until after Christmas, Alan Auerbach, director of the Burch Center for Tax Policy and Public Finance at the University of California, Berkeley, told the Guardian an eventual recovery could look more like a “K” than a “V”, as high earners thrive and the most vulnerable plunge. “We have lacked a coherent national strategy for dealing with the pandemic and 2021 is probably going to be a pretty tough year for California,” he said. In Washington, a bipartisan group of senators was due to unveil a $908bn stimulus package on Monday afternoon. It was meant to marry Democratic and Republican priorities but Politico reported it had little chance of success. Agreement between Democratic House speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell remains elusive. Though the vaccination effort just beginning will be the biggest public health push in US history, it will take some time for the vaccine to reach most of the population. At the same time, the New York Times reported, the Trump administration is “rushing to roll out a $250m public education campaign to encourage Americans to take the coronavirus vaccine”. Former presidents Barack Obama, Bill Clinton and George W Bush are among famous names who have said they are willing to be vaccinated in public. An ABC News poll released on Monday said 80% of respondents said they would take the vaccine. Speaking to Fox News Sunday, however, Dr Moncef Slaoui, chief science adviser to the federal effort to speed vaccine development, said he was “very concerned” about skepticism about the vaccine in some circles. “Unfortunately ... there’s been a confusion between how thorough and scientific and factual the work that has been done is, and the perception that people are thinking that we cut corners,” Slaoui said. “I can guarantee you that no such things have happened, that we follow the science.” He called the development of vaccines from several pharmaceutical companies, including Moderna and AstraZeneca, “a remarkable achievement of science, academia, the industry ecosystem and the US government, working together.” Trump, who recovered from Covid-19 in October, said he would not initially be taking the shot and was reversing an administration directive to vaccinate top officials while public distribution is limited to frontline health workers and people in nursing homes and long-term care. Trump made the announcement hours after his administration confirmed that senior officials, including some aides who work in close proximity to Trump and Mike Pence, would be offered vaccines as soon as this week. “I am not scheduled to take the vaccine,” Trump tweeted, “but look forward to doing so at the appropriate time.” It was not immediately clear what the scale of the vaccination programme was supposed to be, according to two people briefed on the matter who spoke to the Associated Press, or what effect Trump’s tweet would have on efforts to protect top leadership. News that White House staff would receive the vaccine early drew criticism on social media. Trump and his aides have flouted Covid-19 guidelines issued by his own administration, including hosting large holiday parties with maskless attendees this month. Officials said earlier on Sunday doses of the Pfizer vaccine would be made available to those who work in close quarters with the nation’s leaders, to prevent Covid-19 spreading in the White House and other critical facilities. “Senior officials across all three branches of government will receive vaccinations pursuant to continuity of government protocols established in executive policy,” said John Ullyot, National Security Council spokesman. “The American people should have confidence that they are receiving the same safe and effective vaccine as senior officials of the United States government on the advice of public health professionals and national security leadership.” The move to vaccinate top officials would be consistent with the rollout of rapid testing machines, which were reserved to protect the White House complex and other critical facilities. According to guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, there is not yet enough information to determine whether those who have had Covid-19 should also get the vaccine. Pence has not come down with the virus, and his aides have been discussing when and how he should receive the shot. The Pfizer vaccine requires two doses three weeks apart, meaning Trump officials would receive the final shot shortly before leaving office on 20 January. Aides to the president-elect, Joe Biden, have been discussing how he should receive the vaccine and working to establish plans to boost virus safeguards in the West Wing. According to a Capitol Hill official who spoke to the AP, lawmakers have not been informed how many doses will be made available to them.