Simon Jenkins is absolutely right (Boris Johnson must give up on fishing: it’s the only way to get a Brexit deal, 3 December). It would be an extraordinary act of self-harm if Britain failed to do a Brexit deal owing to the minuscule issue of fishing. Significantly more people work in Debenhams than in fishing. I think I’d describe the situation as mad if our government decides to destroy the economy in an attempt to help a few fishermen. It’s a sad sign that jingoistic nationalism before all else is still the government’s priority.Sebastian MonblatSutton, London • Uncharacteristically for him, Simon Jenkins misses the point: commercial fishing might be economically irrelevant to England, but it is of enormous political significance in Scotland. Nicola Sturgeon would never be able to persuade the Scots to leave the union if it meant reopening Scottish water to EU fleets. For that reason, Boris Johnson is right to want to repatriate fishing rights.Michael HeatonWarminster, Wiltshire • Simon Jenkins says that because the fishing industry only employs 12,000 people it should not be a deal breaker. The argument that he does not seem to consider is that the reason the number is so small is because of the effect that EU policies have had on our fishing industry. If, for example, the UK was allowed to fish more than the present 9% of the cod from the Channel (France is allowed 84%) then surely we would have larger employment in that industry.Dr Robert CowenBrighton • I voted remain, but a reinstatement of fishing prerogatives as per normal international law is something tangible amid the whole divisive Brexit debacle. The opportunity for more jobs in fishing communities across the UK, from fishing to related trades such as boat building and repairs, is just too good to miss, as are the prospects of a bigger UK internal market of cheaper and more plentiful fish, and more scope for conservation. A virtuous circle. The benefits felt to Northern Irish and Scottish fishing communities would make for a more settled and united country. Finally, a very senior Scottish Westminster politician, whose vote secured UK entry to the EC, made it clear to me that the fishing side of the deal was bad for the UK and bad for the European cause in the UK.John BarstowFittleworth, West Sussex