The cabinet minister George Eustice has declined to condemn Millwall fans who booed footballers taking a knee in opposition to racism, arguing that Black Lives Matter should be viewed as a “political movement”. The UK environment secretary, who was appearing on Sky News’ Sophy Ridge on Sunday, was asked for his opinion on the incident on Saturday, in which some of the 2,000 fans attending a home game for the first time this season loudly booed the players’ gesture. Players have been taking a knee across English football this season in recognition of the BLM movement and wider concerns about racial injustice in the UK and around the world. Eustice, who came under fire from the anti-racist organisations Kick It Out and Hope Not Hate, said he had not seen the incident and that “the issue of race and racial discrimination is something that we all take very very seriously”. But he added: “My personal view is that Black Lives Matter, capital B, L and M, is actually a political movement that is different to what most of us believe in, which is standing up for racial equality. “Each individual can take their own choices about how they reflect this and I know a number of people feel quite strongly and have taken that approach.” After being played a clip of the incident, which took place at the match against Derby, he said he could not hear it properly, before adding: “There have been problems obviously with racism in football in the past. It’s right that that’s called out and challenged when we see it … If people choose to express their view in a particular way that should always be respected.” Sanjay Bhandari, the chair of the football anti-discrimination body Kick It Out, accused Eustice of a “lazy conflation of taking a knee with a specific political movement” in his criticism of BLM. ”Careless responses like this provide shelter to racists who oppose anti-racist gestures,” he said. In a series of tweets posted after Eustice’s interview, Bhandari argued that “every time there is greater public focus on the fight against racial discrimination, there is always a backlash. Racists rarely admit they are racists – they try to hide their backlash under a seemingly respectable cloak. “The cloak this time is that the gestures are really in support of some political movements associated with the Black Lives Matter slogan and this is mischievously portrayed as a political disagreement. This is complete and utter nonsense.” The Hope Not Hate campaign tweeted: “Saying that ‘Black lives matter’ shouldn’t be controversial and the fact that it is to some says much about the scale of racism in Britain today. Footballers have shown leadership on this issue. Government ministers should try doing that too.” The Conservative MP for Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland, Simon Clarke, later tweeted his agreement with Eustice: “Racism is an evil that demands our common determination to defeat. But the BLM movement has a specific and controversial political agenda, as they themselves have declared.” Millwall has sought in recent years to shake off its longstanding reputation for racism in the stands and violence among supporters, with the south London club seeking to emphasise its anti-racist work in the community. Eustice’s comments came after widespread condemnation of the incident within football on Saturday. Both the English Football League and the FA expressed their support of the players, with the FA saying it “strongly condemns the behaviours of any spectators that actively voice their opposition to such activities”. The Derby striker Colin Kazim-Richards, who had stood with a raised fist when other players were taking a knee, described the booing as “an absolute disgrace”. He added on Twitter: “Having to say this is a pain but I’ll say it every single damn time – this is why I stand and stand proud and I have to say every single person involved with (Derby County) did too – made me proud to wear this shirt with the boys today. In a statement released the day after the game, Millwall FC said it was “dismayed and saddened by events which marred Saturday’s game”. It said it would be meeting with Kick It Out in the next few days. • This article was updated on 6 December 2020 to more accurately reflect George Eustice’s statement that people expressing their views should “always be respected”.