When a box of soft, pastel lamingtons arrived at Caleb Byrt’s office, it helped quell his homesickness at a time when work was more stressful than usual. Byrt is an occupational therapist from Geelong who has lived in London for the last four years. Like many of the best Australian wines, confectionery and telly, the lamington is a legend at home and a relative nobody away. In the UK it’s occasionally sighted at Aussie barbecues and antipodean-run cafes, or recalled by long-term Neighbours fans as the solution to many of Erinsborough’s fundraising problems, but it’s not the sort of thing you’ll find supermarkets selling in six-packs. But Radio Lamington might be about to change all that. Since launching in London in April they have not only raised the international profile of the iced sponge squares, but helped keep spirits up among the city’s NHS frontliners by donating a box for every one sold. So far they’ve delivered more than 40,000 lamingtons to hospitals around the city – including to Byrt’s team. “The highlight for me was watching UK locals admit they thoroughly enjoyed an Australian dessert they had never experienced before,” he says. “It also was appreciated in the wider sense, in that the work the team does is often thankless.” Radio Lamington is the brainchild of Prue Freeman, the Australian co-founder of London’s Daisy Green restaurant group. Freeman, who grew up on a sheep farm outside Ballarat, moved to London in 2010 to work in finance but always intended to start her own business. By 2012 she was selling coffee and banana bread to city bankers from a bike at the bottom of the Gherkin building. Now Freeman and husband Tom Onions have 12 cafes and restaurants across central London. They’re brightly lit, Australian-inspired venues with upbeat staff and a buzzy atmosphere that’s as much a part of the experience as the menu. All of this meant that, when they were forced to close during London’s first lockdown, it wasn’t so easy to pivot to takeaway. “We weren’t really set up,” Freeman says. “Our business is more about people coming in and the ambience and brunch doesn’t travel that well.” Staff were sent home and the company’s brand-new kitchen in Paddington was closed. But London’s not an easy place to wait out a pandemic, especially for young hospitality workers who often live in crowded share houses with people they don’t know very well, and no access to gardens or other outdoor space. Cabin fever soon set in. “People were going a bit crazy,” Freeman says. “Everyone was at home for long periods of time and we all kept saying, what can we do, how can we help?” In April they decided to reopen the kitchen and start baking for the #FeedtheNHS campaign. Around 25% of London Ambulance Service paramedics are Australians or New Zealanders, and with huge numbers in the hospitals too, lamingtons were the obvious choice. “It was just something nice that we could do, and a bit of a taste of home,” says Freeman. “The people working there are doing such a lot for everyone. We just wanted to do something a bit lighthearted in an otherwise dark situation.” “The first few weeks we were just making what we’d always done, the sort of classic lamington,” Freeman says. “But over time people started playing around with flavours.” They now do rainbow lamingtons (rainbows have become a symbol of support for NHS workers), pecan pie, tiramisu, lemon and yuzu. There’s even a Golden Gaytime-inspired lamington – a homage to the classic Australian ice cream with a vanilla sponge, toffee filling and malt biscuit crumb – to give Australians in London a double dose of two favourite nostalgia foods. As London re-enters tough lockdown restrictions, the lamingtons will keep coming. “Out of everything we make, lamingtons are the most labour intensive,” Freeman says. “They definitely aren’t the quickest things to make, but they’re worth it.”