A black woman trains her binoculars on something we cannot see in the darkness. Another reclines on a couch in sepulchral gloom, in a pose borrowed from Manet. Two black men pull on white socks at dusk, echoing the athletes in a painting by Degas, but in a darkness so obliterating it makes their actions seems conspiratorial, perhaps even ominous. The paintings of Lynette Yiadom-Boakye are not quite portraits, and never quite narratives. She is not painting from the life, so much as the imagination. In an introductory wall text at Tate Britain, the artist speaks of working from scrapbooks, photographs, assorted images and ideas to paint her black subjects. We are to think of these compositions as fictions, amounting to riddles. This is certainly what her paintings appear to present. A woman looks down, another looks away, a third shuts her eyes against us: what are they thinking? Two figures cover their mouths in theatrical gestures of silence: what are they hiding? A team of sportsmen with their arms around each other are all wearing black shorts, except one in white underpants – why, and what is the significance? The titles don’t help. Indeed they only complicate the question (and more strategically, particular pictures). A relatively straightforward profile of a dancer in a black leotard, which seems almost to be an exercise in the pure pleasure of painting a figure in oils, is called Later Or Louder Or Softer Or Sooner. Yiadom-Boakye is a writer as well as a painter. But it is as if the picture would have been too easily available without that title. Her accomplishments as a painter are everywhere evident. Born in London in 1977 to Ghanaian parents, Yiadom-Boakye had many years of academic training. She has immersed herself in the art of the painters’ painters she admires and invokes – Velázquez, Manet, Degas, Sickert. The opening gallery reprises Sargent’s Dr Pozzi in his famous red overcoat as a black man in spa slippers. The catalogue essayists praise her drapery in terms of Cézanne. Her painting of dark skin in shadow, circumambient gloaming or night is superb. She makes a strong virtue of contrapposto, chiaroscuro and the sumptuous sinking of oil into linen. Her canvases work on all scales. She can introduce a burning blackness into a sandy shoreline without puncturing a tonal hole in the picture, and position two children against waves and marine light so that the briny air seems to shiver. She is adept at flickering shadow, gleaming teeth and the radiance of dark colours in the forests of the night. She has a particular hook – a flash of white in the prevailing darkness, which might be an eye, a cigarette or a flower behind an ear – and a look that is much in demand. Tate Britain is only the first stop on a European tour. What connects the people in her paintings seems to be an age-old preoccupation with figure against ground: odalisque on couch, thinker on chair, loner against wall or nothing but thin air. The round faces of two women repeat as a couple of plates on a table; four men walk towards the viewer like a cinematic freeze-frame; an unusually populous group portrait of African leaders pose against a blank backdrop. The compositions are inherently formal, allusive, art historical. Some of these subjects are androgynous, but it is never clear why – or why that matters. Some are supposedly timeless, or so admirers say. But it isn’t quite true. A hairstyle, a shoe, a particular neckline, accessory, shirt or even just decent dentistry always gives a contemporary inflection to the old art aesthetic. And having established that modus operandi, or cognitive dissonance, Yiadom-Boakye just keeps at it. This show presents work made over 17 years. The paintings are elegant but strong; dense yet evasive; gliding yet heavily worked. They engage your close and questioning attention with supreme efficiency, only to thwart it. A man holds a parrot on his finger, another holds a goldfinch, a third an eagle. A woman in richly painted blue jeans steps forward into the picture frame – Debut, it’s called – and later in the exhibition, so does another figure in a rather bigger picture, wearing jeans with the identical glow. It is hard to ignore the repetitions. And what strikes is how little Yiadom-Boakye varies the tone. No painting seems to carry more weight than any other; no figure has more or less significance; no particular scene seems to stand out in the gallery or memory. The mood is continuous, unvarying. The scenarios, no matter how quiet, melodramatic or secretive, come to feel even-handed and complacent. This goes to the ultimate mood of Fly in League With the Night. The show is a deep pleasure for the eye, no doubt about it. But the premise of each painting – this particular grin, that dancer’s flexed feet, those crouching figures – is at every turn exceeded by Yiadom-Boakye’s exceptional fluency. What ought to be singular or strange – a man holding a bird in utter darkness, for instance – appears generic. The inscrutable disquiet of her fictions becomes a comfortable conceit. Lynette Yiadom-Boakye: Fly in League With the Night is at Tate Britain, London, until 9 May 2021 (temporarily closed due to Covid tier 3 restrictions)