José Mourinho refused to be drawn into discussions about whether Harry Kane and Son Heung-min form the best duo he has managed as Tottenham prepared for their match against Crystal Palace on Sunday. Instead, Mourinho affirmed his two most prolific attacking players were “world class”. “I don’t like to compare players, and some weeks ago I saw in some special media like I had chosen my all-time team,” Mourinho said. “It’s completely fake because it’s something I always refuse to do. Never. “I owe so much to my players that I would never say: ‘This is my favourite keeper, this is my favourite centre-back, this is my favourite striker.’ Never. I never do that. I don’t compare players. I’m just grateful to players that gave everything for me. Sonny and Kane, without comparing them with other players, they are, I repeat, world-class players. World-class players. I’m not telling anything different than that.” Kane has eight league goals and 12 assists and he has engineered eight of Son’s 10 goals. The quality of their performances and synergy on the pitch have helped to drive Tottenham to the top of the league, culminating in Mourinho being announced on Friday as manager of the month for November. It is the fourth time he has achieved the distinction. Although Mourinho is notorious for often speaking about his achievements and titles in singular form, he notably chose to recognise his squad when asked to comment on his latest distinction. It was a reflection of the strong collective culture he has succeeded in fostering at Tottenham, which he is understandably focused on maintaining. “It is not about me, it is about the team and if it was about me it would have to be the coaching staff of the month because without the other guys it would not be possible. This kind of thing I never feel it as an individual award, I always feel that it belongs to the team and the results we did. If we don’t have three victories and one draw at Stamford Bridge in November, for sure we wouldn’t have any chance to win it. It is about the team.”