Jürgen Klopp and a visibly emotional Steven Gerrard have delivered warm tributes to Gérard Houllier, the former Liverpool manager whose death at the age of 73 was announced on Monday. Gerrard was given his first-team debut at Liverpool as an 18-year-old by Houllier in 1998. As an increasingly influential part of Houllier’s midfield, Gerrard won the FA Cup, League Cup, Uefa Cup, Super Cup and Charity Shield under the Frenchman. “I’ve got an awful lot to thank the man for and I’m finding it really hard to come to terms with it right now,” the Rangers manager said. “The news was very difficult to take. It’s a huge blow. I came in to work yesterday morning really happy after our result at the weekend and then to receive that news was a bitter blow.” Gerrard’s assistant, Gary McAllister, was once described by Houllier as his “most inspirational” Liverpool signing. “Gérard obviously played a huge part in both our careers and also our lives,” Gerrard said. “He was more than just a manager. A caring man, a loving man. “Throughout your career, different people look after you and shape you. I always try and take all the best bits from all the coaches and managers I worked with. It’s impossible for me add the charisma, the care and the love that Gérard carried. “This is not a guy who would focus solely on football and what you gave to him in terms of the relationship player-to-manager. This was someone who, at my age, wanted to change me as a human being into an elite professional, who wanted me to be a better person, who wanted me to really understand the tactics and the game in a different way and become an even better player and build all the other stuff around the talent I had at that age. I’ll never forget that.” Klopp, preparing for the visit of Tottenham to Anfield on Wednesday, said Houllier deserved his status as a “true legend” at Liverpool. “He texted me a lot,” said Klopp. “A very, very supportive man, a great, great coach and an even better human being. Very warm personality. “What he would have loved to see, 100%, was our new training ground. As you know, he was very influential in the rebuild and modernising of Melwood, and during the construction work here we were in contact, and he asked me how it will be. He would have loved to see it. Sadly, he cannot – or not from here at least. Tomorrow night, I’m pretty sure our supporters will pay tribute in an appropriate way.”