After the trauma of Manchester United’s Champions League exit at RB Leipzig last Tuesday, when they were exposed defensively, perhaps there was something soothing about a stalemate with their neighbours. From the perspective of Ole Gunnar Solskjær, the manager who only seems to deal in chaos and extremes, the priority was certainly to avoid further damage. He could ill afford another high-profile loss which would have given more ammunition to his critics. It was a derby that will not live long in the memory. Despite the knife-edge tension, the sense that one error or one action could prove decisive, there were precious few moments of real drama in front of goal. Solskjær, though, would have enjoyed the resilience that two of his players showed, the character of David de Gea and Harry Maguire. It represented a dose of redemption, the latest instalment of the highs and lows of the game. De Gea, who had been prominent on the list of the culpable in Leipzig, was thrust into a first-half one-on-one with Riyad Mahrez and he came out on top while Maguire, who also laboured against the Bundesliga team, could reflect on some important interventions. City had marginally the better of the chances and it will irk Pep Guardiola to have drawn a blank. Kevin De Bruyne carried latent menace but he and his teammates could not find a way past De Gea and the club continue to feel like a puzzle this season. They are no longer free-scoring City and have missed Sergio Agüero, who has endured an injury-hit season and was absent here because of illness. At least they have found a measure of solidity. They have now gone 565 minutes without conceding a Premier League goal and, in John Stones, they had one of the evening’s outstanding performers. The centre-half is back in favour, ahead of Aymeric Laporte and his assurance would not have been lost on Gareth Southgate, who was in attendance. The England manager last played Stones in November 2019. Could a recall be in the works? The closest that City came to conceding was in the 47th minute when Bruno Fernandes crossed for Marcus Rashford, who took a touch and moved the ball just before Kyle Walker arrived to foul him. The referee, Chris Kavanagh, awarded the penalty only for VAR to spot that Rashford had been fractionally offside. One of the big questions concerned how United would start, having done so badly in their four previous matches in all competitions. The numbers showed they had been behind in the first half in each one but here they were close to taking the lead on 12 minutes. Victor Lindelöf rose to flick on Luke Shaw’s corner from the right and Scott McTominay strained every sinew to reach the ball at the far post. He lunged with his right foot rather than his left and could not get there. United had a couple more flickers before half-time from corners and a couple of scraps around the City box. Fernandes swiped at a difficult half-volley while the recalled Paul Pogba was crowded out after a loose ball out from Ederson. City had the clearer first-half chances and none was better than the one that saw De Gea distinguish himself on 35 minutes. It was a lovely box-to-box move, Gabriel Jesus driving it but, inevitably, it was De Bruyne who ignited it. There was an audible gasp inside the stadium when he took Jesus’s pass outside the area and instantly played in Mahrez on the overlap, setting him up against De Gea. After the save, De Bruyne lifted the rebound high. Raheem Sterling had looked dangerous earlier, although his touch was heavy following a De Bruyne pass in the seventh minute. The forward’s best moment came when he swapped passes with De Bruyne and cut sharply inside Aaron Wan-Bissaka before skating away from Lindelöf. Maguire blocked his shot. City could also point to the 26th-minute opening when Mahrez dropped a ball over the top for Jesus, who got to it on the half-volley ahead of Wan-Bissaka, only to blaze high. It was a difficult skill and Wan-Bissaka had applied some pressure. Jesus will feel that he ought to have done better. Guardiola played Fernandinho and Rodri in front of his back four and although De Bruyne tried to spark City from his roving attacking midfield role, the pickings were slim. Unusually, City did not commit many men forward. Solskjær reverted to a back four, having begun in a 3-4-1-2 system in Leipzig. His big move was to start Pogba on the left of a midfield diamond and the Frenchman showed in flashes, although it was Fernandes who sparked the move at the beginning of the second half that almost led to the breakthrough. Walker’s challenge on Rashford was rash. He would be spared by VAR. Briefly, United raised the tempo and Rashford shot wastefully after being found by Pogba. At the other end, Maguire blocked from De Bruyne after an offside-looking Jesus had broken away. United’s home record remains poor. They have won only once here in the league all season. On this occasion, they will take the point.