December marks the 10th month of the Covid-19 pandemic. For a child this can feel like their entire life with no end in sight. For my two sons, nine-year-old Joey and eight-year-old Jackson, the initial transformation from normal to “new normal” did not exactly start out smoothly but turned out to be an unexpected gift. We–myself, my two sons and my husband, Mark– live in a small town, about an hour outside of Chicago, with farmland interspersed throughout a typical suburban landscape. On a normal day there is not much to do in New Lenox, Illinois, but when you are forbidden from doing everyday activities it feels much more isolating. I have photographed my sons since they were born while working on personal projects about boyhood, so documenting my family during difficult times was not out of the ordinary for them. While visually recording this time felt important to me, the act of taking photos gave us all a small sense of normalcy. Each of my children responded differently to the pandemic. Jackson is more emotional when it comes to change while Joey tends to accept his circumstances easily but they both struggled to cope. We reminded them it was important to talk about their feelings and it is OK for boys to have fears and show vulnerability. My husband and I spent time comforting both boys, listening to their concerns, and responding to their psychological needs. We reminded them it was important to talk about their feelings and it is OK for boys to have fears and show vulnerability. It was not the time to become little men, it was quite the opposite. During the first couple months, I grew increasingly scared and frustrated with the daunting uncertainty of the crisis. It was still important to me that my boys understood there were more serious problems going on in the world than little league being canceled. There were families suffering much worse than they could imagine. Unknowingly, they were learning the most valuable lesson of their young lives, empathy. A mindset that will hopefully stay with them through adulthood. Eventually they realized there was indeed a positive side to their circumstances (and that Mom was right). Their excitement began to build as they had more time for exploring the open lands, building forts and pond fishing. They gravitated to the outskirts of the neighborhood. It was close enough for their little legs to travel with only a glimmer of the familiar in the distance. Did escaping for a short time help them subconsciously cope with this unending new normal? I learned so much about resilience and acceptance from my children during the Covid-19 pandemic.