Perhaps we’re so hardened, or punch-drunk, after a year of being battered by the pandemic that we don’t quite register how shocking this is. We stand this weekend on the brink of a no-deal crash-out from the European Union: the very outcome that all but the most extreme Brexiters once agreed would be a catastrophe for this country, an outcome our leaders insisted would never happen. Of course, there might be one last twist. Perhaps Boris Johnson will hail himself as a hero with a breakthrough before the weekend is out. But both he and Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European commission, are bracing themselves for failure, the latter counselling Europe’s leaders that no deal is now the likeliest outcome. Remind yourself that this is a total reversal of everything the Brexiters ever said. They promised voters that a deal would be a piece of cake to seal – “the easiest in human history” – such a breeze that David Davis, our then Brexit secretary, could turn up to the first round of Brussels talks without a document in his hand, armed only with a smile. In July 2017, Johnson cheerfully told the Commons: “There is no plan for no deal because we are going to get a great deal.” Exactly a year ago tomorrow, he won a general election by swearing that a Brexit deal was “oven-ready”, waiting only for the electorate to flick the switch by voting Conservative. Sure, the Tories now like to say they were referring only to the withdrawal agreement (the same text Johnson later condemned as contradictory and sought to rewrite). But plenty of voters thought the deal was done – and Johnson was happy for them to think it. Still, that serial deception is secondary to the damage a no-deal Brexit will do, an impact so obvious that until relatively recently, all but a tiny core of fanatics agreed it was a disaster that had to be averted at all costs. It will shrink our GDP by at least an extra 2% on top of the 4% that would be inflicted by leaving the EU even with a trade agreement. It will cripple our exports. The more than 50% of our imports that come from the EU will be disrupted or become more expensive, whether that be food, medicine, chemicals or industrial components. The tariff on basic foodstuffs will be 20% or more – and this in a time of rising food poverty. The change will play havoc with supply chains and drive out foreign investors who located in Britain because they believed they’d have easy access to the single market. Note last month’s warning from Nissan that its plant in Sunderland “will not be sustainable” if there is no deal. After many years of ultra-smooth trade, on 1 January we will add a whole lot of friction. If no deal happens, some will say it was inevitable. For decades, the Conservative party has been driven by a Europhobic awkward squad and leaders who indulged them. For the ultras of the misnamed European Research Group there was no agreement that could ever match the thrilling purity of severing all ties with the dreaded continent, walking out and slamming the door in our neighbours’ faces. And yet the deal on the table would once have delighted the hardest Brexiters. They would be out of the EU and unbound by the single market’s obligation to allow the free movement of people. Britain could freely import and export into the single market, only facing extra impediments if it chose to diverge from EU environmental or labour standards. That should hardly be a problem, given that Brexiters always insist they have no desire to weaken those safeguards. Indeed, if you ask Brexiters what exactly it is they want to do that the EU has stopped them doing, their eyes dart around the room and they change the subject. It’s the theoretical right to deviate from EU standards they want. Of course, as Von der Leyen pointed out, Britain would retain that right under the deal on offer. It’s just that, if Britain chose to exercise it, there might be a cost – in the form of measures imposed by Brussels to offset any advantage the UK would have given itself. That is what Johnson finds so unacceptable. And so he has decided that, rather than face the possibility of tariffs and barriers being imposed in future, he will choose the certainty of tariffs and barriers in three weeks’ time. It defies logic: “Because I worry that you might one day punch me in the face, I’m going to punch myself in the face right now.” Much of this is rooted, as it always was, in the sovereignty fetish that devoured first the Tory’s Eurosceptic wing, then the Tory party and, soon, the entire British economy. It obsesses over the abstract noun of sovereignty, claiming that an EU deal with binding rules would violate that sacred principle. But every trade deal contains binding rules – a deal with the US would be no different. It’s true even of the WTO rules that will govern our relationship with the EU from next month, and which Johnson now rebrands as “Australian”, hailing them as the very incarnation of national freedom. Perhaps, then, this is not really about the trimming of sovereignty – a compromise Brexiters are happy to make with everyone else in the world. “It’s because it’s Europe,” says trade analyst Sam Lowe of the Centre for European Reform. Ultimately, he’s concluded, this isn’t about tariffs and barriers, but something far more visceral. “They’re annoyed we’re in Europe’s vicinity.” If they could move Britain physically further away from the continent, they would. They long to be free of its taint. It will be tempting for those who deplore this break with our neighbours to see a no-deal Brexit as a chance for vindication – such a calamity that at last, leavers will see that remainers were right, that Project Fear was in fact Project Reality. “Maybe the trauma, disruption and agony of a no-deal exit will at last shake us out of the fantasy” that fed Brexit in the first place, says one former cabinet minister. I understand that temptation, but we cannot succumb to it. First, this disaster will hit the poorest “first and worst”, as the anti-Brexit activist Naomi Smith puts it. There is no comfort to be had in that. Second, it’s a delusion to imagine that if Brexit goes wrong, those who voted for it will blame the Brexiters. They’ll be urged instead, by the government and much of the press, to blame anybody and everybody else: Europe, remainers, the traitors in their midst. It’s a pleasant thought that disillusioned leavers might come back to pro-European internationalism, maybe even to the Labour party. But it’s surely as likely or more that, stung by the pain of no deal, they would look for remedy further right: that, to quote Smith, “Things would just get darker.” This is the prospect that faces us this weekend. We are on the precipice, led by those who promised there was another way. And now they are about to pull us into the abyss. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist