Singapore’s Changi airport is charging customers up to $269 per night for the chance to camp in a tent in its retail wing, the latest unusual travel experience aimed at boosting revenue during the pandemic. Tickets for the “glamping” experience, which have already sold out, offer guests the chance to “wake up to the refreshing view of the majestic HSBC Rain Vortex”, the world’s largest indoor waterfall. Tents are four metres in diameter and come with blankets. Shopping discounts are also included. “Usually we go out of the country every holiday but since we can’t travel much and it’s a school holiday, I thought why not do something different for the children,” camper Fadlina Musa told Retuters. Her husband, Khairil Anuar Malek, added that it would be nice to get out of the house. “It has been very tough for all of us, so we wanted to experience closeness at a different level,” he said. The travel industry, hit by the pandemic, has searched for new ways to attract customers. Airlines and agents have sold takeaway in-flight meals to would-be travellers, opened flight simulators to the public and run speed dating events. Voyages to nowhere, where flights and cruises start and end in the same place, have also been launched, though with mixed success. Earlier this month once such cruise from Singapore ended abruptly and 1,700 guests had to isolate after a passenger tested positive for Covid-19. The government later said the result had been a false alarm and that three subsequent tests on land had come back negative. In September, Singapore Airlines stopped running flights to nowhere after the trips were criticised by environmental groups. Instead it said it would offer people the chance to eat on board a grounded Airbus A380, the world’s largest passenger aircraft. Several other airlines, however, including Taiwan’s EVA Air, have continued to run such sightseeing trips for people who miss the experience of flying. Singapore this week banned travellers from the UK transiting through its airport in response to a new variant of coronavirus which has spread in England.