Jamie Oliver’s Christmas cooking specials have become almost as ubiquitous as the turkey on the table in recent years and despite the exceptional circumstances facing our 2020 celebrations, Oliver returns with a new two-part series full of creative ideas to liven up our potentially smaller gatherings. First up are edible gifts to deliver to your loved ones who might not be present on Christmas Day, including a mulled wine-glazed ham and an indulgent yule log. Ammar Kalia The Soul Sanctuary Gospel choir gives voice to this retelling of the nativity, focusing on the perspective of marginalised characters witnessing Christ’s birth. Made up of singers who have themselves faced homelessness, Soul Sanctuary reframe the Biblical tale into a thoroughly modern choral drama. AK Lyra and Will plot to reclaim the alethiometer from Boreal and when you have a knife that can cut through dimensions, heists become a lot easier. Meanwhile, Mrs Coulter explores our world – “A culture of consumerism, not faith” – and looks confused hearing the Lighthouse Family. Graeme Virtue Each of Steve McQueen’s masterly Small Axe films works as a stand-alone piece, but together they form an extraordinarily vivd picture of diaspora life. This week is the true, coming-of-age story of award-winning writer Alex Wheatle (Sheyi Cole), who finally found a sense of community in late-70s Brixton. Ellen E Jones Take That frontman Gary Barlow hosts a performance of hits from his latest album, Music Played By Humans, as well as time-worn classics live from the Natural History Museum in London. Backed by an orchestra, Barlow will also be joined by special guests Michael Bublé, Ronan Keating and Alesha Dixon. AK The poster couple for many a chateau-dream turn their attention to the orangery (yes, they have an orangery) and discover what lies beneath. Never one to miss the chance to upcycle, Angel gets her hands on two old daybeds, while there’s an ambitious plan to fix the roof with some pre-loved slate from Wales. Hannah Verdier Gone Girl, 11.15pm, Film4 Gillian Flynn’s bestseller gets the louring David Fincher treatment: a tense, unsettling tale of murder and misogyny. When Amy (Rosamunde Pike) and Nick (Ben Affleck) relocate from New York to the midwest, she disappears and he, in the Hitchcockian manner, is prime suspect. Paul Howlett One-Day International Cricket: South Africa v England. 7.30am, Sky Sports Main Event. Second ODI in the three-match series. Premier League Football 11am, Sky Sports Main Event. Sunday clash followed by matches at 2pm and 4.15pm. F1: Sakhir Grand Prix 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Penultimate round of the season at Bahrain International Circuit.