Liverpool and Everton are the only Premier League clubs who will be allowed to play in front of fans from Boxing Day under fresh Covid-19 tiering restrictions announced by the government. The spread of the new Covid-19 variant means a number of regions previously in tier 2, which allows crowds of up to 2,000, have been moved into the stricter tiers 3 and 4. Seven Football League clubs – Carlisle, Plymouth, Exeter, Bournemouth, Shrewsbury, Harrogate and Tranmere Rovers – remain in tier 2 areas and can still host supporters, but the return of fans has proved short-lived for the vast majority. It leaves football in a parlous position as the epidemic continues to worsen, with doubts growing in particular about the capacity of EFL clubs to continue fulfilling their fixtures. The Guardian understands leading top-flight clubs also harbour concerns about the welfare of their numerous loan players at EFL sides, although there are no plans to act on them at this stage. Rotherham, Millwall, Portsmouth, Ipswich, Peterborough, Bristol Rovers and Sunderland have had to postpone matches because of positive tests this month. The League One fixture list looks at particular risk of decimation, with four Boxing Day games already called off. There is disquiet in numerous quarters about the lack of regular testing beneath the top flight, with some sources predicting a chaotic picture if the situation does not improve quickly. The Ipswich physio, Matt Byard, called for a “circuit breaker” – in effect a temporary suspension of play – after the League One club were forced to call off their next two games following positive tests for six players and staff, including their manager Paul Lambert. That reflects the club’s wider stance and a further member of their squad is understood to have tested positive on Wednesday. There are worries that, particularly in the lower divisions, clubs find it difficult to monitor the movements of players who may be based in different tiers – for example those on loan from a tier 4 club to one in tier 2 – and could attempt to travel back home. Given the EFL’s procedures see weekly testing only for those showing symptoms, some feel that many potential exposures to the virus are simply not being picked up. The next set of mandatory EFL tests is in early January. Although the Premier League scaled back its testing regime from twice-weekly to weekly at the start of the 2020-21 season, its clubs in tier 4 areas will revert to the original level imminently. The EFL maintains its protocols are robust if deployed correctly, and are backed by evidence. It issued revised guidance to clubs this week but there are currently no plans to further formalise the testing process. Similarly, the league expects the season to finish in May as planned. That might only prove an issue if fixtures piled up to such an extent that the calendar could simply not accommodate them. The number of positive tests in the top two tiers of the women’s game, for which there are no scheduled fixtures until 9 January, increased sharply to a record 32 out of 864 last week. That follows a total of four from 854 the previous week. The Guardian understands a number of players at Chelsea, Spurs and West Ham are among those to have tested positive, with at least one club reaching double figures. Sunday’s derby between Chelsea and Tottenham was postponed, along with West Ham’s match against Aston Villa. Many WSL players share accommodation, meaning a requirement to self-isolate can lead to groups being ruled out of action.