Three years ago, Matthew Warchus’s production of this Christmas perennial was one of the most joyous evenings I’ve spent in the theatre, bringing a compelling story of redemption and a magical festival of carols together through the power of a great old building that blazed with lanterns, rang with handbells and seemed alive in every bit of its being. The pandemic has stopped all that, reducing theatres to streamed productions of pared-back shows. So this revival, in a staged performance relayed on Zoom, is a brave and welcome attempt to claw back some of the spirit of Christmas present. I just wish I had loved it more. On the plus side, the sheer theatricality of the original show eclipsed Jack Thorne’s adaptation, which emerges here as smarter and more profound than I first appreciated. It makes the point that, for all its gothic accretions over the years, Dickens’ novella is at heart a bildungsroman: the story of one man’s journey to full humanity, even if he happens to leave it a bit late. Andrew Lincoln quite rightly internalises Scrooge’s torment: you can see the sheer effort of facing up to himself flicker across agonised eyes. But, oh dear, how dizzying the swirl of superimposed figures becomes, and how inadequate a split screen is in encompassing the supernatural horror of the early scenes. As Scrooge is confronted by the ghosts of Christmas past, present and future – all three innovatively played by women pushing antique perambulators – the scale jumps up and down like a sugar-rushed child. For all the admirable attempts to show characters darting from one frame to another, the three vertical boxes through which the first act is told inhibit sideways movement. The subliminal suggestion that Scrooge is at his best when he stays in his box is thematically problematic, though the chief casualty is the expansive Mr Fezziwig, beautifully played by Clive Rowe, whose gestures are thwarted by a vertical frame. While I guess this makes the point that generosity is a horizontal quality – a reaching out to others – it’s a shame, because another revelation of this on-screen version is that the Fezziwigs, who were once willing to welcome the impecunious young Scrooge into the heart of their family, remain the still centre of the old miser’s frantic mind’s eye. They are a good memory with the power to woo him, while the bad memories – of his violent father, his bullying schoolmaster – work on him by opening up old sores. It is not until he confronts Fezziwig’s daughter, Belle, on her doorstep – and finds a mature woman who has made peace with her destiny – that he fully understands the urgency of his mission to change his ways. In this scene, calmly represented as two people facing each other in frames of different colours, the filming hits its mark. Part of the encounter’s quiet impact is its contrast with a staging that opens out, in the second half, to include the auditorium itself. Masked and distanced musicians support the signature handbells, and a technician is drafted in to represent the audience as a Christmas feast pours down, sprout by sprout, from the deserted balconies. It is profoundly moving to be trusted with this glimpse of a theatre community making do. By the time they all settle down in a circle – Scrooge exchanging fond glances with a wonder-struck Tiny Tim as Silent Night rings out around them – there wasn’t a dry eye in the house. Well, in mine, anyway. A Christmas Carol is available online until 24 December.