Police are beginning to crack down on people leaving areas in higher tiers for neighbouring places with lower coronavirus restrictions, as officers in York issued what police described as a “shocking number of fines” to people from tier 3 areas visiting the tier 2 city over the weekend. North Yorkshire police said Covid marshals and officers visiting hospitality venues in York encountered “large numbers” of visitors from tier 3 areas and had processed 55 tickets to people in breach of their own tier regulations. They said more than 100 further tickets were still awaiting paperwork completion and processing. Although North Yorkshire and the city of York are under tier 2 measures, other parts of Yorkshire, including Leeds, Hull, Bradford and Sheffield, are tier 3. Under the government’s tiered coronavirus system, hospitality venues such as pubs and restaurants can remain open in tier 2, although people should not mix with other households indoors. In areas under tier 3 measures, venues are closed except for takeaway and delivery services. Supt Mike Walker of North Yorkshire police said: “People very clearly know and understand the risks, they know that this virus is deadly, they will know about the identification of a new strain and know the serious steps the government has taken in the south-east, so there really is no excuse for acting so irresponsibly. “If you choose to visit the city of York from tier 3 areas without a justifiable reason to have made your journey – with our extra patrols, chances are you will encounter one of our officers and you’ll be asked about the reason for your visit.” A number of fines were handed out by Sussex police on Sunday evening after officers dispersed a meet-up in Crawley of about 100 cars, most of which had been driven from tier 4 areas. On Sunday, PC Glen McArthur from the force’s roads policing unit described the incident as “total stupidity”. He tweeted: “Police units across the county have just attended Crawley to break up a car cruise of about 100 cars, most of which from TIER 4 areas. It’s tough for everyone but do your part and stay home, please!!!!!!”