The Cambridge United manager has hit out at the “disgusting” behaviour of fans who booed as the players took the knee before his side’s win over Colchester. Mark Bonner said those involved had embarrassed themselves and the club by their actions. Other spectators quickly responded with applause but the boos had been clearly audible as both teams took the knee in support of Black Lives Matter for the first time at the Abbey Stadium this season. “It’s disgusting to be honest,” Bonner said. “It shines a light on our club for all the wrong reasons. What was a really good night for us on the pitch was overshadowed by a real small minority that decide to boo in a moment when we’re reflecting the values that everyone at our club believes in – inequality, racism, all these things that need kicking out of society. “It’s just behaviour that’s unacceptable in our club. We don’t want that at all. What’s most encouraging is the vast majority drowned them out quite quickly with an applause and reflected the values of our club much better. We work incredibly hard in the community to highlight all these issues and we’ve clearly got some work to do because some people have embarrassed our club tonight and embarrassed themselves a little bit.” "It shines a light on our club for all the wrong reasons."Cambridge United manager Mark Bonner says fans who booed players taking a knee before their match behaved unacceptably and embarrassed the football club. A Paul Mullin double helped Cambridge climb above Colchester United, who pulled a goal back through Michael Folivi’s second-half penalty, and into the play-off places after a 2-1 win. Exeter ejected a spectator from the ground after booing was heard when players took a knee before kick-off before their 2-1 loss to Harrogate. A club statement read: “Exeter City Football Club would like to thank the vast majority of supporters who supported our players when they took the knee as part of tonight’s EFL wide campaign. Unfortunately one supporter was ejected from the stadium and the club will take the appropriate action.” The latest incidents followed similar episodes at Millwall and Colchester this month. Millwall said they were “dismayed and saddened” by events against Derby at the Den on 5 December when the long-awaited return of supporters was marked by booing when players took the knee. Colchester’s League Two game with Grimsby on the same day was preceded by fans booing the players’ anti-racism gesture before kick-off. The club’s owner, Robbie Cowling, said fans who want to boo players taking the knee are not welcome.