The jungle north-east of Christmas Island’s immigration detention centre is dark and unforgiving. A person, seeking refuge or release, can disappear from sight in just a few steps. The terrain runs steeply downhill to the nearby roiling sea. Jagged basalt rock, slippery and sharp, marks the descent. Treacherous country at any time of day. But how a refugee under Australia’s protection came to be there, running weakened, staggering and disoriented through that jungle on a dark November night, is a four-year saga of punitive indifference, bureaucratic dishonesty and, finally, fatal incompetence. Fazel Chegeni was already a vulnerable man when he arrived in Australia seeking the most basic of recognition as a human being. Stateless all his life, marginalised in every place he’d been, he had been beaten, tortured and left to die in a desert before he sought asylum in Australia. Chegeni’s file with the Australian immigration department, obtained by Guardian Australia, runs to more than 700 pages. There is a lifelessness to its pages, the dry bureaucratic language of process and procedure, occasionally enlivened by notes scrawled in Chegeni’s own hand, his own voice pleading for help. The bulging dossier details Chegeni’s brutal torture, including rape, at the hands of the Iranian regime, the alarming deterioration of his mental health in detention in Australia, and the repeated requests for intervention from health professionals that were not acted upon. Over four years, on at least a dozen separate occasions, case managers, psychologists, detention centre operators and immigration department officials consistently warned that Chegeni’s mental health was being harmed by his ongoing detention, highlighting his history of torture and trauma in Iran and his repeated suicide attempts, and arguing he should be released immediately. They suggest, request and finally plead for senior management to intervene in the case of a man clearly headed for catastrophe. Guardian Australia has spoken to more than two dozen people who knew Fazel Chegeni, on Christmas Island and off: from those held in immigration detention alongside him to the friends he knew during his brief period of freedom in Australia; the advocates who counselled him during days of despair; the case managers charged with managing his detention; to the doctors who treated him in his final harried hours. His fate was entirely predictable to those who knew him and knew his history. Too late, a coronial inquest into Chegeni’s death uncovered a litany of failures in his protection in detention: people inside the Australian government who raised concerns about his care were sidelined, shut out or ignored; doctors’ orders were overridden by bureaucratic diktat; and ultimately, when Chegeni made his final, desperate escape over the fence from detention – on an island where there was nowhere to go – the untrained guards simply switched off the alarms and pretended it didn’t happen. Fazel Chegeni was left to die. Chegeni, whose full name was Fazel Chegeni Nejad, was a Faili Kurd, born in Ilam province in western Iran in 1981. When he was 14, his family moved to the capital, Tehran, seeking a more prosperous future, including work for their teenage son. But Tehran held little promise. Chegeni’s was always a life on the margins. As a Faili Kurd, he was not recognised as an Iranian citizen: the regime regarded the Faili as Iraqis who were expelled, as Chegeni’s parents were, by Saddam Hussein in the early 1980s. In the decades since, there has been some slow repatriation, but tens of thousands of Faili remain caught, unpeople welcome nowhere. Chegeni had never been to Iraq, had never left Iran, but in Iran his heritage meant he was always an outsider. He never went to school, nor learned to read or write. He could never visit a hospital, obtain a licence or vote. The police would not protect him if he was beaten or robbed, as he regularly was. Invisible, he worked odd jobs in Tehran’s sprawling subterranean black economy. The work was perilous and his labour exploitable. There was no one to whom he could complain when he was ripped off. He drifted between jobs and was often unemployed. Then he was arrested. In interviews years later with Australian immigration department officers, Chegeni was repeatedly asked to recall in detail the particular tortures inflicted upon him. In 2004, at a relative’s wedding, a fight had broken out over a previous marriage, and Chegeni, trying to intervene to stop the groom being beaten, was attacked with knives and cut deeply. Without identity documents he had no right to visit a hospital, so a relative stitched his wounds, leaving him with long jagged scars across his body. Two years later, during a raid on his village, his scars attracted the attention of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, Iran’s feared paramilitary intelligence agency, known as the Sepah. They suspected he was a troublemaker. Chegeni was taken to Khirzan prison, where he was held for 40 days. “There were two men, Hussaini and Mosavi,” Chegeni told Australian immigration officials through an interpreter. “And their role was to torture me. “They would undress me completely and force me to clean around the toilet with my tongue. They would then spit on batons and rape us with them. They would say that I was here to die. “I was fed 50 grams of potato and one slice of bread each meal. I had lost so much weight that I became skeletal. As they believed that I was dying, they released me into the desert.” But somehow, Chegeni found his way back to Tehran. When he finally arrived home, he was so emaciated his family didn’t recognise him. More than six-feet tall, he weighed less than 50kg. Chegeni was now on the radar of authorities. Over the following years, he was hauled in again and again to be questioned before, finally, he decided to leave. In February 2011, Chegeni paid for a fake passport and a ticket on a flight to Dubai. From there he flew to Indonesia. Eight months later, after paying a smuggler $11,000 of borrowed money, Chegeni had a place on a boat bound for Australia. He arrived on Christmas Island on 23 October 2011. The Australian government was comprehensively aware of the systemic persecution faced by the Faili Kurdish ethnic minority in Iran’s Kurdish communities. “[They] face discrimination in housing, education, freedom of expression and religion, health and employment,” Chegeni’s departmental file says. “The government restricts cultural and political activities, including the organisations that focus on social issues. The provinces where they live are the poorest in the country … cases of excessive child malnutrition and extreme poverty have also been recorded in these areas.” Due to the fact I am a stateless Faili Kurd, I have been continually discriminated against and persecuted in Iran. Chegeni himself told the immigration department of the discrimination Faili Kurds suffer in Iran. “Due to the fact I am a stateless Faili Kurd,” he said, “I have been continually discriminated against and persecuted in Iran. I was unable to obtain even limited schooling. Without education it has been difficult for me to subsist in Iran. I have also had issues with employment. I am illiterate and I am ashamed of that.” The persecution would be worse, he said, if he were sent back. The act of claiming asylum in the west meant the authorities “would consider me a spy”. He was asked to retell his story over and over again. Each time he gave the same answers. Chegeni was a “credible witness”, according to his department file. Bluntly, he told his interrogators: “If I was forced to return, I would be severely harmed, if not killed.” On 7 March 2012, an immigration department official formally adjudged that Chegeni was “stateless” and had a “well-founded fear of persecution” in Iran. He was “someone to whom Australia owes protection obligations”. Chegeni was a refugee. Australia was legally obliged to protect him from harm. Chegeni was on a “positive pathway”, in the parlance of the immigration department: ultimately he would be allowed to live in Australia. However, four months before that positive decision, in the Curtin detention centre in Western Australia, one solitary minute had transpired that was to change the direction of Chegeni’s life. Video exists of that landmark minute. Security camera footage from Curtin immigration detention centre on 22 December 2011 shows Chegeni seated, wearing a black singlet, as he eats in a mess hall. From a doorway, another asylum seeker approaches him, standing aggressively over him as he speaks. Reportedly the man had earlier been in disagreement with other asylum seekers, not Chegeni, over access to a telephone. But the man leans over the seated Chegeni, barking at him. Chegeni responds physically, pushing his hand into the man’s face. The man breaks a plate on Chegeni, knocking him to the ground and breaking his nose. A fight erupts, drawing in several detainees on both sides. The CCTV footage shows the fight raging across the dining hall and into a doorway. One man throws a chair and Chegeni appears to kick another on the ground. Guards are seen standing back, allowing the fight to dissipate, and the disturbance subsides as quickly as it erupted. As the Western Australia supreme court commissioner Kevin Sleight would later comment: “The attack lasted for a very short time ... The victim [the man Chegeni pushed] was not seriously injured and has made a full recovery from his injuries. No property was damaged. No staff were attacked. Order was quickly restored.” But that minute would follow Chegeni the rest of his life. He was charged, along with four others, with assault. The fight occurred in December 2011. Four months later, in March 2012, Chegeni was formally found to be a refugee. However, he would stay in detention nearly a year more, his mental health deteriorating rapidly. Chegeni was caught: stranded in a detention that was potentially limitless and that he could not challenge. On 7 March 2012 – the day the Australian government formally recognised Chegeni’s refugee status – detention medical provider International Health and Medical Services (IHMS) found incarceration was exacerbating his “history of torture and trauma”. Chegeni’s days in immigration detention, its uncertainties and its caprice, were all too painful reminders of his time in prison in Iran. “Documented clinical evidence suggests that there has been deterioration in Fazel’s mental health since being detained. Clinicians involved in this case suggest that Fazel is transferred from his current place of detention to a less restrictive environment … as soon as possible.” He was not moved. In June 2012, frustrated at delays in his visa process, he was found with razor blades threatening to stab himself if he wasn’t moved to another country. IHMS’s senior consultant psychiatrist Dr Geoffrey McKeough reviewed Chegeni inside Curtin detention centre. He asked, in a formal assessment, that Chegeni be released: “He has pretty much exhausted his capacity to cope in the detention environment and is likely to experience a continuing deterioration in his mental health if maintained in this very restrictive detention environment. In my opinion this man has a strong case for priority processing on grounds of both mental health and his experience of torture and trauma.” But still Chegeni remained detained and in August, his file reports, he repeatedly banged his head against a wall in an act of self-harm. Three days later he attempted to hang himself using clothes and the limb of a tree. He was rescued. In October 2012, Chegeni was again assessed, this time by Gracie Lopez, a psychologist from Foundation House with a specialty in torture and trauma counselling. He demonstrated “high levels of hopelessness”, she reported. “Fazel is very unwell psychologically … he remains a suicide risk. Fazel’s mental state is likely to deteriorate further if he remains in a detention centre environment which he experiences as very punitive.” Chegeni told Lopez he couldn’t understand why he was still in detention and said he believed he’d never be free. He tried to hang himself again. Five months later, he climbed on the roof of a detention centre building and jumped off. He landed on his feet, telling doctors he wanted to die, but was “too much of a coward to do it properly”. And then, with a suddenness that belied the months of inaction preceding, it happened. On 8 April 2013, after 534 days in detention, Fazel Chegeni was released into community detention and allowed to live in Australia. He settled in Millgrove Avenue, Thomastown, a winding street of red-brick homes in Melbourne’s north, where he lived with a fellow asylum seeker. He attended English lessons, though made only marginal progress, and every day he walked a small dog he and his housemate shared. Quiet, and shy about his imperfect English, he had only a small network of friends. But slowly, steadily, he built a life in his new country. “He blossomed,” in the words of one friend. “That’s when he was allowed to flourish.” Others who knew him, inside and out of detention, have described Chegeni as a “gentle soul … not traditionally religious, but a deeply spiritual man”. They say he was “generous, kind and deeply humble”. He owned few possessions in Australia and lived frugally but without want on about $140 a week. He had two sets of clothes; each day he wore one while he washed the other. But he was inordinately proud of a denim jacket he found at a Brunswick second-hand shop. It fitted him perfectly. He carried with him a book on Zen meditation called Peace is Every Step. Jalil Ghadere and Fazel Chegeni knew each other as children, growing up in the same small community in western Iran. He said Chegeni spoke often about his time in Melbourne: “He described himself as the happiest he had been since arriving in Australia.” He didn’t want luxury. He didn’t want [welfare] payments. He just wanted to live. Another friend who knew Chegeni in Australia told Guardian Australia: “Some people, after they lose everything, try desperately to regather everything they’ve lost. Others realise they can never replace what’s gone and they learn to live with what’s important. That was Fazel.” “He didn’t want luxury,” said another friend. “He didn’t want [welfare] payments. He just wanted to live.” But that mad minute in the Curtin detention centre still loomed, a Damoclean sword over Chegeni’s head. In September 2013, Chegeni and three others faced Perth magistrates court over the altercation. On day two of the trial, they were advised by legal counsel to plead guilty, and agreed. Magistrate Barbara Lane convicted Chegeni of assault occasioning bodily harm and sentenced him to six months and one day in prison. In sentencing, Lane said she “accepted that [the assault] was not premeditated or preplanned; that it was a spontaneous act” but that “when this type of conduct occurs in a detention centre, it disturbs the good order and administration of that facility”. On 18 December, Chegeni was granted leave to appeal his sentence. Crucially, his legal team did not apply to appeal against his conviction. On the same day, the then immigration minister Scott Morrison – now Australia’s prime minister – revoked his right to live in the community and he was taken back into detention. In the submission before the minister, IHMS warned it “could not rule out [Chegeni’s] mental health issues not being exacerbated by a return to held detention given his mental health history”. But Chegeni’s criminal charge outweighed those concerns, and he was taken into custody in “the public interest”. He had lived for 255 days in Australia. He would never know another day of freedom. When Chegeni’s appeal against his sentence came before the Western Australian supreme court in December, his prison sentence was withdrawn. Sleight found the sentence was “manifestly excessive” and had failed to consider the victim was not seriously injured and that none of the offenders had any prior convictions. Chegeni’s sentence was wholly suspended. However, while the prison term was dropped, Chegeni’s conviction still stood. And it was this legalistic distinction that meant Chegeni was now trapped by the inflexibility of Australia’s byzantine migration laws. Section 501 of the Migration Act has an especially punitive – and uncompromising – clause for people in immigration detention. It states the minister must cancel the visa of a person who fails the “character test” because of a conviction for any offence committed in immigration detention. There is no discretion permitted, no consideration of the seriousness of the offence, or of any mitigating circumstances. Chegeni was caught: stranded in a detention that was potentially limitless and that he could not challenge. Despite the fact a court had found he should not serve a custodial sentence for his part in the 2011 affray, Chegeni faced indefinite detention because of it. He could not be removed from Australia because he was a refugee, and Australia was legally obliged to protect him. Besides, he was stateless, and there was nowhere he could be sent. But because of the intransigence of Australia’s migration laws, he had to be detained. Chegeni faced no prospect of release without the immigration minister specifically intervening, choosing to allow him to apply for a visa. Dozens of these cases come across the minister’s desk, but progress on these cases was painfully slow, to the point of stagnation. As one department staffer complained in an email, asking about the progress of Chegeni’s case: “Some recent [visa application] bar lift submissions that have gone to the minister did not end up getting signed. For this reason, we have put these types of submissions on hold while we clarify with the minister’s office how we should proceed with these types of cases.” In January 2014, the immigration department accidentally leaked Chegeni’s personal details online – along with those of nearly 10,000 others in immigration detention – in a massive and embarrassing data breach uncovered by Guardian Australia. The secretary of the department wrote a letter to Chegeni to apologise. Throughout 2014, Chegeni’s mental health dramatically worsened. His case notes show a series of increasingly concerned case managers and psychologists begging for senior managers to intervene in his case. In an August case review, it was noted: “Case manager is of the view that [Chegeni] should be accommodated in the community while awaiting the resolution of his case.” A month later, a submission from departmental staff to then minister Morrison argued that the ongoing, indefinite detention of Chegeni, along with that of nine others in similar situations, had been found by the Australian Human Rights Commission to be unlawful under international law: a breach of Australia’s obligations under the international covenant on civil and political rights. The submission recommended: “Due to the length of time these 10 detainees have spent in held immigration detention, and the finding that they are persons to whom Australia has refugee convention … non-refoulement obligations, you may consider it appropriate to exercise your power … to place them into community detention. “If placed into community detention, the department would continue to manage all 10 detainees’ cases closely. International Health and Medical Services would manage their health needs and an external service provider would manage their welfare.” Morrison rejected the submission and declined to intervene. The refugees stayed in detention. Two months later, on 14 November, Chegeni’s case manager wrote again: “He appears to be at breaking point and I am quite concerned about him from his presentation … please … keep an eye on him in the meantime.” Another departmental officer wrote on the same day: “He faces further extended periods in detention. He has controlled himself remarkably well under the circumstances and has been a pleasure to have at the [Melbourne immigration detention centre] since his return. He asks for nothing but peace.” Four days later, Chegeni’s case manager wrote that Chegeni felt he was being bullied by other detainees. “This bullying has been going on for some time now and it is difficult for Serco to control. Fazel is becoming more withdrawn and he no longer feels confident or comfortable to walk around the centre. He has been of excellent behaviour … and although it would obviously be preferable to … stop the bullying rather than move the victim, Fazel has advised that he cannot take the situation any longer and needs to move. For his ongoing mental health I support the move and hope something can be arranged ASAP.” And on 20 November, Chegeni’s case manager wrote again that his presentation was “erratic”, his train of thought illogical and his sentences unintelligible. The email mentioned his “history of self-harm”. The next day he wrote yet again: “Fazel’s mental health has worsened.” Another officer raised similar concerns: “He is obviously becoming very exhausted by the prolonged period of detention and I would support a new place for him, this may help improve his mental wellbeing.” Also mentioned was Chegeni’s “past history of attempted hanging”. Three days later, on 24 November, Chegeni’s case was reviewed yet again. “Case management strongly supports him being reconsidered for community detention/bridging visa as soon as his circumstances allow given his length of time in detention, his positive refugee status and his deteriorating mental health. “Overall, [Chegeni’s] behaviour has improved significantly. No incidents of relevance have been recorded since March 2014. Case Management stated that [Chegeni] has been of ‘exceptional behaviour’ since arriving at the [Melbourne detention centre] and is always polite and courteous.” In the margins of the paper, another senior officer has scrawled in block letters: “Can we discuss with case management re: possible return to community detention in the new year? (or bridging visa, or temporary protection visa).” Those in the department alive to Chegeni’s deteriorating condition were desperate, it seems, but powerless to help him. Case notes from this time say he withdrew from classes and activities in detention, and he simply refused to speak. In March of 2015, one of the men who came on the same boat with Chegeni to Australia died. Omid Ali Avaz, a fellow Kurd living in Brisbane on a bridging visa, committed suicide in his home – the 29-year-old “died of unnatural causes” according to internal department emails. Chegeni, by now in detention in Brisbane, formally requested to go to his friend’s funeral and his case manager recommended he be allowed to attend. By email, senior department staff rejected his request. Then news reached Chegeni from Iran. His sister, too, had died. Chegeni appeared to grow increasingly desperate in detention. Throughout his incarceration, Chegeni’s file is littered with client request forms, with his increasingly manic handwritten pleas scrawled across the page. We knew he was sick. He was a sick man. Everything hurt him, everything made him upset. “Can I see may cais mangeir pleas. Tank you,” a typical note reads. His signature is scratched into the paper below each request. Chegeni was now deeply psychotic, according to case notes. He threatened to kill himself and was judged “noncompliant” and was moved to a higher-security centre in Wickham Point in Darwin. There, he threatened to jump off a roof again. “We knew he was sick. He was a sick man,” a man detained alongside Chegeni told Guardian Australia. “Everything hurt him, everything made him upset. But no help, only punish. Why could no one do anything?” Again, his case capriciously turned for the better. While being held in Darwin, Chegeni was sent a letter inviting him to apply for a temporary protection visa to live in Australia. Morrison had intervened in his case and “lifted the bar” on his application for a visa to live in Australia. He could apply. But the vicissitudes of detention wore at Chegeni, enlivening hopes before cruelling them again. Even this sliver of promise carried disappointment. Later, friends in detention say, Chegeni received another letter from the department. His application had stalled; it was not valid because of a form incorrectly filled out. He would need to resubmit it and start again. From 1 July 2015, Chegeni came under the aegis of the newly formed Australian Border Force: created as the country’s “frontline border law enforcement agency”. The force had a difficult start, attempting a massive public visa crackdown that was ultimately abandoned in the face of public protests. And in the five years since, the agency has remained plagued by controversy, with consistent reports, both internal and from independent government auditors, of mismanagement, corruption, bullying and incompetence. The advent of the ABF also changed the way refugees and asylum seekers were treated, with, in its own words, “a greater focus on operational security and secrecy”. In September, the ABF decided to transfer several dozen asylum seekers and refugees from Darwin to Christmas Island, citing security reasons. They gave the move a codename: Operation Stabilo. Chegeni was put on the manifest for the flight, despite the protests of several in the department that he was on a “positive pathway”, that is, he would soon be granted a visa, and he had specialist medical appointments he needed to attend in Darwin and would only have to be flown back again on a charter flights at a cost of several thousand dollars. An internal ABF directive stated detainees with medical and mental health issues that could not be treated on Christmas Island were “not to be considered for transfer”, nor were those with court appearances, a history of self-harm or who were imminently to be released with a visa. Chegeni met all of those criteria. He was still put on the list. Katherine Peart was the director of case management for the department of immigration at Darwin’s Wickham Point detention centre in September 2015. She told the coronial inquest that in that month, she noticed a lot of “closed-door meetings” between ABF staff, and learned that a transfer of detainees was planned in secrecy. When she asked an ABF member what was going on, she was told they “could not divulge that kind of information”. Peart was ultimately told who was being moved from Darwin to Christmas Island, and said she was “very surprised” to see Chegeni’s name on the list. She raised her concerns with her manager immediately. Others in the department did similarly. The ABF held a final meeting on the day Chegeni and others were transferred. Peart was excluded from the meeting and a subordinate departmental officer invited in her place. Peart raised concerns that she was not told about the meeting, and that her replacement was “not senior enough to perform this role”. Later, when Chegeni died, she would say “it was such a waste … we failed him”. Chegeni stayed on the list for transfer. He arrived in detention on Christmas Island late on 19 September. In Green 1 compound in the sprawling, remote Christmas Island detention centre, Chegeni had a room to himself. In the terminology of detention, he was placed on a “medium SME” – which stands for “supportive monitoring and engagement” – where he was required to be physically monitored every 30 minutes because of previous self-harm attempts. Despite the round-the-clock monitoring and a slew of medical appointments, Chegeni deteriorated. Gradually, then suddenly. He told doctors he had been recognised as a refugee and he didn’t understand why he had been sent back to Christmas Island, where he had begun his detention within Australia’s regime nearly four years before. He didn’t sleep, and the steadily increasing regimen of antidepressant and antipsychotic medication appeared to have little impact. Chegeni said he was powerless to stop “the bad thoughts in my mind … the bad thoughts of suicide”. He became very distressed, putting his head in his hands, clutching his head and face and rocking in his chair Shortly after arriving on the island, Chegeni had a regular mental health review, this one marking 48 months in detention. According to the coronial report, Nurse Colin Li described him at the time as “flat and depressed”. But Li said his patient insisted – it seems as much to convince himself as the nurse – “I am not crazy, I don’t want to hurt or kill myself.” Chegeni’s case notes from this time make for brutal reading. The reports show him being brought in for meetings, the purpose of which he doesn’t understand, each appointment another incremental step in a process about which he is given vanishingly little information. He saw doctors daily about blinding headaches, was medicated, his doses steadily increased. But he grew sicker. “He became very distressed, putting his head in his hands, clutching his head and face and rocking in his chair. He was saying he felt enormous pressure and confused,” a case manager reported. Friends reported finding him regularly crouched, rocking back and forth, with his head in his hands. “He spoke about being in detention for a long time and how it was making him feel sick and depressed,” fellow detainee Harbinder Singh told the coronial inquest. Wissam Jadiri, a fellow Iranian asylum seeker, had known Chegeni’s parents in Iran. He spent time with Chegeni in WA’s Yongah Hill detention centre, where they had passed the time playing board games. He now found himself reunited with his friend on Christmas Island. Jadiri was shocked by Chegeni’s physical and mental state. His friend, he told the coronial inquest, was almost unrecognisable after years in incarceration, and he now watched him grow worse every day. “He appeared sad and spoke and behaved in a childlike manner and needed to be looked after,” Jadiri said. Chegeni saw medical centre staff every day about his headaches, but, Jadiri said, believed “they would not help him”. Chegeni told doctors he was coughing up a white liquid that he thought was “milk from my brain” and that “my brain is coming out from my nose”. After he collapsed in his compound, Chegeni was booked for an appointment with a cardiac specialist in Darwin for 15 October. But the ABF told doctors he could not be moved to Darwin “due to security issues”, so the appointment was rescheduled for 18 November in Perth. Chegeni never made it. At 9:15pm on Friday 6 November – his 1,477th day in detention – Fazel Chegeni went over the wire. The Christmas Island detention centre sits at the remotest point of that isolated island, a fortified teardrop of land carved into the dense jungle of the north-west point. Earlier in the evening, Chegeni was shivering and shaking, so his friend, Wissam Jadiri, lent him a jumper, an unusual item of clothing for Christmas Island’s relentless muggy tropical heat. Chegeni smoked a cigarette outside the medical centre, before returning the jumper, saying he would be back in 15 minutes. Chegeni then climbed on to the roof of the education centre, running across it before swinging off a gutter – breaking it – to drop into the “sterile zone” between the detention centre’s preliminary and final fences. Two fellow asylum seekers saw him escape, and called out for him to return, but he didn’t reply. They hoped he would return voluntarily, and didn’t want him to be punished, so they told no one. CCTV footage uncovered later shows Chegeni carefully climbing a 1.2m wire mesh internal barrier before he steadily scales the 4.7m perimeter fence. In the footage, he appears to be carrying a bedsheet to dampen the shock from the electrified and alarmed fence. As soon as Chegeni touched the final fence, a specific alarm sounded in the immigration detention centre’s control room. The alarm, from those who have heard it, sounds like no other inside the centre: “Very loud and ominous sounding.” An experienced control room operator who later reviewed the footage of Chegeni’s escape said the sound “would have been obvious to a trained operator … the alarm sounding was unmistakably the external fence alarm”. But the two men in the control room didn’t know what it was. They had received little training, and had been rostered on together after a bare handful of hours watching others work in the control room. In the coronial inquest, Australian federal police detective Adam Broadribb bluntly described their training as “next to none” and said they had “no idea whatsoever” what the alarms meant. “Both men in the control room … were inexperienced,” WA coroner Sarah Linton put it more diplomatically in her report, “and were not able to follow the control room procedures competently. “As with most technology, it is only as good as the person operating it.” As the alarm rang out, the men pressed a button in the hope it would stop the noise. The alarm continued to sound. It was not until 31 minutes after Chegeni had escaped that they finally spoke to a supervisor, who told them the alarm was the perimeter fence alarm. He told them simply to reset it so the noise would stop. They reset the alarm. They recorded nothing in the official log book. And they went back to work. Two hours after Chegeni went over the fence, a routine headcount was conducted. In Green 1 compound, they were one person short. An emergency headcount was ordered: every detainee was woken up for a face-to-photo check. Chegeni was missing. A sweep of the rooms turned up nothing, similarly a patrol of the perimeter of the centre. At 2:45am the Australian federal police and Australian Border Force were notified. No one thought to, or wanted to, mention the alarm. A senior security manager checked the log: nothing had been reported. For 12 hours, the search for Fazel Chegeni was focused inside the centre, fed by a belief escape over the outer perimeter fence was impossible. As the sun came up on Christmas Island with Chegeni still missing, failure after failure compounded an inchoate and disorganised response. The three people who knew that the perimeter fence alarm had gone off “had not informed anyone … as they had not made the connection between the alarm and the missing detainee”. The head groundsman who discovered the roof gutter damaged by Chegeni’s escape had not been told a detainee was missing so didn’t report it. “It did not seem to be within anyone’s contemplation that Mr Chegeni Nejad had left the centre,” a disquieted coroner would later observe. As would emerge later, Chegeni was still alive at this time. He might have been found and saved. It was not until 10am Saturday – more than 12 hours after Chegeni sounded the alarm by going over the wire – that detention centre manager Denise Alexander concluded he had escaped. At about the same time, police officers discovered the damaged fence where Chegeni had climbed over it. They followed a track from that point about 60m into the jungle. Chegeni was not there. The path came to an abrupt end, and the police could see no footprints, no sign of disturbance of a man gone further in. They would return to this spot. In her report, coroner Linton said that while over 700 pages of medical notes demonstrated Chegeni’s worsening condition, and some individuals within the system had attempted to help him, an inflexible and secretive decision-making process – and a series of failings in his care on Christmas Island – ultimately contributed to his death. “His death was preventable,” she found. “Greater emphasis should have been placed on his medical needs and less on the security issues that [Chegeni’s] behaviour was raising.” The Australian federal police took over the investigation, launching a search and rescue operation at 10:45am, which began to search the jungle outside the detention centre at 2pm. Chegeni had now been missing for nearly 17 hours. The area immediately outside the fenceline where Chegeni had escaped was searched again, along with the track into the jungle. No sign. The search was halted as darkness fell about 6pm. At 8am the next morning, the same territory was searched again. Almost immediately, the body of Fazel Chegeni was found, 35 hours later but barely 60 metres from the detention centre he’d fled. A piece of dark blue bedding sheet was tied in a tight ligature around his neck, gripped by his right hand. Having fallen as well, he’d struck his head on a rock. Robber crabs – the giant omnivorous crabs native to Christmas Island – had already begun to prey on his body. Coroner Sarah Linton found Fazel Chegeni’s death was caused by the ligature compression on his neck. He had died sometime late on Saturday night or early Sunday morning. It has been said that uncertainty does the most damage, as it leads to feelings of hopelessness. His family told the court he had clearly meant to kill himself, but the coroner said she was unable to determine whether Chegeni had meant to kill himself or had accidentally choked himself to death. “I make an open finding as to the manner of death,” she said. Linton was more certain about the factors that led to his death. “Mr Chegeni Nejad was a vulnerable man whose mental health was adversely affected by being held in detention, and the longer he remained in detention without any clear date of release, the more deeply affected he would become. “It has been said that uncertainty does the most damage, as it leads to feelings of hopelessness, and I believe this was the case for Mr Chegeni Nejad. His situation was compounded by the fact that he struggled to understand the complex immigration process, so that even when things were progressing well, he found that difficult to comprehend and often mistook positive information as a negative sign that he would never be granted the opportunity to live freely.” A spokesman for the department of home affairs told Guardian Australia the department and the Australian Border Force “take all reasonable steps to provide a safe environment to prevent any injury or death in immigration detention facilities”. “Where deaths in immigration detention do occur, the department cooperates with coronial investigations and carefully considers any recommendations.” Fazel Chegeni spent a lifetime looking for somewhere to belong. He died distressed and confused, entirely alone, in a country sworn to protect him, but resolutely hostile to his very presence. Fazel Chegeni never found what he was looking for. He never found home. On Christmas Island his fellow detainees rioted, incensed at his insensitive treatment and his incompetent protection. In Melbourne, friends held a quiet vigil in memoriam. “Fazel is free now,” one said. “God gave him a visa.” • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. Hotlines in other countries can be found here