When comedian Lolly Adefope was asked to suggest people she’d like to speak to for this issue, Munroe Bergdorf was the first and only name on her wishlist. “I’ve long been inspired by her,” she said. Meanwhile, the activist and model has had a busy year. In June, Bergdorf joined L’Oréal’s UK diversity and inclusion advisory board, having been dropped as the brand’s first transgender model in 2017, following comments about “the racial violence of white people”, which were deemed at odds with the company’s values. (In an Instagram post about her reinstatement this summer, she wrote that she believes in “accountability and progress, not cancellation and grudges”). The next month, she signed a six-figure deal for her first book Transitional, a “gender manifesto”, out next year. Covers with Teen Vogue and Time magazine followed (Bergdorf was chosen as one of the latter’s “Next Generation Leaders”). The two meet online, four days after Joe Biden is confirmed to have won the US presidency. But it’s not the first time they have crossed paths. Years ago, Adefope recalls being a plus one to one of Bergdorf’s birthday parties at a pub, eliciting a hoot of recognition. “I was having the worst birthday ever,” she laughs, “I broke up with my boyfriend that night, thank you for uprooting my trauma!” Today, Adefope is speaking from Portland, Oregon, where she’s filming the third season of Shrill, one of Bergdorf’s favourite TV shows. Perhaps best known for playing Aidy Bryant’s blunt but loving housemate in the hit US comedy, Adefope, 30, has become one of television’s busiest character comedians – from appearances on This Time With Alan Partridge to her ditsy Georgian noblewoman in BBC’s Ghosts; she has also written and starred in her own BBC Two comedy short, Sorry. Bergdorf, 33, is at home in London with her pet dogs, who make occasional appearances throughout the conversation. After a few giddy exchanges about how “gorgeous” the other one looks, the pair settle down to a lively discussion about cancel culture, the limits of corporate activism and their pandemic epiphanies. MB So how are you? LA I’m good. I’m in Portland shooting series three of Shrill. MB That’s how I first heard of you. What’s it like being in America, with the election? LA We had a really late-night shooting on Friday. Then on Saturday, I had a lie-in, and then woke up and said, “Oh, great. What a fantastic day!” Lots of people screaming in the street, lots of cars honking, which was fun. And there was a double rainbow! Where are you? MB I’m in London and locked down. I’m not as shell-shocked as last time. I actually came to the end of my lease just as lockdown 1 started, so I didn’t have my own house. What a year! What’s been your takeaway from 2020? LA That it turns out I love doing nothing. Our generation are always go-getting, hustling. It feels as if we always have to be ascending in our careers. When I’m in Portland, I meet people who are hairdressers, they have a wonderful life, they go on hikes and do loads of things. Their career is just the thing they do to pay the bills. They enjoy it, but it’s not this huge, continuous journey of trying to make it. And I’m attracted to that lifestyle, of just having a nice life. MB At the moment I feel like my career has gone in a different direction from a lot of people’s. My experience has been really strange, in terms of navigating success in a tragic time. It’s a weird one. LA What’s been your lowlight of 2020? MB I guess, Tory leadership? LA Imagine if I said, “I love the Tories!” MB It’s a pro and a con. I think it’s a pro, because we’ve started to see what Conservatism is really about. LA They’re showing their asses. MB When you have leaders who make decisions for the good of the country, rather than the good of the few, that’s good leadership. I think [the government] demonstrated that [they are about] profit over people. LA I think we’ve also learned a bunch about society. The radical lack of empathy is extremely concerning. MB It’s like when you’re at school, and there were people who would act out, and it would impact others in the classroom. I feel as if I’m in a massive classroom, but the ones who are disrupting the class are Donald Trump and the Conservatives. LA I remember someone told me Donald Trump may not leave after the election. It seemed like a fictional, almost science-fiction idea. MB We’re having misinformation spread across the internet; QAnon and conspiracy theories have gone into overdrive. That is really concerning. That’s definitely my low. LA My immature lowlight is, I was in a cab, and the driver did a wee into an empty bottle. MB No! Ha, and I just went existential with my lowlight. It would be amazing if Joe Biden zoned in on what trans people are facing, rather than just acknowledging that we exist LA It was insane. I thought, “What is he doing under the seatbelt? Surely this isn’t gonna be what I think it’s gonna be?” I couldn’t really see what was going on, but I glimpsed over and saw a bottle of what looked like apple juice. OK. So he’s weed in a bottle, he’s still driving. It’s multitasking, it’s almost quite impressive? That’s what the Tories are doing to our country – pissing all over it. The conversation moves on to Joe Biden becoming the first US president to mention trans people in his victory speech. MB I’m not gonna get too excited about presidents doing what they should be doing. We’re so downtrodden that when people in power give us a scrap we get excited. But I’m also trying to recognise that we’ve come from a president who was legislating against trans people, so it was a nice nod. What would be amazing, would be for Biden to specifically zone in on what we’re facing, rather than just acknowledging that we exist. It’s time to look at the individual instances of oppression that are systemically woven into the foundation of our countries. What do you want to see in the next four years? LA I feel similarly. When brands jumped on the [Black Lives Matter] protests, I was sceptical. The brands coming out and saying, “We stand with the black community” – that got me down more than it invigorated me. I just thought, “This is meaningless.” The brands posting this stuff will think they have done something, which makes them complacent. Everyone was posting black squares on Instagram and saying, “I’m doing the work, I’m buying Reni Eddo-Lodge’s book.” MB It’s so performative. LA Yeah, I just felt really negative about it – apart from the protests, which I did think were inspiring. Young black people in the UK and the US were fighting for their rights. MB What do you think the next step is? Us talking about our experiences of racism within our industries was, I think, a really big moment. From my perspective, you can be punished and blacklisted for speaking out about racism. John Boyega is in the papers today, talking about how he thinks his speech at one of the protests is going to affect his career. LA I think it’s tough. I struggle a lot with #Oscarssowhite and all of the stuff, where institutions have revealed they’re not explicitly racist, but not representing the people they should be representing. We call it out and then maybe the next year, they have nominated films directed by people featuring black people. These institutions haven’t changed. It’s just that we’ve been calling them out. So do we just spend our lives calling out racist institutions, so that we can then become part of the institutions that used to be racist? It feels counterproductive in a way. I wonder whether it’s about us as black creators coming together to create opportunities, and not depending on white-led institutions. MB I think we need to do a bit of both. We need to be involved in things that already exist, because we live in a world where the framework is white. It’s important to participate, but also to build things that are for us and by us. LA The most innovative, creative products I’ve seen recently have come from black women. Rihanna has revolutionised the beauty and lingerie industries, and that has an impact on the mental health of young women, who are measured by their beauty. [Seeing yourself represented] connects to your self-worth. Rather than join Victoria’s Secret and change it from the inside, she had her own show, which has now become this widely respected thing. The conversation moves on to cancel culture. MB I didn’t know that you’d been cancelled. LA Well, I wasn’t fully cancelled. I tweeted a joke about an all-white comedy lineup that had 25 people on it. And I said, “Someone’s dreaming of a white Christmas,” because it was a Christmas gig. Then Jason Manford got involved. MB Who’s that? LA Thank you so much for not knowing who he is. He’s a comedian who decided to defend the gig. I am a comedian, I was making a joke. And then it got reported as being a race row. There’s a ton of downsides to social media, but it’s given marginalised people a voice MB The thing that strikes me in all of this talk about snowflakes, is it always gets turned into a race row by white people. LA I was making a very casual joke and having a fun time on Twitter. And suddenly loads of white men were crying because I was criticising this charity gig. And then people were tweeting, “So you think that the charity shouldn’t get money?” and stuff like that, and I had to explain the joke: I’m not talking about the charity, I’m talking about representation. In hindsight, I would have just left the joke as it was. There was a time when I thought, if I can just bring one person around, if I can change one person’s mind, that’s been a good day on Twitter. Now, I feel that people are looking for an argument. This week a woman tweeted at me, “Oh, you’ve got she/her in your bio. That’s because you’re a bully,” or something. And I thought, I could engage with this woman, or I could just have a nice day and make some people laugh. She’s not interested in getting her mind changed. She’s just angry at me. MB What do you think about cancel culture? LA When I think about people getting cancelled, I think of someone like you, because it was traumatising, and you were demonised. Whereas [some] people talk about figures like JK Rowling, who are very wealthy and absolutely fine. People say cancel culture is not real, but, actually, if you look at cases like yours, it is completely real. That’s what we should be talking about when we talk about people getting cancelled. MB I think cancel culture has been around for ever; we just haven’t called it that. Lucy Meadows was a primary school teacher, who took her own life [in 2013, after her gender reassignment became national news; at an inquest into her death, the coroner accused the Daily Mail of “ridicule and humiliation” and a “character assassination”]. That’s cancelling. Not a business being called out for their lack of diversity – that’s accountability. There’s so much emphasis on freedom of speech, and people should be able to say what they want to say. That is true, but you also can’t expect people to roll over and take it. That’s the difference between then and now. Social media has given people a voice, and that’s a really important, positive takeaway. Obviously, there’s a ton of downsides, but the fact that marginalised people have a voice, and we can organise and come together: Time’s Up, Trans Is Beautiful, all of these amazing movements can happen. The Tories stopped us from doing it. They stopped queer people from organising in public halls under section 28 [repealed in 2003]. The conversation turns to social media more generally. MB I’m trying to renegotiate the relationship I have with my phone, and make sure that I’m not spending as much time on it. Although, I really like doing things like this online now, even though I would love to have met you in person. Flying around the world to do talks was not sustainable for me. Flying to America for a matter of six hours – I don’t think that is going to be a thing any more. As much as I love travelling, we need to think about sustainability. I digress! How about you? LA At the beginning [of the pandemic], I was addicted to checking my phone, then slowly realised it was making me very sad and stressed. I’ve tried screen-time limits on Twitter and Instagram. I have a weird, nostalgic love for Twitter, because when I was getting started I would post jokes to try to forge a comedy career. It was just people making funny jokes and trying to make each other laugh. Now it’s not that. I find myself slowly muting every single person I follow, rather than getting off the app. I’ll mute everyone one by one, and eventually I’ll have a nice time. I have convinced myself I need social media for my job. MB Jennifer Lawrence and Michaela Coel have definitely proven that you actually just need to be good at your job. There are so many people who aren’t on social media who are just really good. And you are. LA Thank you, and maybe they’re good because they’re not on social media all the time! MB I do need it for my job, unfortunately, and I do resent it sometimes. It’s eating away at democracy and people’s mental health. LA Going back to what I said about the protests and black squares. The one thing I did like in that moment was people shutting up for a while, and letting others speak. As the conversation draws to a close, they discuss how each has been inspired by the other. MB All your roles are so different, and that’s not something you necessarily see with a lot of young black women within the industry. I’m not an actor, but it’s inspirational to watch you. You don’t really see black women in period dramas. I mean obviously in America, but it’s always with a maid angle. LA Yeah, exactly. You working with L’Oréal again is very inspirational. It’s very easy to say, “Let’s not get involved with people who we disagree with.” But it’s so important to keep the conversation going. There’s no point in just stopping and saying, “This is how the world is going to be and there’s nothing we can do about it.” The whole point is growth and moving forward.