Lauren McNamara* says the last year feels something like a dream. The 22-year-old from Werribee graduated university in 2019 with a degree in game design and were looking for work in their field. They had started a new relationship and had a holiday to Europe planned. “I was like 2020 is going to be my year,” Lauren says. “Then it wasn’t.” First came the bushfires that blanketed Melbourne in smoke, making climate change feel real and immediate. Then while travelling with their partner, people began to warn about the spreading illness. At first they thought nothing of it, but having come home just before the borders shut, they watched as cities across the country fell into lockdown. The bar where Lauren worked laid off staff overnight, leaving them out of a job at a time when no one in the industry they had trained for was hiring. And then it all just seemed to go on for months. “It was absolutely cooked,” Lauren says. “I was in a horrible position of going to doctor’s appointments that cost me thousands, being constantly misdiagnosed, prodded at, on top of personal relationship issues that I was just completely unable to deal with at the time. And this is all with the looming threat of getting sick, and with the inability to act out strategies to cope with stress. “And then the thing that kept pulling me into the pit was what I was seeing in the media with these people just denying the reality of an infectious illness on top of the lonely repetition I found myself in. “When I look back, it feels like a dream, which I realise now is disassociation.” Lauren is far from alone. “I’ve pretty much been in my room since the bushfires,” Isobel Alvarez-Milne says. The 22-year-old lives in a six-person sharehouse in Carlton, Melbourne. She has just finished a Bachelor of Arts, majoring in philosophy, and says that while the last eight months has been better for her than others, she has still grappled with a growing “nihilism”. Her friends, too, continue to struggle with their mental health. “It’s a far bigger chain than just Covid,” Isobel says. “If anyone says it’s about disrupting our potential to jetset or to go overseas, they are missing the point. “It’s the potential for not being constantly preoccupied with the destruction of the earth – of the literal eating up of the earth. It’s not just freedom of movement, it’s the freedom of mind.” Though the pandemic may now be under control in Australia, Dr John Bonning, the president of the Australian College for Emergency Medicine, says the public health crisis is far from over as “unprecedented” numbers of young people struggling with their mental health present to emergency rooms across the country. Compared to last year, Bonning says the number of young people aged under 17 turning up in emergency rooms with high levels of stress, anxiety and other complex issues has grown by 25% through September and October in some regions. “Clearly significant social and economic pressure is being felt in our communities, and this often disproportionately affects already vulnerable members of our communities,” Bonning says. “The Covid-19 pandemic has exposed the gaps in Australia’s mental healthcare systems as being more like chasms and made already dire situations all the more urgent.” This is backed up by a run of recent studies capturing a snapshot of the lives of young people across the country. One longitudinal study organised by Prof Zlatko Skrbis of Australian Catholic University has been following 2,000 Queenslanders since the aged of 13. With data stretching back to 2006, the researchers issued a special survey in June 2020 asking about mental health among the group, now 27, even though they had not lived through a lockdown like in Melbourne. Since 2015, the survey had been tracking a decline in mental health among participants at 3% a year, but when the results from the special survey came back, researchers found that decline had picked up speed. In just six months, the number of participants reporting good mental health had dropped a further 4%. Those reporting bad mental health was one-in-three. “Really, the eye of the storm was Victoria,” Skrbis says. “But when you look at the Queensland population, you see the impact of Covid is still very tangible, across different segments of the population.” Breaking down the numbers found young women were likely to be faring worse than young men, while those living in cities were worse off than those in the country – who actually reported an improvement. By far, however, a “gap” was clearest between those who had stable, secure work compared with those who were unemployed. “When it comes to employment status, again it’s sociology 101. The further you are embedded in the employment market, the more likely you are to be cushioned from the negative effects when it comes to mental health,” Skrbis says. Other surveys provide an indication as to why. Just before Christmas 2019, Associate Prof Amy Lykins, senior research fellow at the New England Institute of Healthcare Research, sought to map the relationship between mental health and climate change events among young people in New South Wales. “Then last summer happened,” Lykins says. “Right when it started to rain and the dams began to fill up, the fires were out. And then the pandemic hit. For many that period was a double insult. Or triple, if you include the drought.” The result of her survey paints a bleak picture. It records high levels of depression, anxiety, stress and potential substance abuse. “And that’s everybody,” she says. “Whether they experienced the bushfire events directly or not – though for those who were exposed to the bushfires, their levels were even higher. It’s a reasonable indicator of where these young people’s mental health was at in March to June.” When people were given a chance to explain why they felt this way in four, open-ended questions about how they saw their future, Lykins sums up what people said as: “Overall, not good.” “In that section we saw comments about Covid-19, job losses, school shutting down, not seeing friends,” she says. “And then things not related to the pandemic at all: my sibling died, my friend died, someone was murdered. A litany of horror.” One area of good news was captured in data released by the Victorian coroner’s court that shows – contrary to expectations – suicide rates have not increased. While these do not break down across age group, the state coroner, John Cain, says the trend has remained stable over the past eight months. “To date, there has been no increase in the frequency of suicides in Victoria during the coronavirus pandemic,” Cain says. “Rather, the frequency of suicides in Victoria this year is slightly lower than last year – with 580 suicides as of 31 October 2020, compared with 600 for the same period in 2019.” “It is encouraging to see there has not been an increase in suicides to date. But our key focus is to prevent suicide deaths and see the figures continue to go down. “The court takes seriously the concern expressed by Australia’s mental health experts that there may be an emerging mental health crisis and potential rise in suicides.” Measured in financial terms, addressing the growing demand for mental health care could save $20bn a year according to a Productivity Commission report released in early November. When the economic advisory board looked at the issue, it found poor mental health and suicide cost the Australian economy $220bn a year. “Australia’s current mental health system is not comprehensive and fails to provide the treatment and support that people who need it legitimately expect,” the report said. Recent announcements from the federal government have recognised the issue by setting aside $100m in the budget to double the cap on Medicare-subsidised psychological sessions to 20 each year. While this has been welcomed, it has also been criticised for not addressing basic issues of access, as more psychological sessions will help those already seeking care, but will not necessarily help those who need it find support. Niranjan Bidargaddi, associate professor in digital health with Flinders University, says that if they are not careful authorities risk misdiagnosing the problem. “One issue is that young people’s problems stem from job security, they’re more casual, they’re more insecure,” Bidargaddi says. “You can provide mental health support by providing financial support, by providing a safe environment for them to socialise in, stay connected in and learn. “This means broadening the definition of how we’re tackling mental health. Young people are already redefining what it means to be mentally well and we need to see it in a holistic way that is intrinsically connected to physical, psychological and social aspects of life.” The other issue is a question of approach. His team is currently conducting a study on how mental healthcare has been delivered during the pandemic given how many services have moved online due to restrictions on movement. While that study is ongoing, Bidargaddi says it has already called into question some basic assumptions by mental health providers who have been quick to embrace digital delivery thinking young people prefer that. However, that may not be true. Direct feedback from providers suggest older people may prefer video chat, while young people prefer to visit in-person out of a desire for community and interaction. “It’s possible we are getting service models wrong,” Bidargaddi says. “This is why it is actually very important to understand what are the things young people value most and then design solutions to strengthen those and enable them, as opposed to assuming they just need more time with a professional.” Lauren, meanwhile, says the root of their anxiety was in watching other people show little interest in doing right by others and fixing that requires real, meaningful change. “Yesterday it was the pandemic, tomorrow it’s climate change, whatever happens it’s like we’re all trying to tell older people that this stuff is important, that we need to take this seriously because it’s a thing we are going to live with, but it doesn’t feel like they care,” Lauren says. “You see it in the guy on the street not wearing a mask or the prime minister who won’t do anything about climate change. It all just feels like a nightmare.” * Name has been changed • In Australia, support is available at Beyond Blue on 1300 22 4636, Lifeline on 13 11 14, and at MensLine on 1300 789 978. In the UK, the charity Mind is available on 0300 123 3393 and Childline on 0800 1111. In the US, Mental Health America is available on 800-273-8255