BD: Steph, gardening is dull and awful before you even get to the gardening bit. There’s the boring Saturday afternoons at a nursery, the transporting of the plants (messy), the planting of the plants (also messy, plus you have to dig a hole). Then you have to look after them. It’s not enough to hold a hose. You need stuff … fertiliser, potting mix, tools and special gloves. You have to prune! Even then gardens are not guaranteed to thrive – or even live. A puppy will destroy a weekend’s work in minutes. A storm will snap delicate trees, hot weather will wilt roses, drought will dry once-lush lawns. Even if it all does work as it should, Mother Nature doesn’t let us linger too long in our pleasure gardens. We get a season and then one day we wake up, and the branches are bare, the flowers are no longer in bloom and blossoms have fallen off the bough. Better never to have started gardening at all. SC: Brig, were you tangled in blackberries as a child? Did a nettle sting you? I’m sorry to hear you think gardening can only result in despair, but I’m here to tell you it can bring you joy, peace, excitement, wonder and happiness – because that’s how I feel when I make plants grow. It sounds like you think the only pleasure to be found in a garden is when it blooms with flowers. Have you never looked at a leafless, snow-covered tree – on one of your overseas jaunts perhaps – and thought about the beauty of the depths of winter?’ Have you ever eaten? Unless you’re subsisting solely on Soylent, you must know how good a fresh strawberry tastes. Imagine how it would feel to fill your plate with piles of something delicious (peaches! tomatoes! even potatoes!) that started out as a single tiny seed. The varieties of things you can grow to eat vastly outnumber the things capital has decided to make available to you at the supermarket. Do you love capitalism that much? The best gardening advice I ever received was from a dear friend of mine who told me: “Plants want to grow. If you pay attention, they usually do.” I’m afraid I’ll have to diagnose you with terminal failure of attention. Fortunately, Stephanie Alexander, a great enthusiast of gardens, has some advice on this. In a worksheet designed to help primary schoolchildren learn to garden, she advises getting in touch with your senses. Here’s your task: find a neighbour who has an abundant, well-tended garden – if they have a kitchen garden, so much the better. Let them take you through it and tell you the stories of each plant: where it came from, how it grew, the different birds, animals and insects it attracts. Touch the plants. Taste them (not the poisonous ones – best to let the neighbour help you there). Use your senses. And, if they’ll let you, ask if you can take one of their potted plants home for a few days. Pay attention to the instructions they give you about sunlight, wind, water. And look after it. BD: My friend Rohan also used to live in Sydney before he moved to the country. I wondered what his garden was like compared with mine. At the back of his house were fruit trees, flower beds, vegetable patches and two beehives containing around 5,000 bees. Rohan agreed to give me a tour – and some clippings to take away with me. First up is the butternut pumpkin. They were, for Rohan, a bit of an experiment. “I was told to space these a metre apart but I put them 50cm and how wrong I was.” Then there was a bed of silverbeet. “This just gets clipped every morning for my omelette and it’s beautiful.” Rohan gives me a bundle of lemon sage – “beautiful for chicken”. (I used it cooking roast vegetables the next day and it was very tasty.) “Growing a garden in central Victoria – it’s all really good soil; good, forgiving soil,” he says. “It’s dry but we’ve had a wet year.” Usually the seasons are quite distinct in central Victoria. “The summer is brutal. In winter the frost comes and this year it blasted the fig tree, but they are hardy. Avocados don’t go well here but hardy stuff such as plums, apricots and pears do.” Rohan also has an apple tree, strawberry patch, thyme and flowers including sunflowers and lavender. “It’s nice to put flowers near the bees – they’re attracted to flowers, a nectar and pollen source. Lavender is a staple of most bees.” Rohan’s garden is lovely – but how much of a commitment is it? “I’m in the garden for at least 30 to 40 minutes a day. I get joy from it – it’s non-competitive stuff, you can see a result – and you feel like you’re contributing to your own livelihood. You can see tangible results all the time, every time, every single day the fruit gets bigger and glossier,” Rohan says. Does he have any tips for me? “Go and get advice and just get on with it. Make all the mistakes you need to make because it’s about making mistakes. Pay attention to where the light’s coming from. Spend a lot of time trying to find the pattern of the sun.” Is it worth putting the time in? “Yes! You are literally eating your surroundings, you are part of your surroundings. You feel self-sufficient and proud,” he says. Although I can tell Rohan gets a lot of joy from gardening, it’s just not for me. I don’t have the patience and I’m not home much. I’ll save gardening for retirement. Prove Me Wrong is a new summer series in which Guardian Australia colleagues argue over whose tastes on popular culture, food and leisure activities are right … and whose are wrong.