France has failed to lift its ban on freight and passengers from the UK even as Boris Johnson personally appealed to President Emmanuel Macron to put aside his “anxiety” over the mutant coronavirus strain. The prime minister said 20% of food, medicines and other goods passing through British ports had been blocked by Paris’s decision, triggering government crisis plans at Dover and other major pinch points. Speaking after a meeting of the government’s emergency Cobra committee, Johnson said he had stressed to the French president the need to reopen the supply chains between the continent and the UK. France is one of more than 40 countries that has suspended flights and trains from the UK, including Denmark, Germany, Italy, Belgium, Ireland, Turkey and Canada. But Paris went further on Thursday night by imposing a 48-hour ban on any accompanied freight or cargo entering the country from Britain. “I have just spoken to President Macron – we had a very good call – we both understand each other’s positions and want to resolve these problems as fast as possible,” Johnson told a Downing Street press conference. “I want to stress that we in the UK fully understand the anxieties of our friends about Covid, their anxieties about the new variant, but it is also true that we believe the risks of transmission by a solitary driver sitting alone in the cab are really very low. “And so we hope to make progress as fast as we possibly can. I want to repeat that these delays only apply to a very small percentage of food entering the UK, and, as British supermarkets have said, their supply chains are strong and robust, so everyone can continue to shop normally.” Johnson directly addressed other world leaders to reassure them of the UK’s fast response to the detection of the new strain of Covid-19. “I hope that everybody can see that as soon as we were briefed as a government of the fast transmissibility of this new strain at about 3.15pm on Friday afternoon, we lodged all the necessary information with the World Health Organization,” he said. “And we took prompt and decisive action the very next day to curb the spread of the variant within the UK.” As the government sought the reopening of Europe’s borders with Britain, Thierry Breton, a French commissioner for the internal market in Brussels, said the UK had been hit by a double tragedy – the escalating health crisis and the inability to call on EU aid due to Brexit. “It’s a tragedy what’s happening in Britain, and this Brexit is a tragedy, we see it more and more every day,” he said. “It is a decision which we respect because the British people are sovereign. But consider that if Great Britain had remained as we wished, it would have today, like all other European countries, between €30bn and €50bn in aid thanks to the Next Generation EU fund set up by the commission.” Breton went on: “We will have a [Brexit] agreement, but what a waste of time.” The EU is drawing up a coordinated plan to lift travel restrictions from the UK, but no date has yet been set for when passenger, freight and cargo movement will be permitted again, with sources in Brussels suggesting nationally imposed bans could remain in place for some time. Officials from the EU’s 27 member states attending a three-hour meeting on Monday were briefed by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control on the health situation in the UK. They agreed that the priority was keeping the EU’s own Schengen travel zone open and “repatriating citizens and legal residents wishing to return from the UK”, an EU diplomat said. The European commission has been ordered to draw up guidelines for national governments. London and much of the south and east of England was placed in a new tier 4 of restrictions from Sunday. Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, urged people not to travel to Kent amid the closure of the French border. “Please don’t travel to Kent,” he said. “Most people should be staying at home, everybody in tier 4 must at stay home and in tier 3 stay very local.”