Anthony Fauci, the US’s top infectious disease expert in the country’s response to the coronavirus, told NBC News on Friday that he “absolutely” accepted Joe Biden’s offer to join his administration and serve as chief medical adviser. “I said yes right on the spot,” Fauci told the Today Show’s Savannah Guthrie. On Thursday, in an interview with CNN’s Jake Tapper, the president-elect confirmed that he had asked Fauci to continue his role on Donald Trump’s coronavirus taskforce when he takes office 20 January. “I asked him to stay on in the exact same role as he’s had for the past several presidents, and I asked him to be a chief medical adviser for me as well and be part of the Covid-19 team,” said Biden. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, has had a difficult relationship with President Trump, who had threatened to fire him after November’s elections. After public statements disagreeing with or contradicting the president on wearing masks, social distancing and public gatherings, he became the target of Trump’s attacks. Throughout his campaign, however, Biden showed support for Fauci, imploring Americans to follow the guidance of a trusted expert over the president’s often-debunked conspiracy theories. Biden said he spoke with Fauci about staying on by stressing the need to build American confidence and trust in any coronavirus vaccine. He also argued the country doesn’t “have to close down the economy” in order to stop the spread. The news comes as coronavirus cases across the country surge during the holiday season. Fauci and other public health experts have cautioned Americans to avoid travel and large gatherings altogether. In a tweet, the incoming White House chief of staff, Ron Klain, praised Fauci for a lifetime of service and work during the pandemic. There are few public servants in our history who have served as long and as well and with as much distinction at Dr. Tony Fauci. It will be a great honor to work with him again. https://t.co/JghEPQtTlF “There are few public servants in our history who have served as long and as well and with as much distinction [as] Dr Tony Fauci,” he wrote, noting “it will be a great honor to work with him again”. Fauci had confirmed to CBS News that his Thursday meeting with Biden’s transition team was “the first day where there will be substantive discussions about the transition”. Fauci has warned the US could suffer a “terrible” January as the country set three grim coronavirus records on Thursday, recording the highest daily number of coronavirus deaths, the highest number of new cases, and as the number of people admitted to hospital with Covid exceeded 100,000 for the second day in a row.