A captain’s knock and wagging tail have given Australia some hope of victory in a day-night Test that hangs in the balance after two eventful days at the Adelaide Oval, where India are 9-1 in their second innings and lead by 62 runs. Tim Paine led from the front with an unbeaten 73 on Friday, producing arguably his most important knock since memorably helping Australia salvage a draw against Pakistan in the aftermath of the Cape Town cheating scandal. A 32-run stand between Paine and Marnus Labuschagne (47) was embarrassingly the hosts’ highest partnership. Paine, Mitchell Starc, Nathan Lyon and Josh Hazlewood rallied their side from 111-7 to 191, yet it was still Australia’s lowest first-innings total in a day-night Test. Paine put down a diving catch, giving Mayank Agarwal a life on two during an eventful six-over burst after the change of innings. Pat Cummins was entrusted with the new ball and made a mess of Prithvi Shaw’s stumps, while unbeaten nightwatchman Jasprit Bumrah faced 11 deliveries. Virat Kohli will fancy his chances of setting an imposing target but India could already be in a far more dominant position, having handed reprieves to Paine, Labuschagne and Starc. Paine was on 26, and Australia in dire trouble at 113-7, when Agarwal dropped a catch in the deep. Labuschagne was dropped on 12 and 21, by Bumrah and Shaw respectively. Paine brought up his half-century in 70 balls, scoring with a degree of freedom that contradicted every other innings in the match. The wicketkeeper lifted his Test batting average to 33.4 in the process, leaving Adam Gilchrist as Australia’s only gloveman with a higher average. Paine’s side started day two with a bang, needing just 22 minutes and 4.1 overs to capture four wickets and roll the tourists for 244. Starc, who was granted an exemption from SA Health because he’d been isolating at home in Sydney’s northern suburbs prior to flying to Adelaide, cleaned up the tail to enhance his reputation as the world’s premier pink-ball bowler. However, Australia’s top six batsmen failed to hammer home the advantage created by their bowlers. Bumrah shifted momentum in an inspired opening spell, igniting a collapse of 7-95 when he trapped out-of-form batsman Joe Burns and makeshift opener Matthew Wade lbw amid a bouncer barrage. Kohli clutched a magnificent catch to end Cameron Green’s maiden knock on 11, handing Ravichandran Ashwin a third scalp after the spinner removed Steve Smith and Travis Head. Umesh Yadav claimed the all-important scalp of Labuschagne early in the night session, producing a ball that kept incredibly low and trapped the batsman plumb lbw.