Ridley Scott produces this twist-laden sci-fi drama telling the story of two androids, Father (Abubakar Salim) and Mother (Amanda Collin), who are tasked in the 22nd Century with raising human children on the planet Kepler-22b after Earth has been ravaged by war. Tonight’s opener finds the androids having escaped the violent conflict between a religious order and atheist rebellion on Earth with human embryos to start a new civilisation. 12 years on and only one child has survived – or so they think… Ammar Kalia We think of the Amazon rainforest as one of the last great wildernesses. But did an ancient civilisation once flourish there? Archaeologist Ella al-Shamahi explores the mystery in this series – and with deforestation accelerating it comes at a timely moment. Phil Harrison Musicals Week, that much-anticipated highlight of the Strictly calendar, kicks off this year with a routine honouring the drag-themed musical Priscilla Queen of The Desert. Things can only get camper from there, of course, with plenty of opportunity for graceless movers to grab the limelight. Ellen E Jones We may have been indoors for most of 2020 but that hasn’t stopped the weather from being as unpredictable and tempestuous as ever. This special takes a personal approach to the meteorological, including interviewing the people who survived a freak landslide in Fife. AK Another double-bill of the Reykjavik-set drama about grisly murders seemingly linked by a sketchy state-run boy’s home. A fingerprint puts stressed cops Kata and Arnur on the trail of a key suspect just as their home lives implode; there’s also a crash-course in how to say “Toyota Yaris” in Icelandic. Graeme Virtue Performance art pioneer Marina Ambramovic continues her takeover of our screens following an insightful recent BBC documentary with Alan Yentob. Abramovic presents an evening of programming, delving into the history of the artform, as well as her own archive. AK Emma, 12.15pm, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere The latest in a long line of Emma screen interpretations, courtesy of director Autumn de Wilde, has much slapstick fun with Austen’s evergreen social satire; it’s led with dainty aplomb by Anya Taylor-Joy as arch-manipulator Emma, while the cast includes Miranda Hart and Bill Nighy. Paul Howlett Championship Football: Reading v Nottingham Forest 12pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Clash from Madejski Stadium. Snooker: UK Championship 1.15pm, BBC One. Opening semi-final from Marshall Arena in Milton Keynes. Premier League Football 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Yet to be announced match, followed by another head to head at 7.45pm.