Lockdown cannot stop Dawn French from delivering the laughs as she brings this new series of 10-minute shorts to our screens, marking the return of the beloved Vicar of Dibley. Geraldine Granger (French) has been spending her lockdown delivering sermons to her parish over video call and, in tonight’s opener, she tackles the difference between metres and miles when it comes to social distancing, reveals the best music to exercise to and talks with the local kids. Ammar Kalia More joyous comfort recipes from Nigella, whose latest series has been among the most soothing of lockdown TV balms. This week, she takes inspiration from her grandmother’s creme caramel for a custardy dessert, before searching out the perfect pasta to pair with an enticing nduja sauce. Hannah J Davies It has not been an easy year for retailers. But, for some companies, that struggle hints at an opportunity for a fresh start. Budget chain Poundland, for example, is hoping to expand and nudge itself upmarket with new stores. This light-hearted but intriguing two-parter follows the rebrand. Phil Harrison Sam Levinson’s wildly popular teen drama returns for an end-of-year special following its first season in 2019. We pick up in the aftermath of 17-year-old Rue (Zendaya) abandoning Jules (Hunter Schafer) and ultimately relapsing into her drug addiction while facing spending Christmas alone. AK This fascinating documentary charts the the birth of a new capitalism in Russia in the 90s, through the prism of international hockey. We follow marketing impresario Steve Warshaw as he tries to put on a joint venture between the Red Army and Pittsburgh Penguins teams. AK Is Newquay’s reputation as an autonomous party enclave, throbbing with boorish stags and hens while the rest of Cornwall tries to ignore it, still justified? The town’s residents have recently tried a cleanup; this documentary tracks four groups of visitors who might have other ideas. Jack Seale 45 Years (Andrew Haigh, 2015), 1.40am, Film4 There is no escaping the past in Haigh’s riveting domestic drama. Charlotte Rampling and Tom Courtenay are bleakly brilliant as Kate and Geoff Mercer, living in rural Norfolk and planning a 45th-anniversary party; but a letter from Switzerland raises the ghost of Geoff’s long-lost love. PJH Lanka Premier League Cricket: Dambulla Viiking v Jaffna Stallions 2.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. T20 match from Mahinda Rajapaksa Stadium. Premier League Football 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Yet to be announced clash. German Football: TSG 1899 Hoffenheim v FC Augsburg 7.15pm, BT Sport 1. German top-flight clash. 