A series of abusive text messages sent to an Al Jazeera investigative programme were the first crumbs that eventually led to the discovery of an unprecedented hacking operation against dozens of staff from the Qatar-based media network, according to one of the journalists who was targeted. Researchers at Citizen Lab at the University of Toronto claimed on Sunday that the UAE and Saudi Arabia used spyware sold by an Israeli private intelligence company to access the phones of at least 36 journalists, producers and executives from Al Jazeera, as well as that of a London-based reporter with the Al Araby network. Traces of the cyber-attack were unearthed in July when a phone used by an Al Jazeera programme, The Tip of the Iceberg, exhibited suspicious network activity that was undetectable to its users. But unbeknown to the hackers, the Citizen Lab researchers had been monitoring the phone for the previous six months, Tamer Almisshal, the host of the programme, told the Guardian on Monday. Almisshal said he had asked Citizen Lab to install a VPN on the phone in January after receiving threatening messages and calls on the phone from different unknown numbers. “Through different applications I was getting threats against me personally – ‘Don’t talk about this story or you’ll be like [the murdered journalist Jamal] Khashoggi’ – even threats of hacking,” he said. “We decided to take the threats seriously, and we installed on the phone an observation and tracking application developed by Citizen Lab.” The abuse followed a teaser the programme aired promoting an upcoming interview with the French special forces agent who had led the operation to retake Mecca’s Great Mosque after it was seized by militants in 1979. Similar investigations of topics considered sensitive in the Gulf had led Saudi Arabia and the UAE to demand that Qatar shut down Al Jazeera as part of a wider diplomatic feud between the countries. No hacking was detected at first, and Almisshal and his team continued their work, ensuring not to click on links from unknown sources – which might have been the gateway for spyware to be installed – and to keep sensitive material off the phone. In the middle of July, the programme aired an episode investigating BR Shetty, an Indian healthcare mogul whose UAE business empire collapsed earlier this year. A few days later, Almisshal said he received a call from Citizen Lab researchers telling him the phone appeared to have been compromised. “It was a shock,” he said. “My first question was, ‘How?’ I hadn’t clicked on any [suspicious] links. They told me it was zero click, meaning you can receive a phone call through an application on your phone, and even if you don’t reply, just by reaching your phone it can give you spyware.” The phone that appears to have been hacked had been used to contact various parties in the UAE. Citizen Lab said in its report into the hack that Almisshal’s phone appeared to have been hacked by tools developed by Israel’s NSO Group, whose spyware is alleged to have been used in previous surveillance campaigns in Saudi Arabia and the UAE. Citizen Lab identified four spying operators, including one it codenamed Monarchy, who it believed was working on behalf of Saudi Arabia, and another called Sneaky Kestrel, whom it linked to the UAE. Almisshal’s phone was examined by Citizen Lab researchers and Al Jazeera’s IT team, who said they detected the same spyware on the phones of another 35 staff members including producers, journalists and executives. Researchers also alleged the phone of another journalist, Rania Dridi, a London-based presenter for Qatar’s Al Araby network, had been hacked at least six times between October 2019 and July 2020. Almisshal said his programme’s work would continue but that he and his colleagues now worked with extreme caution. “If you ask me, do I trust my phone now, I’d say I don’t,” he said. NSO has said its software is only meant to be used by government clients to track terrorists and criminals. In the past, its software has been linked to allegations of human rights violations, including the targeting of journalists in Morocco, political dissidents from Rwanda, politicians in Spain, and pro-democracy clergy in Togo. In a statement about the Al Jazeera hack, NSO Group said it was not familiar with the allegations. “As we have repeatedly stated, we do not have access to any information with respect to the identities of individuals our system is used to conduct surveillance on. However, where we receive credible evidence of misuse, combined with the basic identifiers of the alleged targets and timeframes, we take all necessary steps in accordance with our product misuse investigation procedure to review the allegations,” NSO Group said. The Saudi embassy in London and the UAE embassy in Washington did not respond to requests for comment.