There is one Brexit deal. There has only ever been one. It has been there from the start, although hard to see through the fog. Its outline has been discernible behind plumes of rhetoric and misinformation billowing out from the Westminster political machine. It was there on the horizon the morning after the referendum. It has not moved during the thousands of hours of debate that followed. The deal was already contained in article 50. It was in every bill in every late-night Commons vote. It was in Theresa May’s backstop and Boris Johnson’s alternative. It is the hard kernel of a soft Brexit and the soft underbelly of a hard one. It is the capital of Norwegian, Canadian and Australian-style Brexits. It is this: the UK will give up wealth in exchange for sovereignty. In what proportions and over what timescale is the only real subject of negotiation. Whether that exchange should be made at all is the essential difference between leavers and remainers. The scenario we now call “no deal” is a way of describing the highest price for the largest portion of sovereignty. The treaty that Johnson might agree in an 11th hour trip to Brussels describes a different transaction using the same formula. The wealth-for-sovereignty exchange rate is not determined by campaign promises, nor is it pegged to the labile mood of Conservative MPs. It is a function of economic and strategic gravity – the difference in trading mass between the UK on its own and the combined heft of 27 EU countries. Brexiteers had plenty of tools for shaping the way that relationship was perceived by a British audience, but there was nothing in the box that could change the actual disposition of forces, nor anything to persuade European leaders to suspend their own appraisal of reality. Following the principle that everything looks like a nail to a man with only a hammer, Johnson has pounded away at the domestic side of Brexit and distorted the shape of British politics. Conventions have been flattened; logic has been twisted; truths have been pulverised. But still the facts that make the deal are unchanged. Leavers started from a position of denial that sovereignty had any price at all – that Brexit was all upside. That case rested on two pillars. First was the idea that EU membership was a drag on Britain, an unwanted subscription service that could be cancelled and the money redirected to better causes. Second was the belief that Europeans would be so sad to lose access to British markets that they would agree to continue something like the old service without charge. Those things were not true, but the Brexiteers believed they could be made true by force of conviction and a more aggressive negotiating stance. Meanwhile, remainers saw the whole deal as a scam. The price was too high and the sovereignty being bought was worthless. It could not make Britain hefty enough in the world to rival Washington or Beijing. There was more global leverage available from a seat at EU summits in Brussels. The best deal on sovereignty was therefore the one that invested the whole pot in the European project. But that argument has never had traction with leavers. The claim that Brexit has no value is palpable nonsense to tens of millions of people who, by the act of voting, bestowed it with profound emotional significance. Sovereignty sounds like independence which is something people want for themselves and their country. Many could also think of concrete benefits from autonomy in lawmaking. Often those things were creatures from Eurosceptic mythology – freedom to do things that Brussels had never stopped Britain from doing – but not always. Anyone who wanted a tougher immigration regime, for example, will get one from Brexit. For liberal remainers, that is just another cost. The two tribes measure the issues on completely different scales, and will continue to do so. Pro-Europeans will be disappointed if they anticipate some definitive moment of vindication, when the bill lands for the hollow monument to sovereignty that Johnson is erecting at vast national expense. Restricted access to European markets will take a toll in jobs and forgone growth. But there will be foreigners and a pandemic to blame. The political furnaces will fire up, incinerating the evidence presented by economists and pumping out the same polluting cloud of specious argument. A springtime bounce back in GDP – a statistical near-certainty given the depth of the Covid-induced slump – will be cast as a Brexit liberation dividend. The trickier part will be converting regulatory sovereignty into material payback to leave voters. Johnson’s shiny monument cannot be melted down and minted into coins for people whose jobs have vanished because the supply chain in which they worked has been rerouted via Slovakia. Autonomy from EU rules affords some leeway to subsidise industry, but most Tories are ideologically repelled by the idea of government picking economic winners. The Eurosceptic instinct tends the other way, applying market forces as the remedy to any malaise, cutting taxes and regulation to purge the body politic of state-induced lethargy. Strategists in Downing Street know that such medicine would be poison to voters in former Labour strongholds that make up the prime minister’s new power base. On the international stage, Johnson’s paddling pool of sovereignty will evaporate in no time. Joe Biden is a friend of the European project and intends to make that the axis for renewal of alliances that Donald Trump despised. Paris and Berlin reciprocate eagerly. One of the unique strengths of British foreign policy used to be serving as the strategic link between Washington and continental Europe. EU membership was the bridge, and now it is burnt. It cannot be rebuilt with the wreckers’ tools. That message has reached No 10, judging by Tuesday’s retreat from plans to repudiate the Brexit withdrawal agreement, but the legal tantrum will not be forgotten quickly. Johnson engages in that kind of brinkmanship because he thinks it shows strength, but it has the opposite effect. Anyone looking from the outside can see the structural weakness of his position regardless of the heroic poses he strikes. Every time he pulls some stunt to demonstrate how serious he is about Brexit for a domestic audience, he advertises the folly of the thing in the international arena. He has borrowed heavily against Britain’s reputation as a level-headed, pragmatic country and reliable ally, just to purchase a few more ounces of sovereignty. It all has to be paid back. But that is the deal. That was always the deal. • Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnist