Bicycle and motorbike messengers have operated in London for a long time, but in the early days there were only a handful of companies, mainly delivering documents in the Square Mile. Modern society has increased the demand for this service, with startups and established companies creating a job that can suit people from different walks of life. The dramatic changes and restrictions on the way we live brought about by the Covid pandemic, have made this profession a key service. Couriers deliver food, shopping, medicines and other products to millions of customers forced to stay indoors. Against rain, cold winds, under the hot summer sun, they have been helping Londoners while risking their health and working for long hours in the traffic. Antonio, a rider from Italy. He has been working for a food delivery company for some years, mainly in central and east London I lost most of my work as a documentary photographer during the first UK lockdown, so I was forced to find a new income and decided to start working as a rider. I’ve been talking to fellow riders since I started this job, who shared their life stories and working experiences. As a documentary photographer, I really wanted to portray them, with the aim of highlighting and praising the sometimes forgotten importance of their work. Nathiely, from South Brazil, enjoys the freedom of being a delivery driver. Valentina: “I collect and deliver Covid tests three days a week. I cover about 70 miles and I stop around 10 times to collect them and deliver them to the hospital. Our work as delivery riders offers a very important service to Londoners but I feel like many people don’t understand the value of what we do, how challenging it can be and the risks we face every day on the road.” Adam, a bike courier and photographer, has been working as a rider for many years night and day. He is trying to save money to fulfil his dream to ride all the way to Australia. David: “The lockdown has definitely been a challenge for me and the other riders I speak to day to day. The drop radius has increased to cover office workers who live close to the centre, resulting in more riding for similar pay. Also, access to basic amenities during your shift has disappeared and this could occasionally be quite a problem. On a lighter note, I have loved riding around a city with no traffic.” Alex, whose parents are from Colombia, was born and raised in Hackney, and is a talented graphic illustrator. He has been riding for several companies for the past three years while developing his creative career. Deborah and Naiara: “We got married in Brazil and straight after that travelled in mainland Europe, where we spent a few months, before moving to the UK. We are working hard to save money for a new accommodation in London and travel to our country to properly celebrate our marriage with our families.” Ali is originally from Tunisia and has three children. Shake, from Uzbekistan, has built his electric bike himself. He works full time while studying for a BA in business administration. Claudia has been an Uber Eats rider since September. Couriers in London come from different backgrounds and all ages. Alfie is British, aged 25, and from east London. Jonathan works for Uber Eats and Deliveroo in the Square Mile area. “It’s not a job for everyone; it’s tiring and cycling in London can be dangerous at times. But its flexibility and the attractiveness of being your own boss makes it a perfect job for many Londoners.”