Along with every recently retired rugby player, Kearnan Myall has experienced a range of emotions these past few days. If reading about fellow former pros being diagnosed with early onset dementia has been upsetting, the ramifications for his generation may be worse. At 34, the former Leeds and Wasps lock – “Ultimately I’m just in the hands of the gods in terms of what happens to me” – has no option but to play a waiting game. What really upsets him is the misinformation about head injuries being trotted out as fact. Myall has been studying psychiatry at Oxford University and while his PhD research has focused on a different aspect of brain function, he has made a point of reading all the latest studies connected with rugby’s head-injury crisis. He believes it is a subject upon which many people in the game urgently need educating. Myall has no desire to bury his old profession but certain pronouncements by coaches and officials in the past week have infuriated him. “I just want the powers that be to acknowledge what the problem is and to start educating coaches and players,” he says, tired of hearing assurances that the professional game is now safer than ever and the science of brain injuries is inconclusive. “It isn’t being concussed and knocked out that is the issue. It’s the repeated hits. It’s just so clear that many of the people at the top of the game – not least coaches and top players – don’t understand this.” For Myall it is not even a debate that the cumulative effect of multiple sub-concussive hits, which a player may not even notice, is a major problem. As long ago as January 2018 researchers at the University of Boston published a paper linking repeated hits, rather than concussions, to the onset of the neurodegenerative disease, chronic traumatic encephalopathy. “Many people don’t understand we’re not talking about people getting concussed and knocked out,” Myall says. “If a player gets concussed in a game and gets taken out for an HIA that’s great. But that’s not what the issue is. The issue is every single tackle you make, every single ruck you hit, every single scrum you hit, every time you hit a bag in training. It’s the constant repetitive hits Monday to Friday and then going out and getting more on the weekend. And then doing that for 38 weeks in a year. Or longer if you include pre-season.” Rather than administrators and coaches congratulating themselves on improving HIA protocols, therefore, Myall wants the game’s guardians to get real. “The problem is that most coaches are badly misinformed and it’s setting the game up for a really big problem in the future. If the governing bodies don’t acknowledge what the problem is now, these lawsuits are going to get bigger and bigger. If we’ve got people at the top saying they’re following the latest research … well, that’s bollocks.” Myall is no stranger to the vicissitudes of the professional game. As detailed in the Guardian last year, the mental stress and strain contributed to him suffering serious bouts of depression. Now he wants people to be aware of another hidden peril. “We’ve got players from Steve Thompson’s era coming out publicly now. My generation might be in the same, if not worse, position in 10 years’ time. At the moment the vast majority of people of my age – and slightly older and younger – are OK. We’re talking from a neurological point of view, by the way. Body-wise we’re absolutely knackered but that’s not what we’re talking about. “I had a lot of serious concussions and a literally countless number of sub-concussive hits. I have a serious sensitivity to light that has developed in the last two or three years that is an early sign of the problems that seem to surface once you hit your 40s. I’m really concerned about it for myself and am proactively looking and doing things to minimise the chances of something developing later in life. “We’ve also still got all these 17 to 19-year-olds coming through who are not being fully told what the risks are. If you join the army, you know there’s a risk you’re going to go to war and might get killed. The problem in rugby, as I see it, is that you have academy kids going into this career blindly. If they decide to carry on, great, so be it. But put in place the things that will minimise the risks as much as possible.” Myall believes there are a raft of measures which could help to mitigate the situation: reducing training contact, investing in hyperbaric oxygen chambers which potentially help reduce the effects of concussion and slow down the onset of dementia, and baseline EEG brain activity tests in addition to structural scans and basic cognitive memory tests. “Rugby isn’t the problem. It’s been around for 150 years or longer. If you look at an amateur game of rugby now and 20 years ago there isn’t a huge amount of difference in the size of players or the standards. Plenty of people who played lower-level rugby back in the day didn’t have dementia when they were 40. So we know rugby can be played safely as a contact sport. It’s the professional game: the size of the players, the forces with which they’re repeatedly hitting each other, day after day, week after week. That’s the problem and that’s what needs to change. “If the people in charge don’t start acknowledging these are big problems and doing things to minimise them that’s when the overreaction happens and you start getting rugby banned in schools. Then you lose the professional and international games because you’ve got no players. In the end, everybody wants the same thing. They want rugby to exist in a similar form to how it does now and to be played for decades ahead.”