We asked you, Guardian readers, to nominate the song you’d want on the ultimate New Year’s Eve playlist: one that represents the year we’ve had, the year we’re hoping for, or just the way we’ll feel (and the words we’ll be screaming) at midnight. Then, 9,534 of you voted on them. It was all over, though, once the Mountain Goats got involved. Their popular 2011 track This Year was sitting at No 3 until the band discovered it and tweeted about this fact with a shameless plea for votes. To my considerable surprise, we are presently number three in this poll, behind Monty Python and R.E.M.. I am not above asking the Mountain Goats massive to vote for us, and I am, in fact, doing so via this tweet https://t.co/SssR2EVrOR Perhaps it’s unsurprising that a song with the chorus “I am going to make it through this year if it kills me” would win this poll, but that it would generate 9.6 times the number of votes as its strongest competitor, and account for 59% of the total votes all on its own, is quite an achievement. This Year received 5,643 votes. The two songs that were previously giving the Mountain Goats a run for their money, It’s the End of the World as We Know It (And I Feel Fine) by REM and Always Look on the Bright Side of Life from Monty Python, came in at a cheery if cynical 2 and 3 respectively, with 100 votes separating them. Even Eric Idle’s own intervention on Twitter didn’t help matters – especially when he revealed he, too, might vote for something else. I was intrigued to find which Python song but of course it’s Bright Side. Then I noticed Things Can Only Get Better with @ProfBrianCox so I was torn. https://t.co/Y3lAs32R5O It was a fair drop from Monty Python’s 490 votes to fourth position, where the Beatles’ Here Comes the Sun sat with 335 votes. Carly Rae Jepsen injected some pure elation to the party at No 5, with Cut to the Feeling carving up the dancefloor with 289 votes. It’s a little bit awkward that 276 of you voted for Don’t Stand So Close to Me by the Police, given it’s a song that name-checks Nabokov’s Lolita and tells a similar story, but we understand that sometimes people really only listen to the chorus. It’s the era of social distancing, we get it. Despite it being championed by none other than Guardian Australia’s own editor Lenore Taylor, Am I Ever Gonna See Your Face Again by the Angels and its cathartic, sweary chorus only made it to No 7, with 217 votes. From there, an eclectic selection of memorable and popular songs from Talking Heads, Phoebe Bridgers, Ian Dury and the Blockheads, Florence + the Machine, Lily Allen, and the Triffids should keep the party lively. The best thing to see out the year, according to 115 of you, would be a great classical work – namely Beethoven’s Symphony No. 9. It’s more than an hour long, so we’ve included only the 22-minute fourth movement from which the unmistakeable Ode to Joy melody comes. Quite how it will feel at 11pm rolling into that from D:Ream’s peppy 90s dance anthem Things Can Only Get Better we can’t tell you, but you only have yourselves to blame. Prepare for a bit of a depressive funk after that, as Wish You Were Here (number 16, 114 votes) by Pink Floyd leads into the thunderously grim Dead Flag Blues by Godspeed You! Black Emperor (17, with 109 votes). If the Ramones’ I Wanna Be Sedated and Peter Gabriel’s Don’t Give Up can’t pull you out of it, No 20 is nothing less than the (unfortunately) unforgettable Tubthumping by Chumbawamba. May we all get up again after this year knocked us down. The full playlist clocks in at 1 hour and 55 minutes, so we advise you hit play at around 10.05pm. We’ve put the winner at the top, but if you want to listen to it from number 20 to number 1, just reorder the playlist by “recently added”, and let the Mountain Goats see you out of this wretched year.