Stars of British television have paid tribute to Barbara Windsor as a “national treasure” and “heroine”, after the beloved veteran actor’s death. Windsor’s death was announced late on Thursday by her husband, Scott Mitchell. In a statement he said: “It is with deep sadness that I can confirm that my darling wife Barbara passed away at 8.35pm on Thursday 10 December at a London care home. “Her passing was from Alzheimer’s/dementia and Barbara eventually died peacefully and I spent the last seven days by her side.” Among the first to pay tribute were Windsor’s castmates from EastEnders. Patsy Palmer, who played Bianca Jackson, shared pictures of the pair together and a photograph of a young Dame Barbara. She wrote: “I’m extremely sad to hear that my friend ‘Dame’ Babara Windsor has passed away. I’m sitting here thinking of the 100’s of memories we shared . “Too many to comprehend. We were like family for a long time, ups downs, ins and outs but you will never meet a more professional actress than Babs.” Palmer, 48, also praised Dame Barbara’s husband, Scott Mitchell. “You deserve the highest accolade,” she wrote. “We shared such magical times together and I’ll cherish every one. I can hear that laugh now as I sit and think about her. I hope it’ll ring in my ears forever.” Tamzin Outhwaite, who played Mel Owen in EastEnders alongside Windsor, tweeted: “Meant to be sleeping but can’t ... RIP Barbara Windsor ... legend icon #nationaltreasure friend heroine”. She added: “All I can hear is ‘Ello darlin’ #ripbarbara.” A representative for actor Steve McFadden, who plays Dame Barbara’s on-screen son Phil Mitchell, told the Press Association he was “devastated” by her death. TV presenter Jonathan Ross also paid tribute on social media. He tweeted: “Barbara Windsor in real life was everything you might have hoped for. So warm, so funny, so kind. Goodnight sweetheart x BarbaraWindsor”. Little Britain star Matt Lucas said: “You don’t become a Dame by accident. Everyone knew Barbara Windsor and everyone loved her. She delighted us on stage and sparkled on screen in a long and illustrious career. She also worked tirelessly for charity, and continued to do so, even when her own health was failing her. “Her devoted husband Scott has been utterly selfless and heroic in caring for her and I am devastated for him. “I will miss her warmth, her generosity, her laughter and the kindness she showed me. She was a remarkable woman and it’s not an overstatement to say I think the whole country is in mourning today.” David Walliams, Lucas’ Little Britain co-star, called Dame Barbara the “unofficial Queen of England, an icon for over half a century and treasured by the nation”. Doctor Who star John Barrowman, who was interviewed by Windsor on BBC Radio 2 in October 2011, said in a video on Twitter she had “the biggest heart in the business”.“In the 30-odd years of my career I’ve had many, many occasions where I’ve been in company with Barbara – or, as everyone just called her, ‘Babs’ – and she will be sorely missed,” the British-American actor said.“She was a small woman but feisty and she had the biggest, biggest heart in the business. And she was a genuine, lovely, warm, caring person and she will be sorely missed by the film, television, radio and theatre worlds.“We all knew that she wasn’t in great health, but it’s still a shock when it comes.“Rest in peace, Dame Barbara Windsor. You will be sorely missed.” RIP Dame Barbara Windsor pic.twitter.com/nc29bIkRXM Singer and broadcaster Aled Jones tweeted: “RIP Dame Barbara Windsor a truenational treasure! X oneofakind”. Comedian David Baddiel paid tribute on Twitter, saying: “RIP the very lovely,very funny Barbara Windsor. What a genuine national treasure she was.” One of Britain’s favourite entertainers, Windsor first become famous for her appearances in the Carry On films.Successfully crossing the generational divide, she was later hailed for her role as Peggy Mitchell, the Queen Vic’s battle-axe landlady in EastEnders who was known for yelling at rogue drinkers to “get outta my pub!”. Comedian David Baddiel paid tribute on Twitter, saying: “RIP the very lovely,very funny Barbara Windsor. What a genuine national treasure she was.” Veteran DJ Tony Blackburn tweeted: “So sorry to hear Barbara Windsor has passed away, a lovely lady who was always such fun. R.I.P. Babs.” With Press Association