Brentford warmed up for their Carabao Cup quarter-final clash against Newcastle with an emphatic 3-1 win over Championship promotion rivals Reading. Mathias Jensen and a Bryan Mbeumo double gave the Bees a first-half cushion, with Sone Aluko’s first-touch goal was merely a consolation. Both sides were missing key players through injury and suspension, but the Bees settled quickest. They took the lead on 11 minutes when Sergi Canos cut in from the left and teased a ball into the path of Jensen, whose shot squirmed through the keeper Rafael Cabral and over the line. Reading had to wait until the 16th minute for a sniff of goal, Alfa Semedo finding a yard but sending in a tame effort that rolled into the hands of David Raya in the visitors’ goal. The Royals came close to levelling after 20 minutes when Ovie Ejaria’s free-kick sailed through a sea of legs only to be cleared by Canos. From the resulting corner the former Brentford loanee Liam Moore stung the fingers of Raya. It was only a temporary glimmer of hope for the visitors as Brentford stretched their lead inm the 23rd minute, Mbeumo curling home from the edge of the area after a defence-splitting 45-yard pass from Josh Dasilva. Six minutes later it was three, a slick four-man move ending with Mbeumo turning sharply on the edge of the box and slotting into the far bottom corner. At the top of League One, Lincoln moved into the automatic promotion spots with a thumping 4-0 win over struggling Northampton. At the bottom end of the table both Wigan and Swindon secured valuable draws. The Latics played out a 1-1 with Fleetwood, while Swindon and Charlton scored two apiece at the County Ground. Burton remain rooted to the bottom of the table after a 3-1 home defeat by Doncaster, who moved up to fourth. Accrington were held to a 0-0 draw at the Wham Stadium by Blackpool but there were goals aplenty at Rochdale, who were hammered 4-1 by a Gillingham side inspired by two-goal John Akinde. There was late drama at Plough Lane, where Crewe moved closer to the play-off spots thanks to a last-gasp Oliver Finney goal to secure a 2-1 win over Wimbledon and Plymouth ended their six-match losing streak thanks to Ryan Hardie's 68th minute winner against MK Dons. Reading rallied before the break but the closest they came to finding a foothold in a one-sided first half came when a powerful drive from the former Brentford academy player Josh Laurent forced a good stop from Raya. That gave Reading hope and Raya had to be alert at his near post to keep Michael Olise’s cheeky free-kick out almost on the whistle. Reading thought they had pulled one back just after the restart when Ejaria fired in a first-time drive but it was brilliantly tipped wide by Raya. The Bees suffered a scare of a different kind when Jensen was poleaxed by a forearm smash from Michael Morrison, but returned to the fray after five minutes of treatment. Leaders Newport suffered a shock 4-2 defeat against Oldham. The Exiles went into the break 2-1 up but conceded three goals in the second half, two of those in the final five minutes, to see their advantage at the top of the table cut to four points. In a game between two teams hot on Newport's heels, Forest Green earned a big three points by beating Carlisle 1-0. Jamille Matt's winner helped Mark Cooper's side leapfrog Cheltenham, who were stunned on the road at Barrow. The Bluebirds, who parted company with manager David Dunn this week, climbed out of the bottom two with a 3-0 win. Bottom side Southend missed the chance to make up ground in the relegation battle, conceding with little more than ten minutes left on the clock to draw 1-1 with Mansfield. Bradford picked up a crucial home win, Harry Pritchard's first-half goal enough to beat Cambridge. Salford and Morecambe boosted their promotion hopes with away wins at Harrogate and Colchester respectively. There was a seven goal thriller at Walsall, where the hosts rallied to beat Port Vale 4-3. Elsewhere, Crawley secured a 2-1 away win at Leyton Orient, Tranmere won 3-0 at Bolton and Grimsby beat Scunthorpe 1-0. They almost made it four just before the hour when Mbeumo played in substitute Dominic Thompson, who squeezed his shot just past the far upright. Reading pulled one back when Olise whipped in a cross to the unmarked Aluko, who headed home three minutes after coming on. That gave the visitors hope and they enjoyed a good spell of possession without ever really testing Raya. Former Liverpool man Ejaria cut in from the left with 10 minutes to go and fired in a rising drive which Raya did well to punch clear. Ivan Toney almost got his customary goal minutes later but his glancing header from a Vitaly Janelt corner bounced just past the far post. The substitute Marcus Forss fired in a long-range effort that flashed over as the Bees saw out Reading’s fightback. Tariqe Fosu came close to putting the outcome beyond doubt in the 90th minute when his weaving run ended with an angled drive that was always rising just over the angle. Toney then smashed an added-time header against the bar and Charlie Goode’s follow-up was blocked as Brentford had the final say in an entertaining affair. They are fourth, while Reading slip out of the play-off spots.