I’ve been hearing the call of the dead. It’s been loud this week, following the death of David Cornwell, the writer known to the world as John le Carré. Ever since the news broke last Sunday, I’ve been devouring every obituary, reading every appreciation. And that’s prompted a question. What is it exactly that we mourn when we mourn a public figure? In the case of Le Carré, I can claim only the smallest personal connection. One weekday morning around a decade ago, he called entirely out of the blue and asked me to lunch – in two hours’ time. Whatever plans I had, I dropped. We met at a London restaurant so crowded that they couldn’t give him a table. So we sat side by side at the bar. He asked me a few questions, listened intently, then, once the main course had arrived, he changed gear, delivering a string of anecdotes and witty, shrewd and entertaining observations. At no point did he explain why he had wanted to have lunch with me, or why so urgently. Only a year later, with the publication of A Delicate Truth, set in the New Labour era, did I realise that I had, unwittingly, experienced something halfway between an interrogation and the debriefing of an asset. I cherished that encounter and a couple of later ones, but that’s not why I’m feeling Le Carré’s loss so keenly. Part of it is simple admiration. “Writer of spy novels” doesn’t capture it: Le Carré was one of the giants of postwar English literature, a master of his chosen form and an exceptional prose stylist. He had an ear for the dialect of the governing classes of this country, perfectly tuned to their evasions, their deceits, their melancholy. Still, that’s not wholly it either. I also respected his deep moral sense: he was fiercely against Brexit, for example, because he saw European cooperation as the only possible weapon against the murderous furies that had been unleashed in the 1930s, the decade of his birth. And I admired his ability to walk moral high wires. In the cold war era that his novels came to define, he exposed the hypocrisies of the west without ever overlooking the cruelties of the Soviet east. He was an unforgiving critic of Israeli militarism, yet was the first to sign a 2019 letter denouncing Labour antisemitism. It sounds straightforward, but few manage to tread those lines without losing their balance. Perhaps it’s also worth mentioning that Cornwell was close to the age of my father, who died two years ago. That inches closer to the heart of the matter. For the way we experience the death of public figures is private, even intimate. Part of it is that the death of one person revives the memory of the death of another. Loss is like that – cumulative, each new bereavement containing those that went before. I remember how many of those who filled the streets in the strange, intense week that followed the death of Diana in 1997 confessed to grieving for someone other than a lost princess. On TV they looked like they were sobbing for an estranged royal, but for many there were tears within those tears – for a husband, a mother, a son. Part of it is nostalgia. The death of Sean Connery in October, for instance, evoked the optimism and confidence of the 1960s, when a British hero could cut a dash. But the more intense nostalgia is personal – the life of a famous person, rewound and replayed when they die, prompting reminiscences of your own past. That’s particularly true of actors and, perhaps even more so, musicians. When David Bowie died in 2016, many mourned the man who they said had supplied the soundtrack of their lives, their young lives especially. They could measure out their memories in his songs: where they were, how they felt, who they loved. Of course, those songs are still there, just as Le Carré’s books will be no less available to read this week than they were last. So what’s the problem? It might be the knowledge that there will be nothing more, nothing new. After 2020, you’ll never see a Diana Rigg performance you haven’t seen before. For a different generation, it might be Chadwick Boseman or Kobe Bryant, but the sentiment will be the same. Those people who, in your teens, struck you as the incarnation of vitality or beauty are now part of the past – and so, therefore, is your youth. Even those who were never our idols, who were just around, prompt a pang when they go. I might not have thought of Des O’Connor, Barbara Windsor or Geoffrey Palmer in years, but their deaths register all the same. A small piece of mental furniture, a memento of childhood, has been removed. Anyone who has packed up their parents’ home, sorting into piles and boxes the tiny, trivial items – a biscuit tin, a holiday trinket – that were once so familiar but will never be seen again, knows the feeling. With those we greatly admired, it goes deeper. Those who used to guide us can guide us no longer. In 2021 US campaigners for equality and civil rights will not be able to rely on the inspiration and counsel of John Lewis or Ruth Bader Ginsburg. They’ll have to push ahead without them. In my own life, I found it comforting to know that, say, the former chief rabbi Jonathan Sacks or the legendary newspaper editor Harold Evans were still around – able to offer sage advice to Jewish people or journalists on how we should approach whatever new challenge arose. But now they too are gone. Sometimes, and irrationally, I’ve wondered if the timing is deliberate. Leonard Cohen died the day before Donald Trump was elected in 2016, as if he was exiting the stage so he wouldn’t have to witness the monstrous clown taking the spotlight. An ardent European, Le Carré departed just days before Britain’s last ties to the European Union will be severed. It means we will have to face the future alone, without these older, wiser minds around to light the way. It can feel lonely, similar to the day you realise your parents – or an older sibling – are no longer there to place a gentle, restraining hand on yours. The grownups are leaving, one by one. From now on, it’s only us – guided by the lessons they taught us and the memories they left behind. And comforted by the thought that, perhaps, they once felt exactly the same way. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist