In a year like no other, Guardian US tried to cover this country the way we know best – centering those who exist outside the corridors of power. We covered families and individuals who were some of the first ones to lose their livelihoods amidst the pandemic and impending recession, and then spent some time with a seven-year-old as she did her best while cooped up at home. We were in Minneapolis, speaking to longtime residents about systemic racism and police brutality, and we were in Holmes county, Louisiana, celebrating with young high school graduates. The “we” of course, refers to our brilliant, thoughtful and deeply dedicated group of photographers. Despite the odds, they captured the truly memorable and moving moments of a year we cannot wait to leave behind. The following is a small selection of the photos that stuck with us. Bike rides and selfies on the Brooklyn Bridge as New Yorkers adapted to a post Covid-19 summer. Photograph by Jordan Gale Left: Minneapolis resident Stacey Ray poses for a portrait with her daughters a few days after George Floyd was killed by a police officer. Ray was one of the many people that photographer Nina Robinson spoke to after the protests broke out. Photograph by Nina Robinson/The Guardian. Right: Diana (left) and Jesus Vasquez (right) pose for a portrait with their children Emily and Daphne in Washington Park, New Jersey. The Vasquez family was one of the many people whose lives had already been upended in the first month of Covid. Photograph by Bryan Anselm/The Guardian Meira with her prism. Photographer Matt Eich documented his daughters quarantining in Charlottesville, Virginia. Photograph by Matt Eich/The Guardian Lee Price with his sons, Daniel and Chase, at their home. Price lost his job at a restaurant two months ago and has struggled to make ends meet. He was one of the many residents from Mississippi we spoke to who wanted his state to reopen despite the rising coronavirus cases and deaths. Photograph by Bryan Tarnowski/The Guardian Left: A group of children play in a stream of water from an uncapped fire hydrant in Corona, Queens. Coronavirus hit this neighborhood of New York particularly hard. Photograph by Ryan Christopher Jones/The Guardian Right: Brittny Daskey and daughter Victoria pose for a portrait in Santa Clarita. Brittny and her partner, who are expecting their second child, lost their home in Lake Hughes, California to the wildfires. Photograph by Damon Casarez/The Guardian Terra Bella, California. 2020. Matt Black drove through California’s central, eastern Coachella and Imperial valleys, to capture how several challenges have compounded to create a tenor of uncertainty across the state. Photograph by Matt Black/The Guardian. Alfonzo Tucker photographed at his home in Tuscaloosa. Tucker was prevented from voting because of a $4 fine, and is just one of the many millions of Americans who have been entangled in a racially biased system – and deprived of their democratic right. Photograph by Johnathon Kelso/The Guardian An oak hammock is filled with saw palmetto in Florida. These berries grow in flatwoods or prairies deep in the heart of the state, and are used to make an oil that is estimated at $200m this year. Photograph by Rose Marie Cromwell/The Guardian Alvin Pavlis and his wife Donna have farmed their land in Iowa for nearly 50 years. Nearly all of their corn crops were destroyed from a hurricane-like storm, called a derecho, that tore through their state in August. Photograph by Jordan Gale/The Guardian Zion at a park in Williamsburg, New York. Zion and her family got help from New York’s Gender and Family Project, which advises parents how to support their children’s gender expression. Photograph by Celeste Sloman/The Guardian Fisherman Bob Baines with kelp from his kelp farm. This year is his first year diversifying his fishing practice by farming kelp, a necessity given the climate breakdown. Photograph by Greta Rybus/The Guardian Left: Deonta Barnes poses for a portrait after the Holmes County Central high school’s socially distanced graduation ceremony. Photograph by Annie Flanagan/The Guardian Right: Angela Hence, with her daughter, after voting in the 2020 presidential election in Southfield Michigan. She was one of the many voters we spoke to and photographed prior to the election. Photograph by Erin Kirkland/The Guardian Protesters at Jefferson Square Park gather in downtown Louisville to call for racial justice and charges against the officers involved in the killing of Breonna Taylor. Photograph by Andrew Cenci/The Guardian Francisco Blanco Arango untangles a fishing net with the help of his granddaughter Ada while Kevin plays with a dog at their backyard in Saladero, Mexico. The BP oil spill in 2010 led to the decline of fish and seafood that many communities, such as this one, had relied on for trade and self consumption. Photograph by Luis Antonio Rojas/The Guardian Sierra Williams, photographed in Eagle Mountain, Utah, for a story on individuals who decided to be child-free by choice. Photograph by Aubrey Trinnaman/The Guardian Mourners and admirers left notes on a mural of supreme court justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg on U Street in Washington. Photographer Lexey Swall captured the somber and reverential mood in the capital after her death. Photograph by Lexey Swall/The Guardian A Trump supporter in front of BOK Center in Tulsa three days before the president held a rally there. Many were outraged by Donald Trump’s decision to hold a rally in a city where Covid-19 cases were surging. Photograph by Vanessa Charlot/The Guardian Scenes from a desolate financial district in the early days of the Covid-19 surge in New York. Photographs by Jordan Gale/The Guardian A lobster boat hauls traps in the Penobscot Bay, the stretch of water between Matinicus and the mainland. Those who live on Matinicus are accustomed to a certain degree of isolation, but photographer Greta Rybus still decided to venture out to capture residents casting their vote in the historical election. Photograph by Greta Rybus/The Guardian