Manchester United remain firmly behind Ole Gunnar Solskjær, and the hierarchy are confident his record as manager shows the side are on an upward trajectory. There is a strong belief that despite crashing out of the Champions League on Tuesday at RB Leipzig, United can mount a title challenge this season. The executive are disappointed to be in the Europa League but Solskjær’s win ratio and ongoing rebuilding of the squad, which has impressed them, mean he retains their support. There is an awareness that when United host Manchester City in Saturday’s derby they will be only five points behind the joint leaders, Tottenham and Liverpool, with a match in hand and that the club remain in contention in four trophies. The manager’s recruitment of Bruno Fernandes on 1 February is viewed as a catalyst: since then United are second only to Liverpool in points won. After 10 Premier League matches this season United’s 19 points and 19 goals is better than the 13 points and 13 goals last term, when they finished third. There is also no wish to perpetuate the perception of a hire-and-fire cycle of managers since Sir Alex Ferguson departed in 2013, and the imbalanced squads and lack of identity it is considered to cause. In any case, the club believe there are growing indications the team can compete for a 21st title and other trophies under Solskjær. His rebuild is considered by the club to have given the squad the requisite character and desired blend of academy products – personified by Mason Greenwood – and his recruitment of players such as Fernandes and Edinson Cavani is admired. There is a belief the team have the identity lacking under David Moyes, Louis van Gaal and José Mourinho. In that post-Ferguson era Solskjær’s 56% win ratio from 108 matches in all competitions (60 victories) is second only to Mourinho’s 58% from 144 matches (84), with Moyes’s 53% placing him third (27 from 51) and Van Gaal last on 52% (54, 103). The United hierarchy are also conscious of how Solskjær’s record compares with managers at the club’s direct rivals. His win ratio is inferior to the 61% of Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp and 72% of City’s Pep Guardiola but better than that of Arsenal’s Mikel Arteta (55%), Chelsea’s Frank Lampard (54%) and Tottenham’s Mourinho (53%). After 108 games Klopp, who has since led Liverpool to the Champions League, Club World Cup and Premier League, had a 50% win return, 6% less than Solskjær’s. Since Solskjær’s first game in charge in December 2018 his record places him some way behind Klopp’s 73 victories from 104 games and Guardiola’s 81 from 110 over the same period. Strong United backing for Solskjær does not mean unconditional support and results will continue to be monitored. After City, United play Sheffield United, Leeds, Everton (in a Carabao Cup quarter-final), Leicester and Wolves before the end of the year, and there is confidence the manager can embark on an impressive run.