Sainsbury’s and Aldi have fallen into line behind rivals Tesco and Morrisons by promising to repay more than £500m of emergency taxpayer support. The major supermarkets have faced fierce criticism for taking advantage of the government’s business rates holiday which has saved them close to £2bn combined at a time when food sales have been booming and other parts of the retail sector are in crisis. The rates relief was intended to prop up retailers banned from trading during high street shutdowns but supermarkets, and discount stores such as B&M, have remained open throughout the crisis while also benefiting from the substantial tax break. Sainsbury’s chief executive, Simon Roberts, said it was going to stump up £440m of its £490m business rates bill but was hanging on to £50m of financial support for Argos stores which were forced to close by lockdown restrictions. Keeping staff and customers safe had increased the business’s running costs but Roberts acknowledged that that food retailers had “benefited from being able to open throughout. With regional restrictions likely to remain in place for some time, we believe it is now fair and right to forgo the business rates relief that we have been given on all Sainsbury’s stores.” Roberts added that Sainsbury’s was “very mindful that non-essential retailers and many other businesses have been forced to close again in the second lockdown and we hope that this goes some way towards helping them”. The German discount chain Aldi, which is the UK’s fifth-largest supermarket with 900 stores, also confirmed on Thursday it would return the “full value of the business rates relief it has received”, which was more than £100m. Giles Hurley, the Aldi chief executive, also pointed to the extra costs it had shouldered during the pandemic but said “we believe returning the full value of our business rates relief is the right decision to help support the nation”. This means that payments adding up to £1.4bn have now been pledged by Britain’s biggest supermarkets. The floodgates opened on Wednesday when Tesco broke ranks and promised to pay its £585m rates bill. By the evening, Morrisons had followed suit, pledging to cough up £274m. While other retailers and hospitality firms have struggled with lockdown closures and other restrictions, supermarkets have enjoyed a surge in sales during the pandemic, albeit with higher costs linked to new in-store safety measures. In total, the big six supermarkets – Tesco, Sainsbury’s, Asda, Morrison, Aldi and Lidl – will save £1.9bn in bills during the tax year to 31 March 2021, according to figures from Altus Group, a property adviser. Altus estimated that the rates holiday was worth £109m for Aldi. The pressure on supermarkets to pay their way has increased, set against a backdrop of an intensifying high street crisis, with 25,000 jobs put in jeopardy this week as a result of the failure of the Debenhams and Arcadia. Businesses in other hard-hit sectors, such as entertainment and hospitality, have also been pushed to the brink. The listed supermarkets Tesco, Sainsbury’s and Morrisons had added fuel to the fire with the decision to pay big dividends to shareholders. Asda, which is in the process of being sold to a private equity consortium, is the only member of the big four yet to act. John Roberts, the chief executive of online retailer AO.com recently suggested that supermarket executives “ask their mum” about whether they should repay the business rates relief. “We live by the mantra of ‘If I have to go and explain our actions to my mum over dinner we should be proud of the decisions that we’ve taken’.”