Rangers survived another tough test of their title credentials as Ianis Hagi’s strike earned the Scottish Premiership leaders a 1-0 victory over Hibernian at Ibrox. Steven Gerrard’s team had not dropped points since they last faced Hibs at Easter Road in September but they were made to fight to the end to claim their 12th consecutive win. Having looked lively early on, Hagi gave Rangers a 32nd-minute lead after Glen Kamara fed Kemar Roofe in the box and his cross snuck through Ryan Porteous’s legs to find the striker rushing past a sluggish Paul Hanlon to hook home. Rangers survived a strong penalty claim just after the hour mark after Hagi’s high boot brushed Joe Newell’s face and Hibs threw all they had at the league leaders as the game ticked into the final stages. Kevin Nisbet missed a good chance and Allan McGregor denied Melker Hallberg but Rangers hung on for the win. Celtic responded with a 3-0 win at Hamilton Academical thanks to a three-goal flurry in the second half. After winning a penalty for handball, Odsonne Édouard converted from the spot before turning provider when Leigh Griffiths doubled his side’s lead from the edge of the box. David Turnbull turned home a rebound in stoppage time to complete a victory that keeps Neil Lennon’s side 16 points behind their rivals with three games in hand before the Old Firm derby next Saturday. Aberdeen came from behind to overcome St Johnstone 2-1 and leapfrog Hibs into third. Liam Gordon gave the visitors the lead with a smart header but Sam Cosgrove levelled from the spot and Ash Taylor scored from a corner after the break to seal the points. Nicky Clark’s scrappy stoppage-time strike salvaged a point for Dundee United and denied a valuable win for Motherwell, who had taken an early lead through Tony Watt’s free header. Livingston also left it late to see off beleaguered Kilmarnock 2-1, as the away side came from behind make it six wins from six for their new manager, David Martindale. Scott Robinson scored a stylish winner in the 92nd minute after Jay Emmanuel-Thomas replied to Chris Burke’s spot-kick. Ross County were the architects of their own downfall at home to St Mirren. The bottom side had Josh Reid sent off for two bookings after 36 minutes before Ross Draper suffered the same fate on the hour mark. Marcus Fraser and Kristian Dennis then put County’s nine men to the sword with two late goals.