Formula One’s longest season has been confirmed by the FIA World Motor Sport Council for 2021. The calendar, consisting of 23 races, is the most ambitious the sport has attempted and is set to run from 21 March in Melbourne until 5 December in Abu Dhabi, with the British Grand Prix to be held on 18 July at Silverstone. F1 had proposed its new calendar in early November and the FIA has now approved it. The previous longest season was 21 races but having held only 17 this year because of the coronavirus it is eager to expand once more, not least because of the major revenue stream of race-hosting fees. As F1 previously stated there will be no race in Vietnam and the slot remains to be filled. Portimão in Portugal, which hosted its first GP this year, is believed to be the likely replacement for the slot on 25 April, a decision which would be welcomed by drivers and fans. The announcement on this final meeting on the calendar will be made in the new year. The Brazilian GP, which had yet to sign a new contract, has also now confirmed a five-year deal with F1 to host the race at Interlagos in São Paulo. The Spanish GP on 9 May remains subject to contract but it is understood that will be concluded shortly.  21 March - Australian GP28 March - Bahrain GP11 April - Chinese GP25 April - TBC9 May - Spanish GP23 May - Monaco GP6 June - Azerbaijan GP13 June - Canadian GP27 June - French GP4 July - Austrian GP18 July - British GP1 August - Hungarian GP29 August - Belgian GP5 September - Dutch GP12 September - Italian GP26 September - Russian GP3 October - Singapore GP10 October - Japanese GP24 October - United States GP31 October - Mexican GP14 November - Brazilian GP28 November - Saudi Arabia GP5 December - Abu Dhabi GP The British GP will be held on 18 July to avoid a clash with the Wimbledon men’s singles final and the European Championship final at Wembley, which are both set to take place on 11 July. The Canadian GP does however take place on the same weekend as the Le Mans 24 Hours – 13 June – a scheduling clash both parties have tried to avoid in recent years. As planned Zandvoort in the Netherlands is on the calendar. The circuit last held a grand prix in 1985 and was due to do so this year before the race was cancelled. It has been scheduled for 5 September. The race at Jeddah in Saudi Arabia also features despite condemnation from human rights groups, who have accused the regime of using F1 to sportswash their reputation.