Once history has repeated itself as tragedy, and then as farce, where does it go for the third wave? Panto? Certainly, small children would now be capable of informing apparently nonplussed cabinet ministers of the location of the infection rate. Guys – IT’S BEHIND YOU. Coming right up behind you, in fact, as an almost entirely predictable seasonal development that they are nonetheless preparing to turbo boost with a Christmas plan whose foolhardiness was almost entirely predictable back when they made it. I think at some level they get off on it. Maybe even psychosexually. Boris Johnson’s government makes itself a hostage to fortune so often that it must have Stockholm syndrome. This wasn’t the diagnosis provided when Matt Hancock (who’s getting a toy doctor’s bag for Christmas) addressed the Commons on Monday. On the one hand, every speech in which Matt doesn’t stare right down the camera and quaver something about a tiny “candle of hope” or the plucky dawn is a win at this stage. Hey, is that a lump in your throat or are you just the actual secretary of state for health? On the other hand, you got the feeling that the one thing Hancock didn’t want to have to say is “there’s been a mutation”. That and “thank you for the opportunity Lord Sugar”. Quite how we’ve ended up with a classic week one Apprentice reject as health secretary during a deadly pandemic is no doubt a cool story someone will tell us some time. The mutation merely underscores the fact that while diseases evolve, the current crop of cabinet ministers doesn’t. Thus there is a very distinct familiarity to the panicky floundering. As so often with this government during the pandemic, it feels like we’ve been here or somewhere similar two or three times before, yet are somehow discovering the place as if for the first time. My deja vu is of having deja vu. Vaccination numbers remain an exquisite mystery, just as testing numbers once were. How many vaccinations have there been? A call to NHS England really builds the suspense, as I’m told “that is being looked into”, “we are giving huge ballpark estimations”, and “last week we said hundreds so maybe it’s gone into the thousands now”. Righto. Eventually someone gets back to say that “tens of thousands” have been vaccinated. For a government obsessed with centralising everything, this one is weirdly relaxed about not being able to lay its hands on these arguably vaguely important statistics, which are going to become decidedly vital as the vaccine gets more widely rolled out. One of the great misconceptions about goldfish is that they have only a three-second memory. In fact, scientists have somehow contrived to prove that goldfish are able to remember things for many months. On that basis, I think you’ll agree that people have been very unfair to goldfish. Casting around for a new shorthand for forgetfulness, we should replace goldfish with ministers in Boris Johnson’s government, who seem constantly surprised by events of which they have had either adequate warning or direct prior experience. Nobody U-turns more than this lot, of course, so perhaps the festive freeing-up will become the latest thing on which the government effects a handbrake turn. But given the noisy fanfare with which Downing Street went about “saving Christmas”, it seems more likely that the scheme will fall into that most dangerous of political categories: the one where something simply must be ploughed on with, just to save face. There is little more ominous than a policy that politicians feel they must pursue far beyond reason, on the basis that going back on it would look bad, or disorganised, or weak. Furthermore, there is no character less suited to making big calls than a man who would prefer to stick his head in the sand than see it Photoshopped into a Scrooge hat on the front page of a newspaper. Unfortunately, that’s our prime minister. Part of me wonders whether attempting to save face is this government’s defining characteristic. (If only there was some other particularly extremist version of a policy they were following through on that could help me back up this theory.) Rather like the first lockdown, which Boris Johnson wrongly assumed British people wouldn’t stomach, a restriction-relaxed Christmas probably wasn’t a hill anyone was going to die on, given there’s a vaccine in sight. Turn a few blind eyes to illicit local mingling, chuck an extra couple of bank holidays in over Easter or in early May, and people would have weathered it. Instead, by February, very significant numbers of people may be walking around feeling that they directly contributed to a relative’s death by unwittingly bringing the virus into a Christmas bubble that they felt was somehow licensed or encouraged by the government. You may regard that as rational or otherwise – either way, it feels set to be what we might euphemise as a psychologically “interesting” moment in the life of the nation. • Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist