My mum only had a few months to live. So we rented a van and took a road trip We’d been incredibly close when I was a child. Then, in 1994 she went away and never came back. Now here we were, taking to the road with no real plan after her cancer diagnosis. He buried a treasure in the mountains, and someone found it. Or did they? Forrest Fenn, an eccentric millionaire, liked to engage with those seeking his hoard but left more questions than answers. How Republicans gutted the biggest voting rights victory in recent history Florida voters overwhelmingly supported restoring rights for those with felony convictions. But tens of thousands of people remain disenfranchised. ‘Disastrous at a time like this’: the US Postal Service is on the brink of crisis The post office could be key to people voting during the pandemic but perverse financial rules and Trump’s hostility put that at risk. How Trump has tipped the scales in America’s most powerful courts Tom McCarthy examines how three appeals courts are becoming more conservative with the arrival of judges picked by Trump – and what that means for cases on issues like voting rights. ‘All we could do was run’: the strange story of Gerald, the turkey who terrorized a city When the bird who dominated Oakland’s rose garden turned violent, the question of his fate caused “rifts that will never heal”. ‘Horrible hybrids’: the plastic products that give recyclers nightmares From singing birthday cards to baby food pouches, a growing trend of mixing materials is making recycling even harder. Why I quit having sex for a year I had been using sex as an ill-prescribed antidepressant, something to soothe me. Abstinence, I thought, was the only way to break my habit. Can one site change what a porn star is supposed to look like? OnlyFans allows content creators to self-identify and cultivate a fanbase on their own terms. ‘This is a war’: Republicans ramp up bid to control election maps for next decade “He who controls redistricting can control Congress,” Karl Rove famously said – and the Republican State Leadership Committee is set to do just that. True alienation: when a person of color tries to fit in with UFO enthusiasts My dad has one passion: extraterrestrials. He joined a group of alien chasers, but being a black Dominican among mostly white believers was challenging. Does living in New York make any financial sense after this pandemic? I’ve perpetuated the illusion that my family lives a stable life, but that was an absurd delusion, and it feels insane to continue as we have. What does it mean to be a ‘Karen’? Karens explain As the meme has become more prominent online, its meaning has become confused – with real-life Karens caught in the crosshairs. Nursing home workers tell their stories: ‘You don’t understand the stress we’re going through’ The coronavirus has devastated US senior care homes. We spoke to frontline staff about their grief and heartbreak – and how they’re trying to keep their loved ones safe. Trauma and triumph: my father, his dementia and surviving segregation Distraction and diversion are your friends when a loved one has dementia. I wanted to dislodge this memory that defined his generation in the way that the killings of Trayvon Martin and George Floyd have and will define later ones. A lifeline’: the doulas guiding clients through childbirth – from a distance As coronavirus changes the way women experience pregnancy, doulas are caught between helping clients and the limitations caused by the pandemic. The Americans forced into bankruptcy to pay for prescriptions Millions of Americans can’t afford the prescription drugs they require to survive, forcing them into bankruptcy, trips to Mexico or cutting off utilities. Use of ‘at-home abortion pills’ rises amid pandemic – and faces new threats Medication abortions have are a safe and accessible method of terminating pregnancy, but they have been targeted by onerous FDA restrictions. Covid-19 proves childcare in the US is broken – can it be fixed? Childcare has become central to US economic recovery, but daycares are struggling to safely reopen during a pandemic and recession. Meet the doomers: why some young US voters have given up hope on climate Politically active young people are often championed as the Earth’s great hope to reverse the climate crisis – but many believe we’ve already passed the tipping point.