The French-UK border will reopen to EU nationals from Wednesday subject to a negative Covid result, after fierce debate over the accuracy and turnaround times of Britain’s testing system. The French prime minister’s office said in a statement that travellers with permanent residence in an EU member state would also be able to enter the country or travel through it from Britain, providing all have a negative Covid test less than 72 hours old. An announcement on goods transport was expected on Tuesday evening, with the two governments hoping to finalise details allowing people whose journeys are considered essential – including British truck drivers – to travel to France. About 4,000 lorries, and thousands more small vans, were waiting to cross the Channel after a two-day French ban on freight on Tuesday, with food transport firms warning that potential disruption levels ranged between “a shambles and a catastrophe” just as January and the end of Brexit transition looms. The ban on freight and passengers was imposed by France in an attempt to contain a newly discovered Covid-19 variant thought to have a growth rate up to 70% higher than previous types. France and more than 40 other countries had closed their borders to travellers from the UK since Sunday. While the new measures should help to ease chaos around Britain’s ports, it is not clear whether the need for a negative test – and fears surrounding the variant – will deter haulage firms and drivers from delivering freight. “Entry to France from the UK for French and EU nationals and for British and third-country citizens with permanent residence can resume on Wednesday on condition of a negative Covid test – PCR or recognised antigenic,” France’s Europe minister, Clément Beaune, confirmed. The UK transport minister, Grant Shapps, tweeted: “Good progress today and agreement with the French government on borders. We will provide an update on hauliers later this evening, but hauliers must still NOT travel to Kent this evening.” The announcement came after a day of wrangling over the form of Covid test France would accept, with PCR swab tests felt by London to take too long to return a result – the target time of 24 hours is often missed – while Paris was concerned that 30-minute lateral flow tests were not sufficiently accurate. Under the new measures, which will remain in place at least until 6 January, negative tests have to be presented before boarding a train, plane or ferry in the UK, with no possibility to test on arrival. It also followed a recommendation on Tuesday from the European commission that all 27 member states should discontinue bans on flights and trains from the UK and reopen freight routes to “ensure essential supply chains continue to function”, including for Covid vaccines. The EU’s executive branch said UK nationals still had the right to free movement until 1 January and “should be exempted from further temporary restrictions provided that they undergo a test or quarantine”. Cargo flows “need to continue uninterrupted … not least to ensure the timely distribution of Covid-19 vaccines”, the commission added. Brussels warned, however, that at the end of the transition period only “essential” travel would be permitted unless the member states added the UK to a list of countries exempted from restrictions. Didier Reynders, the commissioner for justice, said: “Given the current uncertainties and in light of the precautionary principle, member states should take coordinated action to discourage non-essential travel between the UK and the EU. “At the same time, blanket travel bans should not prevent thousands of EU and UK citizens from returning to their homes.” President Emmanuel Macron and Boris Johnson spoke by phone on Monday about measures to ease the chaos at Britain’s ports after France’s decision on Sunday evening to close its border to all traffic from the UK for 48 hours. Concerns have been raised about the welfare of lorry drivers waiting to cross the Channel, with one trade body saying drivers had been given only a single cereal bar each despite being stuck in their cabs for more than 24 hours. Rod McKenzie, the managing director of the Road Haulage Association, told the BBC: “Clearly those drivers have spent a second night parked up somewhere, possibly on a motorway, possibly somewhere else, trying to get across the Channel, and many of them are European drivers trying to get home for Christmas, and their morale is very poor. “Yesterday, Kent county council offered each of them one cereal bar, which is a pretty poor effort, I think, in terms of maintaining their morale, and their spirits.” McKenzie said toilet facilities were also a “big issue”, with concerns over health and cleanliness. “We are not treating them well as a country, we are not treating lorry drivers well in these very difficult conditions that they are in at the moment.”