Name: Clevr Blends. Age: Clevr Blends was started in January 2019. Not so clevr at spelling. What is it? A woman-led, mission-driven wellness company. Brilliant. What is it though? It makes oat milk “superlattes”, in powder form. Instant coffee? So much more. “Your favourite coffee shop latte, just seriously upgraded with brain-boosting, mood-lifting, mind-clearing medicinals,” it says. Such as? Turmeric, matcha, mushrooms, probiotics, adaptogens … What the hell are they? Who knows? Actually the existence of adaptogens is doubtful. But that’s not the point. What is the point? Why is Pass notes promoting what sounds like a lot of Californian nonsense? You’re right about California. The company, run by an entrepreneur named Hannah Mendoza, operates out of Santa Barbara. After initially selling her powdered drinks from a “funky pop-up bar”, the superfoods fanatic has gone into production. What is interesting is who is investing. And who is investing? So on Insta, Oprah posted, to her 19 million followers … Oprah Winfrey’s investing? No, just hawking. Oprah posted: “On the first day of Christmas my neighbour M sent to me ... a basket of deliciousness!” Meaning a basket of Clevr products, as illustrated by the accompanying video. M? Dame Judi Dench? No. Oprah added: “(Yes that M),” with a crown emoji. “My new drink of choice for the morning and night. Wish I had @clevrblends sooner cause I would’ve added it to my Favourite Things list.” M with a crown, who could that be … Meghan, Duchess of Sussex! We got there in the end. Yes, the following day, without divulging her stake, the duchess confirmed her investment, “in support of a passionate female entrepreneur who prioritises building community alongside her business”. First the Netflix deal, now funky female-led superlatte and celebrity neighbours – Meghan and Harry’s new life since quitting royal duties looks a lot sunnier and more 21st century than Christmas parlour games at Sandringham. Yes, but the Windsors might not like that crown emoji; the pair are not supposed to be trading on their royal connections. But it was Oprah who did that. Has the Palace said anything? No, of course not. But they can just disapprove, silently, coldly, Britishly, from afar. And Clevr might not be doing a Balmoral superlatte any time soon: organic bog-grown heather blended with powdered stag horn, powered by a natural sense of entitlement and a stiff upper lip, just add water. No, thank you! I’ll take a pack of the golden superlatte, soothing and warming. How much? That will be $28 (£20) please. TWENTY-EIGHT DOLLARS?! You do get 14 sachets for that. Do say: “Nah, you’re all right. Think I’ll just stop by Tesco and get myself a jar of Mellow Birds.” Don’t say: “Can’t wait for this episode of The Crown.”