When Graham Dwyer was convicted of murder in 2015 it was a triumph for Ireland’s police and judicial system. The architect had committed what prosecutors called “very nearly the perfect murder” but he was caught and sentenced to life in prison thanks to a meticulous investigation. Five years later, however, the conviction risks unravelling over the use of phone data – a twist that could see Dwyer walk free, and also have an impact on data privacy rules across Europe. An outwardly respectable and successful professional, Dwyer had killed Elaine O’Hara in August 2012 after grooming her for sadomasochistic fantasies that included stabbing women during sex. He concealed her body in woodland in the Dublin mountains and threw in a reservoir items that identified her and connected them – phones, keys, a store loyalty card, sex toys and bondage accessories. In August 2013 a dog walker discovered the skeletal remains and anglers snagged some of the items in the reservoir, which was unusually low after a dry summer. A police search found two phones in the mud, from which they extracted texts between a “slave” and “master” that led them to Dwyer. There were no witnesses or physical evidence but texts and phone data about his movements helped clinch a conviction. Dwyer has now appealed on the grounds the retention and accessing of his mobile phone data breached EU law. Ireland’s supreme court referred the appeal to the European court of justice, which is expected to rule in coming weeks in Dwyer’s favour. The case may be about to give the Irish state a major legal headache. The Luxembourg-based ECJ has ruled in recent cases involving Belgium, France and the UK that governments and service providers do not have broad rights to retain data on citizens, and legal experts expect the Dwyer decision to follow that pattern. “They’re not going to change their mind on mass retention of data,” said Fred Logue, a leading information lawyer in Dublin. The court laid out its position on indiscriminate data retention, clipping the ability of police and intelligence agencies to mine vast data troves, in a landmark 2014 ruling – a year before Dwyer’s conviction – on a case taken by the advocacy group Digital Rights Ireland. Along with the UK and several other EU member states, Ireland however ignored the ruling. “Fault lies squarely with Irish authorities for failing to take account of the ECJ ruling,” said Johnny Ryan, a senior fellow with the Irish Council for Civil Liberties. “Because the Irish state never updated the law to reflect that ruling, it now faces the possibility that convictions can be challenged. It’s a lesson in what happens when lawmakers are intransigent.” Irish authorities may now have to “face painful consequences”, he said, adding that the fact the 2014 ruling was based on an Irish case made the state’s subsequent inaction all the more inexcusable. “The Irish state failed to do the necessary homework, and tighten up its data retention law.” Victory in Luxembourg will not automatically free Dwyer. It would factor into his main appeal which is pending at Ireland’s court of appeal and will weigh whether additional evidence, apart from the mobile phone data, justified a conviction. Dwyer’s victim, O’Hara, was a 36-year-old childcare worker with a history of mental health problems. She fell under his influence, her family said, because she wanted to be loved. Dwyer almost got away with the crime. After O’Hara was reported missing her car was found near her mother’s grave south of Dublin, prompting an assumption she had taken her own life by jumping from nearby cliffs into the Irish Sea. The possibility of a killer walking free should not obscure society’s right to data privacy, said Logue. “Hard cases make bad law, you get into the end justifying the means. That’s a slippery slope towards authoritarianism. In an open society you have to be able to go about your business without being surveilled. That may mean in certain cases you can’t solve a crime but that’s the price you pay for an open society.”