The Football Association has chosen not to take disciplinary action against Millwall or Colchester after sections of their crowd booed players taking the knee. Millwall’s Championship loss to Derby and Colchester’s win over Grimsby in League Two on 5 December were overshadowed by supporters opposing the Black Lives Matter campaign. Despite a strong backlash, the FA has ruled against punishing either club. It said in a statement: “The FA has conducted full and thorough investigations into the crowd-related incidents that took place at both The Den and JobServe Community Stadium on Saturday 5 December 2020. “Having carefully considered these matters, including the observations from all relevant parties, we can confirm that no formal disciplinary action will be taken against the clubs concerned on this occasion. “However, The FA would like to further clarify that anyone who chooses to take the knee will continue to receive our support as they highlight the inequality and injustice experienced by the Black community. “To be clear, we do not see taking the knee as a political symbol, and would contend that there can now be no doubt as to what the gesture means in a footballing context. “Therefore, going forward, The FA will continue to monitor and investigate should similar crowd-related incidents occur. “The FA continues to support all players and clubs that wish to take a stand against any form of discrimination, and will always condemn the behaviours of anyone that chooses to actively oppose these values.” Millwall Supporters’ Club said the booing was targeted at the political views of the Black Lives Matter organisation, and not motivated by racism. This week Cambridge fans booed as the players took the knee before his side’s League Two win over Colchester. The FA’s response comes as the Professional Footballers’ Association revealed, after consulting its membership, that “players overwhelmingly support continuing this act of solidarity despite any adverse responses that may be received”. The PFA also accused the EFL of showing “a lack of leadership” over the issue. “While the Premier League has already committed to teams taking the knee for the duration of the season, players across the EFL have been left in a difficult position following a lack of leadership on the issue,” the union said. An EFL spokesman said: “The league’s position, which has remained consistent throughout this period and is a position shared across the professional game, is that we will continue to respect and support the decision of individual players who wish to take this form of action as we respect players’ freedom of expression on this issue.”