Selected by architect Sarah Wigglesworth In February, about four weeks before lockdown, I attended a five-day course in weaving linen run by textile artist Susie Gillespie. Held at a farm near Totnes where they grow their own flax, we flayed, spun, dyed with natural dyes, and then wove a piece of cloth, all in five days. It was incredibly fulfilling, calming, meditative, quiet but also communal, with eight of us all working together but with entirely different interests, aesthetics and skills. Wonderful... Selected by artist and designer Adam Nathaniel Furman This debut novel has inspired me most this year. Lote is the story of Mathilda, an art gallery intern and her obsession with a forgotten black Scottish modernist poet, Hermia Druitt. This book is a bright ray of flamboyant genius, a wild manifesto of aesthetic excess, queerness and fabulous otherness in the face of a miserable year. It basically carried me through the first lockdown. Selected by product designer Jay Osgerby, Universal Design Studio Earlier this year, Vitra reissued Chaise Tout Bois, Jean Prouvé’s only chair design made entirely from wood. Demonstrating that good design endures, Chaise Tout Bois was originally produced in 1941. It is much like Prouvé’s Standard chair (and shares parts) but a wood structure was substituted for the original base because of the rationing of metal during the second world war. At a time when we are seeking environmentally sustainable responses in design, Chaise Tout Bois showcases that well thought-out, resourceful design does not tire. A chair that is as fit for purpose now as it was in the 1940s. Selected by industrial designer Tom Lloyd of Pearson Lloyd One of the biggest changes to London’s urban fabric in 2020 has been the introduction of Low Traffic Neighbourhoods (LTNs) – a radical traffic-management strategy which closes residential streets to through traffic, allowing residents to move more freely and safely by non-motorised transport. Traffic habits and patterns in London have changed dramatically. Apps such as Google Maps and Waze have enabled the widespread use of shortcuts to avoid main thoroughfares. The rapid growth in online delivery vehicles and private-hire services, such as Uber, has increased vehicle mileage on residential roads in London by 3.9 billion miles, compared to 2010. Covid-19 and the ensuing changes to our working lives enabled the rollout of LTNs which engage proactively in the fight against the climate crisis, and for healthier, more sustainable environments for urban life. They are a great example of design for social and behavioural change for everyone in our community. Although there is vocal opposition to these measures, the fact that up to 70% of households in some London boroughs do not even own a car would suggest that the majority of society supports, and will directly benefit from, this new framework for our streets and spaces. Selected by textile and furniture designer Chrissa Amuah The relevance and poignancy of Chinua Achebe’s Things Fall Apart could not have resonated more strongly than it has in 2020, even though it was published in 1958. The conflict within, and eventual tragedy of, Okonkwo – the story’s protagonist – draws parallels with the inner turmoil and reflections we’ve all experienced this year. The pandemic and global civil unrest has forced us, as a collective race, to challenge the status quo and what we had taken for granted that tomorrow would bring. It is the year that exposed our human vulnerability and highlighted our shared humanity. Selected by artist and designer Camille Walala The rainbows were such a genuine moment of unity and sharing, it gave me a warm feeling to see one in the windows of a house. All the NHS workers are heroes, and people, especially kids, wanted to do their bit to help out in some way. It felt very important to have this reason to smile – to create this moment together. Selected by SoShiro creative director Shiro Muchiri I’ve been listening to Zara McFarlane’s latest album – Songs of an Unknown Tongue. McFarlane switches up traditional percussive music from Jamaica with her powerfully soulful voice; the album explores the Black diaspora, womanhood and much more. This amazing album was released around July 2020 – a true work of art. Selected by CEO of Cockpit Arts social enterprise Annie Warburton The Artist Support Pledge started out as an initiative that hoped to recruit 1,000 participants. It now has upward of 79,000 followers and has generated over £70m in sales for artists since March. Like all the best ideas, it’s elegantly simple. The project invites artists and makers to post images on Instagram of works costing no more than £200, using the tag #artistsupportpledge. People interested contact and buy direct from the artist. Every time the artist reaches £1,000 of sales, they pledge to buy £200 of work from other artists. The name belies the mission. The Pledge – conceived in March by artist Matthew Burrows, who was honoured with an MBE in recognition of his contribution to culture – not only supports artists but small, independent makers, designers and craftspeople. It became a lifeline when makers’ income dried up as gallery shows and sales disappeared. Falling through gaps in government support, makers have lost up to 90% of their usual income this year. The Pledge not only generated vital sales but also, at a time when makers were doubting the worth of what they do, made a powerful statement on the importance of art and culture in all of our lives, above all in these darkest of times. Beyond that, the Artist Support Pledge evinces all the best qualities of this year: generosity, fellow-feeling and resourcefulness. It’s an assertion of confidence in the power of community, a new kind of economy, one founded on kindness and a vision of an accessible, equitable global artistic ecosystem. Selected by Judith Harris, head of House & Home at Toast The Sarah Myerscough Gallery in Barnes held an exhibition this year called The Natural Room, that I really enjoyed. There was a mix of hand-crafted contemporary design and art pieces, many of which were created using organic materials such as jute and sisal. It showcased highly skilled craftsmanship – something I really appreciate. I loved the way this beautifully curated collection connected the viewer to the natural world through modern sculptural forms that seem so right for the world we are living in today. Selected by Roberto Minotti, co-CEO of Minotti Out of every crisis new, incredible opportunities can emerge, and in this challenging year the global design community was quick to grasp them. This difficult situation has prompted us all to implement new methods of communication, that took shape with extraordinary digital initiatives, such as ad hoc digital project launches, and led to new collaborative and sharing behaviours. This is definitely my highlight of the year, and I’m so pleased we were part of this process. We created a television studio at our HQ for webinars, video training and online meetings. Selected by Aric Chen, curatorial director of Design Miami We’re living in a time that’s increasingly defined by crises – something that even Design Miami can’t ignore. This month’s fair themes were Earth, water, and shifting notions of America. But Design Emergency tries to offer solutions. This initiative, created by design writer Alice Rawsthorn and Paola Antonelli, director of research and development at MoMA, started as a series of Instagram Live conversations looking for emergency design solutions and problem solving during the early days of Covid. Now it’s a bank of ideas for how designers can help in a post-pandemic world. With this platform, Antonelli and Rawsthorn have perhaps more than anyone tackled the panoply of catastrophes confronting us, giving designers the means to fight back. Selected by Lodes design curator Luca Nichetto One thing that I have appreciated this year is how creatives in the industry are striving to inspire a new mindset towards design. So many of the design and fashion brands have a clearer message about their creations. This is particularly evident in Virgil Abloh’s new collection for Louis Vuitton, Jaime Hayon’s Serious Fun installation at Daelim Museum, Seoul, and the debut make-up collection by Byredo founder Ben Gorham. The industry is shifting towards uniqueness, with less and less homology across all disciplines.