Dane Hurst was learning to dance in “a ramshackle, termite-infested” school in Port Elizabeth, South Africa, when he first heard about a dance company in the north of England where an older classmate had escaped the poverty of their neighbourhood to make a new life. Now, just over two decades later, Hurst has been announced as the new artistic director of that very company, Phoenix Dance Theatre. “I’m definitely humbled and honoured to take up this post,” says the 36-year-old. “I know how incredibly life-changing dance can be.” Hurst came to the UK to train at the age of 18, on a scholarship founded by Nelson Mandela and former ballerina Anya Sainsbury. He soon made his mark as a gifted, arresting, award-winning dancer with the Rambert company and others (including a short stint with Phoenix in his 20s) and, more recently, as a choreographer in his own right. Phoenix’s own story is part of what inspired Hurst to want to lead the company. It was founded in 1981 by David Hamilton, Donald Edwards and Vilmore James, three young black men in the Harehills area of Leeds who had learned dance at school. “Look at how it started,” says Hurst. “Three guys just said: we’re going to make a company. They planted a seed and it required a lot of work. I think what drives me is that spirit, of dreaming, of imagining possibilities, the drive to create something that will have an impact on someone.” Phoenix has been through many iterations and seven directors in its nearly 40-year history and Hurst isn’t planning a wholesale reinvention. He thinks his predecessor, Sharon Watson, has left a strong legacy in works such as Windrush: Movement of the People and Black Waters, both addressing Britain’s colonial history. “I hope to propose more works that have this kind of socio-political consciousness,” says Hurst. “But also to commission works that push the performing arts forward in its aesthetics. And I think it’s important to bring the audience along on the journey. The company exists because of the audience, it’s providing a service to the people, so the work needs to reflect the stories of the people and I hope to continue in that.” He sings the praises of Leeds – “There’s so much culture here” – and hopes to build on Phoenix’s relationship with Opera North and collaborate with Northern Ballet, who share the same building. But he’s also looking abroad and hopes to expand international collaborations and touring. “I’m very much interested in the idea of creating something to connect different cultures to tell stories.” In 2016, Hurst set up Moving Assembly Project (MAP), encouraging cross-cultural collaborations and taking UK artists out to South Africa to run dance and other creative arts workshops with young people. He’s very committed to education. “The only way you can get representation, seeing more people of colour on stage, is if everybody has the opportunity to study without social or economic barriers, if dance is accessible to all.” MAP will continue but Hurst is going to have his hands full in Leeds, with 40th-anniversary plans to juggle alongside projects postponed from this year. Phoenix is in “rude health” he says and has ridden out the coronavirus crisis so far with sound management, but Hurst admits challenging times may be ahead if funding is diminished. The immediate future is uncertain. “I think even up until the summer there’ll be very few performances,” he says. “If the theatres remain shut, we’ll have to find other ways, whether it’s through film, outdoor performances, collaborations with visual artists … we just have to keep making, keep moving, because it brings people together.” Will Hurst himself keep moving? He’s as compelling a dancer as ever but he admits “dancing is for the young body”. Last year he broke a rib on stage during the piece Falling Man. “It was only 10 minutes into the show but it was the only night the critics were there and I had to continue,” he says. “I thought that was it for me. The bone had completely come away from the cartilage and they said that doesn’t really heal.” The rib did heal, “miraculously”, but it shifted Hurst’s mindset towards life post-dance. Might he get back on stage in Leeds? “I don’t see myself performing initially,” he says, “because my focus will be on getting the most out of the dancers and creating some of my own works. And to stay in shape,” he adds, “that’s a full-time business. But I would absolutely love to have a cameo.”