There is a Pied Piper quality to the world’s most famous performance artist Marina Abramović. She holds audiences spellbound and seems to deliver some purgative transformational electricity. I can’t feel it myself and was constantly itching to switch over throughout her heroically egotistical “takeover” of Sky Arts. I refocused, though, when a participant offered a couple of surprising comparisons. “Mussolini was a performance artist,” said artist Franko B in a documentary segment of the long, long evening, adding: “Hitler was a performance artist”. There was no comeback to this apparent acclaim for the Great Dictators. All we got by way of contextualisation was a clip of Hitler speaking. The vacancy of this uncritical reference to mass murderers was a lowlight of a show that made it look as if performance art, once a genuinely radical avant garde movement, has become an airheaded and emptily populist genre. If you are at all suspicious of Abramović’s cult of spiritual and personal “energy”, this evening of assorted performance, interviews, clips and staring won’t have changed your mind. On the other hand if you’re a fan, you may be out in the park right now taking her advice to share your pain with the trees, and not reading this. Even if you agree with Jarvis Cocker and the Tate boss, Maria Balshaw, that she is one of the greatest artists alive, this was not a great use of her gifts. They and Franko B were among the relentlessly affirmative interviewees in a section that told us why performance art is SO important. There was no critical distance, with one enthusiast repeatedly calling Abramović’s performances “astonishing” until he seemed to break down. Yet it was all quite defensive, with touchy dismissals of the “cliches” you get about performance art in the “mainstream media”. Like the idea that it’s some kind of cult in which people are duped by a seductive authority figure into sorting rice for hours for their inner good. Sorting lentils from rice was one of the exercises in the “Abramović method”, a personal arcanum the artist shared with Cocker and members of the general public. When the common people were chucked out at the end, Jarvis stayed behind for a chat with Marina. This elitism seemed to contradict the idea of performance art being a great democratic liberation. The truly visionary German artist Joseph Beuys, whose 1965 live performance in which he explained art to a dead hare Abramović admires, used to say “everyone is an artist”. That openness was strangely lacking from this Abramović-fest. There was never any doubt that she’s the Artist, imparting her unique vision to lucky acolytes. When did performance art become a New Age religion? And so to the tree-hugging. Abramović exhorted a group of volunteers not just to embrace a tree they felt a connection with, but to tell it their complaints. These confessions were filmed. Small and big personal gripes about mothers, sisters and the whole world were aired in a way that perhaps – as everyone testified – cleansed their souls, but as TV viewing was embarrassing, boring and oddly reminiscent of more low-brow fare. When she actually did her staring – straight out of the screen, for up to half an hour at a time – it was unnerving. Andy Warhol did all this long ago, and better, because he loved television. He had his own MTV show in which he would casually chat with friends such as Debbie Harry. Was it art or television? There was no need to decide. Abramović, however, comes from a European avant garde tradition that looks down on mass media. When she created her classic works in the 1970s, letting people aim arrows or loaded guns at her, she was seeking an intensity that defied pop banality. “You had to be there,” says one of her art world champions. This gives the early history of performance art an elusive, legendary quality. It breeds cult fame and cult secrets. As we know these works only from the photos and clips, of which some fine ones were shown, we tend to believe the legend. But in more than five hours of TV, the myth of Marina Abramović was sorely tested. When she actually did her art by staring, for up to half an hour at a time, straight out of the screen, it was unnerving. Certainly a lot better than artist Miles Greenberg sitting in a tank with moths, which scare him, apparently. It was hard to see how this was more profound than watching celebrities eat bugs in a Welsh castle. Five hours or so of Abramović staring straight at camera with no comment might have been “astonishing”. As it was, the Artist and her fans seemed to have no idea how much ammunition they were giving sceptics and satirists. “This is not normal TV”, declaimed the Artist more than once, but in some ways it was very ordinary TV indeed.