There have been more than 50 calls for help overnight to the New South Wales State Emergency Service as wild weather pummels the north of the state and parts of south-east Queensland. The Bureau of Meteorology is warning that wild weather in northern NSW this week will bring heavy rain, damaging winds, flooding as well as dangerous surf conditions. The SES says more than 700 calls for help have been made since Friday – 57 overnight – while a severe weather warning for very heavy rainfall is current for the northern rivers area. More SES personnel have been sent to the affected area to help after volunteers performed five flood rescues at the weekend in Tweed Heads and Byron Bay. The SES said heavy rainfall over Leycester Creek and the Wilsons River at Lismore was likely to reach the minor flood level (4.20 metres) about midday on Monday, with roads and low-lying farm land and rural properties most likely to be inundated with flood waters. Further rises to the minor flood levels were possible at Billinudgel and Mullumbimby, with minor flooding expected along Marshalls Creek and the Brunswick River. During Monday and Tuesday, minor to moderate flooding is possible along the Bellinger River at Thora and Bellingen. This will result in low-lying areas being impacted by flood waters along the Bellinger River, possibly impacting on the communities of Darkwood, Thora, Bellingen, Repton, Mylestom and surrounding areas. The Tweed River at Tumbulgum was likely to reach the minor flood level (1.40 metres) on Monday with the high tide. The SES said the flood situation was being monitored and revised warnings would be issued should the situation change. People in areas likely to be impacted by flooding should refrain from driving or walking through flood water, take note of road closures and monitor emergency warnings and severe weather updates. The BoM said thunderstorms could lead to the possibility of very heavy rainfall and dangerous flash flooding. “At this stage, the widespread heavy rainfall is expected to ease late Tuesday or early Wednesday,” the BoM said. “Thunderstorms may still produce localised heavy falls that may lead to flash flooding during Wednesday.” The BoM also warned damaging winds averaging 60km/h to 70km/h were likely along NSW’s coastal fringe from Yamba to as far south as Crescent Head on Monday. Waves possibly exceeding 5 metres in the surf zone could also be expected from Yamba to Port Macquarie. Communities in flood-prone areas spent Sunday sandbagging low-lying areas and preparing properties. Meanwhile, a surface trough was expected to deepen off the south-east Queensland coast on either Sunday night or Monday morning, the BoM said. A low pressure system was likely to form along this trough and approach the coast. The BoM said damaging winds, heavy rainfall, abnormally high tides and damaging surf could be expected in the Gold Coast, Brisbane, Moreton Island, North Stradbroke Island, Sunshine Coast, Fraser Island, Caboolture, Cleveland, Redcliffe, Jimboomba, Beaudesert and Springbrook. In Western Australia, a flood warning was in place for the De Grey River catchment after a tropical low dumped heavy rain from the Pilbara to the border with South Australia. The system crossed the coast near Port Hedland on Friday and it started bucketing down as the weather system moved south-east towards the Goldfields. A flood warning was issued on Sunday night for residents in the Fortescue River catchment. Warnings were also issued for the Sandy Desert, Warburton district and salt lakes district rivers.