As case numbers linked to a cluster in the northern beaches in Sydney continue to rise, new restrictions are now in place across the city. These are the latest restrictions announced by the NSW government. Household gatherings will be limited to 10 visitors (until 11.59pm Wednesday 23 December). The one person per four square metre rule will be reintroduced for all indoor settings including hospitality venues and places of worship. A cap of 300 people will apply for hospitality venues and places of worship. Singing and chanting at indoor venues will not be allowed. Dancefloors will not be permitted, except for weddings, when a maximum of 20 from the bridal party will be permitted. People in the greater Sydney area and the Central Coast, Illawarra-Shoalhaven, and Nepean Blue Mountains, are also asked not to visit aged care facilities until 11.59pm on Wednesday 23 December, unless it is critical. A stay-at-home advisory was issued on 17 December for the northern beaches local government area. A public health order will remain in effect until 11.59pm on Wednesday (subject to health advice). The order requires local residents or people in short-term accommodation (such as hotels or rental accommodation) to stay at home. People are also not permitted to enter the northern beaches LGA without a lawful reason. Hospitality venues and function centres will close for the duration of the order, with the exception of takeaway from hospitality venues. Gyms and places of worship will also close. A resident of the northern beaches may not participate in a public gathering involving more than two people, unless for permitted reasons such as attending work. Other exemptions to the two-person rule are listed in the order, and include gatherings involving family. Acceptable reasons for leaving home include: shopping for food and other essential goods and services, travel for work purposes if working from home is not possible, travel to or from a school or educational institution, exercise, medical care, carer’s responsibilities or compassionate needs. Other acceptable reasons for leaving home include accessing childcare, providing care or emergency assistance and to escape a risk of harm. A full list of requirements under different circumstances can be found in the order. Source: NSW Health