Ole Gunnar Solskjær has said Manchester United are desperate to win the Carabao Cup, with the manager stating his players are hungry to learn how to win trophies. United are at Everton for their quarter-final on Wednesday, Solskjær having yet to guide the team to a trophy after two years in charge. Last season United lost in the Carabao Cup, FA Cup and Europa League semi-finals. When asked about the importance of claiming a first trophy Solskjær referenced his playing career at United and his former teammates Patrice Evra and Nemanja Vidic. “Yes, of course it’s something we’re aiming for,” the manager said. “I remember myself winning my first trophy [and] even towards the end of my career Patrice Evra and Nemanja Vidic’s first [Manchester United] trophy in the Carling Cup – 2006 [when United defeated Wigan 4-0 in the final in Cardiff]. “That was their first trophy and it does give something to a team. We are desperate to get our hands on a trophy; these players are desperate to learn how to win. “We want to improve every season and to improve on last year is to get to the final and, of course, when you get to the final there’s only one thing that matters and that’s to lift the trophy.” Several members of the United squad, including Marcus Rashford, Paul Pogba and David de Gea – have won trophies with United. Another player to have done so, Jesse Lingard, will be in the squad to face Everton, Solskjær said. The forward has been unavailable at times because of circumstances beyond his control regarding Covid-19. His most recent appearance was in September. “He’s been working hard in training [having] been unfortunate with having to isolate a few times – been in contact, or close contact, with Covid, not even having it himself,” Solskjær said. “He’s been very unlucky being away from the training ground a few times. He works really hard and he’ll be involved in the squad, definitely, on Wednesday.” Mason Greenwood, an unused substitute in the 6-2 win against Leeds on Sunday, should also make the trip to Goodison Park, where United won 3-1 in the league last month.