Britain and the EU have taken a step forward towards striking a historic trade and security deal after a breakthrough in a telephone call between Boris Johnson and Ursula von der Leyen offered grounds for fresh talks. In a joint statement on Sunday, the prime minister and European commission president said the two sides had a responsibility to keep on working, with sources claiming progress was being made. The leaders said: “We had a useful phone call this morning. We discussed the major unresolved topics. “Our negotiating teams have been working day and night over recent days. And despite the exhaustion after almost a year of negotiations, despite the fact that deadlines have been missed over and over we think it is responsible at this point to go the extra mile. “We have accordingly mandated our negotiators to continue the talks and to see whether an agreement can even at this late stage be reached.” The crunch call, described as “constructive” by Von der Leyen, appears to put the troubled talks on a new trajectory, days after the prime minister had said it was “very, very likely” the UK would exit the transition period without an agreement. Sources said the two sides had found fresh agreement over clauses in a potential deal designed to ensure neither side could undercut the other as they set their own regulatory standards. The negotiations between the teams led by the UK’s chief negotiator, David Frost, and his EU counterpart, Michel Barnier, had run until midnight on Saturday and resumed on Sunday at 9am in Brussels. There were early signs on Sunday morning that negotiators had moved together on the issues of fair competition and EU access to British fishing waters but Downing Street insisted that all was “hinging” on the phone call at noon Brussels time. Speaking after talking with the British team in Brussels, Raab said that for all the creativity of the negotiators in the Belgian capital, the negotiation would live or die depending on the outcome of the leaders’ conversation. “I called in to check in with our team in Brussels, they’ve worked incredibly hard. You remember, the prime minister made it made clear we want to leave no stone unturned,” Raab told Sky’s Sophie Ridge on Sunday. “So we’ve been at it very hard at work at a technical everything with all the usual jostling of positions, but what really matters is what the EU is willing at a political level to commit too.” Von der Leyen and Johnson had agreed during a three-hour dinner on Wednesday evening that a “firm decision” would need to be made by the end of the weekend on whether there was any hope of a deal. But both sides had also said they would be willing to talk for a few more days if a final breakthrough could be achieved. After 47 years and 30 days it was all over. As the clock struck 11pm on 31 January 2020, the UK was officially divorced from the EU and began trying to carve out a new global role as a sovereign nation. It was a union that got off to a tricky start and continued to be marked by the UK’s sometimes conflicted relationship with its neighbours. The French president, Charles de Gaulle, vetoes Britain’s entry to EEC, accusing the UK of a “deep-seated hostility” towards the European project. With Sir Edward Heath having signed the accession treaty the previous year, the UK enters the EEC in an official ceremony complete with a torch-lit rally, dickie-bowed officials and a procession of political leaders, including former prime ministers Harold Macmillan and Alec Douglas-Home. The UK decides to stay in the common market after 67% voted "yes". Margaret Thatcher, later to be leader of the Conservative party, campaigned to remain. Margaret Thatcher negotiated what became known as the UK rebate with other EU members after the "iron lady" marched into the former French royal palace at Fontainebleau to demand “our own money back” claiming for every £2 contributed we get only £1 back” despite being one of the “three poorer” members of the community. It was a move that sowed the seeds of Tory Euroscepticism that was to later cause the Brexit schism in the party. Thatcher served notice on the EU community in a defining moment in EU politics in which she questioned the expansionist plans of Jacques Delors, who had remarked that 80% of all decisions on economic and social policy would be made by the European Community within 10 years with a European government in “embryo”. That was a bridge too far for Thatcher. Collapse of Berlin wall and fall of communism in eastern Europe, which would later lead to expansion of EU. Divisions between the UK and the EU deepened with Thatcher telling the Commons in an infamous speech it was ‘no, no, no’ to what she saw as Delors’ continued power grab. Rupert Murdoch’s Sun newspaper ratchets up its opposition to Europe with a two-fingered “Up yours Delors” front page. A collapse in the pound forced prime minister John Major and the then chancellor Norman Lamont to pull the UK out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism. On 1 January, customs checks and duties were removed across the bloc. Thatcher hailed the vision of “a single market without barriers – visible or invisible – giving you direct and unhindered access to the purchasing power of over 300 million of the world’s wealthiest and most prosperous people". Tory rebels vote against the treaty that paved the way for the creation of the European Union. John Major won the vote the following day in a pyrrhic victory. Tony Blair patches up the relationship. Signs up to social charter and workers' rights. Nigel Farage elected an MEP and immediately goes on the offensive in Brussels. “Our interests are best served by not being a member of this club,” he said in his maiden speech. “The level playing field is about as level as the decks of the Titanic after it hit an iceberg.” Chancellor Gordon Brown decides the UK will not join the euro. EU enlarges to to include eight countries of the former eastern bloc including Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic. EU expands again, allowing Romania and Bulgaria into the club. Anti-immigration hysteria seems to take hold with references to “cockroches” by Katie Hopkins in the Sun and tabloid headlines such as “How many more can we take?” and “Calais crisis: send in the dogs”. David Cameron returns from Brussels with an EU reform package - but it isn't enough to appease the Eurosceptic wing of his own party The UK votes to leave the European Union, triggering David Cameron's resignation and paving the way for Theresa May to become prime minister After years of parliamentary impasse during Theresa May's attempt to get a deal agreed, the UK leaves the EU. During his TV appearances Raab had set out how the UK government saw the pathway for a successful outcome. He said: “We want to be treated like any other independent self respecting democracy. If you can accept that at a political level, then there’s every reason to be confident, but there is still I think a long way to go … “The technical tools matter, getting creative solutions, understand the job positions really matters, but what ultimately is required, this 11th hour of negotiation is moving the political logjam, that can only happen at the level of the prime minister and commissioner Von der Leyen.” The biggest stumbling block to a deal has been the EU’s demand for an “evolution” or “ratchet” clause in the treaty that would create a mechanism to ensure that a minimum base-line of environmental, social and labour standards evolves over time, to ensure there is no significant distortion of trade. Downing Street has claimed the EU’s proposals would tie the UK to follow regulatory changes in Brussels on pain of automatic tariffs. Arbitration over those tariffs would only then follow. On Friday, the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, said this was not the latest proposal but that for zero tariff access to the European market, the EU needed some reassurances that if one side deviated significantly on standards on some products that there would be a structured conversation about addressing distortions to trade. Rabb said: “Mark Rutte is on voice, he is normally pretty pragmatic, we are normally quite close to the Dutch on these matters … “There are plenty of other voices. The bottom line is this: are we required to follow EU rules past present future and do we have a situation where when we are exercising normal control over our own law as any democracy does that we suddenly find there is a torpedo of tariffs.” It is understood the EU has now agreed that tariffs should only be applied once there is clear evidence that regulatory changes by one side has significantly distorted trade. Ireland’s Taoiseach Micheal Martin said the recent agreement on implementing the Northern Ireland protocol last week showed that the two sides could reach accommodation on difficult issues. “I think it would be an appalling failure of statecraft if we were not in a position to get a deal over the line,” he said. “It is vital that we do not have an acrimonious break-up because that would be very damaging.” Martin said he believed accommodation could be reached on the level playing field differences. “A resolution mechanism to resolve any future disputes is one that both sides, with a bit of creativity, can sign up to,” he said. “Ninety-seven percent of this deal has been negotiated. The remaining 3% should not be beyond the capacity of both sides to bridge.” Shadow business secretary Ed Miliband had said a no-deal Brexit would be “a disastrous outcome for the country” and said that it made no sense to accept tariffs across the board because of some theoretical future threat linked to standards. “That is like saying I’m worried that my roof is going to leak in five years’ time, so let’s bulldoze the house now,” he said. Asked if Labour would vote for a deal if it were achieved, Miliband said his party had said “we’re minded to support it.”