What were you hoping for?Exhilarating beauty and memorable energy. First impressions?Bingo. What did you talk about?Beloved news outlet the Guardian, public schools, wine (we know nothing), the rest of the clientele, energy, olive farms, A&E, Martin Amis. Any awkward moments?I told the waiter that he had ruined salad for ever, since the one he gave me was so good. He thought I was just accusing him of ruining the salad. Good table manners?We were both clumsy, but the only person to spill a whole glass – sherry – was me. Best thing about Chloe?Tall, funny, attracted to me. Would you introduce her to your friends?She has already met the waiter. Describe Chloe in three words?Spicy healthcare professional. What do you think she made of you?Young gun. Did you go on somewhere?Of course. And... did you kiss?Enthusiastically. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I quite fancied the glass of sherry I spilled. Still thinking about it. Marks out of 10?10. Would you meet again?I’m game for anything. What were you hoping for?Laughter and attraction in equal measures. First impressions?Intimidation. He was reading Ovid. What did you talk about?Nationality envy, climate doom, energy, expat life, poker, cougar logistics, what was free on the menu. Any awkward moments?My disbelief when I realised that the Guardian had set me up with a 24-year-old. Good table manners?I was pleased he is as clumsy as me. I think we spilt more wine than we drank. Best thing about Henry?He is generous with his laughter, which is louder than mine. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes. I know he would hold his own. Describe Henry in three words?Confident, charming, charismatic. What do you think he made of you?According to his follow-up text, “very attractive and an excellent kisser”. Did you go on somewhere?A quick drink before rushing for the last tube. And... did you kiss?No comment. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Nothing. I had a great night. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again?We have exchanged numbers, but I think likely only to meet for book club. • Chloe and Henry ate at Quo Vadis London W1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like‑minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com