There are few occasions with hard-and-fast dress codes these days. You would think this would make the business of what to wear easier, but in fact it makes it tougher. It’s all very well, in principle, being free to do your own thing, go your own way, choose your own path, etc. But sometimes it would be quite helpful to have guard rails to hang on to when you are at risk of falling flat on your face and making an idiot of yourself in public, you know? So I’m introducing a new dress code, which we can call glasual. Meaning, obviously, glamorous but casual. Glasual is completely different from smart casual, in case you were wondering. Smart casual is about bringing a dash of formality to a casual look. Glasual is about bringing a dash of extra fun, added energy, instead. Smart casual is serving up a vodka tonic with a neat slice of lime and a linen napkin on the side. Glasual is adding an extra slosh of vodka. Glasual is the jazz-hands of the dress code scene. It’s about clothes that bring a bit of joy. These are clothes to wear because you are seeing your friends and your friends are brilliant. Or because you’re going to work, but it’s Friday. Because you are excited to be going to a party. Or because you would actually really rather stay home but you’ve promised you’ll go, and dressing up will help you get in the party mood. It is not about fitting in with any formal rules; it’s about bringing a vibe. You can glasual however you like. Start with a wardrobe template you feel comfortable in (whether that’s jeans and a top, or a dress) and add something extra. The shirt I’m wearing here is an ancient J Crew buy, which has become one of my wardrobe get-out-of-jail-free cards, the piece I always pack because it can turn any number of outfits around. It is fancy, but it doesn’t take itself too seriously. Layered under a sweater, as here, or on its own under a simple blazer, it adds just the right amount of silliness. A fancy skirt is another good glasual option. If there’s a sequined, fringed or feathered skirt in your wardrobe, don’t file it away as eveningwear to be worn with a tuxedo at some hypothetical event: wear it out to lunch with a pristine T-shirt and loafers, or to the pub with a sweatshirt and ankle boots. Major earrings can make a white shirt glasual; a posh jacket can do the same for a pair of jeans. Think of it like hot sauce for your wardrobe: just a dash, and you’re good and spicy. • Jess wears red jumper, £59, cosstores.com. Shirt, Jess’s own. Skirt, £299, whistles.com. Mules, £159, kurtgeiger.com. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.