What were you hoping for?For it not to be the most awkward thing on the planet. First impressions?He’s attractive, with a good beard. What did you talk about?His experience of growing up in the Middle East, religion and the sense of comfort it brings, how the Victoria line is the best tube line. Any awkward moments?When I made a sweeping generalisation that men are terrible at asking questions, although Adam really wasn’t. Good table manners?Impeccable. Best thing about Adam?His inquisitiveness. He seemed like a very lovely person. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes. Describe Adam in three words?Attractive, friendly, funny. What do you think he made of you?Hopefully, that I was fun. Did you go on somewhere?No. I suggested we grab a drink but Adam had to get up early for work. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?It would have been good if Adam hadn’t had an early start. Marks out of 10?7.5. Would you meet again?We agreed that there was no romantic spark, but that we would grab a drink when this is published. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for ?A fun evening and a good story. Ideally food that wouldn’t end up all over me. I’m a horrendously messy eater. First impressions?Fantastic timing: she arrived at 8pm on the nose. What did you talk about?Homelessness, veganism, growing up with religion – it got fairly existential. Any awkward moments?None. Good table manners?Impeccable. Best thing about Helena?She made the whole Blind Date-on-Valentine’s Day thing very easy, despite the heart-shaped balloon hovering menacingly above us. Would you introduce her to your friends?Absolutely. Not sure there would be a lot in common, however. Describe Helena in three words?Driven, passionate, smart. What do you think she made of you?I have terrible self-perception, but maybe a bit nervous. Not sure if the lentils caked into my trousers were noticed. Did you go on somewhere?No. I could hear my 5.30am alarm for work calling. And... did you kiss?No, a hug as we departed to different trains. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?A romantic spark and a more eventful date to flesh out these questions! Marks out of 10?7. Would you meet again?Yes, as friends to compare the reviews when this comes out. • Helena and Adam ate at Beza, London SE17 Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like‑minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com