There are those who have dreamed their whole life of walking the red carpet. And then there are those whose first instinct is to be on an entirely different continent. On 7 January, The Great Hack – a Netflix film that shines a light on the murky world of Cambridge Analytica and its role in Trump and Brexit (and in which I play a small part) – is nominated for a Bafta for best documentary, and via a series of increasingly complicated emails cc-ed to a dozen or more people detailing car logistics and dietary requirements, it’s revealed that I’ve been invited to the ceremony. This is unfortunate as I have zero intention of going. “I’m afraid I’m out of the country,” I email back. “But have a wonderful time!” I’m thrilled for Jehane Noujaim and Karim Amer, the film-makers, but it’s their work, not mine, and anyone who has ever been to a British journalism award ceremony bears the scars. There’s only a certain number of times you can politely applaud a story about Barbara Windsor having Alzheimer’s as “scoop of the year” while eating unidentifiable brown matter in a pair of Spanx. From everything I’ve seen, the Baftas take the standard black tie nightmare to new levels: a 3pm start for a ceremony that begins at 7, with dinner not served until 10. And, anyway, I really am out of the country. “You have to come!” Karim yells down the phone at me. “We’re the underdogs. We’re the nerds who’ve got invited to the school prom.” The upshot of this is that merely hours after stepping off an 18-hour flight, I find myself exiting a people carrier outside the Royal Albert Hall wearing that classic combination of a panic-bought dress that doesn’t quite fit and shoes I can’t walk in. There are 11 of us from the film, including producers, executive producers and editors, as well as Brittany Kaiser, the ex-Cambridge Analytica employee who is the film’s complicated central character, and David Carroll, a New York professor who is its expert guide. It’s two days after Brexit. Donald Trump is president. The world is burning. And yet no one thinks to mention it In the film, Brittany conducts her first interview in a bikini in a pool in Thailand, and her Bafta outfit is similarly discreet: battery-operated and with what looks like an electrified jellyfish plastered to the front of it, teamed with an exploding yellow headband. She walks out ahead of us, like one of those flares the Taliban sends up to draw enemy fire, while David, next to me, laughs nervously. “Wow,” he says surveying the limos, the security flunkies, the massed ranks of the international press, “I really didn’t ever imagine I’d end up here!” “Don’t worry,” I reassure him. “Nobody gives a shit about us.” I feel the need to share my insights from a career spent on the fringes of the celebrity industrial complex, though I’m not entirely sure David welcomes these dispatches. You could be nominated for a Bafta and fall over on the red carpet, I tell him, and nobody would care as long as it’s a documentary. It’s unfortunate if slightly inevitable that I prove this point by tripping over a step and landing flat on my face, before being delicately hauled up like a heifer stumbling en route to the abattoir. But then the whole spectacle has more than a touch of the factory farm to it, though you wouldn’t treat a battery hen the way they do Taron Egerton: for a full 10 minutes before they announce best actor, a camera is trained on him, five inches from his face, waiting for the flinch, the twitch, the emotion as “Joaquin Phoenix” is announced the winner. After the camera crews, we face a wall of paparazzi, who couldn’t have less interest in us but who take our photo in case one of us accidentally sleeps with someone from Game of Thrones or is at some point in the future interestingly murdered. And then we make it through the doors. In fairness, the Royal Albert Hall, dressed for the occasion, is quite something. I’m almost prepared to admit that it is a little bit glamorous, but this is before the speeches begin. Slowly, it becomes apparent that this is going to be an exercise in world-class vapidity. As the world looks on, millionaire after millionaire takes to the stage and thanks their director, their mom, their producer, their wife who is also their muse, inspiration and lover. I start texting the group chat. “PLEASE DO NOT MAKE A SPEECH LIKE THIS. SAY SOMETHING.” It’s two days after Brexit. Donald Trump is president. The world is burning. And yet no one thinks to mention it. Given a platform to say anything, the most gorgeous, beautiful, creative, well-paid people in the world say nothing at all. It becomes increasingly unignorable that there is not a single fiction film nominated that has anything to do with anything; that engages in any way at all with the time that we’re living in. Pretty much everyone involved with The Great Hack has slogged their guts out because they believe in the urgency of telling this story, now. And we’re up against For Sama, the incredible story of the horrors of the Syrian war by Waad al-Kateab, a Syrian journalist who was trapped inside Aleppo. But the feature films feel like they could have been made at any time in the last 30 years. It doesn’t help that the Baftas reflect an industry that is almost overwhelmingly white and male, that the svengali who presided over that industry for at least two decades is currently on trial in New York for rape, and that the only category women can be sure to be nominated for are the ones for best actress. There’s a reason perhaps why the range of stories up for these awards is so narrow, so insular, so unengaged, though it takes Phoenix to finally burst the bubble of overwrought politeness and humble gratitude. He steps on to the stage and talks about feeling “shame” in accepting an award from an organisation that sends “a very clear message to people of colour that ‘you’re not welcome here’”. It matters because on the one hand the Baftas couldn’t feel more shallow, more superficial. But on the other, it couldn’t be more important. This is where commissions are secured, reputations are burnished, careers are made. And I have followed from a distance the obstacles that faced a film like The Great Hack. It was too “political”, the film-makers kept being told. In an industry where, in the US, Academy voters are overwhelmingly white, Republican and male, that was a problem. In November, we did an event in New York with Hillary Clinton where she talked movingly about how it was such “a difficult film for me to watch”. But Netflix, twitchy, banned press and film crews from the event. This was a country, Hillary said, which was still in denial, in a “state of disbelief” about what had happened. How Facebook had facilitated an attack on American democracy by a hostile foreign power. How it was at risk of exactly the same thing happening again in 2020. She was right: denial and ignorance. Even in the heart of America’s myth machine, Hollywood itself. When, finally, the moment comes, best documentary goes to For Sama. Waad is sitting five rows in front of us and she takes her young daughter up on stage and makes a heartfelt speech about Syria and it’s impossible to feel anything but solidarity. Not least because Syria is the extreme outcome of the world The Great Hack depicts: a terrible, awful, ongoing hell marked not just by bombs and death but propaganda, manipulation, foreign interference and apathy. These are stories that we have to tell better. This is what I learn at the Brexit-Baftas. It’s only when the creative genius of something like first world war drama 1917, winner of seven Baftas, is brought to bear on this dark world of online manipulation, populist politicians and platform surveillance that change will come. I’ve spent almost every day of the last three years thinking how to explain the complex story of what happened with data, with Facebook, with Brexit, with Trump, but it needs more than news. It needs stars and a soundtrack and a storyteller who can distil what happened into human terms. The story isn’t “political” – it’s epoch-threatening. Afterwards, at the dinner, where I discover even celebs get served unidentifiable brown matter, Karim grabs me and introduces me first to Hugh Grant and then Renée Zellweger who are both, he claims, fans of the film. On stage, Zellweger smiled sweetly and thanked a long list of people. Off stage, she drops the smile and talks urgently about Trump, America, 2020 and what can be done. “What can I do?” she keeps asking. “What can I do?” The celebs care – they’re just trapped inside a system that precludes these subjects being covered, it seems. Those who do put their heads above the parapet such as Hugh Grant, who for years has engaged in hand-to-hand combat with the tabloid press and Brexit and Boris Johnson, pay the price. “I’m not sure I can do any more,” he says. “I fear I’ve reached the end of the road.” At the Chiltern Firehouse, the scene of Netflix’s Bafta after-party, I find another casualty: Damian Collins, the Tory MP who oversaw parliament’s inquiry into disinformation and fake news as chair of the DCMS committee. A week ago, he got the boot. Collins doesn’t directly blame Johnson’s adviser Dominic Cummings, but of course it was him. Collins held Cummings in contempt of parliament and this was the latter’s revenge. Collins’s successor is Julian Knight. “He’s basically been given the job of smashing the BBC, hasn’t he?” I say. Collins doesn’t disagree. There’s some greater point to be made about how we’re discussing the breakup of the BBC at a party paid for by Netflix, one of the platforms whose business model has threatened its existence. But there’s another point that could be made too, that Netflix backed the story told in The Great Hack – even if it got nervous – and the BBC didn’t. It failed to understand and cover events – including the role of Dominic Cummings – that now threaten to tear it apart. It’s two days since Brexit and the world is on fire and at the Chiltern Firehouse we dance until dawn, breaking off only so that I can humiliate myself in front of Rihanna. She appears in front of us, an emissary from a world of power and influence whose Instagram page probably could change the world. “YOU HAVE TO TALK TO HER,” one of The Great Hack’s crew tells me. “She’s from Trinidad! You need to talk to her about what Cambridge Analytica did there!” For some unaccountable reason I listen to him and bound over. She looks at me and curls her lip. “I’m from BARBADOS,” she says. Oh well, you lose some and you lose some. Look at Brexit. But I’m convinced that we’re only at the start of telling the story of what happened. That The Great Hack was a first attempt, but it requires others. We are looking down the barrel of another compromised US election, Facebook still out of control, Russia on the ascendant, Europe weakened, Syria still in flames, Mark Zuckerberg a danger to democracies everywhere. If that’s not a story, you have to wonder what is. And why it’s not being told.