To each man his own hell, and here in Paris we found out what it looks and sounds like for the 15 men in the England starting team, 17 points down while the big brass band in the north stand bangs out the Can-Can and 70,000 French fans sing along. Fair to say that when that’s what is ringing in your ears at the Stade de France, the game is probably not working out quite the way you’d hoped it would. The band struck it up midway through the first half, right after France had scored their second try. England, at that point, were standing in a circle under their own posts, wondering which way led back into the match. They never did find out, despite Jonny May’s best efforts. By the time May got them back into the fight the French had stretched their lead out of sight. Up in the stands the statisticians were just beginning to thumb through the record books to find the last time England were held to nil in a Test, when May scored the first of his two startling, sparkling, solo tries, a real eff-you of a contribution that pulled England back to within 10 points. And for a time, in the final 15 minutes, everyone was wondering whether they really could do it. They couldn’t. In the end Owen Farrell settled for a last penalty and a losing bonus point. Which was about all they deserved. The first half was one of the worst 40 minutes of rugby they have played in a long while. Right up there, as it happens, with the one they played right before it, when South Africa blew them away 20-6 in the second half of the World Cup final. Whatever they’ve been doing in the three months between the two, it hasn’t made an awful lot of difference yet. Here, in their worst moments, England were listless and witless, sloppy, and slow footed. Before the match Eddie Jones made a great point of saying how brutal his team were going to be. The French didn’t much care for the way he was talking. “If they don’t like it, translate it better,” Jones said. Turns out they caught his gist just fine. Judging from the way their brick outhouse lock Bernard Le Roux set about his business he certainly seemed to have a pretty decent grasp of the nuances of it. England started hard. Le Roux, a one man wrecking crew, hit them back harder. He clattered back Manu Tuilagi, who had to go off soon after, and nobbled Courtney Lawes, who needed treatment too. Jones also promised England were going to give this young French team an education in Test rugby. Their defence coach, Shaun Edwards, seems to have taught them plenty of what they need to know in the past fortnight of intensive training. For an hour their defence was impeccable. So England’s opening blows bounced right off. The players seemed so surprised by this that the game was as good as over before they even began to recover from the shock. In that stretch they made too many telling mistakes. Like the missed tackles by Sam Underhill on Teddy Thomas, and Charlie Ewels on Antoine Dupont – France scored points off the back of both of them. It wasn’t much better when they had the ball, because they blew their own opportunities, too. George Furbank, who had a sparky game on his debut, spilled a fine pass from George Ford when he had the hint of an overlap in the French 22. Then, next time England were up there, they tried a driving maul from the lineout. When that stalled, Ford threw the ball wide again, to May this time, who was lining up solo against three French defenders. No surprise, he was turned over. The rapier wasn’t working for them any better than the cudgel. So they switched back again, and battered senselessly away at the French line at the start of the second half until they were turned over again. They desperately missed the ball-carrying of the two Vunipola brothers, Billy and Mako, men who could knock holes in the French defence, not least because of Jones’s decision to pick Curry to play No 8. They need him back on the flank, where he’s one of the very best in the world. At least there’s a fix for that. The other problem Jones has got is what to do at scrum-half. It wasn’t long ago, in the World Cup, that Ben Youngs was playing some of the best rugby of his life, but he was horribly shown up by Dupont here. Youngs is at an age where the end can come on surprisingly quickly, and he surely can’t afford too many more matches like this one. Test rugby moves on awfully fast these days – just ask Joe Schmidt – and right now, pretty much every other team in the world is pushing on with some radical changes, hiring new coaches, appointing new captains, blooding new players. England, and Jones, are going to need to prove they can keep up in front of them all. Because you know how it goes when the times are a changing – he who gets hurt will be he who has stalled.