One defendant in the Gezi park trial grimly predicted the expected results of Tuesday’s hearing would be the “funeral of civil society in Turkey”. But a surprise verdict led to applause and tears of joy as nine of the activists charged with terrorism offences for their alleged roles in organising the 2013 protests walked free from the Istanbul courthouse. The unexpected acquittals of nine of the 16 defendants – lawyers say not guilty verdicts for the seven others being tried in absentia are also expected if they return to the country – were a rare spot of good news in Turkey, where the judicial system has been hollowed out and weaponised against President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s opponents and critics. However, on Tuesday night the situation appeared to be defaulting to expectations, with the leading rights defender Osman Kavala detained on a new warrant hours after the court ordered his release – this time a charge of attempting to overthrow the constitutional order linked to the failed 2016 coup against Erdoğan’s government. Gezi itself has become a potent symbol of the troubles of modern Turkey. The peaceful demonstrations against bulldozing the rare green space in central Istanbul to build a shopping centre in 2013, which spiralled into nationwide protests, were met with a brutal crackdown. In hindsight, it was the first solid indication of Erdoğan’s increasing appetite for authoritarian measures and the scale of the democratic backsliding to come. Many of the president’s detractors had wondered on Tuesday why the court had ruled against the government in the high-profile case. The answer may not lie in Turkey, but in Syria. Turkey is increasingly bogged down in a military operation in Idlib, the last rebel-held province of its war-torn neighbour, where Ankara backs a handful of rebel groups. Russia, its major trade and defence partner, is so far failing to entertain Turkey’s efforts to reintroduce a ceasefire that would protect 3 million civilians who have nowhere left to go. Hundreds of thousands of Syrian families who have fled the regime and allied Russian bombing are camped out in freezing conditions, begging Turkish soldiers to open the closed border. In the face of indifference from Moscow, Ankara, now somewhat diplomatically isolated from its western allies, may be leveraging the fate of the Gezi 16 to once again court favour in Brussels and other western capitals. The Gezi trial has been closely watched by diplomats and human rights groups for years for clues over Turkey’s democratic trajectory. Noises from pro-government thinktanks, media and even the minister of defence, suggesting Turkey ask the EU and Nato for support in Idlib, have been growing louder in recent days. Tuesday’s ruling is a significant step towards restoring faith in the rule of law in Turkey. Yet the re-arrest of Kavala, the silence on the verdicts from government-loyal media outlets, and hundreds of other new arrests of suspects related to the failed 2016 coup, show how much more work there is to be done.