How does a political party lose its heartlands? The question tortures a devastated Labour movement. How it’s answered by the next great red hope will help decide whether Boris Johnson spends just five years at No 10 or many, many more. Whatever Westminster types may think, voters deserting the party that was once their home isn’t a one-off event that only happens way up the M1, in some faraway land where locals reminisce about Arthur Scargill as if he were a distant cousin. It is a process that can be replicated wherever a giant gulf opens up between voters and their representatives – and if politicians and pundits only look, a prize example of how a party can lose its people is happening right now in the capital. Make no mistake, if Labour loses the likes of Tottenham, then it really is finished Haringey in north London is not what lefty romantics mean by heartlands. Yet the council has been Labour-run almost since its creation. Of the area’s two parliamentary seats, Tottenham has kept the red flag flying for half a century. Lose the teary sentiment and the reality for Labour today is that its core voter is not always a white man in a factory town long since retired off an assembly line but as likely to be a black woman in the inner city who gets by on low-paid care work. Make no mistake, if Labour loses the likes of Tottenham, then it really is finished. Yet over the past few days the jarring din of a voter base pulling up anchor from its bed has been coming out of Tottenham politics, and it signals trouble for Labour. The thing about heartlands is you lose them over decades, but one day you wake up and your one-party statelet is gone. Just ask Dennis Skinner. The past fortnight has seen a chaotic council meeting in which the leader was drowned out by heckling from the gallery and a party meeting in which delegates and even cabinet councillors turned on the cabinet. Anyone familiar with Haringey knows these as the rough-and-ready terms of local political trade. But more unusual is the local MP, David Lammy, damning both the council and London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, from the Commons. Or a visiting Khan getting barraged with angry calls for action. Or a face-off between locals and a private firm in which the council is sprayed with abuse. The source of all this noise is an important hub for Latin American migrants – their indoor marketplace, their labour exchange, their community hall – a warren in Tottenham selling everything from steaks to a blow-dry. Called the Latin Village, these 60-odd stalls are run mainly by women, with children running about after school; on Saturday evenings salsa breaks out. In other words, it is magic. Were the Latin Village in Brooklyn, it would be a huge tourist attraction; over here the traders have been treated with contempt. It sits bang in the middle of a huge redevelopment. The giant landlord Grainger plans to rebuild the market and open a tower opposite with nearly 200 flats. This wasn’t designed for locals: not one unit here will be social housing, and the original plans envisaged a “Pasta Express” and “Coste Coffee”, as if that beat the Colombian coffee already on sale. Much of the site is held by the mayor’s Transport for London (TfL), while Haringey owns other bits and is the planning authority. The traders, together with other locals and activists, have had to fight both legally and politically for years to force the Labour council of one of the most multicultural parts of Europe to respect race relations laws and to build in protections for the market. Among those concessions was that non-English-speaking traders should have a market facilitator to speak for them to the market operator. The operator is called Market Asset Management, and is represented at Latin Village by the MAM director, Jonathan Owen. The facilitator appointed by landlord Grainger was, until the end of 2018, Jonathan Owen. So if traders wished to complain about Jonathan Owen, they had to go to Jonathan Owen. Neither Grainger nor Haringey saw anything wrong with this for years. After I and others noted his record of abuse, referring to market entrepreneurs as “bloody illegal immigrants”, the developer’s response was to remove him as facilitator – without installing a replacement. A couple of Fridays ago MAM sent in bailiffs to evict a trader, seemingly with no notice. The apparent claim was that the trader had not paid his rent; but a solicitor’s letter I have seen from last year complains on the trader’s behalf that MAM would not accept his rent payments, perhaps the better to kick him out (Owen did not respond to any of my questions). TfL and Haringey both confirm they knew about the eviction attempt days in advance, yet MAM went ahead and could have succeeded had it not been for local activists, Labour members and a few backbench councillors mobbing the market. This development was not authored by the current leadership of Haringey council. Indeed, early last decade some of them would complain to me about public land sold for a song. Luxury flats, not council houses. Now in office as the self-declared Corbyn council they defend it, as if Squealer and Snowball had learned municipal legalese. A few days before the attempted eviction, the council cabinet considered a scrutiny report on the market and its future. Researching the report, which documents numerous failures of governance, took a cross-party group of councillors over a year and a half; for the cabinet to vote down every one of its most substantive recommendations was the work of minutes. Even the suggestion that all sides get round a table and talk was vetoed. Yet Grainger confirmed to me it would be happy to meet and discuss the locals’ own community plan. It says all licensed traders are “guaranteed a place in the new, purpose-built market through our redevelopment”. Responsibility for this mess is batted back and forth between City Hall and the Civic Centre. The mayor refers to Haringey’s responsibilities, while the council leader, Joe Ejiofor, points out the crucial land is owned by TfL, chaired by none other than the mayor. Ping pong, ping pong! As Tottenham Labour delegates argued in a general committee motion last week castigating both Khan and Ejiofor, “the buck-passing over responsibility is having a devastating effect upon the traders”. That motion passed by a whopping 64 to 1. In parliament last week, Lammy cited a “very serious allegation of overcharging of traders for electricity and other utilities by the market operator – allegations that might amount to fraud and which ought to require police involvement”. These comments are dismissed by Owen as “regrettably ill-informed” but TfL says it will contact him about the allegations. Senior councillors, even those supportive of the leader, can see how this is hurting Labour. “Just like the general election, we’re not listening to our own voters,” says one. Others predict that Ejiofor has only a few months left in charge – “he is so hated for the Latin Village” – which would make him the second Haringey leader in a row to be brought down by a regeneration scandal. The irony is that Ejiofor has done some good, saving a nursing home from closure, putting staff on the London living wage, and cutting council tax for those most in need. But the credit he deserves for that has been lost in the noise over this: a borough vowing to build council homes aiding a huge project that will put up none. An administration pledging to protect small businesses but letting them face abuse and summary evictions. A leadership that talks of community wealth-building while bending over backwards for a giant developer. How does a political party lose its heartlands? Through broken promises and stinking hypocrisy, and finally for appearing to sit in opposition to its own voters. • Aditya Chakrabortty is a Guardian columnist