Having been given the keys to the Old Trafford transfer kitty by Ed Woodward, Ole Gunnar Solskjær appears to be desperate to empty it this summer. Depending on where you consume your transfer guff, the Manchester United manager is planning to pump £160m into the Midlands economy with a double swoop for Aston Villa’s Jack Grealish and Leicester’s James Maddison. That’s an overload of English attacking midfield pizzazz, right? Wrong. Because other sources suggest Jadon Sancho is also on the United shortlist, with a bid of £120m expected to prise the tricky 19-year-old former Manchester City player away from Dortmund. He’ll have competition from Chelsea for Sancho, with Frank Lampard determined to finally sign a real-life actual player after watching recent windows pass him by. Oh, and Lyon’s Moussa Dembélé is another player linked with a big-money move to United, too. The Ligue 1 club would want around £80m for the whizzy forward who has rammed home 15 goals in 32 games. Tottenham have slipped on their running shoes and joined the race to sign Nathan Aké from Bournemouth. The centre-back has been a target for Chelsea ever since they flogged him to the Cherries for £20m in 2017 and they are expected to activate a £40m buyback clause in the summer transfer window. So Daniel Levy may beed to dig a little deeper into his pockets to redirect the Dutch defender towards north London. Another more likely option for Spurs is Dayot Upamecano, whose name is almost as Strong as his defending. The Leipzig centre-back was supreme in the 0-0 draw at Bayern Munich and José Mourinho was there in person to watch the Frenchman keep Robert Lewandowski safely tucked in his pocket all evening. Arsenal are keeping tabs on the Ajax forward Hakim Ziyech. Chelsea had a bid turned down for the Morocco international in January but that isn’t putting the Gunners off. And in a rumour that sounds suspiciously like something we would have published when Arsène Wenger was still Lord of Highbury, Arsenal are also keen to sign the French 21-year-old midfielder Pape Gueye, who plays for Ligue 2 side Le Havre. Elsewhere, Liverpool like the cut of Carlos Vinicius’s jib and may throw a bid in for the 24-year-old Benfica striker when the summer window opens, while Aston Villa may stuff £15m into the Crystal Palace coffers for their Norwegian big man up top, Alexander Sorloth. The 24-year-old is currently out on loan at Trabzonspor, where he is scoring goals for fun.