The Guardian’s Marina Hyde has won two SJA British Sports Journalism Awards, becoming the first woman to be named sports writer of the year in the awards’ 43-year history. Hyde also won sports columnist of the year, with her Guardian colleague, Jonathan Liew, collecting the silver award. Barney Ronay was also a winner at Monday’s ceremony, as he was named football journalist of the year. Hyde’s historic accolades came for her work on the Women’s World Cup, Tiger Woods’ redemption and revenge at the Masters, Theresa May’s decision to knight Geoffrey Boycott, among her regular contributions to the Guardian’s sport pages. Ronay, the Guardian’s chief sports writer, was honoured for his reporting on, among other topics, Liverpool’s comeback against Barcelona, sportswashing in European football and the racist abuse suffered by England players in Bulgaria. There were also silver awards for Donald McRae (sports feature writer), David Conn (sports news reporter) and the Guardian sport website. Tumaini Carayol was nominated in the specialist correspondent category, and Suzanne Wrack was on the shortlist for best football journalist. Guardian cricket writers Ali Martin and Andy Bull won bronze awards, with Martin recognised in the sports scoop category for his report on Alex Hales’ ban for recreational drug use. The Times’ Mike Atherton, winner of the cricket journalist award, paid tribute to his colleague Steve James, whose daughter died unexpectedly a few weeks ago. On a hugely successful night for female journalists, the Times’ Alyson Rudd was named best sports feature writer and CNN’s Christina Macfarlane won broadcast journalist of the year. The Daily Mail’s Laura Lambert won the sports news reporter prize and shared the sports scoop award with Matt Lawton for their work on Saracens’ Premiership salary cap breaches. The central London event was hosted by Jim Rosenthal, who was presented with the Doug Gardner Award for services to sports journalism – the final award of the evening.