Melbourne is surrounded by a huge range of wonderful walks, from easy strolls and hikes suitable for families, right through to challenging full-day adventures. The recent bushfires have kept people indoors and away from bushlands, but many areas were unaffected, and regional Victoria is crying out for visitors to help restart local economies. Just check with Parks Victoria before you go and avoid any walks in bushfire-affected areas, as tracks can be damaged and walking in them can further harm fragile ecologies trying to recover. As well as avoiding walking on days of total fire ban, walking in summer can mean early starts to make the most of cooler mornings, choosing shady walks and those near water, and carrying plenty of water. Here’s a small selection of some of our favourites, from urban Melbourne to further afield. (Easy – 4.5km circuit) This is an interesting child and dog-friendly walk for the whole family, just 4km from the city centre. It takes in Melbourne’s historic boathouses, surprising inner-city bushlands, Dights Falls, the slow winding bends of the Yarra River, Abbotsford Convent and Collingwood Children’s Farm. It’s also a great opportunity to see and hear Victoria’s musical bellbirds. Start and finish at Studley Park Boathouse. Thirty minutes by train from central Melbourne. (Medium/hard – 7km circuit) A place of historical importance, the Kokoda memorial walk is dedicated to Australian military forces who fought and died on the Kokoda Track in Papua New Guinea during the second world war. The steep section of 1,000 steps is often targeted by fitness fanatics and is a good challenge, but it deserves respect and it’s worth pausing to read the plaques and view the memorials along the way. This circular route also proceeds to a picnic area, One Tree Hill, then continues through a quieter section of native forest. One hour’s drive from Melbourne CBD or similar by train from Flinders Street station. (Medium – 2.5km circuit) This tiny park, hidden in plain sight just moments from Calder race track and Tullamarine airport, follows down into a peaceful river valley, carved deep into the flat lava plains to the west of Melbourne. It reveals an oasis and some spectacular lava formations – the circular Organ Pipes of its name – embedded on the river bank above Jackson Creek, along with a rare volcanic tessellated pavement. Short but spectacular, it is accessible to those with limited mobility by prior arrangement with Parks Victoria. One hour’s journey by train or 30 minute by car from CBD. (Easy/medium – 4.2km) This is a wonderful circuit walk around the summit of the You Yangs, offering 360 degree views from Melbourne, across Port Phillip Bay and out over the lava plains to the west. It gives an insight into Victoria’s Indigenous history with a rock shelter and traditional water collection points along the way, a view of the massive Bunjil rock sculpture, and opportunities to spot echidnas and wallabies. Start up at the Turntable car park and follow the well-signed bush path. Good footwear is recommended. There is also the option of doing the short side detour up the steps to the summit of Flinders Peak. The park is only open 8am to 6.30pm (daylight saving hours). One hour by car from central Melbourne. (Medium – series of achievable day walks over three to four days; 43km in total) Starting from Point Impossible near Torquay through to Fairhaven, this picturesque and accessible coastal walk can be broken up into a series of easy (some more moderate) day walks between popular coastal towns, and allows for stops at patrolled surf beaches along the way – perfect for summer, though there is little shade so an early start is ideal. One hour and 30 minutes from Melbourne by car. More information, directions and maps can be found at www.surfcoastwalk.com.au (Medium to difficult – 24km circuit) Wilsons Promontory, at the southernmost part of Australia’s mainland​, is one the country’s most popular national parks . It features over 80km of wilderness bushwalking trails, spectacular ​coastal scenery, abundant wildlife and isolated white-sand​ beaches. This is a superb circuit walk that takes in some of the Prom’s best views and remote beaches. It starts with a climb to Mount Oberon with 360 degree views then proceeds to Telegraph Track Junction through dense native forest before heading west towards the coast to explore beaches at Oberon Bay and Little Oberon Bay. The last section back to Tidal River traverses a scenic headland and Norman Beach. Three hours and 30 minutes from Melbourne by car. (Easy to medium – 6km circuit) Walhalla is a charming and historic mountain township located in a deep valley of Gippsland’s Baw Baw ranges. Between 1863 and 1914, the village was one of Australia’s richest gold areas, home to more than 3,000 people. At its peak Walhalla boasted 10 hotels, seven churches, a hospital, dance halls, sporting clubs, a school and over 50 shops. By 1914 the gold rush was over and the town was virtually abandoned. While most of the buildings and mining equipment were moved away or devoured by the bush, visitors can explore this quaint township and learn all about its history. Two hours and 20 minutes from Melbourne by car. (Medium – 27km one way) Ninety Mile Beach is a continuous narrow strip of pristine sand stretching north-east from the shallow inlets near Port Albert to the wide, open waterways of Lakes Entrance. The beach sits at the edge of the Gippsland Lakes, the largest inland water system in the southern hemisphere. This is one of the most natural, isolated and untouched beaches in the world and is popular for surf fishing, swimming, camping and long beach strolls. This walk covers an extensive section of beach between Seaspray and Golden Beach, however smaller walks can be done all along the shoreline. Three hours from Melbourne by car. (Medium – 8.5km circuit) The highest and most southerly point of Phillip Island, Cape Woolamai has stunning coastal views and panoramas of the island. It also has a large rookery of shearwaters (mutton birds). Wander along the famous surf beach and then along ancient pink granite clifftops. A series of walking trails and viewing platforms link up to make an interesting circuit and take walkers to breathtaking areas such as the Pinnacles, the Cape Woolamai Beacon and the old Granite Quarry. Two hours from Melbourne by car. (Hard – 9km circuit) This adventurous walk takes in many of the Grampians’ most spectacular sandstone sights, including Splitters Falls, the Grand Canyon, Silent Street and the Pinnacle, and is well worth the ups and downs to reach them. Keep well away from the cliff edges and start early to avoid crowds during the holiday season. The circuit starts and finishes opposite the shops in Halls Gap, where you can stock up on water and snacks. Three hours from Melbourne by car. • These walks are featured in Woodslane’s series Melbourne’s Best River, Bay & Lakeside Walks, Best Walks East of Melbourne and Best Walks of the Gariwerd-Grampians National Park (all RRP$24.99).