Malaysia’s 94-year-old prime minister, Mahathir Mohamad, has resigned amid a day of political drama during which he was accused of betraying a promise to hand over power to the country’s would-be leader, Anwar Ibrahim. The prime minister’s office said on Monday that Mahathir had sent a resignation letter to the king. It is unclear if the development will prompt elections in the country. The development follows reports that politicians from the ruling coalition held talks on Sunday at a hotel near Kuala Lumpur about a possible new alliance with members of the ousted former ruling party, the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), political sources said. The meetings prompted Anwar to accuse Mahathir ’s party and “traitors” in his own camp of plotting a wholesale change in the ruling coalition that could ultimately deny him the premiership. After being promised that he would one day become prime minister, Anwar allied with former rival Mahathir to win a surprise victory in the 2018 general election and end the six-decade grip of a party accused of widespread corruption. “We know there are attempts to bring down PH and form a new government,” Anwar said, referring to the Pakatan Harapan (Alliance of Hope) coalition that he helped form under Mahathir, who leads the Bersatu party. Anwar had said of the alleged plotters that: “It involves our former friends in Bersatu and a small faction of traitors from PKR.” Anwar’s PKR party is the biggest constituent of the current alliance, but it is beset by internal divisions. Mahathir had said in recent months that he needed more time for a planned transition, for which he has never set a date. Forming a new coalition would have allowed Mahathir to serve out a full term instead of handing over to Anwar as promised. Mahathir’s Bersatu party held a special meeting earlier on Sunday. Neither he nor the party commented on what had been discussed. t. Anwar served as deputy prime minister and finance minister during Mahathir’s first 22-year stint in office under UNMO, but was sacked in 1998 after falling out over how to defend the economy against the Asian financial crisis. Anwar was jailed twice on sodomy charges that he said were politically motivated. He was released on a royal pardon after the 2018 election. He is a member of parliament but does not hold a ministerial post. His wife is the country’s deputy prime minister.