The gambling industry’s annual trade show has come under fire from politicians over the use of scantily-clad models and racial stereotyping, despite a pledge by the event organiser to improve its image. Many of the exhibits at the ICE London event, an annual showcase for the global gambling industry held at London’s ExCel centre, were fronted by models in highly sexualised or revealing outfits. At least two exhibitors deployed white actors dressed in stereotypical East Asian or Egyptian costumes, promoting gambling products such as slot machines or touchscreen roulette. One firm showed off its partnership with Playboy at a stand fronted by women dressed in the distinctive “Bunny” outfits made famous by the 1960s Playboy clubs and casinos. It comes two years after the Guardian revealed that industry firms were defying a call by the UK Gambling Commission’s then chief executive, Sarah Harrison, to crack down on sexist imagery. Speaking in 2018, Harrison – who has since left the regulator – said the event was characterised by “men representing their companies wearing expensive tailored suits whilst their female colleagues were expected to wear nothing more than swimsuits.” Days after her comments, the Guardian revealed that guests at the 2018 event were entertained by pole dancers and a Playboy-themed show, and hostesses claiming to have been harassed and propositioned. The event’s organiser, Clarion Gaming, promised to take control of the issue to prevent a repeat, with chief executive Kate Chambers promising “cultural change”. While this year’s show does not feature a pole dancing display, many of the stands at the 2020 event are still using women in revealing costumes as display models, while business conversations primarily took place between men in suits. One company, Bulgaria’s EGT Gaming, also hired western actors dressed as stereotypes of Chinese or Egyptian people. Several models in catsuits spent most of the day posing for pictures with suit-clad men beside slot machines. Nearby, Czech firm Kajot had a stand where three models in leather catsuits with tails also posed for souvenir shots. Interblock, which makes automated casino table games, demonstrated a partnership with Playboy at a large booth where at least six women dressed as Playboy “bunnies” were available to pose for pictures with exhibition delegates. International gambling company FBM hired a woman dressed in what appeared to be traditional Japanese costume, including the white makeup often associated with geishas. The model was not Japanese. Some of the women told the Guardian they had been hired through modelling or acting agencies, the names of which they asked not to be disclosed for fear they would lose work. Labour MP Carolyn Harris said the use of scantily-clad women was “archaic and beyond disrespectful”. “Whilst these are overseas companies, the fact they are promoting their business at a UK conference is not acceptable.” The Lord Bishop of St Albans said that the gambling industry was wrong to rely so heavily on sexist imagery. “Gambling firms are currently free to advertise their products and market their companies in a largely free way,” he said. “With that freedom comes responsibility. Sexualised objectification, in any form, is totally unacceptable for any industry, particularly one that has been repeatedly warned about their marketing behaviour. “Advertising and marketing by gambling firms is currently under scrutiny by policymakers and all options for finding solutions remain on the table.” The Gambling Commission said it was for Clarion Gaming to enforce its code of conduct. Clarion Gaming chief executive Kate Chambers said Kajot was in breach of the event’s code of conduct but that the other firms identified by the Guardian were not. Criticism of behaviour at the industry’s annual trade show came on the same day that the bosses of the UK’s largest gambling companies were grilled by a House of Lords select committee over controversies including VIP schemes, the use of non-disclosure agreements and advertising. Kenny Alexander, boss of Ladbrokes Coral owner GVC, said VIP schemes had been “too aggressive”. He also admitted that GVC, which has been criticised for its use of NDAs in disputes with customers, had signed 28 last year alone.