The UK left the European Union on Friday night. On Monday morning, the two sides began the arduous task of reconstructing a 47-year-old relationship based on trade, security, foreign policy and numerous technical policies. Michel Barnier, returning as EU chief negotiator, published the EU’s draft negotiating objectives, declaring them “nothing surprising”, as they repeated the EU’s long-stated principles. Less than an hour later, Boris Johnson began setting out the UK’s opening position, with a very different vision. A quick glance at both texts – the EU one here and the UK’s here – shows how much divides the two sides at the opening stage of talks, which are due to conclude by October, meaning the UK will exit the transition period on 31 December 2020. The EU has said the UK can have a zero-tariff, zero-quota, free trade agreement in exchange for “zero-dumping”, ie maintaining EU standards on workers’ rights, environmental protection and state aid. Barnier told journalists that Johnson agreed this point, when the prime minister signed the political declaration in October 2019, which states that “the future relationship must ensure open and fair competition, encompassing robust commitments to ensure a level playing field”. Barnier said there could not be “any surprise on the British side to hear that, if we are acting in good faith here”. But the UK government statement on negotiating objectives appears to spurn the agreement Johnson signed with EU leaders last October. “There is no need for a free trade agreement to involve accepting EU rules on competition policies, subsidies, social protection, the environment or anything similar, any more than the EU should be obliged to accept UK rules,” it said. The EU envisages a limited agreement on services, covering telecoms, postal services and environmental services. The EU has said it will not negotiate on whether British-based financial firms can access EU markets, but will make a unilateral decision as to whether the sectors meet EU standards (an “equivalence” decision). Ireland’s prime minister, Leo Varadkar, warned last week that British banks’ access to EU markets would be tied to an agreement on fishing. The government wants more ambitious arrangements for the City of London: it has called for a “predictable, transparent, and business-friendly environment for financial services firms” – a request at odds with EU equivalence that can be withdrawn at short notice. In contrast to the EU’s politicised linking of fish with financial services, the government states that the EU’s decision to grant equivalence should be “technical and confirmatory”, reflecting the reality that the UK will be operating under the same regulations. Fishing might be a tiny part of the overall economic relationship between the EU and UK but is likely to cause one of the biggest rows. The EU wants its fishing crews to maintain current levels of access to British waters with stable quotas. Barnier said a deal on fisheries would be “inextricably linked” to the trade agreement. EU officials have also tied the UK’s ability to sell seafood into the EU market to continued access to British fishing waters for European boats. Johnson is adamant that any new agreement should be based on the principle that “British fishing grounds are first and foremost for British boats”. The UK government also stresses that the UK will be “an independent coastal state by the end of 2020 and any agreement must reflect this reality”. The future role of the European court of justice is ambiguous in the EU’s opening position, which has contributed to negative headlines in the UK. The EU has said only the European court of justice can arbitrate on questions of European law, but has not spelled out any process for deciding what is a European law question, or whether it considers the Luxembourg court should be responsible for settling disputes in the future relationship between the EU and UK. Barnier said the ECJ “should be able to continue its role in full” concerning security issues, such as extradition and data-sharing. Downing Street insists there is no need for ECJ oversight of its trade deal, while the government has also said that any security agreement with the EU “must not constrain the autonomy of the UK’s legal system in any way”. The EU has also said future co-operation in security must rest on the UK’s continued membership of the European convention on human rights, the 1950 treaty that set up the European court of human rights, whose members span Albania to Ukraine. While the government has not proposed quitting the ECHR, the Strasbourg court is unpopular with Conservative Eurosceptics and Johnson’s righthand man, Dominic Cummings, called for a referendum on the ECHR before he joined the government. As long trailed, the EU has said the future relationship deal will not cover Gibraltar, a British overseas territory since 1713, claimed by Spain. The EU and UK could reach separate agreements on Gibraltar, but this will require approval from Madrid – a role reversal from the time when Spain, seeking to enter the European Economic Community in the 1980s, had to accept the status quo on Gibraltar. The government does not accept Gibraltar’s exclusion from the deal: it states it will “be acting on behalf of the UK crown dependencies and overseas territories: the whole UK family”. Both sides say they will be ready to discuss the UK’s participation in EU programmes, such as research and the Erasmus student exchange. The two sides also agree that these discussions can only take place once the EU has agreed its next seven-year budget (2021-27) – a politically fraught task that shows no sign of imminent resolution among the EU’s 27 member states. They also agree the talks could end without a free-trade deal. Barnier warned that “if we can’t manage a deal by the end of the year there will be a cliff-edge on many fronts”, naming trade in goods and fisheries. While Johnson said it was “emphatically not ‘deal or no deal’”, he also said the UK could accept a looser, Australian-style arrangement with the EU. Australia has limited agreements with the EU and mostly trades on World Trade Organization terms, although Canberra is seeking a free-trade agreement.