Modern Germany is not the Weimar Republic. But many Germans have been drawing parallels between a recent political earthquake and one of the darkest points in their country’s history. Last Wednesday, for the first time since the second world war, a state premier was elected in Germany with support from a far-right party – Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) – tearing apart a cordon sanitaire which for years forbade major parties from working with far-right politicians. In the East German state of Thuringia, a little-known politician from the liberal Free Democratic party (FDP), Thomas Kemmerich, was elected state premier, beating the leftist incumbent Bodo Ramelow by one vote. The result was made possible by an unspoken state-level alliance of politicians in the FDP, the centre-right Christian Democratic Union, and the far-right AfD. This result is a stark illustration of the splintering of German politics The reaction across Germany was immediate and furious. German chancellor Angela Merkel condemned the vote, calling it “unforgivable” and a “bad day for democracy”. On Saturday, she fired Christian Hirte, the government’s commissioner for eastern Germany, after he congratulated Kemmerich on his success. Comparisons with Adolf Hitler’s rise to power quickly emerged. Ramelow tweeted a quote by Hitler heralding the early electoral success of the Nazi party in Thuringia, and rejoicing in the fact that the governing parties in the state were “unable to form a majority without our participation”. The tweet, intended as a cautionary parallel, included a photo of Germany’s then president, Paul von Hindenburg, shaking hands with Hitler. Beside it was a photo of Kemmerich, following his election victory, shaking hands with Björn Höcke, the head of the AfD in Thuringia, a politician so far to the right that a court last year ruled he could be called a “fascist”. The analogy was imperfect, but some parallels with the Weimar Republic resonate. During his ascent to power, Hitler was aided by conservatives who thought they could use him to retain their own fading influence. In Thuringia last week, conservatives – most notably members of Merkel’s CDU – cooperated with the AfD in a bid to exert their own diminished power. On Saturday, amid extreme public pressure, Kemmerich resigned. The fallout since has been intense. Mainstream parties – particularly the CDU – are in disarray as they struggle to reach a consensus on what to do next in Thuringia, and to address their own waning electoral support. On Monday, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, a CDU politician handpicked by Merkel in 2018 to be a successor, announced her intention to step down as leader of the party. Germany’s already weakened grand coalition – consisting mainly of Merkel’s CDU and the centre-right Social Democratic party (SPD) – has been rocked. For the AfD, Thuringia was a spectacular strategic coup: an example of how to tangibly wield its limited political power to disrupt German democracy. The chaos emanating from the state has been unfolding for months. In an election in Thuringia last October, support for the CDU and SPD plummeted. Die Linke, or the Left, the successor to the East German Communist party, came first with 31% of the vote. But it was support for the AfD that saw the greatest surge compared with the previous election, finishing second with 23.4%. This result – a stark illustration of the splintering of German politics – has made the formation of a government in Thuringia next to impossible. That the AfD is strong in Thuringia, where Höcke leads the party, is particularly worrying. Höcke has railed against Holocaust remembrance and uses Nazi vocabulary, warning of “Volkstod,” a death of the Volk, through a “population replacement”. His wing of the party, known as Der Flügel, is currently on a watchlist for extremism. Years ago, Höcke was nearly ejected from the AfD for his views; today, he’s an increasingly powerful force within the party, and an embodiment of its radicalisation. The greater scandal is that the AfD is winning over so many voters to begin with, particularly across swathes of the former East Germany. Isolating the party is imperative. But this alone won’t diminish the party’s political support. How can mainstream parties win back AfD voters without parroting its policies and rhetoric? Despite the outcry over Thuringia, few politicians seem able to answer this question – or even ask it. Meanwhile, the AfD is attempting to weaponise the mainstream consensus around rebuilding the cordon sanitaire to amplify voters’ grievances with the political establishment. In recent days, AfD politicians have repeatedly accused Merkel and her allies of forcing out an elected state premier. Last week, Alice Weidel, the leader of the AfD’s parliamentary group, tweeted a rhetorical question: “Who is actually endangering democracy in this country?” It’s now possible that a new election will be called in Thuringia. The AfD has proved adept at turning political tumult to its advantage, and recent events may help rally its supporters. With the centrist parties in disarray, few will be surprised if the AfD increases its share of the vote. What has happened in Thuringia may just be a worrying prelude for what is yet to come. • James Angelos is a Berlin-based writer and the author of The Full Catastrophe