The lawyer representing Harvey Weinstein at his New York rape trial made a final appeal to the jury on Thursday to acquit him of all five counts of sexual assault, pleading with them not to “criminalize morality” and to act as the last defense against “overzealous prosecutors”. In closing arguments at the New York supreme court, Donna Rotunno exhorted the seven men and five women of the jury, who hold the fallen movie mogul’s fate in their hands, to set aside emotion and discount any negative feelings they might have towards the defendant. “You don’t have to like Mr Weinstein, this is not a popularity contest – in the jury room I want you to remember that the unpopular person needs you most,” she said. Rotunno did not mention the #MeToo movement, the social reckoning over sexual violence and gender relations in the workplace galvanized by multiple women alleging sexual abuse against Weinstein, in October 2017. But she did allude strongly to the movement when she appealed to the jury to have “the courage to make the right decision, no matter how unpopular you might be when you get back to work or your home”. By doing so, she said, “you can show the world that here in New York, here in the United States, we will not allow outside forces to dictate”. She echoed contentious remarks she had made before the trial began that #MeToo risked undermining the rights of men accused of sex crimes to a fair trial. She said: “If you take the presumption of innocence from Mr Weinstein, you take it away from each and every one of us”. Weinstein, 67, faces up to possible life in prison on two counts of rape dating from 2013, one count that he forced oral sex on a then Project Runway producer Miriam Haley in 2006, and two of predatory sexual assault relating to sex crimes against multiple women. The jury of seven men and five women is expected to begin deliberating on its verdict on Tuesday. Rotunno allowed her closing arguments to stray into a declaration of her highly controversial views about the shift of gender relations towards believing female accusers. She told the jury that prosecutors had created an “alternative universe”, ironically like a movie script, in which “women are not responsible for the parties they attend, the men they flirt with, the plane tickets they accept – in this script, the powerful man is the villain, and he’s so powerful and large that no woman would want to sleep with him”. She complained that her client, whose distinguished roster as the producer of such films as Pulp Fiction and Shakespeare in Love gathered 81 Oscars, had been cast as an overweight monster whose naked photos were shown to the jury just “to shame him”. Rotunno’s powerful summing up will be followed on Friday with closing arguments for the prosecution. Then the jury will be presented with a very different narrative of the once-powerful titan of Hollywood as a brutal serial sex offender. Most of Rotunno’s closing arguments were devoted to discrediting the two key accusers in the case – Haley and the alleged rape victim. The latter is an aspiring actor who the Guardian has not named because of lack of clarity over her desire to be identified. The alleged rape victim was depicted in defense closing arguments as a duplicitous individual who maintained a consensual relationship with the movie mogul over many years but repeatedly lied about it, only deciding to come out with her accusations of violent assault after he had been exposed by the press in 2017 and she could see an opportunity to make money. Rotunno read out an email from February 2018 in which the woman talked about wanting to “pursue damages civilly” against Weinstein, remarking that she did not have “much time” if she were to bring a case in New York given the statute of limitations. The unnamed accuser told the court earlier this month that she had twice been raped by the film producer, once in a hotel room in the Doubletree Hotel in Midtown Manhattan in March 2013 and again in the Peninsula Hotel in Beverly Hills the following year. Over nine hours of cross-examination over two days, Rotunno was so aggressive in her investigation that she reduced the woman to a panic attack involving uncontrollable sobbing. In her final statement, Rotunno relentlessly unpicked the accuser’s testimony. She pointed out that a day after the alleged Doubletree attack, the woman met Weinstein to celebrate his birthday. “You claim you were raped in a New York hotel on March 18th and then voluntarily go and celebrate his birthday the very next day – and that’s not a factor in whether you would be believed about what happened in that hotel room?” The defense lawyer walked the jury through a long series of communications between the accuser and her alleged assailant beginning in 2013 and ending in 2018. “Miss you big guy,” the witness wrote six months after the first alleged rape; “thank you for your unfailing support and kindness that helped me believe in myself,” she said to him two months later. “Not words you say to your rapist,” Rotunno told the jury. The lawyer’s excoriating summary of the case underlined the uphill job facing the prosecution in its attempt to secure a guilty verdict on all five counts. It is exceptionally rare for US prosecutors to go ahead at trial in cases where female accusers have maintained close and at times sexual relations with their alleged attackers years after incidents. Rotunno deployed the same tactics of character assassination against Haley, who alleges that Weinstein forced oral sex on her at his New York apartment in July 2006. The attorney suggested that the witness was “lying about the nature of the interaction” which was entirely consensual. Again, the lawyer heavily emphasized the idea that Haley was only out for the money, telling the jury that it was only after the New York Times came out with the first allegations against the movie producer in October 2017 that her “memories resurface”. The first thing Haley did, Rotunno said, was call Gloria Allred, “a civil lawyer who sues people for money”. Allred, the attorney noted, has attended court several days, sitting in the front row behind the prosecutors. “She doesn’t sit here for her health or because it’s fun for her, but because she knows there’s a pot of gold at the end of this criminal trial,” Rotunno said. In the US, Rainn offers support at 800-656-4673 or by chat at Rainn.org. In the UK, the rape crisis national freephone helpline is at 0808-802-9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800-737-7328) or 1800respect.org.au. Other international helplines can be found at Ibiblio.org.