Aston Villa’s players revelled in the adulation of a pitch invasion in midweek but sunk to the turf at the final whistle here as Bournemouth earned back-to-back league victories for the first time since September to leapfrog Villa and climb out of the relegation zone. A goal from Mbwana Samatta on his full debut was insufficient for Villa, whose visions of Wembley are firmly on hold after Bournemouth, who were reduced to 10 men when Jefferson Lerma was sent off early in the second half, basked in a momentous victory. Eddie Howe gathered his team in a huddle at full-time for an impromptu post-match debrief while the home supporters serenaded his players after a gutsy performance. “We have shown we are still alive and kicking,” Howe said. “We have a long, long way to go before we can say we have done anything. Nothing is decided but we are in there fighting and showing we want to be in the Premier League. “When we show the workrate, passion and belief we are a different team. That is the thing that has been missing probably in the games when we have dipped below where we want to be. It changes our performance totally. You see a team fighting and scrapping for everything and that is what we need to deliver again and again.” This fixture provided Bournemouth’s first taste of life in the top flight almost five years ago and the outcome of this match was always likely to have significant implications as to whether this season may be their last for the time being. Reality bites for Villa too, with Dean Smith’s side, who return to action in a fortnight’s time against Tottenham, a point above the relegation zone after reaching the Carabao Cup final with victory over Leicester on Tuesday. Even Lerma’s red card, awarded by the referee, Anthony Taylor, after the midfielder picked up two cautions for fouling the Aston Villa captain, Jack Grealish, could not dampen Bournemouth spirits as first-half goals by Philip Billing and Nathan Aké paved the way to victory. Lerma will miss Bournemouth’s trip to Sheffield United next Sunday and will walk a tightrope thereafter, having picked up nine bookings for the season; no player has picked up more yellow cards in the Premier League since the start of last season (23 in 52 games). The second here was soft, Grealish collapsing after little contact, but for all that the sending off rankled with Howe, that decision galvanised Bournemouth, who would have added a third had Ryan Fraser connected with Callum Wilson’s cross. Villa’s deadline-day signing Borja Bastón did not complete his move in time to feature but the January recruit Samatta became the first Tanzanian to score in the Premier League, nodding in after Keinan Davis’s deflected shot looped up inside the box. Smith was kicking his heels approaching half-time and, in truth, his side’s revival was too little too late. Other than Grealish, who twice went close after cutting inside Adam Smith, Villa lacked invention and struggled to assert themselves. Villa felt they should have had a penalty after the Bournemouth goalkeeper Aaron Ramsdale inadvertently punched the substitute Björn Engels and Smith argued there should have been substantially more than four minutes second-half stoppage-time after accusing the ballboys of time-wasting. Ultimately, though, the Villa manager acknowledged the blame lay at his players’ door. After soaking up the highs of midweek, this was a difficult defeat to stomach.