Barring fallow years, there are two Glastonbury Festivals held annually. One costs £265, and is both the quintessential and the exceptional music festival; both the apex of its category, and something its devout attendees insist is unlike all else. The other is included in your licence fee: a sprawling, hegemonic media creation visualised by the BBC. It is this filmed, disseminated Glastonbury that has symbolic influence, not unlike the mediated image of Oxbridge in the public consciousness. A black musician headlining the festival, it could then be argued, is nearly as potent an image as black students attending Oxbridge — and after lending considerable financial muscle to the latter in 2018, the grime MC Stormzy accomplished the former on Friday 28 June 2019. Unlike the fourth or fifth Coldplay top billing, it was one of precedent: Stormzy was the first Black British solo artist to headline the festival. At only 25 years old, and with a single album under his belt, he had neither the seniority nor the weighty discography of most headliners. To succeed, the performance had to be not individual but collective; to be on behalf of a genre, a community. The context had to permeate the event itself. It began with a video in which Stormzy discussed the occasion with Jay-Z, himself the first rapper to headline the festival in 2008. The American told his successor to pose the question: “How can I create a culture around this whole thing? Because culture moves the whole world.” Those words echoed around Worthy Farm and through TV and laptop speakers up and down the nation. Then, they were duly enacted. British rap and black Britain was conjured up in all its variety. David Lammy’s speech about the demonisation of black men was sampled; black ballet dancers performed, as did child BMX bikers; rappers Dave and Fredo came out to perform their number one hit Funky Friday. The inclusion of the latter was spelled out by Stormzy: “The reason I invited them here is that Funky Friday is the first pure British rap song to go number one in the UK. Do you understand what that means? That means we’ve come a long way.” In other words, the performance was a symbolic tool, designed to use one of the nation’s biggest platforms to proclaim the power of Black British music and Black British people. This was not the Kanye West set of 2015 — in the face of backlash over his booking, that rapper revelled in iconoclasm and individualism, with a battery of spotlights shining straight down onto a stage he shared with practically no one else. Rather, Stormzy continually acknowledged the before, the after and the people around him, naming dozens of his peers and friends as if to speak them onto the stage with him. And Big Mike also used his pulpit to address how the context needed changing. The “fuck the government and fuck Boris” line from Vossi Bop was played twice for the audience’s evident satisfaction. The Banksy-designed stab-proof vest he sported, emblazoned with a monochrome Union Jack, was a blunt signifier of the discontent and violence in British society. But for all its politics, the form of the performance was distinctly orthodox. Compared to the icy minimalism of Kanye’s headline slot, Stormzy’s was accessible; even sentimental. Gospel choirs, confetti and Chris Martin on piano don’t exactly signal avant-garde tendencies; big live band crescendos with flames and fireworks are straight out of the traditional Glasto playbook. A popular touch honed on informal music videos and endearing chat show appearances was employed with full force. Crucially, this popular touch was used to channel mass emotion without adulterating Stormzy’s own identity. The largely white, middle-class audience sung along to the deeply Christian Blinded By Your Grace, Pt. 2 and went bar for bar with the MC on the street-orientated Big For Your Boots; they probably had little in common with either. Nevertheless, enthusiasm resounded though the media, even extending to five stars in the Telegraph — impressive for an artist who had some choice Anglo-Saxon for its most famous columnist. Brendan O’Neill in the Spectator did a more spirited job at defending his magazine’s alumnus, claiming that for all the rebellion on stage: “Boris, being pro-Brexit [and] un-PC... is far more countercultural than Stormzy will ever be.” Nonsensical as it sounds, it acknowledged what the gushing reviews did not: that Stormzy’s performance, for all its political anger, fitted front and centre in the mainstream. But by co-opting the cultural establishment, Stormzy and his peers have altered it, overwhelmingly for the better. To paraphrase another big man with a beard, it’s not enough to spit bars against society: the point is to change it.