Somewhere amid the din the final second slipped away, the final whistle went and Real Madrid were defeated for the first time in 22 games, eliminated from the Copa del Rey by Real Sociedad. Having gone 3-0 and 4-1 down, Madrid seemed to be going out without a fight but there is always a fight here. A goal from Rodrygo with nine minutes left and another from Nacho in stoppage time gave them hope of a dramatic comeback, the Bernabéu roaring. In the end, though, Madrid ran out of time, leaving the Basque side heading into the semi-final with a 4-3 win. The competition has been reborn this season, with plenty of upsets after the format was changed to favour the underdog. And yet, the game where there was no advantage for the supposed weaker side delivered perhaps as big a shock as there has been – not least in the way it happened. Madrid, until their late rebellion, were taken apart by a young, dynamic and hugely exciting team that dominated the ball and the chances – so much so that there were two ovations from the home fans, both for visiting players. Martin Ødegaard, on loan from Madrid, was applauded off and so was Alexander Isak, who scored twice. Between them those two players had given Real Sociedad a lead that they ended up being surprisingly close to losing. They had performed superbly, too. Ødegaard did not celebrate the opener 22 minutes in – his shot clipping under the body of Alphonse Areola in goal – but there was no stopping his teammates. Sociedad had deserved that opener and might have added to it, too. A second was ruled out by VAR and a handful of first-half opportunities were wasted. When Isak finished brilliantly twice early in the second half – the first an acrobatic volley, the second a shot smashed into the roof of the net – it was an act of justice. Marcelo scored for Real soon after to suggest there might still be a game after all, only for Mikel Merino to make it 4-1 with 20 minutes to go. The midfielder turned in Isak’s low cross to send home supporters heading towards the exit. It was over, they thought, but they were wrong. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/02/06-55221-gnl.fw.20200206.jf.helicopter.mp3 Vinicíus got a goal that was ruled out but the momentum was building and goals from Rodrygo and Nacho set up a noisy, nervous finish. Madrid threw everything forward, with Sergio Ramos missing a late chance and Andoni Gorosabel sent off for the visitors. But it is Real Sociedad who progress, joining Granada, Mirandés and Athletic Bilbao, who shocked Barcelona at San Mamés, in an unexpected quartet of semi-finalists.