Dominic Cummings’s dislike of anyone who gets in his way, whether they be civil servants, ministers, MPs, special advisers or journalists, has a long history. His abrasive style and combustible dealings with those around him were the reason David Cameron’s director of communications, Andy Coulson, a former editor of the News of the World and no soft touch himself, refused to allow him a role as an adviser in the Tory/Lib Dem coalition government in 2010. Coulson’s red-top instincts told him Cummings was trouble. But after Coulson had to resign in early 2011 over phone-hacking allegations at his former newspaper, Cummings did return as a special adviser to Michael Gove, then education secretary. As he and Gove set about trying to reform the education system in a hurry, hugely expanding the academies programme and introducing free schools, Cummings tore into anyone who questioned anything he and the boss were doing. For education reforms then, read plans to “level up” the country now. In Cummings’s mind, nothing was allowed to stop him and Gove and anyone who got in their way had to be removed. Now he is at the heart of power it is precisely the same. In the coalition’s early days, it was widely believed in Whitehall that Cummings was behind a Twitter account called @toryeducation (formerly run from Conservative central office) which attacked Gove’s critics, including journalists and ministers. For a special adviser to launch such attacks clearly breached the civil service code. Cummings denied involvement, saying he was “not @toryeducation”, while never specifically refuting that he posted on the account. There were also staff disputes in the education department to which he was directly linked. In February 2013, the Observer revealed that a civil servant in Gove’s department had received a secret payoff of about £25,000 from public funds, after launching a lengthy grievance procedure involving Cummings and the department’s former head of communications James Frayne. While a departmental investigation cleared both men and said no disciplinary action was needed, the final judgment made clear that their conduct had on occasions fallen short of the levels expected and “been perceived as intimidating”. The civil servant also lodged a case with a tribunal, where allegations would have been heard in public. A date was set but, after negotiations, the official accepted the payment in return for going quietly. When he worked for Michael Gove, his view was that the Department for Education held the power and it was up to him what he would tell No 10. Now, it is that No 10 has absolute control According to papers relating to the case, Cummings undertook “random acts of verbal aggression” and could be “rude and threatening”. A few weeks before the Observer revealed the settlement, Gove – who, under the ministerial and special advisers’ codes, was responsible for his advisers’ behaviour – denied all knowledge of allegations of misconduct in an appearance before the education select committee. Today, as Thursday’s reshuffle and Sajid Javid’s resignation as chancellor clearly showed, Cummings’s objective is to centralise as much power in 10 Downing Street as possible. When he worked for Gove, however, it was different. Special advisers who worked for the coalition remember how Cummings sent emails to No 10 advisers complaining that Downing Street was not showing the necessary urgency about school reform. Sean Kemp, a special adviser at the time to the deputy prime minister, Nick Clegg, sees similarities in Cummings’s attitude but also a glaring contradiction. “Comparing it with now, either one can see it as hypocritical or he has changed his mind. Then, his view was that the Department for Education held the power and it was up to him what he would tell No 10. Now, it is that No 10 has absolute control over all the departments.” A few weeks after Boris Johnson became prime minister, Cummings began a purge of those he believed out of line. In late August, he sacked a 27-year-old Treasury special adviser working for Javid, Sonia Khan, without informing her boss. He summoned her to No 10 and demanded to see her mobile phone before asking a police officer to march her off the premises. He is thought to have concluded that Khan had been dishonest about her contacts with her ex-boss, the former chancellor Philip Hammond, who was strongly opposed to a hard Brexit, and one of his ex-aides – accusations that Khan denied. She is now pursuing a case for unfair dismissal. There is talk of other complaints against Cummings. On Friday, two more special advisers in No 10’s policy unit were dismissed. Before the reshuffle, the Whitehall view was that Cummings’s power might have peaked. But when Javid resigned, having refused to sack all his advisers as Johnson and Cummings demanded, it was clear that Johnson’s faith in the man who helped deliver victory in both the Brexit referendum and the general election was stronger than ever.