The start of the Daytona 500 on Sunday was delayed by an unexpected rain shower that began moments after Donald Trump and his motorcade finished a ceremonial parade lap. The presidential limousine, nicknamed “the Beast” left the tarmac at Daytona International Speedway and the 40 drivers were expected to begin the race moments later. Instead, the sky opened for a brief shower and drivers returned to pit road. The start had already been pushed back 13 minutes to accommodate Trump, who made a dramatic entrance hours earlier, setting off a raucous celebrations. Thousands cheered as Air Force One performed a flyover and landed at Daytona International Airport a few hundred yards behind the track. Trump’s motorcade arrived a few minutes later, prompting another loud ovation. Both entrances were broadcast on giant video boards around the superspeedway. Trump served as the grand marshal for the Daytona 500, delivering the opening line – “Drivers, start your engines” – in front of 100,000 at the biggest event in the Nascar calendar. He then got in the limousine and turned a lap. It was a very political engagement as well as a welcome one for a president who has survived impeachment and whose attorney general is now under severe political pressure. Many in Trump’s conservative base are Nascar fans and Florida is a key swing state which Trump won in 2016. The president’s re-election campaign was set to fly a banner near the circuit and run a TV ad during the Fox broadcast of the race itself. About 9 million people watched last year. Trump took pictures with supporters and at least a dozen drivers were escorted from the pre-race meeting to a private introduction. “I got to meet the president! How cool is that?” driver Aric Almirola said. Presidents who have attended Nascar events at the speedway include Ronald Reagan, George HW Bush and George W Bush, the last sitting president to do so in 2004. “There’s a real sense of positive, overwhelming affirmation to hear the roar of the crowd,” Ari Fleischer, White House spokesman under the younger Bush, told the Associated Press. “What politician doesn’t want that? Secondly, there’s what I call the reverberation effect. People watching at home, who hear the roar of the crowd for a president, that can drive them toward some sense of approval or fondness or liking for the president.” In 2012, a Washington Post/ABC News poll found positive views of Nascar to be higher among Republicans than Americans overall. White Americans were somewhat more likely than blacks and Hispanics to have a favourable opinion, while adults aged 65 and older were slightly more likely than those under 30 to view Nascar positively. Trump is also viewed more positive by Republicans, white Americans and older adults, compared with other Americans. Last year, Trump awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom to Roger Penske, a businessman and founder of one of the world’s most successful motorsports teams. The president plans a fundraising swing and political rallies in western states next week.