Born in Greater Manchester, Ralf Little, 39, appeared in the BBC comedy series The Royle Family and Two Pints Of Lager And A Packet Of Crisps. His films include 24 Hour Party People and The Waiting Room. He plays the new lead in the long-running BBC One series Death In Paradise. He lives in London. What is your greatest fear? Going to jail for something I didn’t do. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself? Laziness. What is the trait you most deplore in others? Lack of critical thinking. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought? A watch that begins with an R. What makes you unhappy? Lack of purpose. What do you most dislike about your appearance? My broken nose. When I was 17, a week before I was due to start filming The Royle Family, I was trying to break up a fight and somebody whacked me. Because I was about to start filming, I couldn’t go through the process to reset it and I became known as the guy who looks as I look now. Who would play you in the film of your life? Johnny Depp, but it’s more likely to be Blake Harrison, because we get mistaken for each other all the time. What is your most unappealing habit? I have a very efficient digestive system. What is your favourite smell? Not that. What or who is the greatest love of your life?Playing football. What is the worst job you’ve done?For two weeks I worked behind the players’ bar at Bolton Wanderers football club – footballers don’t tip. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you? “They’ve gone in a different direction for the role.” Agents say it to soften the blow if you don’t get a part, and it happens often. What do you owe your parents?They raised me with an attitude that I would be good at anything I tried. It’s not necessarily true but, if you approach any new task or idea with that assumption, then your chances of succeeding are increased. What does love feel like? Confusing. If you could edit your past, what would you change?I wouldn’t have tried to break up a fight when I was 17. When did you last cry, and why?Watching the film The Iron Giant slays me every time. How often do you have sex?Considering my girlfriend lives and works in America, not often enough. What do you consider your greatest achievement?Having a 23-year acting career with no qualifications. What keeps you awake at night?Worry about work: it’s a precarious business being an actor. How would you like to be remembered?Simply as a man who put a smile on the face of everyone he met. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?Don’t quote The Office without explaining the context .