At Plonkers wine bar in York city centre, brass plaques on the bare brick walls show how high the floodwaters have risen over the years. The highest was 17ft 8in in 2000 – “Here it comes”, the plaque reads. The lowest is 2012’s 16ft 7in, captioned “Here again”. Another plaque from 2015 says “Keep on smiling” and records a height of 17ft 2in. Flooding has become a part of life for the businesses on the banks of the River Ouse which runs through the city, and owners have invested thousands in water pumps and flood barriers to help their buildings weather the storms. But after countless swampings and near misses, many are starting to feel the strain. “I’ve had this business for 30 years, and I have flooded nearly every year,” said Plonkers owner Leann Williams. “I’ve listened to every story and every solution and every promise, and nothing will get done, it just stays the same.” The Ouse is expected to peak at 14ft 5in above normal levels on Monday, which is within the city’s flood defence limits, but other areas of Yorkshire have been badly hit. Firefighters rescued people from 10 homes in Settle on Friday night, and the village of Horton in Ribblesdale was completely cut off. North Yorkshire fire and rescue service tweeted: “We have two crews and a water rescue team from Ripon in Horton in Ribblesdale which is currently surrounded by flood water. Crews are checking residents and ensuring everyone is safe.” This is the third weekend in a row the area has been battered by heavy rain, following storms Ciara and Dennis. For 30 years I’ve provided jobs in this city. I’m done, I don’t want to do it any more. It’s heartbreaking Large swathes of the country have been affected, with England receiving 144% of its average February rainfall. More than 1,000 homes and businesses were flooded in the Calder Valley by Storm Ciara, and south Wales and the Midlands are still reeling from the floods caused by Storm Dennis last weekend. Boris Johnson has come under criticism for failing to visit affected areas, and flood victims say the compensation on offer is not enough. Households can apply for up to £500 emergency relief, while business rates and council tax will be paused for those “significantly affected”. Small to medium-sized businesses can apply for a grant of up to £2,500 if they have suffered severe, uninsurable losses, but this leaves many without support. Williams said she only received financial aid in 2015, when the Foss Barrier failed and 500 homes in York were inundated, so she is mainly shouldering the burden alone. “I get really emotional about it because it’s 30 years and I’m at the point now where I’ve had enough, I want out,” she said. “For 30 years I’ve provided jobs in this city. I’m done, I don’t want to do it any more. It’s heartbreaking.” The company’s pump system keeps the bar functional when water levels are high, but on Friday afternoon the bar was quiet – when people see the water at the bottom of the street, they often assume Plonkers has shut up shop. “This street is known as the flooded street, so we’re the one that’s classed as closed. It’s half-term and it’s just awful. It’s horrendous.” But not all businesses have escaped unscathed. Next door the Lowther pub is closed as water has flooded the basement. In 2012 the floods caused £390,000 worth of damage. And just along the river is the King’s Arms, known as the “pub that floods”, often used in the media to illustrate the high water levels. The Ouse is rising by about a third of an inch (8mm) a year on average, and although a nearby flood defence – part of the city’s £45m five-year plan – is due to finish next year, this area is still under assessment. The Environment Agency is trying to juggle the needs of residents and businesses in trouble spots across the city. Progress is being made, but for those facing the waters every year, it’s not happening quickly enough. In a historic motor house on Skeldergate Bridge, overlooking the Ouse, is Dyls Café Bar, where the floods have taken their toll. “We’re suffering extremely badly at the moment,” said owner Malcolm Dyl. “When the water is up, somebody has to sleep here all night because the electric could cut. If the electric cuts we have to put a generator on – it costs money.” Dyl estimates he’s spent as much as £80,000 on flood barriers and water pumps to keep the business safe, but it’s often touch and go. “What if this time it does come up over the barrier? It’s very close to. It will wipe our business out completely.” On Saturday the flooded river completely inundated Dyl’s outside terrace and the riverside footpath, but the business is still open and accessible from the top of the bridge – although many customers are put off by the high water levels. “Our trade is down by 80% this February compared to last year, so you can imagine our cash flow. Our budget has gone out the window. Everybody I speak to, I just don’t get any help,” Dyl said. Peter Kilbane, a City of York councillor, sympathised with the business owners, saying York has been quieter than usual this half-term: “Every time we flood and they show that picture of the King’s Arms on the TV, we take a hit in terms of footfall. We need to get the message out there really clear that even in a big flood, York is open for business.”