Two charter flights carrying cruise ship passengers from Japan have landed at military bases in California and Texas, with passengers facing a quarantine period to ensure they do not have the Covid-19 virus that has been spreading thoughout Asia. A plane carrying American passengers touched down at Travis air force base in northern California shortly before 11.30pm local time (0730 GMT) on Sunday. A second flight arrived at Lackland air force base in Texas about two and a half hours later. Japan’s defence minister, Tarō Konō, had tweeted earlier that Japanese troops helped transport 340 US passengers on 14 buses from Yokohama port to Tokyo’s Haneda airport. About 380 Americans were on the Diamond Princess cruise ship. The US said it arranged the evacuation because people on the ship were at a high risk of exposure to the virus. For the departing Americans, the evacuation cuts short a 14-day quarantine that began onboard the ship on 5 February. The virus is officially called Sars-CoV-2 and this causes the disease Covid-19. It is a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals. Many of those initially infected either worked or frequently shopped in the Huanan seafood wholesale market in the centre of the Chinese city. New and troubling viruses usually originate in animal hosts. Ebola and flu are other examples – severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars) and Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (Mers) are both caused by coronaviruses that came from animals. The virus can cause pneumonia. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. In severe cases there can be organ failure. As this is viral pneumonia, antibiotics are of no use. The antiviral drugs we have against flu will not work. If people are admitted to hospital, they may get support for their lungs and other organs as well as fluids. Recovery will depend on the strength of their immune system. Many of those who have died were already in poor health. China’s national health commission has confirmed human-to-human transmission, and there have been such transmissions elsewhere. As of 12 February there are now 45,182 confirmed cases and 1,115 deaths. There are cases in 28 other countries outside China, with deaths recorded in one case in Hong Kong, and one case in the Philippines. The number of people to have contracted the virus overall could be far higher, as people with mild symptoms may not have been detected. The number of confirmed cases of coronavirus in the UK has doubled from four to eight after four more people in Brighton were diagnosed with the infection over the weekend. There are nine cases of the virus in the UK. Four were located in Brighton, one in London. At Arrowe Park Hospital in Merseyside 83 people in quarantine were told they would be allowed to leave on Thursday after they all tested negative. Of the 1,750 tests carried out so far in the UK, more than 99% had been negative. We don’t yet know how dangerous the new coronavirus is, and we won’t know until more data comes in. The mortality rate is around 2%. However, this is likely to be an overestimate since many more people are likely to have been infected by the virus but not suffered severe enough symptoms to attend hospital, and so have not been counted. For comparison, seasonal flu typically has a mortality rate below 1% and is thought to cause about 400,000 deaths each year globally. Sars had a death rate of more than 10%. Unless you have recently travelled to China or been in contact with someone infected with the virus, then you should treat any cough or cold symptoms as normal. The NHS advises that people should call 111 instead of visiting the GP’s surgery as there is a risk they may infect others. Health experts are starting to say it could become a pandemic, but right now it falls short of what the WHO would consider to be one. A pandemic, in WHO terms, is “the worldwide spread of a disease”. Coronavirus cases have been confirmed in about 25 countries outside China, but by no means in all 195 on the WHO’s list. There is no need to panic. The spread of the virus outside China is worrying but not an unexpected development. The WHO has declared the outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern, and says there is a “window of opportunity” to halt the spread of the disease. The key issues are how transmissible this new coronavirus is between people and what proportion become severely ill and end up in hospital. Often viruses that spread easily tend to have a milder impact. Sarah Boseley Health editor and Hannah Devlin The state department announced later that 14 of the evacuees confirmed they had the virus but were allowed to board the flight because they did not have symptoms. They were being isolated from other passengers on the flight, the state department and the Department of Health and Human Services said in a joint statement. Dr Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases at the US National Institutes of Health, said on Sunday that an infected person who showed minimal symptoms could still pass the virus to someone else. After arriving in the US, all of the passengers must go through a further 14 days of quarantine at the military facilities – meaning they will have been under quarantine for nearly four weeks. Australia, Canada, Hong Kong and Italy were planning similar passenger evacuations. Other governments, including Canada and Hong Kong, will also require the passengers to undergo a second 14-day quarantine. Japan on Monday announced a further 99 infections on the Diamond Princess, raising the ship’s total number of cases to 454. Overall, Japan has 419 confirmed cases of the virus, including one death. The US has confirmed 15 cases within the country. Separately, one US citizen died in China. Cheryl and Paul Molesky, a couple from Syracuse in New York, opted to trade one coronavirus quarantine for another, leaving the cruise ship to fly back to the US. Mrs Molesky said the rising number of patients on the ship influenced the decision. “We are glad to be going home,” she told NHK TV in Japan. “It’s just a little bit disappointing that we’ll have to go through quarantine again, and we will probably not be as comfortable as the Diamond Princess, possibly.” She sent Associated Press a video of her and her husband boarding the plane with other Americans. “Well, we’re exhausted, but we’re on the plane and that’s a good feeling. Pretty miserable wearing these masks though, and everybody had to go to the bathroom on the bus,” she said. Some American passengers said they would pass up the opportunity to fly to the US because of the additional quarantine. They were also concerned about being on a long flight with other passengers who may be infected or in an incubation period. One of the Americans, Matthew Smith, tweeted that he saw a passenger with no face mask talking at close quarters with another passenger. “If there are secondary infections onboard, this is why,” he said. “And you wanted me to get on a bus with her?” He said the American health officials who visited their room were apparently surprised that the couple had decided to stay, and wished them luck. “Thanks, but we’re fine,” Smith said he told them.