Australia have recalled allrounder Mitch Marsh from the international cricket wilderness but snubbed Marcus Stoinis for the short-format tour of South Africa. Marsh and Glenn Maxwell have both won recalls to Australia’s one-day and Twenty20 squads but Stoinis, on the day he was named the BBL’s player of the tournament, has been overlooked for both. “Marcus Stoinis is a stand-by player for each squad and was unlucky to miss out due to the make-up of the current top order,” selector Trevor Hohns said. “It is terrific to have a back-up player of his calibre in such good form.” Marsh last featured in an Australia side in the Ashes series last September – he hasn’t played an ODI since January 2018 or a T20 international since October 2018. Maxwell last played for Australia in October before taking a break from cricket, citing mental health issues. He returned to action in the BBL for the Melbourne Stars. “It is fantastic to have Glenn back in both squads given his brilliant form in the middle order for the Stars, along with his results with the ball,” Hohns said. “The same can be said for Mitch. He has been in tremendous touch with the bat for the [Perth] Scorchers since his return from injury and is now back bowling well. His performances warranted inclusion in the area he operates as a powerful middle order batsman and handy bowler.” Pacemen Sean Abbott and Jhye Richardson have been summoned into the T20 squad and Matthew Wade is included in both the ODI and T20 squads. WA’s Ashton Turner has been dropped from the ODI squad after failing to fire in last month’s three-game series in India. Australia play three T20s against the Proteas on 21, 23 and 26 February before three one-dayers on 29 February, 4 March and 7 March. One-day squad: Aaron Finch (captain), Alex Carey, Pat Cummins (joint vice-captains), Ashton Agar, Josh Hazlewood, Marnus Labuschagne, Mitch Marsh, Glenn Maxwell, Kane Richardson, Steve Smith, Mitchell Starc, Matthew Wade, David Warner, Adam Zampa. T20 squad: Aaron Finch (capt), Alex Carey, Pat Cummins (joint vice-captain), Sean Abbott, Ashton Agar, Mitch Marsh, Glenn Maxwell, Jhye Richardson, Kane Richardson, Steve Smith, Mitchell Starc, Matthew Wade, David Warner, Adam Zampa.