A senior German conservative politician, who was once seen as the brains behind Angela Merkel’s inner circle but was later sacked by the chancellor, has put himself forward as a surprise candidate to take over as leader of her Christian Democratic Union (CDU), further complicating the party’s chaotic succession planning. Norbert Röttgen announced his candidacy for the soon-to-be vacant seat at the top of the CDU in a press conference on Tuesday, saying he had decided to run because he believed the party should strategically position itself as the “party of the centre”. Last week, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, Merkel’s protege, threw the party into turmoil by saying she would not stand as chancellor in the next federal election, due by October 2021, and announcing she would give up the CDU chair. Röttgen’s unexpected move makes him the first official contender for the post of party leader. All the potential contenders so far are men hailing from the powerful state of North-Rhine Westphalia. Friedrich Merz The 63-year-old lawyer left politics for the financial industry about a decade ago, but stepped down from his role at asset manager Blackrock last week, saying he wanted to get "more politically involved" in the future. Having been ousted as parliamentary leader of the CDU by Merkel in 2002, many have said he has never forgiven the chancellor, though he has downplayed the idea of any lasting resentment towards her. Merz has built up a personal fortune of millions, including two private jets, which has caused controversy, particularly after he claimed that he remained a member of the middle class. He promises to return the CDU to its former strong position. He says he can win back millions of voters who drifted to the AfD and has presented himself as more liberal than in the past on issues such as gay marriage Jens Spahn Still aged only 39, the youngest member of Merkel’s fourth cabinet has in the past portrayed himself first and foremost as a critic of the chancellor’s refugee policy, calling it “the white elephant in the room”. But his stint at the health ministry has revealed a new side to the ambitious and energetic politician, who has fought to introduce policies that weren't a natural fit with his previous free-market conservative profile, such as compulsory measles vaccinations for children. He is married to his long-term partner Daniel Funke, the editor of society magazine Bunte. Armin Laschet A staunch defender of Merkel's migration policy and an uncompromising critic of the AfD, Laschet holds a natural position of authority in the CDU as premier of the large state of North-Rhine Westphalia. Laschet pulled off a coup by ousting the Social Democratic Party in this traditional centre-left stronghold in 2017. Known as a moderate in policy terms, Laschet is also still relatively unknown at federal level. Norbert Röttgen The senior German conservative politician has put himself forward as a surprise candidate. He has something of a national profile due to his role as head of the parliamentary foreign affairs committee, but is not seen as a big hitter in the party. He also served as an environment minister under Merkel from 2009 to 2012. In the past, Röttgen has been seen as someone who could work with the Greens, currently the second-biggest party in the polls after the conservative bloc. A member of the Bundestag since 1994, Röttgen was one of a number of broadly liberal politicians with an interest in environmental policy who formed Merkel’s inner circle and helped write her 2005 election manifesto. In 2009, in Merkel’s second term in power, he was made Germany’s environment minister. But Röttgen fell out of favour with the chancellor in 2012, after choosing to run for the premiership in North-Rhine Westphalia, Germany’s most populous state, and achieving one of the worst results in his party’s history. He was sacked from cabinet days after the result. In recent years, Röttgen has managed to rebuild a national and international profile in his role as head of the German parliament’s foreign affairs committee, proving his reputation as an eloquent debater with stances on Brexit, the war in Syria and the trade stand-off with Donald Trump that were often more forthright than those of the chancellor. His power within the party is seen as limited by his missteps in the past, however, and the fact that Röttgen’s liberal profile is so similar to that of another potential continuity candidate, the current North-Rhine Westphalian premier, Armin Laschet, has raised eyebrows. In the past, Röttgen has been seen as someone who could work with the Greens, currently the second-biggest party in the polls after the conservative bloc. In a letter quoted by the regional newspaper Rheinische Post to Kramp-Karrenbauer, Röttgen said the situation was “so serious that it was about the future of the CDU and what that meant for the stability of Germany”. The other potential CDU leadership contenders are Friedrich Merz, an economic liberal and former arch-rival to Merkel, and the rightwing health minister, Jens Spahn. The CDU leader is likely to be the chancellor candidate for the conservative bloc, but the Christian Social Union – the Bavarian sister party to the CDU – could put forward a candidate.