We believe there needs to be a healthy balance between public service and private interest in the media as much as in other spheres. But we fear that news of government intentions to weaken the funding arrangement for the BBC (TV licence may be abolished in 2027 and jail threat removed, says Morgan, 6 February) is the start of a concerted attempt to diminish public service media, that will favour the growing centralised, commercial control of social, print and broadcast media. The BBC is one of the very few remaining bastions representing public, not private, interests, which is vital for the quality of civic and cultural life in Britain. We believe that the weakening of protections for the licence fee is part of an ideologically driven plan that will critically undermine a great, internationally respected brand representing the best of Britain, at a time when the nation needs it most. The BBC provides a public media platform that can guarantee universal access and open opportunities for real civic engagement, while protecting against the harms of a media otherwise dominated by market forces. Private media platforms have been caught data mining, using addictive techniques and being co-opted for politically partial purposes. A truly public media – and the BBC needs to be more accessible, accountable to and representative of citizens – is a vital counterbalance. It is the government’s job to protect and enhance the public sphere. It is not brave enough to say outright that it wants to destroy the BBC, but acts as if that is its intent. Anyone has a stake who reads, listens to or watches the BBC’s extraordinary range of output, underpinned by the licence fee. Like any organisation, the BBC makes mistakes, but the answer is for it to become a more plural, open and truly public media platform, not be killed by a thousand cuts. It is time to draw a line. We believe the BBC should be protected and improved as one of the few remaining national institutions that binds us together, and creates a wealth of debate, drama, discussion and information, without which we would be a much poorer country.Andrew Simms, Lindsay Mackie, Shaista Aziz, Alan Rusbridger, Prof Colin Crouch, and Michael Frayn • What can you buy for 43p? Not even a second-class stamp. Yet that is what the BBC costs licence payers each day. For that we get independently gathered, fact-checked news 24 hours a day, with unrivalled worldwide coverage and expertise; spectacular wildlife programmes; internationally renowned dramas and comedies; and a wealth of sport and music – on TV, on the web and on the radio. The BBC, like the NHS, is a unique and precious British institution – a public forum for entertainment, debate and information. At times of national crisis and joy, many of us turn to it. It is a national asset and accomplishment, which should be celebrated. It is also, most importantly, a crucial part of our democracy, holding governments and politicians of all parties to account. If we allow the BBC to be dismantled, bit by bit, under the guise of “modernisation”, or “necessity”, or to be so diminished that it no longer counts, I think we will come bitterly to regret losing an institution that is uniquely ours.Laura PhillipsLondon • It is entirely right that those who watch the BBC without paying should be prosecuted, just as someone who tried to hack into any other supplier’s output for free should be. The BBC, a public broadcaster, was deliberately given its own source of funding so that, unlike so many other public broadcasters, it would be, and could be seen to be, independent of government influence. This has of course long been the basis of its outstanding reputation for impartiality, both at home and abroad. If, instead, funding is to be paid directly to broadcasters at the government’s discretion then it is inconceivable that the government would not expect favourable coverage in return, or indeed, that broadcasters would not seek to curry favour by toadying to the government, as happens in much of the rest of the world. The licence fee is just another form of taxation, and evading taxes is a criminal offence. It is admittedly a regressive tax – though at about £3 a week, hardly a huge burden – but if the government wishes to grant exemptions, these should be funded from general taxation and not by expecting one group of consumers to subsidise another. The decriminalisation of non-payment therefore seems to have no justification and, what with the government also refusing to allow ministers to appear on certain programmes, it does seem that this is just part of a government vendetta against an organisation that it – wrongly, in my view – perceives to be biased against it. We must fight to save the BBC and the licence fee as a guarantee of its independence.Adrian CoskerHitchin, Hertfordshire • If non-payment of the BBC licence fee is decriminalised, can we assume this will apply to non-payment for the provision of other public services such as water, road tax, bus and train fares, heat and light, local authority care charges, council tax and even broadband?Chris JeffriesStockport, Greater Manchester • Like many Labour supporters in recent years, I’ve had it in for BBC news coverage across the various formats. However, as recently reported, Rupert Murdoch now has plans to launch a Times radio station – to add to his more tabloid-style talkRadio (Times radio venture aims to lure listeners away from BBC, 29 January). I think I can see where the BBC licence fee debate is going.Noel CullinaneLeeds • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition