Alistair McDowall joined forces with the director Vicky Featherstone four years ago to stage X, a play that took place on another planet. The playwright teams up with Featherstone again for this 45-minute monologue performed by Kate O’Flynn. With it, they return back to Earth and the terra firma of a single, unremarkable life. O’Flynn is an unnamed woman who takes us from her cradle to her grave under lighting designer Anna Watson’s simple but effective single spotlight. In the beginning, there are dissociated words, repetitions and animal noises spoken by a stationary, seated O’Flynn. This babble grows into sentences as O’Flynn moves into teenhood (“I want to not be square, please god”) and further into adult terrain, capturing a very contemporary trajectory with divorce, second marriage and the daily grind of a commute: “Driving to work” is repeated monotonously, as if in perennial groundhog state. McDowall channels female experience with warmth and humour: there are school-girl snogs, periods (“blood, blood, blood”), masturbation, orgasms and childbirth. There is, in it all, the sense of an entire life flashing by and this central conceit is well-worn in literary form. Recently, Lucy Ellmann’s novel Ducks, Newburyport dramatised the inner life of an Ohio housewife, but McDowall’s play also has shades of James Joyce, from the childlike voice that opens A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man to Molly Bloom’s chapter-long stream-of-consciousness in Ulysses. There are aspects, too, of Beckett’s spot-lit figures speaking in various states of existential extremity. “Is this what I imagined life was?’ asks O’Flynn without answering the question. It’s a clever withholding of judgment but also leaves us yearning for something more. McDowall is not giving us the life of an artist or a person of note. This woman seems to be emphatically ordinary – and endearing for her ordinariness. As she streams through her life in words, she becomes eminently relatable: an everywoman journeying through joys and woes. The glitter in this production ultimately lies in its performance; O’Flynn quickens and slows, changes tone and rhythm, and at times her monologue sounds orchestral, as if she is trying to chase multiple strands of thoughts at once. If this is the stuff of ordinary existence, O’Flynn brings all of it to life with such ache, warmth and feeling that she makes it mesmerising. At the Royal Court, London, until 15 February.