Mark Wood has had the pause button pressed on his Test career again after being ruled out of England’s tour of Sri Lanka. The 30-year-old fast bowler looked to have made a breakthrough in South Africa as regards his physical hardiness, playing consecutive Tests at the end of the 3-1 series win and taking nine wickets during the second of those at the Wanderers. But a side strain picked up during the Twenty20 series that followed means Wood is targeting the summer’s first home Test against West Indies at the Oval on 4 June, having joined Jimmy Anderson (rib) and Jofra Archer (elbow) on the sidelines. Lancashire’s Saqib Mahmood, who has made international debuts in one-day and Twenty20 cricket this winter, has been named as Wood’s replacement and will be in the touring party who depart for Sri Lanka on Monday. England play two Tests in Galle and Colombo starting on 19 March and while seamers are unlikely to dominate on the expected surfaces, the loss of first Archer and now Wood denies Joe Root the potentially game-breaking option of 90mph-plus pace. Archer’s injury – a stress fracture to the elbow – raised questions over Root’s deployment of him in his first year of international cricket, including the 42 overs he sent down in one innings during the 1-0 Test series defeat in New Zealand. But Archer has since defended his captain, telling ESPNCricinfo: “It’s not his fault I’m injured. I’ve seen that said a lot actually. It’s not my fault, it’s not anyone’s fault. If everyone knew when they were going to get injured, then there wouldn’t be physiotherapists, there wouldn’t be any injuries really. “I don’t like it when people get blamed wrongfully. It’s hard work being captain, being a relied-on batter as well, it all comes with its own pressures. I don’t think anyone needs additional pressures which will hamper them, and evidently, hamper the team.” Wood’s setback is more in keeping with what has been a stop-start career, having played in only 15 Tests out of a possible 67 since his debut in 2015. The South Africa tour was his comeback from a more serious side strain sustained during the World Cup final against New Zealand last July. But the hope remains among the England medical staff that through targeted deployment by the coaches and the longer run-up he introduced 18 months ago, Wood is through the worst of the injury problems that have led to three ankle operations.