A fourth patient has tested positive for coronavirus in England, the chief medical officer said on Sunday, as the Balearic Islands confirmed a British man had tested positive for the virus in Mallorca. Prof Chris Whitty said the new case was a known contact of a previously confirmed UK case and the virus was passed on in France. The patient is being treated at the Royal Free hospital in London. The new case appears to be linked to a cluster of cases in a French ski resort. On Saturday it emerged that five Britons including a nine-year-old child were in hospital in France after being diagnosed with coronavirus. Another six UK nationals are being kept under observation in French hospitals. The group had been staying in two apartments in a ski chalet in the Alpine resort area of Contamines-Montjoie near Mont Blanc when they were visited by a Briton who had been in Singapore. French officials said the British national who was in Singapore returned on 24 January and stayed for four days in the area in eastern France, before returning to England on 28 January. The visitor was found to have the virus when he returned to the UK at the end of last month. Whitty said: “Experts at Public Health England continue to work hard tracing patient contacts from the UK cases. They successfully identified this individual and ensured the appropriate support was provided. The patient has been transferred to a specialist NHS centre at the Royal Free hospital, and we are now using robust infection control measures to prevent any possible further spread of the virus.” It is understood the third case confirmed in the UK is a middle-aged man who caught the illness in Singapore. He is thought to be the first UK national to contract the disease and was transferred to St Thomas’ hospital in London, where there is an infectious diseases unit, on Thursday. The Department of Health and Social Care did not give any detail on how the cases were linked. The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the Wuhan coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine. The UN agency advises people to: Despite a surge in sales of face masks in the aftermath of the outbreak of the coronavirus outbreak, experts are divided over whether they can prevent transmission and infection. There is some evidence to suggest that masks can help prevent hand-to-mouth transmissions, given the large number of times people touch their faces. The consensus appears to be that wearing a mask can limit – but not eliminate – the risks, provided they are used correctly. Justin McCurry While the total number of cases in the UK stands at four, on Sunday the government in the Balearic Islands confirmed a British man had tested positive for coronavirus in Mallorca. The man’s wife and two daughters tested negative and were not showing any signs of having the virus. The health ministry said it was in the process of identifying who may have already been in contact with the man. Speaking on BBC One’s Andrew Marr Show on Sunday, the justice secretary, Robert Buckland, said he was confident that the UK was ready for any outbreak of the virus. “Of course, the NHS is always preparing itself for emergencies, or situations of extreme pressure,” he said. “And this is no exception. And the planning that goes on, year in, year out, will be put into good operation. And is indeed being put into good operation at the moment. So I think we can confidently say that we are ready. “This is, of course, a particularly widespread and dangerous outbreak. And we are being extremely vigilant and working closely with the Chinese authorities.” On Sunday the second and final flight carrying British citizens from the coronavirus-hit Chinese city of Wuhan landed in Oxfordshire. The flight, with more than 200 people onboard including some foreign nationals, arrived at RAF Brize Norton shortly before 7.30am on Sunday. The foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, said the flight had brought back 105 British nationals and family members, as well as 95 foreign nationals and family members. A total of 13 staff and medical professionals were also onboard. The passengers were being taken to the Kents Hill Park hotel and conference centre in Milton Keynes to be quarantined for 14 days. Two British nationals were not allowed to board the flight after they initially failed temperature checks, although later checks were normal. One of them, Josh Skarratts, told Sky News: “Now we are stranded in Wuhan having missed the last plane out of Wuhan and our last means of evacuation.” Locals in the area of Kents Hill Park hotel told the Press Association they were unconcerned about living in close proximity to the quarantine area. “They’ve got to go somewhere. You could say that it may have been better if they had been put in a more of an isolated place,” said Stephen Szyelimski. “I’ve got no bones of contention. I’ve got no upset. They’ve got to do it, it’s got to be done and it’s got to be done properly. And I hope we get on top of it very quickly.” The three joined buildings that make up Kents Hill Park were cordoned off with temporary wire fencing, and security officers will patrol the site for the duration of the quarantine. Staff in blue scrubs, gloves and masks were seen welcoming the arrivals on to the premises on Sunday morning, reported the Press Association. The conference centre and hotel is close to three schools. A spokesman for Milton Keynes council said: “Local schools have been alerted and are working to update and reassure parents”.