Manchester United stuttered throughout this tepid affair yet still remain favourites to reach the last 16 at the expense of Club Brugge in next week’s return leg. Towards the end here snow fell, replacing the rain, on a night when each side was frozen in a deep below-par state. While Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s side have the away goal, whether United possess the talent and skill to win this competition for a second time in four seasons is doubtful. “It was a difficult game against a well organised team in difficult conditions,” said the manager. “I don’t think it was one of the best games.” Solskjær made six changes for this second of three games in seven days, with Anthony Martial leading a 3-4-2‑1, while Philippe Clement’s side had the former Liverpool No 1 Simon Mignolet behind a 5-3-2. United’s win at Chelsea on Monday was the perfect way to commence the closing phase of the campaign following the winter break. The question, though, remained the same: might it finally initiate a formidable run of form that has been elusive since the beginning of Solskjær’s tenure. They started well, but that would prove a false augury in a half when United were largely dismal until the last 10 minutes. From kick-off Nemanja Matic hit Diogo Dalot with a diagonal along the right and his flick was collected inside Brugge’s area by Martial. Moments later United had a scare, though. Brandon Williams missed a challenge, enabling Emmanuel Bonaventure to advance towards Sergio Romero in the United goal. When the ball found Hans Vanaken, Brugge’s captain seemed certain to score, but Matic intervened and the danger fizzled out. United threatened again via a sequence that began with Victor Lindelöf and Dalot exchanging passes inside their half and featured a contribution from Luke Shaw before Andreas Pereira’s shot was saved by Mignolet low to his left. Now, the Brugge goalkeeper was about to have a prime role in United conceding. Matic overran the ball to give Brugge a goal-kick. Mignolet took this quickly, hitting a long delivery through the middle. This was collected by Bonaventure, who held off Williams and calmly lobbed the advancing Romero. United immediately claimed to the referee, Aleksei Kulbakov, that Mignolet had hit a moving ball but despite VAR being in use from this round on, the Belarusian was unmoved. Here was a test for United and one that might have become sterner if Mats Rits had not scuffed an attempt near Romero’s goal. United escaped but continued to be vulnerable whenever the home side attacked. Harry Maguire was caught out of position so Percy Tau dropped in behind and from the ensuing play Bonaventure broke the United ranks again. This time Romero saved his shot at a tight angle from close in. The home crowd was in raucous voice. When Shaw’s pass put Maguire under pressure close to his goal, the captain bought a foul by falling as Tau approached and the spectators were in uproar. Solskjær may have looked at Bruno Fernandes on the bench and decided his midfield poise was required. United were poor, embodied by Maguire scooping a regulation pass straight out. Yet from this error United equalised. Maxim De Cuyper aimed his throw-in at Brandon Mechele near halfway but the centre-back dozed, Martial stole the ball, swooped towards Mignolet and finished for a fine solo strike to follow his opener at Chelsea. Solskjær said: “It is a good goal [but] he wasn’t really in the game – he didn’t make enough runs in behind, it was a frustrating night for him. He’s got two in two and you’ve to be patient as a striker – [be ready] when the chance comes.” Martial’s 14th of the season silenced the stadium aside from the travelling support and he came close to adding another. Once more his skill fashioned him space and he was unlucky to see a left-foot shot from a 20-yard angle rebound off Mignolet’s left post, the keeper’s fingertips saving his side. United started the second half brightly but as with the first faded. First, Juan Mata fed Dalot and his curving cross came close to creating a chance for Martial. Then Mata slipped in the Frenchman but when he should have shot he tried a return ball to the Spaniard and the move broke down. From here any quality seeped from the contest – each side proving bereft of a spark. On show was a hodgepodge of mistimed touches and passes. Solskjær put on Odion Ighalo, Fred and Fernandes for the last phase of the match and though no real upturn occurred in his brief cameo the last of these managed four shots – the most for United, which was indicative of how poor they were. “He made a difference in 10 minutes,” Solskjær said, after a night that will not be long remembered.