He was only fifth past the winning post but Tiger Roll made a very encouraging return to action in the Boyne Hurdle, his first race since winning the Grand National for the second time 10 months ago. While he made this comeback on a low-key Sunday card at Navan, his next two outings will be at the very centre of racing’s spotlight, at the Cheltenham Festival and then the Grand National. “I thought he ran a brilliant race,” was the immediate reaction from Tiger Roll’s trainer, Gordon Elliott, whose mood was no doubt elevated by the fact that his other runner, Cracking Smart, defied odds of 16-1 to carry off first prize. “It’s great for him to win it,” Elliott added, “but he’s probably going to get overshadowed by Tiger Roll.” Keith Donoghue, who rides Tiger Roll in his work at home, got the ride on him this time and apparently believed they were going to win the Boyne for the second year in a row, so well was his mount travelling at the third-last hurdle. Soon after that, however, the 10-year-old’s lack of race-fitness told and the front three got away from him. Elliott had predicted as much. “He’s only been back cantering since 1 January and people shouldn’t be expecting fireworks,” the trainer was quoted as saying in the Racing Post on Sunday. “He’ll be ridden out the back and hopefully he can pass a few horses. If he does that and enjoys himself, it’ll be job done.” Tiger Roll was a notable drifter in the betting market as punters cottoned on to that lack of expectation, opening at 7-2 but sliding out to a starting price of 9-1, with twice as big available on the exchanges. In that context he ran very pleasingly, coasting into the argument half a mile from home like a talented horse, even though the distance of this race would be well short of his optimum. “I was very, very worried with the [heavy] ground and I was worried about his fitness. But I thought it was a positive run,” Elliott said. “As long as he’s OK in the morning, it’ll be all systems for Cheltenham and then all being well the Randox Health Grand National. He’ll probably go to Cheltenham in the next 10 days for a pop round over the cross-country course. I’m absolutely thrilled.” Bookmakers largely opted to leave their prices unchanged. Tiger Roll is 6-4 favourite for Cheltenham’s Cross‑Country race and 6-1 to achieve an unprecedented third consecutive success in the National on 4 April. However, Magic Of Light, runner-up in the National last year, was eased out to 20-1 for this year’s race by several firms after finishing last of the eight runners in the Boyne.