Cooking for one can feel like an effort; with no one else to keep happy, you can easily opt for quick fixes such as toast or cold leftovers. Sometimes this is just what the doctor ordered, but it is telling how even the smallest culinary act can make supper feel more nourishing; perhaps the ultimate in looking after yourself. This soup is simplicity itself but can then be adapted and garnished a hundred different ways: here with spicy, garlicky crumbs. It keeps beautifully in the fridge for a week, longer in the freezer. I always try to keep a little ’nduja in the fridge or freezer to transform fast suppers. The crumbs are a delicious contrast to the velvety soup. Prep 15 minCook 50 minServes 4-6 50ml olive oil1 onion, peeled and chopped1 celery stalk, chopped4 garlic cloves, peeled; 2 finely chopped, 2 crushedSalt and pepper50g butter500g leeks, cleaned and roughly sliced1 bay leaf400g floury potatoes, peeled and diced into small equal sizes150g double cream For the crumbs25g ’nduja75g stale bread, blitzed to crumbs Warm half the oil in a large, deep pan over a medium heat and add the onion, celery and chopped garlic. Season generously and sweat for 10 minutes before adding the butter, leeks and bay leaf. Continue to sweat for another 10 minutes, until the vegetables are soft and sweet, before adding the potatoes. Stir for five to 10 minutes, scraping any caramelised bits from the bottom of the pan. Add the cream and 750ml of water, bring to a simmer and cover for 15 minutes, until the potatoes are soft and falling apart. Meanwhile, warm the rest of the oil in a small frying pan and cook the crushed garlic for three to four minutes, until it begins to colour, then add the ’nduja and push it down with your spoon so it melts into the pan. Stir in the breadcrumbs and a pinch of salt, then fry for a minute or so until the crumbs have absorbed the fat; set aside until ready to serve. When the potatoes are ready, use a hand blender to blitz the soup smooth. Check and adjust the seasoning, remembering that the crumbs will be salty. Scatter over the crumbs and serve at once. If you are vegetarian, try topping the soup with black olive crumbs or garlicky croutons instead. Either crumbs will make a delicious topping for even the simplest of pasta dishes (garlic, olive oil and parsley for a start). Experiment with thyme or tarragon in the base of the soup for different flavour profiles.