A travel writer’s journey is often centrifugal in its bearing, from the known to the unknown; but the journey itself has the effect of inaugurating a new centre – a river’s source, a mountain’s peak, a remote island or fabled city. In Kapka Kassabova’s book, the destination is a lake – or rather two connected lakes, Ohrid and Prespa, on the Balkan peninsula. “Sometimes,” she notes, “history’s thoroughfares are disguised as geography’s outposts.” It’s a region she visited on childhood holidays, but never as an adult, sensing that she “wasn’t ready”. As with her last book, the superb Border, the destination is also a tripartite political frontier. The journey is a search for an ancestral home, something forsaken – the “lacustrine realm” her grandmother Anastasia left as a young woman and felt agonisingly, debilitatingly drawn back to. In that sense, To the Lake is a classic account of the exile (albeit at a remove) seeking completion through return. “Geography shapes history – we generally accept this as a fact,” Kassabova writes in her introduction. “But we don’t often explore how families digest big historio-geographies, how these sculpt our inner landscape.” Kassabova has never been interested in derring-do; the perils are of the psychic variety, and they are genuine The lakes lie less than six miles apart, separated by the limestone Galičica mountains, with Ohrid split between the territories of Albania and North Macedonia, while the borders of those two countries meet that of Greece in the middle of Lake Prespa (another pinpoint). Patrimonies and sovereignties continue to shift. Towards the end of the book’s writing, in early 2019, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia was renamed the Republic of North Macedonia by an agreement signed beside – and named after – Lake Prespa. On a map, the national boundaries that lattice the region appear no more considerate of topography than the cracks in a plate are of the underlying pattern. Borders and their intrinsic, deforming violence remain Kassabova’s subject. But in this book she goes further, tracing the intrusion of those cracks deeper into the souls and psyches of successive generations, herself included. Chronic wanderlust predates her birth, she tells us (“in the womb I revolved ceaselessly”); it is a syndrome she associates with a history of emigration on her mother’s side of the family, culminating in her own migrations from Bulgaria to New Zealand to the Scottish Highlands. Of her late grandmother in Bulgaria she remembers wondering: “How did she come to be here (urban and incomplete), yet often talked of there (watery and complete)”? Connected to this incompleteness is a matrilineal history of illness – “The Pain” – that rises in each generation “like a dark wave”. “Something pulled us down,” she writes, “and compelled us to be unwell.” As a search for a kind of water cure, the book might find a place alongside others about recovery through journey-making – Jenny Diski’s Skating to Antarctica, for instance, or Guy Stagg’s recent The Crossway. And yet while To the Lake may be a quest narrative, the book’s subject is not the author, nor is its objective personal transformation: “Unless we become aware of how we carry our own legacies,” she explains, “we too may become unwitting agents of destruction.” Arriving in the Macedonian resort of Ohrid, on the lake of the same name, Kassabova circles the city and the water less like a surveyor than someone scanning the ground for something she dropped on an earlier visit. “Lake Ohrid is one of those places on the earth that make you feel as if something fateful awaits you. As if you were always meant to come and you can’t believe it’s taken you so long.” In Ohrid itself, her grandmother’s home city, “all the men looked like my cousins”. “Whose are you?” is the recurring, vital question – to which family do you belong? Almost everyone she meets is related to her or remembers some close relative. Lake Ohrid, we learn, is Europe’s largest natural reservoir, and one of the world’s oldest lakes. “Every time I went into the water,” she writes, “I felt instantly happy.” It is a kind of homecoming; but not every home is happy. If the lake represents liberty, it has also been a barrier, preventing the people of its shores from leaving. As she learns more about the region and her ancestors, the author recognises a pattern: “of absent men and women left behind, unbending women who dislocated themselves and their loved ones out of shape trying to right what had gone wrong with the family”. One woman she meets has a “face so stricken that you couldn’t look at it for more than a second”. Kassabova has never been interested in derring‑do; the perils she encounters are of the psychic variety, and they are genuine. “To journey to the place of your ancestors, you must be prepared to see what it is easier to deny.” Sight and sightlessness, blindings and blindness literal and wilful, are recurring themes. “The dead open the eyes of the living,” reads the book’s epigraph. The saints painted on the walls of the rock churches lining the lakes’ shores have had their eyes chiselled out by iconoclasts of one faith or another. According to legend, after the Battle of Kleidion in 1014, the Byzantine emperor Basil II had 15,000 of the Bulgarian Tsar Samuil’s defeated soldiers blinded – sparing only a handful to lead their comrades home to Samuil’s seat on Lake Prespa. (There is a village on the lake whose name translates as “The Gouged Ones”.) Kassabova is hypervigilant of such horrors and their echoes. Seen from the air, the two lakes themselves “look like eyes in an ancient face” – and we are continuously aware of their steadfastness, their unruffled witness to the turmoil unfolding around them century after century: pogroms, lynchings, vendettas, battles, more blindings, mass drownings, national boundaries drawn and redrawn like razorblades across skin. The lakes maintain their vigil. The book’s second, shorter, part concerns a second trip made in the autumn to the Albanian portion of Ohrid, and finally to the smaller Lake Prespa. The tone darkens. Albania is a country “kinder to the dead than to the living”. Prespa, she is told, is a “crazy lake … unstable, with a mind of its own”, a place of mysterious vortexes and monster carp. When she swims in its waters there is “an unsettling feeling of something lurking beneath”. What does trauma do to a place, Kassabova seems always to be asking. What persists in the soil – or the water – once spilled blood has been leached away? “This landscape is i thyerene moshe,” she is told, “broken by age”. To the Lake’s objective is not healing so much as reconciliation, a quest for spiritual wholeness. “Our tragedy,” she writes in the closing paragraphs, “is fragmentation.” The narrative performs another kind of reconciliation, too. A characteristic of modern travel writing is a patchwork, broken-mirror approach to form: short, lapidary encounters; the micro-patterning of images and tales and meditations – a tendency attributable to modernism as much as to the impressionistic, stop-start nature of any journey. It was partly the compound facets of Border that accounted for its miraculous glimmer. To the Lake is more languid and more patient, as fluid and inexorable as the underground watercourses that connect the two lakes. The book’s achievement, likewise, is to reconcile, thrillingly, what those twin bodies of water represent to Kassabova: the unconscious and the conscious; the darkness of history and the radiance of life and love. • William Atkins’s The Immeasurable World: A Desert Journey is published by Faber. To the Lake by Kapka Kassabova is published by Granta (RRP £14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.