Twitter shares climbed on Thursday as the social network beat revenue expectations by posting its first billion-dollar quarter, shrugging off fears it could be facing a slowdown in advertising. The company reported fourth quarter revenues of $1.01bn, above a consensus of $996.7m and at the very top of the company’s own forecast range. Shares rose 6% in early trading on the New York Stock Exchange as investors breathed a sigh of relief as the firm rebounded following a poor third quarter. In October, Twitter’s share price plunged almost 20% when revenues came in lower than expected as the company blamed issues including bugs in its advertising system on mobile apps. The key metric of “monetisable” daily user numbers – those to whom it serves ads – hit a record 152 million in the fourth quarter, up 21% year-on-year and ahead of the 147.5m expected by analysts. “We reached a new milestone in the fourth quarter with quarterly revenue in excess of $1bn, reflecting steady progress on revenue product and solid performance across major geographies, with particular strength in US advertising,” said Ned Segal, Twitter’s chief financial officer. Advertising revenue rose 12% to $885m in the fourth quarter. US advertising revenue totalled $509m, up 20% year-on-year. International ad revenue grew at a more sedate 3% to $375m. The company said international growth was steady but had been held back by ongoing “headwinds” relating to its mobile advertising tech and an issue, now resolved, relating to targeting. In October, Twitter reported it had been using personal data to target adverts without the correct user permissions. It turned off the features when it found the bugs, denting its ability to sell targeted ads. Last yearthe group said it would stop accepting paid political ads globally, ramping up pressure on Facebook to follow suit ahead of the US presidential elections. “Twitter numbers look pretty darn good and a bounce back from a lacklustre third quarter,” said Neil Wilson, chief market analyst at Markets.com. “It’s also encouraging that Twitter is executing on its strategy in a quarter when Snap struggled and Facebook also found life tougher.”