The Six Nations champions, England, began their 2020 campaign with a pulsating victory in Pau that owed as much to scramble defence as it did to their impressive attacking repertoire. The sun blazed down on Stade du Hameau in south-west France on an unseasonably warm 24C day, with skill levels correspondingly high in front of more than 14,000 passionate fans. England began in the manner of grand slam winners, pinning Les Bleus back in their own 22 for the first 20 minutes with a ruthlessly effective mixture of powerful picking-and-going and expansive passing and running. The visitors’ continuity had the French defence scrambling until Abby Dow’s opener after nine minutes. The outside centre, Emily Scarratt, burst through close to the French posts, England recycled and sent it through the hands to the right, where Dow was lurking to touch down in the corner. A second try soon arrived from a perfectly executed driving maul in the same corner. Vicky Fleetwood emerged from underneath a pile of bodies to claim it and Scarratt converted to make it 12-0 after 19 minutes. France seemed in disarray but their captain, Gaëlle Hermet, seized the initiative back for her team. Les Bleus rumbled a maul down the right and the openside flanker picked the ball out of a ruck, bashed through a couple of tackles and off-loaded beautifully to the scrum-half, Laure Sansus, who sprinted over. Jessy Trémoulière converted and the momentum shifted. The hosts forced a scrum penalty on England’s ball, Trémoulière stroked three points off the tee and the home crowd stirred as the gap was reduced to two, five minutes before the break. On the stroke of half-time Sansus broke dangerously down the left and found Trémoulière but a thunderous tackle from Dow sent the French full-back into reverse, summing up England’s defensive intensity throughout. Sarah Bern came on for England at half-time and was sent roaring over the try-line within eight minutes thanks to service from Natasha Hunt, but the score was chalked off for a clear obstruction by Sarah Beckett. From England’s perspective the third quarter was all defence; neither side registered a point thanks to a combination of French inaccuracy and relentless tackling by the English. The visitors then bounced off the ropes for the killer score on 62 minutes, Scarratt romping on to a perfect off-load from Amber Reed and sprinting clear from long range with the French defence out of shape. Scarratt converted her own score for 10-19. France rallied yet again and England were perhaps fortunate not to see a yellow card after giving away penalties at scrum time (an area of home superiority) and in trying to repel the French driving maul. Trémoulière narrowed the gap to six points, six minutes from time, but England held firm to win a richly entertaining encounter. In Dublin Ireland saw off the challenge of Scotland with an 18-14 win, while in Cardiff Italy staged an upset with a 19-15 victory over Wales.