As we all wait with interest to see how Manchester City fare in their bid to get their two-year ban from European competition overturned by the court of arbitration for sport, representatives of various players may be making contingency plans in case the appeal doesn’t go as well as the club expects. Juventus are rumoured to have identified City striker Gabriel Jesus as a summer target and may also move for Argentinian forward Mauro Icardi, should PSG decide not to make his loan move from Internazionale permanent. With the palaver surrounding the future of Paul Pogba at Manchester United showing no sign of abating, Juventus are also lining up alternative midfield signings in case they fail to re-land their man. Bayern Munich’s Spanish midfielder Thiago Alcântara has been identified as one potential signing. Brescia teenager Sandro Tonali and 21-year-old Lyon midfielder Houssem Aouar are also on the shortlist. Unable to nail down a starting spot at Chelsea, Emerson is getting itchy feet. The Italy international left-back’s agent says he and his client are aware of interest from Juve and Inter, and expects to receive offers from both clubs come season’s end. Reports from Italy say Inter are also hopeful of signing Napoli striker Dries Mertens, who was linked with a move to Tottenham Hotspur or Chelsea in January. German newspaper Bild says Arsenal have been keeping tabs on Bayer Leverkusen centre-back Jonathan Tah, who will be allowed to leave the club in the summer. Renowned for being somewhat gaffe-prone and slow, the 24-year-old is valued at around £33m and should fit right in at the Emirates. The brightest goalscoring prospect to come out of Canada since Paul Peschisolido joined Birmingham City in 1992, Jonathan David has been turning heads with his performances for Belgian side Gent this season. Arsenal and Everton are reported to be among a whole hosts of clubs interested in signing the 20-year-old, but will face competition for his signature from other suitors in France and Italy. And finally, currently out of contract at the ripe old age of 33, Wales midfielder Joe Ledley recently told BBC Wales that he’s looking for a club reasonably close to his family home in Cardiff as he tries to get game time in the hope of forcing his way into Ryan Giggs’ plans for Euro 2020. One suspects that joining the Newcastle Jets in Australia may not have been exactly what he had in mind, but the A-League side are reported to be interested in bringing him Down Under.