An emotional David Warner completed a stunning return to international cricket by claiming his third Allan Border medal, finishing a single vote ahead of Steve Smith. Australian cricket’s other highest individual honour went to star women’s allrounder Ellyse Perry, who picked up her third Belinda Clark award with 161 votes. Warner and Smith were banned from representing Australia for a year after the 2018 sandpaper scandal, only returning in June to the national set-up. Prolific performances in the World Cup and Australia’s home Test summer allowed Warner (194) to edge out Smith (193) in Monday night’s count at Melbourne’s Crown Palladium. Last year’s medallist Pat Cummins (185) capped off a consistent 12 months across all formats to round out the top three. Warner’s triumph goes with his Alan Border medals from 2016 and 2017, with the three victories putting him in rare company, only one behind four-time winners Ricky Ponting and Michael Clarke. He became emotional when delivering his acceptance speech, especially when it came to mentioning his family and wife Candice. “I couldn’t be any prouder to stand here and receive the award ... [and] to see the rest of the other guys doing so well,” Warner said. “I really had a hunger and determination to come back and really put my foot forward ... so to have a summer like that really put a smile on my face.” Perry’s dominant Ashes series skyrocketed her eight votes in front of last year’s winner Alyssa Healy (153), with Jess Jonassen third on 89, adding to her Belinda Clark award wins in 2016 and 2018 – both of which also came in Ashes years. She smashed 116 in the Test against England, then grabbed 7-22 – the best one-day bowling figures by an Australian woman. “It’s a huge surprise and I will savour it. It’s been a very special time to be involved,” Perry said. Warner also picked up the Twenty20 international honour, while Marnus Labuschange was rewarded for his stunning consistency since the Ashes Lord’s match to win his maiden Test player of the year award. Limited-overs captain Aaron Finch (38 votes) finished ahead of axed batsman Usman Khawaja (33) for the ODI player of the year. Warner’s success caps off a significant redemption tale, with the aggressive opening batsman banned by Cricket Australia from holding a leadership position after the Cape Town ball-tampering saga. The 33-year-old plundered bowling attacks during the World Cup, finishing with 647 runs at an average of 71.88, one run behind Indian opener Rohit Sharma for the leading scorer of the tournament. Warner struggled during Australia’s retention of the Ashes, before making up for it with a dominant home summer, highlighted by a record-breaking 335 not out against Pakistan at Adelaide Oval. Smith was the opposite, as he was untouchable against England with 774 runs from only four Tests, but below his absolute best on return to Australian shores and failed to score a century across five Tests. In other awards, former Australian batsman Shaun Marsh took out the men’s domestic player of the year and Wes Agar picked up the Bradman young cricketer, while Healy won both the women’s ODI and T20 international player of the year awards. Tayla Vlaeminck was recognised as the young women’s cricketer of the year.