The powerful Seven Barrows stable is home to some serious pre-Cheltenham jitters this year, as Epatante, the longstanding favourite for the Champion Hurdle, has been coughing. Nicky Henderson announced the news through Twitter on Thursday evening but stressed that no cause for the coughing could be found and he hopes she can still have a normal preparation for the Festival race in less than a fortnight. “Epatante has been coughing a few times over the last couple of days for no obvious reason that we can detect,” the trainer said in a statement issued directly from his own Twitter account. “Her blood tests are perfectly normal and she is feeling very well and fresh in herself.” While conceding that he could do without such a scare, Henderson said it does not prevent Epatante continuing in her routine work. “She is now on medication which will not affect her racing or training. We will blood test and scope her again on Monday.” Perhaps more significantly, Henderson added: “She is the only horse that has coughed at Seven Barrows at any stage this week.” One of the first replies to his post said: “Keep her away from Altior and Champ”. Having been a general 3-1 shot on Thursday morning, Epatante was pushed out to 9-2 for the Champion Hurdle by a couple of firms, while the punters on Betfair made her 11-2. Her stablemate Pentland Hills is threatening to become favourite at 5-1. Benie Des Dieux is just 5-2 with some firms betting ‘non-runner, no bet’ but she was 15-1 on the Betfair exchange last night, suggesting the market does not yet expect that she will be switched to the Champion Hurdle from her established target, the Mares Hurdle. Meanwhile, Richard Johnson made such an excellent comeback from injury that he is no bigger than 11-4 to keep his title as champion jockey. Just 37 days after breaking an arm in a fall at Exeter, Johnson took two rides at Musselburgh and won on both, meaning he is just 18 wins behind Brian Hughes with two months left in the season. Hughes, meanwhile, endured a day of mixed fortunes, mostly spent at the High Holborn office of the British Horseracing Authority where he appealed against a whip ban and gave evidence at another hearing. He had hoped to make it to Musselburgh in time for the 3.52pm race, in which he was to ride the fancied Away At Dawn, and he booked a motorbike taxi to weave him through the London traffic for a flight from Heathrow. The ambitious plan was foiled by the steady pace of justice in the BHA’s hearings dungeon, where it became clear at an early stage that proceedings were not going to fit with Hughes’s plans. Some consolation was that his four-day ban was reduced to two. Henry Brooke took the ride and finished third on Away At Dawn, with Johnson winning the race easily aboard Dubai Guest. Johnson’s earlier victory was gained in much more dramatic circumstances, as his Made For You appeared held before rallying strongly in the final half-furlong to prevail by a neck. Both the jockey’s winners were trained by Olly Murphy, a valuable ally this winter.“It feels great,” Johnson told Racing TV after the first win. “I’d no trouble or pain from my arm all the way through the race but to honest I was blowing more than the horse at the end. “When I was lying on the ground at Exeter knowing I’d probably broken my arm I thought the championship had gone. But the weather has been on my side and Brian hasn’t had as many opportunities as he might otherwise have had. “People are saying the gap is ‘only 20 winners’ but you try riding that many, as it isn’t easy!” Doncaster 2.00 Volt Face 2.35 Goobinator 3.05 Imada 3.40 Miss Heritage (nb) 4.10 Molly Ollys Wishes 4.45 First Flow 5.15 Free SkiNewbury 2.10 Alnadam 2.45 Monte Cristo 3.15 Financial Outcome 3.50 It Sure Is (nap) 4.20 Invincible Cave 4.55 Dorking Cock 5.25 Whiskey LullabyLingfield2.20 River Dawn 2.55 Diva Rock 3.30 Healing Power 4.00 Merhoob 4.35 Vipin 5.05 Copper PointNewcastle5.10 Top Power 5.45 Lexington Force 6.15 Buniann 6.45 Speed Merchant 7.15 Watheer 7.45 Ghost Buy The Opening Show was keeping good company on Monday night, when racing’s weekly magazine programme was nominated in the ‘Best TV/Digital Show’ category alongside Match Of The Day and other heavy hitters at the Sports Journalism Awards. While the award eventually went to Cricket on 5 for highlights of the final extraordinary day of the Ashes series, The Opening Show was given bronze in the seven-runner field, a significant piece of recognition for a programme that appears to be finding its feet and an audience. Figures provided by ITV4 say the show, screened at 9.30am on Saturdays, has been getting an average audience of 175,000 this jumps season, since Cheltenham’s November meeting. That represents a 28% year-on-year increase, they say. It is a still greater increase on the 124,000 being reported at the end of 2017. “The general feeling is that the audience numbers over the last few months have been fantastic,” Oli Bell, The Opening Show’s regular presenter, told me. “There are some really nice features which have proved really popular. We do a ‘Where Are They Now’ which tips the hat to famous racehorses and finds out what they’re doing in retirement, we’ve got Richard Hoiles’s quiz and The Insider, the anonymous pro punter who’s our equivalent of The Stig in some ways. “The SJA nomination is recognition beyond racing’s little bubble, that this is a show that’s well made and popular and a good way to start your Saturday. It was really good fun and great to be there with the team. When they played the footage of the shows we were up against, you realise you’re in a category against Match Of The Day, the NFL Show, it made us all feel very proud. It was reward for a lot of people’s hard work.” “Punchier debate” is cited by The Opening Show’s editor, Tim Williams, as something he has sought to provide. He added: “Stable staff have been brilliant at providing access to the horses arriving, meaning we can connect with the real stars of the show, both human and equine. And we’ve tackled tough issues the sport maybe hadn’t discussed much in the past, like mental health. We’re particularly proud of the exclusive interview we did with Kieran Shoemark, which had a big impact.” The Opening Show does not yet command the same following as The Morning Line, which was usually over 200,000 in its final years, but that programme benefited from the more obvious platform of Channel 4. Racing will be hoping that The Opening Show can sustain its pleasing momentum. In the meantime, we all wait for news of the sport’s much-delayed new deal with ITV. Trends evolve. The past seven winners of the Pertemps Final had previously run nine times or fewer over hurdles. This strongly suggests that the three-mile event on Day Three is following the pattern of many big handicap hurdles, in that it can pay to focus on the less-exposed sorts. Those seven were all unexposed as stayers, so look for an up-and-coming horse, who may have run at the distance just once or twice. Phoenix Way and Welsh Saint are a couple with the right kind of profile. The Weatherbys Cheltenham Festival Betting Guide 2020, written by Paul Ferguson, is out now and available through this link for £15.95. A Cheltenham Festival stat of the day will appear here from Monday to Friday, this week and next. Musselburgh1.00 Judex Lefou 1.30 Made For You 2.07 Shanroe Street 2.42 Overcourt 3.17 Celtic Flames 3.52 Away At DawnLudlow1.40 Feel The Pinch (nb) 2.15 Red Risk (nap) 2.50 Nautical Star 3.25 Another Venture 4.00 Whatsdastory 4.30 Optimised 5.00 DemopolisTaunton1.47 Todd 2.22 Eritage 2.57 On The Road 3.32 Jobsonfire 4.07 Risk And Roll 4.37 Lady Chartreuse 5.07 Time To TinkerNewcastle1.55 Sweet Dime 2.30 Papa Power 3.05 Persian Sun 3.40 Cosmelli 4.15 Dandys Gold 4.45 FortamourChelmsford5.30 Ice Ice Lady 6.00 Flying Focus 6.30 Maori Knight 7.00 Fantastic Flyer 7.30 Griggy 8.00 Lady Of York