A serious, substantial piece of work is the strategic plan published on Thursday by the newly created Horse Welfare Board. It is full of interesting and original thoughts, reflecting on racing’s relationhip with its horses and can be downloaded here. At one point, under the heading “The importance of language”, the Board muses: “We may inadvertently be using language or phrases ... which reinforce the impression of an underlying welfare ‘problem’. For example, it is common for people in the sport to say of a horse before a race, ‘I just hope he comes home safe.’ While this is undoubtedly an expression of how much that horse matters to the person in question, does it reinforce the perception of a high risk to horses when racing, when in fact it is fare more likely that the horse will return safely?” Stiff upper lip for the good of racing, appears to be the message. Well, this is England. But it’s an interesting idea, that the casual use of language by fans and insiders can harm racing’s cause. Another example of this, I suggest, is the constant reference to “the whip”. The broader public with no investment in the sport is naturally bound to be, at the very least, suspicious of the idea of animals being hit with something called a whip. The sport insists the item has been remodelled so as to avoid hurting the horse, so that it is merely a method of communicating urgency; in that case, why not refer to it as ‘the Procush’, the only make which is permitted under the rules of British racing? Racing would be accused of being evasive, but such a change would be valid. As much as I enjoy old racing footage, the implements jockeys used to wield in the 70s look scary to modern eyes and the way they were used could be called aggressive in some cases. Those were whips. The modern item and its use are easily different enough to warrant a different label, underlining the changes made, and it ought to have the gradual effect, over time, of calling racing’s efforts in this area to the attention of agnostics - and, importantly, policy-makers. I’m hardly the first to make the point. M’colleage Dave Yates at the Mirror has been hot on it for some time, so I’m surprised it doesn’t seem to have been debated by the HWB, but there is still time. Another idea that hasn’t yet grabbed the HWB is extending whip punishments to include the trainer and the owner who employed the jockey that broke the rules. As I’ve said before, heaping more punishment on the jockeys is neither sophisticated nor fair. Drag their employers into the soup and you can hope that each jockey will be instructed: “Win if you can but for God’s sake don’t break the whip rules”. If you’re serious about seeking culture change, that’s how to make it happen. The record of four-year-olds in the Weatherbys Champion Bumper stands at just one winner from 80 runners since 1996. That winner was Cue Card, who would go on to prove himself at the top level for many seasons, whilst the previous four-year-old winner was the high-class hurdler Dato Star. This shows the kind of calibre of horse required to defy this statistic, and Panic Attack is prominent in the betting this year for the age group. The Weatherbys Cheltenham Festival Betting Guide 2020, written by Paul Ferguson, is published this week and available through this link for £15.95. A Cheltenham Festival stat of the day will appear here from Monday to Friday for the next three weeks. I was a bit worried for Venetia Williams when her strike-rate fell to 9% in January, a time of year when her stable is usually near its strongest. But five wins from 13 in the past fortnight suggests there’s nothing wrong at Kings Caple, so there is every reason for optimism about Cloudy Glen (4.40) at Warwick. He ran out at the first after late support at Cheltenham last month but then did well behind a really promising type at Sandown. One win from six runs this winter is a poor return in view of the ability he’s shown but it may be worth giving him another chance in a winnable contest. At Exeter, Springfield Fox (2.15) is napped, though odds of 6-4 are not generous. Unbeaten in three points, he proved well ahead of his rating when he made his handicap debut on his first time over fences last month. A 10lb rise ought not to stop him. The Devon National is trappy but 10-1 is better than I expected about Ice Cool Champs (4.20), who has evidently been helped by a wind op. He’s bred to relish the step up in trip, being out of a half-sister to Mini Sensation and Shotgun Willy. Newcastle12.30 Ginflix 1.00 Snookered 1.35 On The Blind Side 2.07 Siannes Star 2.40 Tupelo Mississipi 3.10 Trapper Peak 3.43 Dark Lochnagar Warwick1.25 Lieutenant Rocco 2.00 Grand Roi 2.30 Little Ginge 3.00 Deja Vue 3.35 Sissinghurst 4.10 Midnight Tune 4.40 Cloudy Glen (nb) 5.10 La Reine Poutine Lingfield1.50 Brooklyn Boy 2.25 Agreed 2.55 Halfacrown 3.30 Fuente 4.00 Chocco Star 4.30 Equipped 5.00 Autumn Trail Exeter2.15 Springfield Fox (nap) 2.47 Danny Kirwan 3.20 Ashfield Paddy 3.50 Lisa De Vassy 4.20 Ice Cool Champs 4.50 Martha Brae 5.20 Mocacreme Has Wolverhampton5.15 Double Reflection 5.45 Pilot Wings 6.15 Steelriver 6.45 Lady Sansa 7.15 Never Alone 7.45 Al Daiha 8.15 Watheer