Slowthai has been involved in an altercation at the NME awards, and has been criticised for his behaviour towards host Katherine Ryan. After being taunted by members of the crowd, video footage shows the Midlands rapper raising a glass threateningly above his head, before throwing it at a crowd member, jumping off stage and being held back by security. Earlier in the evening he had made leering comments to host Katherine Ryan, saying on the microphone: “Baby girl … if you want to do something, see me later … you ain’t never had anyone play with you like I’ll play with you.” Crowd members shouted that he was “misogynist”. @slowthai pic.twitter.com/MBtxPv0ZFa Ryan batted the comments away with mocking – and filthy – humour, and later said on Twitter: “He didn’t make me uncomfortable. This is why we need women in positions of power. I knew he had lost from the moment he opened his mouth like any heckler coming up against a COMIC – not a woman – a COMIC. I was operating 2/10. What a sweet boy. I defused it.” Slowthai has apologised for his behaviour, saying: “What started as a joke between us escalated to a point of shameful actions on my part. I want to unreservedly apologise, there is no excuse and I am sorry. I am not a hero.” Elsewhere at the awards, Taylor Swift was awarded best solo act in the world, and said: “This is like the craziest awards show I have ever been to, and I love it so much.” It was her second NME award following a win in 2016 and, referring to the middle-finger shaped statue, said: “I have this award and I put it in my kitchen, and every single morning when I go down and I wake up, I’ve just got this right in my face, just like a full middle finger putting me in my place, like, ‘Good morning!’ So it’s amazing to have a matching set.” In the other international awards, Slipknot were named best band, Lana Del Rey won best album, and Billie Eilish’s Bad Guy was named best song. In the awards for best British artist, the 1975 won best band, FKA twigs best solo act, Little Simz best album, and AJ Tracey best song for Ladbroke Grove. Slowthai won the award for best collaboration, for his song Deal Wiv It with Mura Masa.