Altior, with his winning streak reset from 19 back to zero, will return to action at Newbury on Saturday for the first time since his defeat by Cyrname at Ascot in November, and with Nicky Henderson, his trainer, apparently still regretting his decision to send Altior up against the top-rated chaser in training on his first start of the campaign. At an event on Monday to launch the buildup to the Betfair Hurdle card at Newbury, where Altior will face a maximum of nine opponents as he attempts to win the Game Spirit Chase for the third year running, Henderson suggested Altior and his connections had “paid the penalty” for running in a much-anticipated head-to-head with Cyrname. “Paul [Nicholls, Cyrname’s trainer] might disagree with me totally but his horse didn’t run his race in the King George [on Boxing Day] and we took a long time to get over it,” Henderson said. “Under normal circumstances he wouldn’t have run but you are then leaving the race as a walkover. What would the racing public say about that? You should say the horse comes first, unfortunately we did it the other way round and paid the penalty.” Henderson also suggested that he had felt under pressure to try something different with Altior by stepping him up in trip. “We said we would have a go at a longer distance, but what we did was leave all the other races like the Clarence House Chase [at Ascot in January] going begging. “It was the wrong thing to do but there was a lot of pressure put on us, saying: ‘Come on, do something different. If you say he is a champion, prove he can stay. Otherwise he is just a boring two-mile chaser.’ So he’s a boring two-mile chaser.” Exactly when and where anyone ever used the word boring in connection with the exceptional Altior was not specified but it was surely not the punters for whom Altior was akin to a four-legged cash machine during his long unbeaten run over hurdles and fences. What backers need to assess now, however, is whether the run at Ascot may have left a permanent mark on the 10-year-old. Having given his all on very soft ground over two miles five when he was short of race-fitness, will Altior now struggle to rediscover the zest at two miles that carried him to victory in the Champion Chase in 2018 and 2019? He is, according to Henderson, working as well as always at home. “Altior schooled last week [and] you would seriously wonder why in the world we would want to go further than two miles. No horse in England would keep up with what he was going the other day, not one. Blink and you would have missed it but that’s him.” On We Go (4.05) is a little weak in the market for the long-distance handicap hurdle at Sedgefield but in other respects still seems to have plenty going for her as she attempts to follow up the first win of her career at Ayr last month. Kenny Johnson’s mare improved to get off the market from a 4lb lower mark than 89 here, but had been hinting at some ability prior to that success and is still very lightly raced for a seven-year-old with just six runs in the book. She faces a significant step up in trip but had plenty left in the closing stages at Ayr, where she made most of the running but seemed to be coming back to the pack before rallying for the win. If ridden with a little more restraint, On We Go has more scope for progress than most of her opponents and is a fair bet at around 8-1. Ouro Branco (3.00) returned from 22 months on the sidelines to make a successful start over fences with something in hand at Catterick Bridge in December, and registered a decent timefigure in the process. He should go close off just a 6lb higher mark, while at Market Rasen, Balgemmois (2.45) and Lady Master (3.50) are fairly priced for the handicap chases. Joseph O’Brien does not send many horses to Kempton from his base in County Kilkenny but his form figures for the last half-dozen are 2-2-1-4-1-2 and Munaajaat (8.00) has several runs at Dundalk in the book which give her a big chance. Atletico (7.00) and Ilhabela Fact (7.30) should also go well on the same card. Sedgefield: 1.25 Sabbathical, 1.55 Haasab, 2.25 Ulterior Motives, 3.00 Ouro Branco (nb), 3.30 Let The Heirs Walk, 4.05 On We Go (nap), 4.35 Two Hoots Market Rasen: 1.40 Colorado Doc, 2.10 Blue Hussar, 2.45 Balgemmois, 3.15 McFabulous, 3.50 Lady Master, 4.20 StarskyKempton Park: 4.50 Sir Rodneyredblood, 5.25 A Go Go, 6.00 Law Of Peace, 6.30 Family Fortunes, 7.00 Atletico, 7.30 Ilhabela Fact, 8.00 Munaajaat, 8.30 Estrela Star