Hadley Freeman’s captivating family memoir inscribes itself in the pantheon of family stories that connect the grandchild to the generation of the grandparents. From the Americas (I think of Gabriel García Márquez’s Living to Tell the Tale) to Africa (Aida Edemariam’s beautiful The Wife’s Tale), in an era of renewed identity politics, many wish to engage with the inter-generational connections that skip the parents. Freeman’s focus – initiated by finding a burnished red shoebox stuffed with papers and secrets – was originally on her father’s mother, born as Sala Glahs in 1910 in Chrzanow, a small town of the Austro-Hungarian empire, not so far from Kraków. She was one of four siblings, and the intertwining of the life of Sala – who later became Sara – with that of her three older brothers encouraged Freeman to broaden her attention. The challenge for the structure and direction of a book such as this is obvious: family lives, as well as the discovery of the details, tend not to be linear. “When I became an adult, I suddenly couldn’t stop thinking of them,” Freeman, a, Guardian journalist, explains. Many will know that feeling, the persistence of regret, of not having had a certain conversation, or asked a particular question. There is a singular form of communication that exists between grandchild and grandparent, not necessarily in a spoken form. It was finely explored by Maria Torok and Nicolas Abraham, two Hungarian psychoanalysts who sought to understand how secrets skip a generation and are transmitted from the first to the third generation. “What haunts are not the dead,” they concluded, “but the gaps left within us by the secrets of others.” The writer sets out to know who they are, and who she is. The reader is intrigued by the tales because they offer a way better to understand the gaps in their own life. There is also the question: what would I have done in times of brutal upheaval? Give me a grandparent, it might be said, and I will tell you about the grandchild. Sala was part of the generation of Ostjuden – eastern Jews – who headed west following the upheavals of the first world war, including pogroms against the Jews. In the 1920s the four Glahs siblings headed to Paris, where they lived happily under the name Glass. The life of each followed a different path. Jehuda Henoch became Jules Henri Glass, married a woman with roots in Lwów, invented the Omniphot microfilming machine, set up his own company and became a successful businessman. The ill-fated Jakob became Jacques; in May 1940, as the Germans approached Paris, he joined a regiment connected to the Foreign Legion, which happened to be the same one my Lwowian grandfather joined, based in Barcares on a beach in southwest France. He was taken prisoner, but returned to Paris where he dutifully registered as Jewish. The third brother, named Sender, became Alex Maguy, a successful couturier who worked with a young Christian Dior and would, in later life, become a gallery owner who hoped to hang out with Picasso, and then did. Sala became Sara. She met Bill Freiman, an American man of business and left for the US and marriage, which allowed her to escape the horrors that engulfed Europe. But her husband promised more than he delivered and she led, it seems, an emotionally unfulfilled life in a place that never quite felt like home. She lost her “easy-going” brother Jacques as well as her favourite cousin, Rose, in the Holocaust. Freeman traces the lives of the four siblings with elegance and humanity. She confronts the mysteries of life that cause four individuals with a similar beginning to reach very different endpoints. Is it will, or fate, or chance, or something else? Such questions flow below the surface of the narrative. Occasionally they reach out with brutal force: could it be that death in an extermination camp is the price you pay for being decent and playing by the rules? The sibling who stands out is the one defined by the greatest ambiguities, at once attractive and repellent. Great uncle Alex – “small bald and tough like a bullet” – is recalled for the cabana he kept on the beach at Deauville, who, as his great niece records (with admirable clarity), was “suspected of collaboration” during the war, and of having associated with known collaborators after the war. Serge Lifar, for example, a former director of the Paris Opera Ballet, commissioned Alex to make costumes in the postwar years and so offered him a financial lifeline. In that period, Alex records in a personal reminiscence, “my real concern was to get my couture business relaunched”. This is delicate material, the dark side of a beloved family member. How much of one’s ancestral identity must one give up to live in the modern world, Freeman asks To Freeman’s credit, she lays the material out in a balanced way, allowing the reader to form their own view, not imposing her own. Alex’s “life-saving pragmatism took precedence over his loyalty to a greater cause”, she concludes, inviting the reader to go the extra mile in the case of such fascinating characters as Lifar (I was catalysed into a modest investigation of my own, and quickly found material that confirmed his brilliance and ghastliness: “Jewish culture is incompatible with omni-Aryan culture,” he wrote to the Commissariat Général aux Questions Juives, in an effort to save his own skin and stave off further inquiries as to his own heritage). To survive and to prosper may be a matter of chance and strategy. Does one go with the flow, and what if different flows pull in opposite directions? “How much of one’s ancestral identity must one give up to live in the modern world?”, Freeman asks. The question is pertinent once again, as matters of populism, nationalism and racism come to the fore. House of Glass is interspersed with Freeman’s own thoughts on matters of assimilation and social mobility. Past and present exist in a state of constant interaction, and this finely honed and engaging account draws the threads between then and now. • Philippe Sands’s The Ratline: Love, Lies and Justice on the Trail of a Nazi Fugitive is published in April by W&N. House of Glass is published by 4th Estate. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over #15.