Ellie Mae O’Hagan (The ‘anti-woke’ backlash is no joke – and progressives are going to lose if they don’t wise up, 30 January) is absolutely right. Many people didn’t buy into this across-the-board social liberalism, or at least not fully, and now feel that the wind is blowing in their direction and are emboldened to vent their criticism. But it’s not enough just for liberals to recognise that this is what’s happening and adjust their tactics accordingly. The anti-woke people have a point. It’s not that they are right but that the emphasis we liberals place on having the correct attitudes towards feminism, homophobia, identity politics, and so on, is just not that important in their world. Many have far bigger fish to fry, like getting a job that pays a living wage, surviving on a pension or social security, finding somewhere to live, worrying about their health. Recognising a “woke” issue, deriving the correct behaviour to it, and adjusting one’s own behaviour accordingly is, frankly, a luxury they can’t afford and is irrelevant to their lives. We need to respond to this ourselves. Yes, by all means fight against all forms of discrimination in our society but at the same time recognise that there are bigger ills that face far too many people, regardless of their gender, race or sexual orientation. Our loudest voices should be saved for this. The more people who are able to live reasonably comfortable day-to-day lives, the more people there will be with the time and energy to fight prejudice in our society.David WilliamsSwanmore, Hampshire • The reaction against wokeness isn’t always a backlash. It could be a natural part of the journey that people go through when first exposed to these ideas. White privilege and intersectionality are difficult ideas to confront even if you are leftwing or liberal, and I’ve seen the process described as like going through the stages of grief (denial, anger, bargaining, depression and acceptance). I’ve witnessed first-hand at least two people go through similar changes when confronted with their own privilege – getting angry and crying, then reading, and learning, then accepting. Maybe what we’re seeing is not always a simple backlash, but rather the first vital steps to acceptance. For many it will take a painfully long time, but then history is a long game.Penny SouthgateBristol • Ellie Mae O’Hagan is right to urge caution against the resurgence of those who believe that “you can’t say anything any more”. But waking up to an anti-woke backlash requires a better analysis than assuming that this kind of prejudice is owed primarily to “older, white homeowners and pensioners”, even if it concedes that there are “millions of Laurence Foxes up and down the country” whose blinkered views are now mainstream. Racism is much more insidious than this, which is why it has been fought with heart-aching regularity and depressingly arduous effort in every decade of the last and this century, including when “social liberalism … was the new normal”. The nineties and noughties may have appeared more amiable, but those at the raw end of gender, racial or sexual inequality were unlikely to have been convinced that these virulent prejudices were anything other than dormant, at best. Anti-racism is hard work and while it is entirely legitimate to point out the operation of “white privilege” and useful to identify its principal beneficiaries as “white, male and middle class”, it is only meaningful to do so in order to identify its structural reality. Unfortunately, the Question Time audience member’s use of the latter reduced it to a label – a poor substitute for the hard work of offering a counter argument. There is a lesson here if we are to rise, yet again, to meet the challenge O’Hagan is alerting us to: reductive reasoning, even if only apparent, impedes rather than assists the struggle against prejudice. Paul McGilchristColchester, Essex • Having just read the article on “the anti-woke backlash” I still have no idea what is meant by “woke”, anti-woke” etc. Can someone explain to me why everyone seems to have departed from the English language? I need a translation!Sheelagh SpinkSampford Brett, Somerset • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition