One of my most commonly requested columns is on skincare for 50+ skin, yet I rarely oblige: my recommendations should apply to all ages. What categorises us is not age, but our evolving skin type and condition, and the same solid skincare principles apply to all humans. Whether you’re 18 or 80, a good vitamin C serum gives glow, a retinol will treat wrinkles, acids still clear and exfoliate, an oil will condition skin, SPF will shield it, moisturiser will protect. Despite all this, there is one type of face cream targeted (in the west at least) exclusively at mature skins, that is worthy of your specific attention: the rose-tinted moisturiser. The thinking here is as simple as it sounds. Take a good quality cream from your “anti-ageing” skincare range for customers over 50, add subtle, rosy-toned pigments, and instantly dismiss dullness and sallowness without the aid of makeup, by imparting a perky glow of health. My favourite is IT Cosmetics’ Confidence In A Cream Rosy Tone (£39 for twice the usual size, 60ml). I’m not generally one for skincare by a makeup-first brand, but the original untinted version was such a wonderful surprise that I couldn’t wait to try its rosy sister. The quality of the cream is excellent, particularly if you’re a foundation wearer, as it gives exactly the kind of bouncy, unsticky and unpeeling base that makeup likes best. The tint does as promised, livening up cheeks and dark circles, without the sickly, calamine pink you may fear. Vichy are admirably focused on mature and menopausal skin these days, and their Neovadiol Rose Platinum Moisturiser (£30 for 50ml) fits nicely into the lineup. Rich, cushiony and glow-giving as it is, it does contains mineral oil, which mine and many dry skins can tolerate perfectly well, but should be avoided if you’re oily or prone to breakouts; there’s an age-old assumption by beauty brands that mature skins will always be dry and spot-free, but many of you will know this to be hogwash. Lancôme Rénergie Multi-Glow Rosy Tone Reviving Cream (£51.20 for 50ml) is the most expensive, but one can positively feel the cost. With a more complex formula, the texture is beautiful – whipped and rich, but ungreasy – and the rosy pigments even out irregular tone and boost sallowness better than the rest. All can be deployed at any age. • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.