I have enormous respect for the journalism of your columnist Zoe Williams. I was therefore extremely disappointed to see her speaking of “how hard and existentially pointless it is to run on the spot. All that energy spent, no distance covered: it’s like eating cottage cheese or learning Welsh” (Retro and noisy: Canada’s Air Force fitness drills are a 60s tonic, Weekend, 1 February). I am from Manchester originally, but I was Welsh Learner of the Year in 1990, and have used Welsh as a living language throughout my subsequent career, on a daily basis. This has included serving as chair of governors at two Welsh-medium primary schools. Learning Welsh is a challenge, but it most certainly is not existentially pointless. One of the things that the whole experience taught me was a fervent internationalism, which refuses to belittle those of other languages and cultures for being who they are. Over the years I have tried my best to provide pastoral care, often to first-language Welsh speakers – and as I speak on occasion with others about matters of ultimate existential concern, I realise how worthwhile all the effort was. I give thanks to dedicated Welsh language tutors and to those in communities throughout Wales who have supported me on this decades-long journey. It can in no way be described as running on the spot!Y Parch Ddr/Rev Dr John GillibrandFicer Llandeilo Tal y Bont a Phenllergaer/Vicar of Llandeilo Tal y Bont with Penllergaer • Moving from rural Wales to south London in my early 20s, I was struck by the sophistication with which young people communicated about issues of cultural and religious difference. The schoolkids on the bus seemed able to appreciate and embrace these differences as a fact of life, rather than treating them as something to be met with “tolerance”. This stands in contrast to Zoe Williams’ attitude in citing Welsh language learning in a discussion of “existentially pointless” tasks. There are several ways to say sorry in Welsh. Here are two: Mae’n ddrwg gen i (north Wales)Mae’n ddrwg ’da fi (south Wales)Dafydd PierceSouth Hampstead, London • My mother tongue isn’t Welsh, I wasn’t born in Wales and I abhor nationalism, but I am offended by Zoe Williams’ comments. Every language enriches our cultures, our understanding of our mother tongues, and multiplies our views on the world and ways of thinking; it’s another melody and song for our ears. In short, Williams’ attitude is an insult to our humanity.Dr Mary GillieLlanllechid, Gwynedd • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition