Police in Queensland have established a major crime scene investigation after four people, including three young children, died in a “horrific” car fire in Brisbane. Officers were called to Raven Street at Camp Hill about 8.30am on Wednesday after reports of a car on fire. The bodies of the three children under the age of 10 and one man were discovered inside the car. A fifth person, a woman, who police say was known to both the man and the children, was discovered with extensive injuries. Speaking to reporters at the scene, Det Insp Mark Thompson said it was one of the most horrific scenes he had attended. “It will be a horrific thing for police and emergency services to deal with in the coming days,” he said. “We’ve all got different experiences in life. I’ve seen some horrific scenes, this is up there with the [worst] of them.” Thompson said police had not yet been able to inspect the inside of the vehicle, and that the cause of the blaze was still unclear. He declined to say whether police were treating the deaths as a murder-suicide. “How the fire actually occurred has not been ascertained at the moment. For us to call it a murder-suicide or an accident is not appropriate at the moment,” he said. Witnesses reportedly described hearing a number of explosions and screams after the blaze broke out. The Courier Mail reported the suburban Brisbane street had been blocked by crime tape at both ends, with police surrounding a car wrapped in orange plastic. Neighbour Murray Campbell said he heard a number of loud bangs which sounded “very much like a gas cylinder explosion”. He said he called triple zero, and did not see anyone run from the car, which was engulfed in flames. Earlier, Queensland’s police minister Mark Ryan briefed parliament about the incident and confirmed that the victims included children. “[It is] a horrific incident,” Ryan said. “The situation is at a very early stage and I am informed that police are investigating all of the circumstances surrounding this tragic set of events. “My thoughts are with all of those affected by this terrible tragedy.” An ambulance spokesman said a passer-by suffered minor burns after trying to assist the victims. “As far as I’m aware, somebody did step in to try and help that was close by,” he said. “That’s the only detail I know at the moment. He was treated for some minor burns to his upper body. They’re not life-threatening.”