In a swap of high scorers, the Minnesota Timberwolves acquired D’Angelo Russell on Thursday from the Golden State Warriors for Andrew Wiggins, according to multiples sources. ESPN first reported the trade, which also includes additional players and draft picks. Russell had been on Minnesota’s radar for months, a dynamic point guard in his fifth season in the league after going as the second overall pick in the 2015 draft. The first choice that year was Timberwolves center Karl-Anthony Towns, a friend of Russell around whom the front office has been trying to rebuild the roster. Minnesota will be Russell’s fourth NBA team. He averaged 23.6 points per game for the injury-wrecked Warriors, a career high after coming in an offseason trade with Brooklyn. The Wolves tried to woo him then, too, but Russell instead steered that sign-and-trade swap toward the Warriors, the five-time defending Western Conference champions who’ve won three NBA titles during that span. Russell is playing the first season of a four-year, $117m contract. Wiggins, the first overall selection in the 2014 draft, never fulfilled his potential with the Wolves, a shooting and slashing wing with the athleticism and frame to dominate on the perimeter. He is averaging 22.4 points this season, an uptick from the past two years but still capped by a pattern of inconsistency. He’s been a defensive liability, too, for a team that has persistently ranked among the easiest to score against in the league. The 6ft 7in Wiggins is in the second season of a five-year, $147m deal. The Timberwolves, who have lost 12 straight games, have bottomed out in their first year under president of basketball operations Gersson Rosas as he attempts to remake the roster for a faster-paced, three-point-heavy offense as directed by rookie coach Ryan Saunders. The Warriors are the only team below the Wolves in the West this season, with stars Steph Curry and Klay Thompson on the mend. The Warriors also struck a lower-profile deal before the deadline, sending Glenn Robinson and Alec Burks to Philadelphia for draft picks. -- The Los Angeles Clippers have acquired guard Marcus Morris Sr from the New York Knicks in exchange for forward Maurice Harkless, the Athletic reported. The deal continues to evolve, according to the report, and could include more players and/or draft picks. Morris, 30, has averaged a career-best 19.6 points in his ninth NBA season and first with the Knicks. The Clippers entered play Thursday in second place in the Western Conference with a 36-15 record. The Knicks were 13th in the 15-team Eastern Conference with a 15-36 record. -- The Cleveland Cavaliers have reportedly agrees to acquire center Andre Drummond in a trade from the Detroit Pistons. Cleveland, who are just 13-39 this season, are sending forward John Henson, guard Brandon Knight and one of their two second-round picks in 2023 to the Pistons. One of the conference’s best all-around big men, Drummond is averaging 17.8 points and 15.8 rebounds in his eighth season with Detroit. Drummond’s arrival will make the Cavs immediately better, and it may allow them to make more moves, perhaps with forward Kevin Love or center Tristan Thompson, who is eligible for free agency this summer. -- Andre Iguodala’s trade to Miami was getting closer to the finish line on Thursday after the Heat and Memphis Grizzlies agreed to terms on a six-player trade, according to sources. The portion of the trade involving Iguodala was agreed on Wednesday night, as was the 2015 NBA Finals MVP agreeing to a two-year extension with Miami that will be formalized when the totality of the deal actually gets approved by the league. Justise Winslow knew he was leaving Miami for Memphis on Wednesday night, as evidenced by some social-media posts and a late-night visit to his now-former locker room to pack up his belongings and wish a security guard well. Also in the deal: Dion Waiters and James Johnson leaving Miami for Memphis, with Jae Crowder and Solomon Hill leaving the Grizzlies for the Heat. Iguodala, speaking to The Undefeated on Wednesday night, said he was eager to play alongside Jimmy Butler and Miami’s young core while helping mentor them as well. “Jimmy Butler ... he’s looked at as different but is very well-respected in terms of the passion and the hard work that he brings to the game,” Iguodala said. “I feel like his temperament and values that he has really resonates with the Miami Heat. They’re very well aligned. I think he’s brought out the best in those young guys.” Iguodala specifically mentioned Heat center Bam Adebayo, a first-time All-Star this year. “Bam, I’m really looking forward to playing with him,” Iguodala said.