Chris Jordan could be forgiven for thinking he must prove himself against South Africa to secure a place at the T20 World Cup finals but the England seamer has an alternative perspective. Jordan has missed only one of England’s 28 sprint-format matches since the last T20 World Cup in 2016 and he is their second highest wicket-taker of all time with 56 at an average of 23.71. England have a number of fast-bowling options for the series, with game two at Kingsmead in Durban on Friday and England expected to be unchanged, while the injured Jofra Archer and Pat Brown will doubtless come into the reckoning as the year progresses. However, Jordan believes the culture fostered by England means he does not feel as if he is on trial. “One of the hallmarks of this team is that whoever is playing at the time is trying to keep their standards as high as possible,” he said. “I don’t think that the environment has been created in such a way to feel that pressure for a playing spot. You have that in any team anyway, but I don’t think that is the focus at all. We have a strong squad here and any XI we put out on any given day is strong enough to beat any team so those are the things that we are trying to focus on as much as possible.” The tourists made a false start under the East London floodlights after failing to chase seven in the final over as Lungi Ngidi’s death bowling helped South Africa win the first game of the three-match series. England came unstuck chasing a no-better-than-par 178. Jordan, who took two wickets in two balls, still backs the batsmen as they look to respond at Durban. “With our batting lineup I am confident of chasing pretty much any score,” the 31-year-old added. “Seven off seven [balls] should be doable. But credit to Ngidi, he bowled a good last over. Potentially we could have been a little bit smarter at times but T20 cricket is one of those things. You try to take the positive option more often than not and some days it goes your way, some days it doesn’t.”