The first thing I can remember is riding my tricycle around the balcony of our very small apartment in Brussels. Looking back, it seems so dangerous. My dad taught me that struggle can inspire achievement. He fought the regime of Mobutu [in Zaire, now the Democratic Republic of the Congo] and was forced into a labour camp, but he escaped to Belgium and later became the first black mayor in the country’s history. My mother grew up in rural Belgium and one day she brought home my father – the kid from Africa. That was a big contrast for a local family then. But it shows we can all progress and keep progressing. As the child of a migrant, you quickly learn about inequality. My parents told me: “You will have to work twice as hard as kids from other backgrounds.” I thought: “OK, if I work twice as hard, I will be twice as good.” My neighbourhood had a lot of gangs, but I would remind kids in the same situation that the world is a lot bigger than the place you know and want to dominate, and it is full of opportunities. You just need a goal. Mine was football. It’s easy to take the wrong path, but what happens on the next street corner could define the rest of your life. Celebrating a goal in front of thousands of fans is a weird experience. Before I hit my long-range goal for Manchester City against Leicester in May, which helped us to win the Premier League title, a teammate shouted: “Don’t shoot!” And I thought: “Why not? Let me do what I want!” My happiness was a mix of rage and adrenaline exploding together. Suffering racist abuse inspires the same feelings in me as any other injustice: anger and revolt. I used to respond, but now I look at the bigger picture: where can I voice my opinion and complain? And what is the diversity of that governing body? Populism upsets me. It’s a dangerous game played by people who understand the implications of what they do, but are just too driven to win. We need serious debate. Everything is too ideological. Studying for my MBA made me feel vulnerable – in a good way. I was way out of my comfort zone. I wasn’t awesome, but I worked myself up to a good level. Learning how to build a bigger vision prepared me well for my new management role at Anderlecht. There is no harder job than being a parent. The pressure of playing in front of 90,000 fans is bearable. But being responsible for my own children is by far the most difficult mission in my life. Treble Triumph by Vincent Kompany is out now, priced £20. Buy a copy for £16.80 at guardianbookshop.com