The absence of money, a familiar problem for followers of horse racing, is, I am told, the reason why the sport in Britain does not yet have a Hall Of Fame, nor any plans for one. It is an idea that has been kicked around for decades but we have yet to arrive at the decisive moment, when a powerful person wakes up and says: “Today, I am going to find the pockets deep enough to pay for this thing...” The benefits to racing would obviously include having a building in a busy town somewhere that would act as an entry point to the sport for the mildly curious. It would be a source of news stories and debate when decisions were made as to who should be honoured therein. Most importantly, it would be a place for racing to show how much it treasures its past and values the achievements of those who went before. The sport in Britain has, frankly, been poor at this. If you don’t value your own history, you can’t expect anyone else to do so. If you don’t value your past, you cheapen your present. Mini halls of fame have emerged in places like Cheltenham and Aintree and there is, of course, a fine racing museum at Palace House in Newmarket that would welcome your support. But I tend to think that a truly impactful Hall Of Fame would be closer to a major population centre. While our rulers dig down the back of the sofa for the readies, can we not at least build an online Hall Of Fame, with biographies of our greats and footage of their greatest moments? Old lags like me know a lot of the stories and can find many of the old races but it shouldn’t take 35 years of hanging around the tracks to become familiar with racing lore. It should all be neatly packaged in a single, readily identifiable website that could act as a rabbit hole down which interested youngsters could tumble. I was in Tate Britain the other day, reading about a curator who found John Martin’s Destruction Of Pompeii wrapped up inside Delaroche’s Execution of Lady Jane Grey, 45 years after both paintings were thought to have been lost in a flood. Horse racing’s entire history might have been lost in a flood, for all the central authorities seem to care about it. Fanatics are left to discover what they can and occasional treasures are temporarily displayed on social media before being washed away by the following tide. With Cheltenham just over a month away, Shishkin will be the focus at Huntingdon, where he is unbackably short at 1-3 for the Sidney Banks. The acceleration he found on Newbury’s run-in last month was just extraordinary and he is now favourite for the Festival’s opener, the Supreme Novice Hurdle. And yet he must prove himself again here, not least to his owner, Joe Donnelly, who also has Asterion Forlonge, an impressive Grade One winner at Leopardstown on Sunday and also fancied for the Supreme. Will Shishkin show so much stamina that he ends up going to the Ballymore instead? Tune in … Tea Clipper (3.05) is easy to like at 9-4 for the following handicap hurdle, Tom Lacey’s unbeaten youngster seeming likely to be suited by the step up in trip. Earlier, Thomas Shelby (1.31) returns to the track where he scored in December on his second start for Caroline Bailey and can hopefully keep going in the right direction at 3-1 or so. Lots Of Luck is well treated under a penalty in his handicap chase but it’s only four days since he won at Taunton. Yorgonnahearmeroar (2.01) has become very well handicapped and a change of stables to Michael Scudamore may well help, along with this drier surface. He’s 6-1. Up at Doncaster, it’s intriguing to see that Jenkins (2.55) is 12-1 from 33-1. He had a big reputation at one time and, while his Boxing Day effort was disappointing, this is a drop in class and a step up in trip. It will be interesting to see what Bryony Frost can do with him and he is surely faster than this lot, so long as he has some energy left in the last half-mile. With the tongue tie absent and cheekpieces back on, connections are clearly interested in ringing the changes. Huntingdon: 1.00 Swilly Sunset 1.31 Thomas Shelby 2.01 Yorgonnahearmeroar 2.31 Shishkin 3.05 Tea Clipper (nap) 3.40 The Composeur (nb) 4.12 AllavinaChelmsford: 1.10 Jen's Lad 1.40 Calidus Mirabilis 2.10 The King's Steed 2.40 Storm Over 3.15 Brigand 3.50 Thegreatestshowman 4.20 Rodin.Doncaster: 1.23 Imperial Nemesis 1.53 Zoffee 2.23 Well Smitten 2.55 Jenkins 3.30 Glory And Fortune 4.04 See Forever 4.40 Out On The Tear.Newcastle: 4.30 Corked 5.00 Ascot Week 5.30 Union 6.00 Youneverletmedown 6.30 Heath Charnock 7.00 Athollblair Boy 7.30 Hunters Step 8.00 I Am Dandy.