Tom Davis’s comedy of manners comes to its end after a somewhat predictable but nonetheless entertaining first series. Finally out of the suburbs and taking a holiday at the British seaside, Gary (Davis) has his plans for a quiet family getaway scuppered by wife Terri’s plans to make holiday friends with a glamorous French couple. Meanwhile, Big Gary is on the hunt for the fabled pasty he had when he last visited decades ago, but can’t remember where the shop is. A much-needed dose of summer. Ammar Kalia The former Countryfile presenter reaches the end of her decidedly un-touristy journey by returning to her ancestral home of Chíos, the fifth largest of the Greek islands. From family history to Homer, it is a gentle finale that sees Bradbury’s mum Chrissi join in with the fun. Hannah J Davies Adrian Chiles and Mehreen Baig continue to explore four stretches of coastline around the Irish Sea. This week they pitch up in Anglesey, Wales, via the stormy Menai Strait. According to Lord Nelson: “If you can sail here, you can sail anywhere.” Not much comfort to our clearly seasick presenters. Ali Catterall It was the 1985 album that catapulted synthpop band Tears for Fears into the mainstream, spawning hits such as Everybody Wants to Rule the World. Band members Roland Orzabal and Curt Smith talk through how they made the record in this special. AK The comedian continues his cynic’s tour of his home country, this week travelling from Edinburgh to Aberdeen. He ponders the role of language, talking to the Scottish rapper Darren McGarvey, as well as seeing how standup is interpreted for the deaf community. AK Norton’s couch lineup tonight includes a popular singer who can actually act (Justin Timberlake) and a popular actor who can actually sing (Anna Kendrick). Perhaps more importantly, these charming stars of the film Trolls World Tour are past masters at sending themselves up. Graeme Virtue Beast, 9pm, Film4 Tranquil Jersey is the setting for writer-director Michael Pearce’s tale of blood, sex and murder. Twentysomething Moll (Jessie Buckley) is chafing at home with her oppressive mother (Geraldine James) when she encounters handsome poacher Pascal (Johnny Flynn); their affair unfolds while a serial killer stalks the lanes. Paul Howlett T20 cricket: South Africa v England 3.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event Second of the three-match series from Kingsmead, Durban. Premier League football: Wolves v Leicester City 7.15pm, BT Sport 1 Live from Molineux. Championship football: Hull City v Swansea City 8pm, Sky Sports Main Event From the Kcom Stadium.