Thousands of people face spending the next fortnight stuck on a luxury cruise ship quarantined off the Japanese port of Yokohama, after initial results showed 10 passengers have tested positive for the novel coronavirus. The Diamond Princess, with more than 3,700 passengers and crew onboard, had been prevented from sailing on Monday after an 80-year-old passenger who had travelled on the vessel late last month tested positive after he arrived home in Hong Kong. Of a further 273 people on board who have since been tested following health screenings, 31 results had come back – and of those 10 were positive, according to Japan’s health minister, Katsunobu Kato. It is not clear if more tests will be carried out. None of the 10 infected people – three each from Japan and Hong Kong, two Australians, one American and one Filipino crew member - had severe symptoms, public broadcaster NHK said. Also on Wednesday, health checks began on 1,800 passengers and crew on a second cruise ship docked in Hong Kong, after 30 staff members reported symptoms including fever, according to Reuters. Hong Kong’s health department said that 90% of the passengers were Hong Kongers and no mainland Chinese were on board. Previously, three mainland Chinese that had been on the ship between 19 and 24 January, and were found to have contracted the virus. No passengers have been able to leave the World Dream ship, operated by Dream Cruises, without permission. David Abel, a British passenger who has been on the Diamond Princess for more than two weeks, said that people had been instructed not to leave their cabins. “All the passengers aboard this ship, we remain confined to our cabins,” Abel, who is on the ship with his wife, Sally, said in a Facebook video on Wednesday afternoon. “We can’t even open the door and walk down the corridor. Confinement to cabins really is what it is.” Abel, from from Woodford Halse in Oxfordshire said he felt sorry for two women the couple had befriended who are smokers. Japanese health authorities have banned smoking on the ship, including inside cabins and on balconies. “Thank god my wife and I gave up smoking 20 or 30 years ago,” he said. Abel, who is diabetic, thanked social media users for sharing his request for appropriate food earlier in the day. “I believe my food problems are well and truly taken care of now, and we just look forward to see what’s going to happen each and every day that goes by, because basically we don’t have a clue.” He added: “It’s going to be a bit of a challenge – 14 days where we can’t interact with passengers directly.” He said the only contact they had had with other “equally as bored” passengers was from their balcony overlooking the sea. “All those at home especially our family – we’re OK, we’re in good spirits and I’ll do my best to keep my pecker up for the rest of the 14 days,” he said. “It’s all about staying positive, making the best of a situation and let’s try and do that.” Two Australians are among the 10 people who have tested positive, the cruise company Carnival confirmed. The other people infected are three Japanese, three from Hong Kong, one American and one Filipino crewmember. The patients, who are reportedly aged in their 50s to their 80s, were being removed from the ship by the coast guard and taken to local hospitals. The ship’s owner, Princess Cruises, said 3,711 people were aboard the ship, consisting of 2,666 guests and 1,045 crew. About half of the passengers are from Japan, with 223 Australians on the vessel. Even before the announcement on Tuesday morning banning passengers from leaving their rooms, most areas were deserted as people stayed isolated to avoid infection. “It was like a ghost ship,” said Abel, who walked around briefly on Tuesday. “There were a few passengers at the bars having a drink but it really was empty compared to how it had been over the past few days.” The couple were due to fly home to the UK on Monday but had to cancel their flight after they were not allowed to leave the ship. The measures introduced on the ship follow an announcement by the UK government that all British nationals in China should leave “if they can” to reduce risk of exposure to virus. An evacuation flight sent by the British government to Wuhan, the Chinese city at the centre of the epidemic, is expected to leave in the early hours of Sunday morning local time, and land at RAF Brize Norton. A total of 165 Britons and their dependents remain in the wider Hubei province. The US state department has said it may be staging additional evacuation flights on Thursday, while Japan said it would send a fourth chartered flight to bring back about 200 passengers. It was not immediately clear if Japanese health authorities planned to test other passengers on board the Diamond Princess. Kato said the remaining passengers and crew – who come from 56 countries – would be required to stay on the vessel for 14 days, the maximum incubation period of the respiratory illness that has killed 490 people in mainland China and infected more than 23,000. The ship was due to undertake an eight-day round-trip cruise on Wednesday, but that had been cancelled, the company said. Princess Cruises said the ship would be resupplied with food. “The ship plans to go out to sea to perform normal marine operations including, but not limited to, the production of fresh water and ballast operations before proceeding alongside in Yokohama where food, provisions, and other supplies will be brought onboard,” a statement said.” Photographs and video posted on Twitter by a Japanese passenger showed masked health workers in blue plastic gowns walking down empty corridors on the ship, along with shots of deserted lounges and a barren deck. The passenger has also been tweeting announcements in English and Japanese, including Wednesday morning’s confirmation that 10 people had tested positive. “A lot of people on board are anxious about what happens next,” the passenger wrote. “I want to know what possible measures will be taken from now on. Will we spend the next 14 days stuck on the boat? Or 10 days? What will happen to the foreign passengers? Will even those who test negative have to stay? I want to know what’s going on.” The Diamond Princess arrived at Yokohama, south of Tokyo, on Monday evening, with passengers informed that their departure would be delayed while tests were carried out. The ship was prevented from leaving after it emerged that a Hong Kong resident in his 80s, tested positive for the virus last weekend after returning home on the vessel on 25 January. He had boarded the cruise liner at Yokohama on 20 January and joined a shore excursion in Kagoshima, southwestern Japan, on 22 January, local media reported. The patient visited mainland China for a few hours on 10 January and tested positive on 1 February, six days after leaving the ship. The ship, which belongs to the British-American cruise operator Carnival, has since made stops in Vietnam, Taiwan and the Japanese ports of Kagoshima, on Kyushu island, and Naha on Okinawa.