An investigative journalist known for holding the Tanzanian government to account has been released from prison after pleading guilty to charges widely discredited as politically motivated. Erick Kabendera, who has written for the Guardian and various other publications, was arrested by plainclothes police officers in July last year. This week he has been ordered to pay 275m Tanzanian shillings (£92,180) on charges of tax evasion and money laundering. “Finally I’ve got my freedom. It’s quite unexpected that I would be out this soon. I’m really grateful to everybody who played their role,” said Kabendera, 39, outside court following his release on Monday. The accusations against the journalist mutated multiple times during his imprisonment, from claims that he was not a Tanzanian citizen, to sedition under cybercrime laws and leading organised crime. Eventually, prosecutors claimed Kabendera had used two companies as “vehicles of money laundering” and had failed to file the proper tax returns. Although Kabendera’s lawyers originally rejected the charges, in October they agreed to pursue a plea bargain. Activists believe that Kabendera’s ailing health may have prompted him to plead guilty. “There is absolutely no justice in what transpired in the Dar es Salaam court today,” said Deprose Muchena, Amnesty International’s east and southern Africa director. “While it is welcome news that Kabendera is out of prison close to seven months later, it is outrageous that he had to pay such a hefty fine to gain his freedom after having been unjustly jailed for exercising his right to freedom of expression. “The country must publicly commit to ensuring that everyone can freely exercise all their human rights and stop the politically motivated persecution of dissidents and journalists like Erick Kabendera.” The International Federation of Journalists described Kabendera’s detention as part of a “very disturbing” pattern of increasing media repression and intimidation in Tanzania, where President John Magufuli – known as “the Bulldozer” – has shut down newspapers, fined critical outlets, arrested opposition leaders and restricted political rallies. Muthoki Mumo, of the Committee to Protect Journalists, described the charges against him as “transparent retaliation for critical journalism”, adding: “[We] are deeply concerned that even after months in detention without the prospect of bail, during which he suffered illness and lost his mother, Kabendera’s ordeal is not yet over as these cripplingly heavy fines continue to hang over his head.” Kabendera’s lawyer, Jebra Kambole, said the journalist had managed to pay off some of the fines and was working out a way of paying the remaining 173m shillings required as “compensation for tax evasion”. “We are also hoping he will get an independent medical checkup for his ill-health,” said Kambole. Agencies contributed to this report