Boris Johnson should consider setting targets to level up the UK’s weakest regions to tackle widespread inequality, according to one of the government’s senior independent policy advisers. The chair of the Industrial Strategy Council (ISC), Andy Haldane, who is also the Bank of England’s chief economist, said targets could play a part in driving forward plans to develop an industrial strategy in the same way that green targets are used to support reductions in carbon emissions and tackle the climate emergency. Speaking at the launch of the council’s latest report on the extent of the regeneration problems facing large parts of the UK, he said: “There might be a reason to translate policy into something more target-like. Could we help in developing those targets and then assessing them, yes we can and yes we shall.” A report by the ISC found that the UK has one of the worst productivity gaps between its regions when compared to EU countries, except for Romania and Poland. Areas with higher productivity, which measures the average income generated from an hour of work, are widely seen as providing higher incomes and better educational and health outcomes for the local population. Haldane’s comments came only weeks before chancellor Sajid Javid’s first budget, when he is expected to put forward a raft of infrastructure schemes and funds to improve the skill levels of college leavers, especially in “left behind” areas. Javid has joined the prime minister as an advocate of government support for the forgotten towns and regions of the UK following an election victory that depended on the votes of millions of people from poorer areas of the north and west. Haldane said: “I would be astonished if there wasn’t some down payment on industrial strategy targets [in the budget]. “It is possible that ‘levelling up’ will replace ‘Brexit’ as the most commonly used phrase in Whitehall and that will be progress,” he added. In a message that chimed with the prime minister’s support for government intervention, Haldane said market forces would “naturally” widen the differences between regions and within regions in a “normal evolutionary process”. It was up to the government to lean against this tendency, he said. Otherwise, many places in the UK would continue to be caught in a vicious cycle of declining incomes, poor housing, health and education outcomes.“Spatial inequalities, like income inequalities, are a natural consequence, but that doesn’t to mean we should tolerate them,” Haldane said. “But regional policy is known for one thing and one thing only and that is its lack of consistency and coherence. It has been chopped and changed on a fairly regular basis. This lack of consistency, for me, has contributed to the trend. The good news is that there is something we can do about it.” The report found that regional differences in average worker incomes were about as large in 1901 as they were last year: “There was a period of regional convergence during the mid-20th century, but this was reversed during the 1980s and 1990s. Since 2008, productivity differences between the nine statistical regions of England, as well as Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland – have decreased slightly. But productivity differences within these regions have risen.” Raising the level of the bottom third of UK’s regions to the national average would increase the UK’s GDP by 3%, or £65bn, said Haldane. “The international experience makes it clear that it is possible with the right policies in place.” But Haldane rejected calls for the ISC, which relies on the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy for staff and funding, to become an independent body with full-time employees. The ISC produced “independent and rigorous” reports, he said, and rejected criticism that the ISC was in danger of being a thinktank.