The conservative “shock jock” Rush Limbaugh revealed on Monday that he had been diagnosed with advanced lung cancer. The hugely influential radio host made the announcement during his nationally syndicated radio show. Limbaugh, 69, added that although his intention is to continue working “as competently and as expertly as [he does] each and every day”, he will begin undergoing treatment immediately, taking him off-air for the next couple of days. He said he was aiming to be back by Thursday, calling the program “the source of [his] greatest satisfaction”. “Every day I’m not here, I’ll be missing you and thinking about you,” he said. In the segment, Limbaugh said doctors discovered the issue after he complained of shortness of breath. Limbaugh is widely considered one of the most high-profile conservative media personalities in the country. The rightwing talk show host began his radio program 31 years ago and had recently signed a new long-term contract. He has used his platform to campaign on a variety of conservative issues and to attack liberals, often causing controversy with his extreme rightwing views and comments on abortion, feminism and race. His huge and passionate conservative listenership has given him immense political clout, especially with Republican politicians. Limbaugh idolized Ronald Reagan, who once wrote a letter that Limbaugh read on the air in December 1992 which said: “You’ve become the number one voice for conservatism in our country.” In 1994, Limbaugh was so widely credited as key to Republicans’ takeover of Congress for the first time in 40 years, that he was deemed an honorary member of the new class of politicians. Limbaugh has frequently been accused of hate-filled speech, including bigotry and blatant racism through comments and sketches such as “Barack the Magic Negro”, a song featured on his show that said Obama “makes guilty whites feel good” and that the politician is “black, but not authentically”. As news of his condition broke shocked fans and political analysts immediately chimed in to wish Limbaugh well. Say a prayer today for my fellow talker Rush @limbaugh who just announced he has lung cancer and will be undergoing treatment. America needs his voice! My heart and prayers go out to Rush Limbaugh, who has been diagnosed with advanced lung cancer.He has inspired a generation to enter politics, including myself. We are fighting with you, Rush!!! pic.twitter.com/cIKbFed6n6 His radio show often featured prominent guests, including Donald Trump. Limbaugh was also an occasional election surrogate, campaigning for and alongside Trump during the 2018 midterm election. At a rally in Miami on Friday, the president called Limbaugh “a major star who never wavered despite the fake news hits he has had to endure. His voice is far bigger than theirs!” Well wishes were not limited to those who share Limbaugh’s conservative leanings. So Rush Limbaugh has advanced lung cancer. And as a liberal lefty who disagrees with everything he has ever said and done - I wish him well in the fight ahead. Fuck cancer. The Rush Limbaugh Show is part of the Premiere Radio Networks, a subsidiary of iHeartMedia. In a statement, Rich Bressler called Limbaugh “both a colleague and a dear friend”. “I know he will handle the situation with courage and grace,” he said. “Millions of people nationwide join me and all of iHeart in wishing him a full recovery.”