The UK is facing its first significant test of how to contain a potential coronavirus outbreak after the government confirmed a 20th victim of Covid-19 and details of its contingency planning for an upsurge in cases began to emerge. The latest patient in England is the first to contract the illness while in the UK. The chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, said it was unclear whether the man from Surrey contracted it directly or indirectly from someone who had recently returned from abroad. “This is being investigated and contact tracing has begun. The patient has been transferred to a specialist NHS infection centre at Guy’s and St Thomas’ [hospital].” The Guardian has been told that there are now fears that a doctor from the patient’s surgery may also have been infected with the virus. If confirmed, this would prompt particular concern – the GP would routinely have seen scores of patients over the course of the last week. As part of the official UK action plan being drawn up by ministers and Whitty, military medics and British Red Cross and St John Ambulance personnel will be drafted in to help the NHS cope with a major outbreak. Under ministerial planning for a “reasonable worst-case scenario” of a potential pandemic, doctors and nurses working for the armed forces would help at hospitals where staff who have the virus are too ill to work or are self-isolating at home. The developments came amid mounting alarm about the spread of the disease prompting havoc on the financial markets and growing doubts about the future major events including the Olympics. A British man became the first UK citizen to die from the virus after being infected on the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan. He was the sixth passenger from the ship to die, Japan’s health ministry said. Stock market losses smashed through $5tn (£3.92tn) for the week, as the FTSE 100 and Dow Jones fell again. The Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, warned that the expected global slowdown due to the coronavirus fears will have a knock on impact on the UK. Boris Johnson has said he would convene a Cobra meeting on Monday. EasyJet and IAG, the owner of British Airways, both reported significant drops in demand and plans to cancelling flights. The Geneva motor show was cancelled after Switzerland banned all gatherings of more than 1,000 people. The International Olympic Committee member Dick Pound said a final decision on whether the Japan Olympics will go ahead in July could be made as late as May. The World Health Organization said the risk of spread and impact of the virus is now “very high” after the Nigeria reported the case of the disease in sub-Saharan Africa. Dr Mike Ryan, executive director of WHO’s emergencies programme, said: “We are on the highest level of alert and highest level in terms of spread and of impact. But that is not in order to alarm or scare people.” In total there were four new UK cases on Friday, including the first confirmed positive test in Wales in a woman from Swansea. She had visited northern Italy, Europe’s worst-hit area, where there have been 21 deaths and 820 confirmed cases. Public Health Wales said medics were trying to trace people who had been in close contact with a woman. The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the Wuhan coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine. The UN agency advises people to: Despite a surge in sales of face masks in the aftermath of the outbreak of the coronavirus outbreak, experts are divided over whether they can prevent transmission and infection. There is some evidence to suggest that masks can help prevent hand-to-mouth transmissions, given the large number of times people touch their faces. The consensus appears to be that wearing a mask can limit – but not eliminate – the risks, provided they are used correctly. Justin McCurry Two new patients in England caught the virus in Iran and are being treated at a specialist unit at the Royal Free hospital in London, said Whitty. On Thursday Whitty said sports events and concerts may have to be cancelled and schools closed for more than two months if the UK is hit by a global pandemic. The exams regulator Ofqual is considering “contingency plans” over this summer’s exams in case of widespread outbreak. In Surrey, health chiefs are worried by the possible diagnosis of the unnamed doctor of the new coronavirus case because his wife is also a GP. Public Health England is “contact tracing” everyone with whom either of the couple has been in contact – including all patients they have seen – so they can also be tested for evidence of the infection. It is not yet known if his wife has also contracted the virus. Simon Lewis, the British Red Cross’s head of crisis response, confirmed that it had held talks with the government and NHS and local council chiefs about what role it would play. “We have already provided some assistance around isolation units at Arrowe Park hospital [in Wirral, where people have been quarantined after returning to the UK] and Heathrow airport and we are talking to partners about any additional support we might be able to offer in the days and weeks ahead,” Lewis said.