It’s sad when you get to the age where you start seeing old trends coming around again, especially in the notoriously slow-moving world of horticulture. So when I walked into an achingly cool east London houseplant shop recently to see an enormous display of avocado seedlings, neatly potted up with avocado motif labels, I just had to crack a smile. Rather like buying old fashioned milk bottles to decant your supermarket-bought carton into for that added feeling of 1970s “authenticity”, buying a plant that was famously trendy to grow from kitchen waste is, I guess, peak hipster. If any of you are keen on the look of their glossy, evergreen leaves, but frankly not the silliness of paying for something you can get for free, here’s my guide to growing this retro houseplant from the large seeds you save from your supermarket fruit. Back in the 1970s, when avocados first became popular in Britain, a trend emerged for sprouting their seeds, speared with three toothpicks and suspended in a glass of water. Indeed, enough people were evidently successful with this that if you take a look over the fence into many city gardens, it’s not an unusual sight to see an avocado tree in full fruit. Eventually outgrowing their living-room homes and relegated to being planted outside, these plants have thrived remarkably well in the protected microclimate the concrete of the city provides. But, even so, as a botanist all I can think about is how weird a way of germinating them this is. For starters, piercing their stones is a really effective method of introducing bacterial and fungal infections, which large seeds like avocados are already prone to. Growing them in constant contact with water further ups the risk of rotting, due to excessive moisture. Conversely, not keeping the water level topped up (which you’d need to do every day in a warm room) will mean the seed will just fail to germinate altogether. Seriously, if you could pick a sowing technique with the highest likelihood of failure, it would be this! The good news is that all you need to do to increase your chances of success and simultaneously reduce your workload is to half bury your seed in a pot of gritty seed compost, pointy end up. Give it a thorough water, cover the pot with a plastic bag to seal in the warmth and moisture, and then leave it alone. Kept in a warm place, like a well-insulated windowsill, you should begin to see signs of germination in two to four weeks. This starts with the seed splitting open, followed by a tiny sprout emerging from the centre of the split a few days later. At this point, remove the plastic cover and keep it in a spot with bright, indirect light and you have a pretty (and evidently super trendy) houseplant for free in a matter of few weeks. Follow James on Twitter @Botanygeek