The Conservative government likes beauty. It has said as much, through the mouths of ministers, so it must be true. “This government,” the housing secretary, Robert Jenrick, recently told the Daily Telegraph, “will make sure that beautiful, well-designed homes and places are the expectation, not the exception.” It has created the Building Better, Building Beautiful commission in order to help “increase the use of high-quality design for new build homes and neighbourhoods”. Last week it produced a report, Living in Beauty, that argues that beauty should be legally enshrined in the planning system. But what’s this? Barely two weeks ago the same Robert Jenrick gave planning permission to a £1bn development called Westferry Printworks in London Docklands, against the strong objections of his own planning inspector. The latter, David Prentis, said the project’s five towers, the tallest of them 44 storeys high, would “fail to preserve” the setting of Tower Bridge and of the Unesco world heritage site in Greenwich. The development would be “harmful to the character and appearance of the area”. Its inclusion of 282 affordable homes in a total of 1,524 units was deemed not to achieve the “maximum reasonable amount”. The Greater London Authority has said that “insufficient attention has been paid to any factor other than seeking to maximise the amount of market housing in the scheme”. You can hear the GLA’s pained surprise that the project’s developer, Richard Desmond, should suffer such a lapse of judgment. Desmond, after all, is the former publisher not only of the Daily Express, but also of Asian Babes, Big Ones, Big and Black, Horny Housewives and other beauty-focused publications. The Bartlett School of Planning, which is part of University College London, has meanwhile reported that most new housing is “just not meeting the basic requirements for civilised living”. New developments, it says, lack amenities such as green space, playgrounds and access to shops. It cites zones such as Palmerston Heights in Plymouth, developed by the housebuilding giant Persimmon Homes, where residents complain of car-dominated roads that are unsafe for children, of long journeys to pubs and takeaways, of houses “so squeezed in” that they can see right into their neighbours’ bathrooms. Scruton treated architecture as a thing observed rather than lived Which is to say nothing of the ongoing horror of units created under permitted development rights, which allow offices to be converted into joyless, minuscule, ill-lit, ill-ventilated “homes” without the usual processes of planning permission. Yet all these developments have happened with the connivance and sometimes encouragement of the same government that now claims the sensibilities of a latterday John Ruskin. Jenrick used his clout to approve Desmond’s Docklands Big Ones. Persimmon Homes benefits from the subsidies of the government’s help-to-buy schemes. Jenrick’s views on beauty have an acknowledged debt to the philosopher Roger Scruton, who was made the first chairman of the Beauty Commission in 2018. Reflections following his recent death run from those who describe him as Britain’s “greatest modern conservative thinker” (Boris Johnson) and a “perfect knight” (the Spectator) to those who question his statements that homosexuality is “not normal” or that “sexual harassment just means sexual advances made by the unattractive”. Even the latter assessments, though, tend to make a respectful nod to his writings on aesthetics. Expressed in his 1979 book The Aesthetics of Architecture, and not significantly revised thereafter, his views on the subject were less objectionable than some of his other remarks, but they omit much of what is significant in making architecture good or bad. His aim was to establish “an aesthetics of everyday life” that is “susceptible of objective enjoyment”. He believed that western classical architecture is uniquely able to provide “a process of arrangement in which every normal man” – and one can only surmise that these are the same men who are not gay – “may participate”. Scruton’s position was that of the connoisseur or tourist, one who stands in front of an individual building and appraises it as he might wine or music, bringing to bear his knowledge of the classical orders of architecture. Often, his judgment coincided with that of less educated viewers of buildings, but not always – he couldn’t abide the work of the ever popular Antoni Gaudí, for example. It is one way of seeing, as far as it goes. What his viewpoint underplayed was the experience of architecture as something moved through and inhabited. It lacked curiosity about the people who make and commission buildings and their motives for doing so. It treated architecture as a thing observed rather than lived. It meant that Scruton didn’t have much to say about town planning, interiors, landscape or other aspects of architecture that were less susceptible to his judging eye than a single static building. Why this matters to the people of Palmerston Heights, or to anyone who will have to witness Westferry Printworks, is that this narrow description of beauty is a flimsy defence against the brute forces that make these places what they are. By neglecting to dirty his hands with the difficult decisions of three-dimensional design, he offered no tools for dealing with the economic and political pressures of planning. Beauty, in other words, is more than skin-deep. It is ugly to cut affordable housing, to force people into their cars if they want to go out for something to eat, to put people into dank boxes, no matter what their architectural style. Adequate play space is, in most people’s view, more important than the detail of an Ionic portico, but Scruton’s philosophy could only speak of the latter. Were Scruton still with us, he might express dislike of the monsters bred of Tory planning. It should also be acknowledged that the Beauty Commission is young and it might yet be able to guide the likes of Persimmon to sunnier uplands. I truly hope that they succeed. But until proved otherwise, the suspicion is that talk of “beauty”, using Scruton’s erudite but superficial understanding, will only be a dressing on the not beautiful realities of government-approved, developer-led housing.