Stronger penalties for misuse of the whip appear to be a certainty by this autumn, following the initial report of the new Horse Welfare Board, published on Thursday. While the board had much to say on other topics, including racing’s responsibilities to its horses and the need for a code of practice on euthanasia, it reserved its most urgent comments for the subject of the whip. “The overall number of offences (over 500 in 2018) remains unnecessarily high and the current penalties do not provide an adequate deterrent effect,” the board concluded. The HWB does not have power to require action from the British Horseracing Authority on regulatory matters, but the BHA immediately signalled that it would begin a three-month consultation with racing insiders and the public on changes to the whip rules, with a view to deciding on and implementing changes by the end of October. In fact, the number of whip offences fell to an all-time low of 410 last year, less than half the number from 2011. However, the board pointed to concern on the subject from the public and politicians before insisting that racing show “a proactive, positive direction of travel in relation to the whip, taking steps to eliminate misuse and leading any discussions around the future removal of the whip for encouragement”. The HWB urged that the consultation should include questions about whether horses should be disqualified when its rider breaks the whip rules and also whether the whip should be banned as a means of encouraging horses forward in races. It adopted a neutral tone on those issues, insisting only on the need to increase penalties. Taking questions on their report, board members signalled that there could be room for more creative ways forward, like extending punishments for whip misuse to the trainer and owner who had employed the jockey found in breach. They noted with particular concern an increase since 2016 in the number of offences of the whip being used above shoulder height. Barry Johnson, a former president of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons who chairs the HWB, said: “This is a matter of public trust. We’d like people, especially those unfamiliar with horses, to understand and accept what’s necessary for our jockeys to race safely in a fair sporting competition. “It’s not about taking away the whip. Anyone who’s ridden a half-ton horse knows you need to be able to exercise control for the safety of horse and rider. This is about what should be allowable under our rules and how we penalise misuse to keep breaches to a minimum.” Notably, the board’s report insists racing as a whole should assume a “collective lifetime responsibility” for its horses and added: “This is an area in which a step change is needed. Responsibilities must be clarified, particularly the responsibilities of owners in relation to horses at the end of their racing careers.”Provocatively, it suggested there was “frequently a lack of awareness of the extent of individual responsibilities towards the horse. This sometimes includes a lack of moral responsibility.” It called for training and education of owners before they invest in a horse, to explain their duties towards it, and added that the responsibilities of sales houses, slaughterhouses, pre-training yards and rehoming centres should also be clarified. Nick Rust, chief executive of the BHA, responded enthusiastically to the HWB report. “I am proud of the work already done by the sport, including our own team of vets and officials, to give our horses the best possible quality of life,” he said. “When I saw the scale of the Welfare Board’s ambition, I was even more proud. “Racing people want the very best for our horses. We would love more people outside our sport to understand just how much we put into keeping horses safe and allowing them to enjoy the quality of life that goes with being an equine athlete.” Charlie Liverton, chief executive of the Racehorse Owners Association, said: “The report is challenging and it should be. The ROA board is fully supportive of the strategy and is very much looking forward to working with the Welfare Board to activate those elements most pertinent to owners. “We must always remember that one of the things that may put off tomorrow’s owner is a lack of understanding of the welfare standards. If we can provide clarity about just how well these horses are looked after, before, during and after their racing careers, it will provide much greater comfort about what they’re looking to invest in. I don’t think it’ll put people off coming in. It’ll make it much clearer what ownership entails.”