Stop me if you’ve heard this before. An athlete smashes the world record in special shoes that L’Équipe says act as “little trampolines” and Sports Illustrated warns “take advantage of the easygoing old rules”. But the athlete in question is not Eliud Kipchoge or Brigid Kosgei. And the shoes are not Nike Vaporflys, with their platforms that could have been borrowed from the Bay City Rollers. Instead the reports are from 1957, after the Russian Yuri Stepanov set a high jump world record in a shoe with a 4cm heel. It was so big, in fact, that it caused him to limp during his run‑up. But it worked. Stepanov had failed to qualify for the Melbourne Olympics. Yet suddenly the shoes, as one reporter colourfully put it at the time, allowed him to “emerge from mediocrity like a chorus girl hopping out of a paper cake”. But this is where 1957 and the modern day diverge. For after Stepanov’s world record, athletics’ governing body promised to “take a stand”. And it did. For while the record stood, the heel height on jumping shoes was quickly limited to 13mm and the controversy soon faded. Do not expect the same closure in the Great Shoe Wars of the 2020s, despite World Athletics’ new regulations on Friday. In fact, the battle is rapidly moving to a second front: the track. You will have read the headlines. Nike’s controversial Vaporfly shoes, which typically improve marathon times in elite men by around 90 seconds, are officially legal. Meanwhile limits have been placed on the height of new shoes (40mm for road shoes, 30mm for track spikes) and the number of plates they have – and any swizzy new shoe tech must, from 30 April, be available in the shops before being used in a race. It means that the AlphaFly shoes worn by Kipchoge in his recent sub‑two‑hour marathon almost certainly do not comply. But pretty much everything else does – and that is good news for Nike. Over the past year its shoe technology has been changing the game on the track as well as on the road. And while some have claimed that under the new rules Laura Muir’s prototype spikes would be banned, that is not the case. Indeed Muir and her training partner Jemma Reekie wore them in an indoor 800m race on Saturday, where Reekie ran a remarkable 1min 57.91sec – not only a personal best by nearly four seconds but the fastest time indoors by any woman since 2006. Reekie’s time has catapulted the European under-23 champion into a genuine Olympic contender overnight. And, inevitably, there were questions on social media about whether she was wearing souped-up spikes. The shoes are indeed special. But, crucially, they seem to be legal. Andy Young, who coaches both athletes, tells me that, while they contain the special Pebax foam used in Kipchoge’s marathon shoes and a plastic plate, they meet all the new regulations. “These are not the carbon-plated spikes referenced online in pictures of patents,” he said, before confirming the spikes would shortly be available to buy. However, there are other prototype Nike shoes that appear far more space age – including ones worn by the Dutch athlete Sifan Hassan when she won world 10,000m and 1500m gold medals and others worn by the US runner Donavan Brazier last week. No one knows for sure about their status. But rival brands are certainly worried about how closely World Athletics will enforce its own regulations. The three years it took the governing body to make a decision on the Vaporflys makes many nervous – as does the close relationship between the organisation’s president, Seb Coe, and Nike. Another concern is that Nike has so many patents out on its technology that it will be hard to catch up. One source I spoke to reckoned that it was two years ahead of its rivals. And so the familiar issues remain: will major races on the road and on the track be decided by shoe brand rather than human endeavour? It has certainly happened before. At the 2016 US Olympic trials Kara Goucher finished fourth behind two athletes wearing Vaporfly prototypes disguised as normal running shoes, which may well have cost her a place in Rio. So what next? When I spoke to the scientist Geoffrey Burns, one of the world’s leading experts on shoe technology, he predicted more fireworks on the track. “The ruling for road-racing shoes made sense at 40mm, as that effectively included all current production models of racing shoes,” he said. “The spike rule, however, leaves an enormous space for future development.” What does that mean in practice? “The Nikes we saw last summer seem to be the first iteration of a spike that really deviates from convention,” he said. “It looks as if they extend the shoe with a forefoot air bladder and/or more foam. It’s easy to see how those elements, with the right configuration and properties, could give a runner a mechanical advantage. So it’s back to the question – and everybody’s answer exists on a spectrum – are we OK with that?” And so here were are again, arguing about shoes and how much technology should be allowed. To paraphrase Winston Churchill: this is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the end. It is, perhaps, the end of the beginning.