Uefa said in its statement that the “adjudicatory [judging] chamber” of its club financial control body (CFCB), which administers compliance with financial fair play rules, had found that City committed “serious breaches” of the FFP regulations. The club had overstated its sponsorship revenue, Uefa said, both in the club’s accounts and in the information submitted to Uefa between 2012 and 2016. The adjudicatory chamber also ruled that City had failed to cooperate with the investigation, presumably by not providing information requested, or officials to be asked questions. This finding, resulting in the two-year ban from the Champions League and €30m fine, is based on a small number of City’s internal emails published by Der Spiegel in November 2018. They suggested that the club’s owner since his 2008 takeover, Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan of the Abu Dhabi ruling family, was funding most of the £67.5m sponsorship by the state’s airline, Etihad. FFP, introduced by Uefa in 2011 for all clubs competing in the Champions or Europa Leagues, was a major reform to encourage clubs not to make huge losses from escalating players’ wages or overspend beyond their revenues. Breaking even – a maximum €45m loss was permitted for the first period, 2012 to 2013, which has since been reduced – applies even if a wealthy owner is bankrolling those losses. So City, where Mansour was massively funding player signings to rocket the club into the elite, faced an impossible task to meet the €45m deficit. They needed to show boosted revenues, and in 2011 Etihad’s sponsorship greatly increased, the airline also taking on the naming of the council-owned stadium. The Der Spiegel emails suggested, however, that Etihad were funding only £8m of a sponsorship declared to Uefa as £67.5m, with the rest being funded by Mansour. So that meant the owner was funding losses, rather than sponsor revenues. Worse than the effect on City’s FFP figures is the finding by the CFCB that this did happen, City did “overstate” their sponsorship and had been deceitful, a very serious breach of trust. City refused to comment when the German magazine published the emails, saying they were “hacked or stolen” and taken out of context. When the CFCB’s investigatory chamber decided it had to launch an inquiry, City welcomed it and said they would prove the apparent deceit was not the case, subsequently saying they had “irrefutable evidence”. However, the IC was not convinced and charged the club in May, and then City condemned the process as “unsatisfactory, curtailed and hostile”. After the adjudicatory chamber upheld the charges on Friday, City repeated these allegations against Uefa’s processes and went further, in effect accusing both CFCB chambers and its members, mostly distinguished lawyers, of impropriety and bias. The ban is a body blow to City’s football ambitions, finances – the loss of revenues could be more than £200m on top of the fine – and the image expertly worked for since 2008. They would struggle to retain Pep Guardiola as manager and some of the players, for whom Champions League participation is a core aspiration in a relatively short career. If the ban is upheld, the Premier League says it understands it will still have four qualifiers for the Champions League, so the fifth-placed team would qualify. They are appealing to the court of arbitration for sport (Cas). By agreement, sporting participants who have a dispute with their governing body do not sue in courts, but go to arbitration. City have said they are confident of proving to Cas that the guilty finding is wrong, repeating that they have “irrefutable evidence” that Mansour was not subsidising the sponsorships.