Just like his hero Robert Langdon, who combines an eidetic memory with an uncanny knack for solving mysteries, incredible swimming skills and the ability to look good in Harris tweed, it turns out Dan Brown has has a similar range to his talents: novelist, composer and now picture book author. The Da Vinci Code author is set to publish his first picture book, Wild Symphony, on 1 September – to be accompanied by a classical music album, his first official music release since his writing career began. Brown has a background in music, and before he published The Da Vinci Code had released a handful of albums, which included songs such as Sweet Pleasure in Pain, and a ballad about phone sex, 076-LOVE. The new work, said the bestselling author, is inspired by classic children’s stories such as Peter and the Wolf, and picture books from his childhood. The story follows one Maestro Mouse, who visits a series of animal friends, including cheetahs, kangaroos and blue whales. Puffin, which will publish the book in the UK, said that each spread in the book “offers a piece of mindful wisdom for navigating life”, covering topics including compassion, patience and respect. With pictures by Hungarian illustrator Susan Batori, the images include clues and puzzles in the backgrounds “for interested readers of all ages”. The album, performed by the Zagreb Festival Orchestra in Croatia, will be released with the book. One piece of music has been composed for each animal, intended to be listened to as the book is read. There will be a world premiere concert of Wild Symphony, with further performances to follow around the world. “I love storytelling, and my novels always attempt to weave together varied themes,” said Brown, who is also working on a new Robert Langdon thriller. “With Wild Symphony, I was excited to build on this idea and create a truly layered experience by using three different languages simultaneously – art, music, and words. In the same way that an opera captivates its audience by presenting beautiful sets, dramatic music and lyrical drama, Wild Symphony strives to be an immersive feast for eyes, ears and mind, all at the same time.”