If ever there was a time for Pete Davidson to release a career-defining standup special, it’s now. Because, as things stand, Davidson’s work as a writer and actor has been fully eclipsed by the fact that he is rarely out of the tabloids. You know about his endless high-profile romances, with figures such as Ariana Grande and Kate Beckinsale. You know about his struggles with mental health and substance abuse and self-harm. You know about his running battle with Saturday Night Live, the show he barely turns up for, openly wishes to leave and yet still inexplicably sticks with. You know the rumours about his penis that spawned the phrase “big dick energy”. You know all this because Pete Davidson: The Walking Headline is much more interesting than Pete Davidson: The Man Who Tells Jokes for a Living. So Davidson’s new Netflix special Alive From New York is a perfect way to redress the balance. By turning in an incisive, honest, well-honed set, he could single-handedly reverse the tide of bad press. It has happened before: John Mulaney used The Comeback Kid to catapult himself from a failed sitcom star to the world’s best standup; Aziz Ansari used Right Now to reset his career after allegations of sexual assault; Patton Oswalt’s Annihilation saw the comic come to terms with the death of his wife through pure catharsis. Alive From New York is the best chance that Davidson will ever have to reframe a narrative that he appears to be lumbered with. And in that regard, there is good news and bad news. The bad news is that this special just isn’t that special. This is a loosely formed and oddly brief set, delivered to a crowd that is semi-appreciative at best. Some jokes – if you can call them that, since many take the form of a wobbly premise that circles a punchline once or twice before wandering off – are met with total silence. These jokes, especially in the first half, are poorly observed and lack any form of unique insight. We get a This Is What Drugs Are Like joke. We get a This Is What Babies Are Like joke. We get a This Is What Sex Is Like joke. They are punishingly rote and delivered without conviction. If the entire special was made up of moments like these, Alive From New York would be dead in the water. However, Davidson has one thing working for him, and he sporadically manages to harness it in a way that cuts through. It is that he is Pete Davidson and his experiences are not exactly common. When he uses this power for good – when he gives his life and career the sort of examination they deserve – the special picks up a handful of notches. His story about how Louis CK tried to get him fired from SNL, and his subsequent glee at CK’s #MeToo revelations, has a focus that snowballs into some of the biggest laughs of the set. His stuff about his engagement to Grande, and her public description of his penis, are intimate in a way that few other comedians would emulate. By the end of the special, when he’s describing how his father died in 9/11, and how the stories told about his dad changed from childhood to adulthood, you’re fully on Davidson’s side. He’s being honest. He’s being incisive. If the entire special was made up of moments like these, Alive From New York would be talked about for years. Davidson isn’t Mulaney. Every inflection of every word hasn’t been honed to a high sheen. He’s shy and mumbly and awkward and seems to fall through his set arse-first. But he’s the sort of comedian that, if you caught him by accident in a club at 1am, would impress you immediately. Alive From New York isn’t quite the special that people wanted from Pete Davidson. But it’s close. You hope that, when he records a second one, he’ll be able to get closer still.