Josh Adams has been ruled out of Wales’s remaining Six Nations games against England and Scotland with an ankle injury sustained against France. Adams, who has scored 10 tries in his past 10 Tests, sustained the problem during his country’s 27-23 defeat in Cardiff. The Welsh Rugby Union confirmed Adams will miss the remainder of the tournament. He is due to have surgery this week and “could return in 12 weeks for the latter stages of the Guinness Pro14”, with the WRU adding: “No one has been added to the squad.” It is a blow to the new Wales head coach, Wayne Pivac, given Adams’s sustained excellence: the wing finished the World Cup this season as the tournament’s top try-scorer. He has claimed 14 tries in his 24-cap Test career and been unquestionably Wales’s most potent attacking weapon during the past year. It means Wales are without four of the backs who started the grand slam game against Ireland last March – Liam Williams, Jonathan Davies, Adams and Gareth Anscombe. Adams’s fellow wing George North is also doubtful for the match against England on 7 March after sustaining another concussion, this time following an aerial collision with France’s Gaël Fickou. North then failed a head injury assessment and he is now set to follow graduated return-to-play protocols. Johnny McNicholl would be in the running to replace Adams against England and Liam Williams, who has not played since sustaining an ankle injury four months ago, could also find himself in the mix as his rehabilitation nears completion. McNicholl has featured in all three of Wales’s Six Nations games in this year’s tournament, including two appearances as a replacement. However Pivac could also look at the uncapped teenager Louis Rees-Zammit, who has made a major impression for Gloucester on domestic and European stages this season. Williams, meanwhile, has rejoined the Scarlets from Saracens with immediate effect rather than in the summer. If he is ready to play, given his lack of match action, there is a possibility that Wales could release him for the Scarlets’ Pro14 clash against Munster in Limerick on Saturday. The Welsh scrum-half Rhys Webb has signed for Bath for the remainder of the season and could feature against Bristol on Sunday. Webb will rejoin the Ospreys next season, where he will be coached by Toby Booth, who has been announced as the new head coach at the Welsh outfit. Ireland prop Cian Healy will miss the remainder of the Six Nations with the hip problem he sustained in the 24-12 defeat by England, robbing him of the chance to reach 100 caps in this tournament. Lions second row Ian Henderson returns to the squad for this week’s two-day camp having been withdrawn from the team to face England because of the birth of his son.