The next six weeks are crucial for players on the periphery of the England squad. Gareth Southgate has just two more matches left before he picks his final 23 for Euro 2020. The manager is unlikely to bring in a lot of new faces for the friendlies against Italy and Denmark next month, but here are 10 players who are worth considering even though they have never featured in England squads before. Jack Grealish has plenty of competition for a place in the squad, but surely his form cannot be ignored any longer. The Aston Villa captain has created 55 chances in the Premier League this season – 20 more than any other Englishman. He has also scored seven goals and registered five assists, all while playing for a team that is just a point above the relegation zone. The form of Nick Pope and Dean Henderson – who have both kept nine clean sheets this season (as many as Alisson, who joins them out front in the race for the golden glove) – makes it difficult for Aaron Ramsdale. That being said, the 21-year-old is enjoying an impressive season and could be viewed as a long-term successor to Jordan Pickford. He has made 83 saves this season, which is the fourth highest in the league and the best of the English goalkeepers. Dominic Calvert-Lewin has already scored 10 goals in the Premier League this season, making this the most productive campaign of his career by far. The Everton striker is a stalwart of the Under-20 and Under-21 sides, which will undoubtedly feature in Southgate’s thinking. His workrate and threat from crosses also give him an appeal. With three right-footed, three left-footed and four headed goals this season, the 22-year-old’s increased potency in the box will keep the pressure on Danny Ings, who is currently the favourite for the final striker spot in the squad. Mason Greenwood is an outside bet given the form of Ings and Calvert-Lewin, but his ability to play out wide in a front three could stand the teenager in good stead. With Marcus Rashford out injured, the 18-year-old should be given plenty of opportunities to impress for Manchester United. He has scored in the Premier League, Europa League, League Cup and FA Cup this season (as well as the EFL Trophy and Premier League 2), finding the net every 131 minutes on average for United’s first team. Phil Foden would probably be a first-team regular for the vast majority of Premier League clubs but, unlike Greenwood, he is unlikely to play enough minutes to impress Southgate. England have a lot of options in attacking midfield and the fact he has only played for 260 minutes in the league all season will count against him. Nevertheless, Foden is only 19 and his record of two goals, two assists and a 90.6% pass accuracy in just 187 minutes of Champions League action suggests that, if he were to feature more for City, he would soon be called up to the England squad. Unlike Foden, Reece James has secured a starting place for his club. His buccaneering runs down Chelsea’s right wing have really caught the eye since the turn of the year. The 20-year-old even earned the right-back spot in our January team of the month. Again, England are well stocked in his position but, if James can hold on to his place at Chelsea, he may force his way into the squad as back-up for Trent Alexander-Arnold. England have an abundance of talented right-backs but the options on the opposite flank are not so convincing. With that in mind, Brandon Williams could have a real shot. Keeping Luke Shaw – a direct competitor for an England spot – on the bench at Manchester United would certainly help his cause. The 19-year-old has shown real maturity and confidence for his club this season. In his 14 starts for United, the team has kept eight clean sheets and lost just twice. One thing that has become very clear at Everton since Carlo Ancelotti took over as manager is that Mason Holgate is his first choice centre-back. Like Williams, Holgate faces competition from a fellow teammate in Michael Keane – among others – for a place in the squad. Having leapfrogged Keane in the pecking order at Everton, he will hope to do the same for England. The 23-year-old’s ability to step out from the back will certainly appeal to Southgate. He has registered three assists so far this season and is certainly more composed in possession than Keane. Last season Southgate said he would not bring Jack Grealish into the squad while he was playing in the Championship, so the fact that Southgate and his coaching staff have kept a close eye on Kalvin Phillips this season suggests two things: that the 24-year-old is capable of playing at a higher level and that England lack options for that crucial defensive midfielder role. Jordan Henderson and Harry Winks can play that position, but Declan Rice is the only real ball-winning midfielder in the top flight who is available for Southgate. Phillips certainly fits that profile, having made three tackles per 90 minutes this season in the Championship. However, his form – like that of his team – has taken a turn for the worse recently. He is a wildcard at this stage but if Japhet Tanganga maintains his form and keep his place at Spurs now that Ben Davies is returning to fitness, he is an interesting option. Even though he is a centre-back by trade, Tanganga has looked comfortable in both full-back roles since the turn of the year. The 20-year-old is a no-nonsense defender whose committed displays have won praise from Spurs fans and José Mourinho alike. Tanganga has played for England at Under-16, Under-17, Under-18, Under-19 and Under-20 level and he has even won an international trophy – the Toulon_Tournament in France in 2017. • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and ratings• Follow WhoScored and Martin Laurence on Twitter