“Footballers in dressing-room communal baths celebrating FA Cup wins used to be a sports pages staple,” reminisces Roger Kirkby. “When was the last such photo taken?” We’re guessing there are a number of reasons why we no longer see giddy footballers photographed in changing room baths, Roger. The first is that many clubs have updated their facilities and huge tubs where players can collectively scrub themselves clean are not as common as they used to be. Privacy and PR are a big deal for clubs too, so the thought of images of naked players cavorting in baths getting shared on social media may well set alarm bells ringing. That’s not to say that players in the modern era don’t take a plunge to celebrate. If we broaden the question out to include celebrations of victories outside of the FA Cup, we can find a few relatively recent photos. Here’s one of Lille’s Moussa Sow leading a sing-song with teammates (including Eden Hazard), after they claimed the Ligue 1 title with a win at PSG in May 2011. They are fully dressed, mind, so there was no danger of any indecency working its way on to the internet. Another team that we are grateful to for still having a big bath are Feyenoord. Their players used the space it afforded them to pose with the KNVB Cup after their victory over AZ Alkmaar at De Kuip stadium in April 2018. It’s also the most recent communal-bath photo we can find, so hopefully answers Roger’s tweaked question. “I stumbled across this picture of Paul Lambert in the bath celebrating a Scottish Cup win for St Mirren in 1987 when writing an article about him for our local fanzine,” writes Garry Brogden. “It’s haunted me ever since.” On the subject of haunting pictures, try this one for size: here’s Mark Hughes, Gary Pallister and a far too relaxed-looking Bryan Robson celebrating Manchester United’s 1993-94 Premier League win with some bubbly in the Old Trafford hot tub. Let’s be honest, though, the old pictures are the best. The steam, the booze, the emotion. Bournemouth’s players, and first-team coach and club stalwart John “Captain” Kirk, piled into the Dean Court bath after their famous FA Cup win over Manchester United in January 1984. No sign of manager Harry Redknapp, however. And here’s Manchester City celebrating their promotion to Division One in 1985. Some careful cropping was required with this one but not for Mick McCarthy, who hit the Maine Road bath proudly wearing his full kit and a rather serious expression. When Liverpool end their 30-year wait to win the league this season, it’s unlikely we’ll see images of Jürgen Klopp’s well-drilled side letting their hair down with some booze and a bath. They are far too well-behaved for that. Liverpool’s title-winners of 1975-76 were always up for a celebratory tipple. Here they are taking a dip in a Molineux bath that is probably 12% alcohol. Even their strict longtime physio and coach, Ronnie Moran, was happy to toast a famous 1-0 victory over Barcelona at Camp Nou after the 1975 Uefa Cup semi-final first leg with a bottle of ale and a soak. And who wouldn’t want to take a relaxing plunge in that bath? If pictures of footballers in baths (celebrating or otherwise) float your boat then have a look at this classic gallery from 2014. It’s pure gold. “Has any player played for more teams beginning with the same letter than Jan Hochscheidt (Energie Cottbus II, Erzgebirge Aue, Eintracht Braunschweig and Eintracht Braunschweig II),” asks Stephen Bond. We have found a few, Stephen. “David Connolly played for five (or six depending on whether the last counts) Watford, Wolves, Wimbledon, West Ham, Wigan and AFC Wimbledon,” writes Tony Marsden. “Interestingly, or maybe not, I have held a season ticket at some time for four of the clubs he has played for – the two Wimbledon clubs and his Dutch teams: Feyenoord and Excelsior).” Unfortunately we’re a stickler for accuracy and AFC has to be scratched off, Tony. “Among the 26 clubs Sebastián Abreu of Uruguay has represented (a record in itself), five start with ‘S’: San Lorenzo, San Luis, SD Aucas, Sol de América and Santa Tecla. And not only that, but each of the clubs are in a different country: Argentina, Mexico, Ecuador, Paraguay and El Salvador – none of which includes his homeland. He’s also played in five other countries, the wanderlust addict,” gasps Ian Forth. Steve Claridge was always going to pop up wasn’t he? “He played for Bournemouth, Birmingham, Brighton, Brentford and Bradford,” tweets Steve Hyde. If we’re being really picky (and we are), the Cherries are officially AFC Bournemouth. but ultimate journeyman Claridge has also played for five ‘W’ teams – Weymouth, Wolves, Wycombe, Walsall and Worthing. Back to B, and Steve can offer us a new front runner: “Neil Redfearn can go one better than Claridge, having played for Bolton, Barnsley, Bradford City, Boston, Bradford Park Avenue and Bridlington.” More of you have written in with examples of teams playing home games at a rival’s ground – starting with Steven Chinn … “I believe that in World War II, after bomb damage at Highbury, Spurs returned the WWI favour and Arsenal played games at White Hart Lane.” Indeed, they did Steven. Arsenal played Wartime League games there to entertain locals. Highbury was also used as a centre for air raid precautions, which explains why it could not host matches. “To expand on the answer of Bristol Rovers playing at Ashton Gate, the game against Swindon happened on 11 April 1987 but the most interesting fact is why it occurred,” begins Paul Biles. “As part of the transfer of striker Trevor Morgan from Rovers to City, one of the terms of the contract was that Rovers could use Ashton Gate free for one game. I’m presuming the terms did not extend to the local derby that was played the following week at Twerton Park.” “What’s the most disallowed goals scored in a match?” asked Jonathan Malpass in 2004. On 2 April 2000, Celtic had four goals chalked off in 17 minutes against Kilmarnock, including three from a distraught Tommy Johnson. Needless to say, they still won the match 4-2. Since then Sheffield United, in 2016, have had four goals chalked off in a single match, too. Erling Braut Haaland has said it is his dream to win the Premier League...with Leeds United. What examples are there of highly rated young players signing for an unlikely team because of personal support? “With Liverpool having done the double over seven out of the eight teams they’ve played twice in this season’s Premier League as of 25 February, they might end up doing the double against 18 out of their 19 opponents. What’s the record for the most doubles over everyone else in a league?” asks Derek McHugh. Jamie Hamilton was sent off the other week for Hamilton Academical, has any other name sake player played for a club/been sent off?... “Has there ever been an English league or FA Cup game played in July?” asks Tai Wai Cheung. If there had been an injury time goal in Sunday's Arsenal v Everton match, we'd have seen a goal in the first minute and the last minute of both halves. Surely there can't be many examples of this happening? @TheKnowledge_GUToday's friendly between Spartak Moscow and Pakhtakor saw a goalkeeper change his kit at halftime as it clashed with the opponents' colours.Has such a makeover ever happened in a competitive match? What’s the biggest game to take place in the lowest tier? The Sheffield derby was a Tier 3 affair in 2011/12. Email your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.