“There was a lot in it but at the same time,” said Thomas Müller, “there was nothing in it.” One of Bayern’s very sharpest minds (and tongues) hit the nail on the head for the umpteenth time in a career every bit as interesting off the pitch as it has been on it. As Munich waited for a storm to brew, meteorologically as well as metaphorically, the Bundesliga’s big clash of the season to date simultaneously gave and took away, delivered and let down, satisfied and left you hungry for more. It felt as if the whole occasion had been set up to blindside you, from the scheduling – unquestionably the standout game of the weekend being left to last, unusually for Germany, and the 1800 Sunday timeslot – through the teams’ respective preparations, right down to the chronology of the match itself. At the end of it we didn’t quite have the spectacular that we wanted, but we did have a title race fully intact. The fear, for neutral and non-Bayern fans, of that not being the case had been clear in the days and weeks building up to it. As Leipzig faltered and flustered in recent weeks, looking far from their confident selves and letting five league points and a place in the DfB Pokal slip through their grasp, it seemed as if they were arriving to face Bayern – in a stadium where they’d never so much as taken a point – at just the wrong time. Behind that assured exterior even Julian Nagelsmann, who had very publicly admonished, questioned and encouraged his team as is his way, must surely have had his own doubts. In the first 45 minutes, it looked as if those fears were absolutely on the money, and that the script was an altogether familiar one. At times in that first half it felt as if the visitors’ defensive lynchpin Dayot Upamecano was the only thing standing between Bayern and a typical Allianz Arena procession, holding back an insistent tide with a Herculean display of fortitude. If there are people who believe he’s not at least agonisingly close to being the Bundesliga’s best defender, then they wouldn’t have been in the Allianz on Sunday. Maybe those tough opening moments could be the passage of play that changed something masquerading as a title race into the real deal. “With how we approached the first 20 minutes,” Timo Werner later reflected with more than a touch of his coach’s candour, “it was actually only a matter of time before we were behind.” While Upamecano stretched every sinew and Peter Gulacsi did his thing, denying Thiago Alcântara and Robert Lewandowski without fuss, there was an awakening, exactly as their manager had hoped. Nagelsmann had done his thinking - but he had not overthought things, like so many who have fallen by the wayside here before. “Bayern expected us to be high up the pitch,” he explained, “so we wanted to play a bit deeper and play on the counter-attack.” The plan wasn’t quite executed to precision in those early stages, he admitted, or to be “quite as deep as we actually were,” but it eventually gave his team more freedom. And that second half was the twist in the tale. It wasn’t as pronounced as it might have been had Marcel Sabitzer and Werner taken golden chances as Leipzig created a flurry at the start of a second period and attacked with gusto. “In the second half,” wrote Christoph Kneer in Süddeutsche Zeitung, “a game developed that represented the current top of the league. The new money from Leipzig fought back and were a bit cheeky, while Bayern’s old money felt challenged and tried to defend their status. Bayern might be light years ahead of Dortmund and Leipzig but games like this show them that they have to stay vigilant and make smart decisions. Simply buying Leipzig’s best won’t work. Leipzig don’t need the money.” Others spoke of a level of genuine competition giving Bayern a greater chance to realise their European dreams, keeping them on their toes unlike in many previous seasons, give or take Dortmund’s near miss last term. “You had the feeling from the 70th minute that nobody wanted to go all in,” Müller suggested. That level of mutual respect offers potential satisfaction going forward that surpasses an afternoon with no goals, and that may well not just blow over. • This should have been the weekend when Dortmund took advantage of the top two playing each other to close the gap, but the ceiling fell in, as it has threatened too ever since the Winterpause ended, with BVB on the wrong end of a seven-goal thriller at Leverkusen. There was much to like about their attacking play – including a stupendous debut goal for Emre Can – but having led 2-1 and 3-2, they conceded twice in 82 seconds in the final 10 minutes to go home with nothing. “We’re conceding too many goals,” lamented sporting director Michael Zorc, “and that’s why we’re not in a better position.” After leaking seven goals in the last two games during a week which also saw BVB exit the Pokal, Zorc isn’t joking. Outrageous from Emre Can! Wow! ☄️Two touches then he shapes it into the net from 25 yards! His former club are stunned!Dortmund lead. pic.twitter.com/likPxtaPvI • For Leverkusen, it was a huge boost as they reignited their drive towards the top four. The feeling in Peter Bosz’s dressing room was that Die Werkself leapt an important mental barrier with their comeback – especially after they got past the blow of Kai Havertz hitting a post when clean through at 2-2, only for Raphaël Guerreiro to go back up the other end to give the visitors the lead. “There have been games where we’ve been broken by things like that,” said two-goal Kevin Volland. • Werder Bremen had hoped their stirring Pokal win over Dortmund in the week would be a turning point, but they slipped back into more Weserstadion misery as Union played their way to an excellent 2-0 win on the back of Marius Bülter’s superbly taken brace. Sporting director Frank Baumann again defended Florian Kohfeldt as Werder slipped into the bottom two, and turned his ire on to the players. “We are all responsible,” Baumann said emphatically, “but first and foremost, the team is responsible.” • It was a disappointing day for Union’s neighbours Hertha, again, as Mainz exited with all three points thanks to a Robin Quaison hat-trick. They got all four goals, in fact, with Jeffrey Bruma’s unfortunate own goal briefly giving the home side hope, although the Dutch centre-back was widely praised by his new teammates for a solid debut. • “You have to ask yourself what potion he’s been drinking,” said Sebastian Rode of Timothy Chandler after his US international teammate (previous season-best goalscoring of two) got a brace in Eintracht Frankfurt’s 5-0 Friday night demolition of Augsburg to make it four in five games and continue his side’s excellent start to 2020. • It’s Storm Sabine, rather than Ciara, in Germany but regardless of name, it was enough to put the kibosh on Mönchengladbach v Köln, the Bundesliga’s first postponed match in nearly nine years. Eintracht Frankfurt 5-0 Augsburg, Bayer Leverkusen 4-3 Borussia Dortmund, Wolfsburg 1-1 Fortuna Düsseldorf, Werder Bremen 0-2 Union Berlin, Schalke 1-1 Paderborn, Freiburg 1-0 Hoffenheim, Hertha Berlin 1-3 Mainz, Bayern Munich 0-0 RB Leipzig