Name: Javad Age: 30Income: About £28,000, or £120 a day Job: Digger operator, Romford I was forced to flee Iran when I converted to Christianity. I could have been imprisoned or killed because of my beliefs. I didn’t want to leave Iran – I’d graduated and was just starting to build a career as a survey engineer but there was no alternative. My uncle paid some smugglers to help me escape Iran and get to Europe. That journey took five months. It was a very difficult time. I remember walking for days. Other times, I travelled in the back of a lorry. I didn’t have any money or any belongings apart from the clothes on my back. I arrived in the UK in the back of a lorry. When the driver saw me, he was so angry. I felt scared. The police turned up and arrested me. I was sent to a detention centre. There were so many different nationalities. I didn’t know what would happen to me but I felt safe at last; people were kind and provided me with food and a bed. Afterwards I was sent to a hotel in Glasgow to live with some other asylum seekers before being placed in Dagenham. Shortly afterwards the Home Office granted me leave to remain for five years. This led to me becoming homeless as I had to vacate the designated housing I’d been put up in. Fortunately I found a bed at a YMCA. That’s when my journey really began to change. I was referred to Renaisi, a social enterprise that helps disadvantaged people, and during their weekly visits they’d ask me about what I wanted to do with my life, what my goals were. I said I wanted to study civil engineering and return to the building trade. I really wanted a job as digger operator but knew I’d struggle to do the training as it was expensive and I would need to save for years. Renaisi organised my CSCS card, which is required to work on construction sites, and by some miracle, my support worker referred me to Beam, a crowdfunding website that helps homeless people like me. I received £4,324 – more than enough for the £2,844 digger operator course and the £700 for the street works course. I couldn’t believe it. For the past four months I’ve worked as a freelance digger operator. Recruitment agencies find me jobs which could last for a few days or a few weeks. Recently I was on a demolition job, which was exciting as I hadn’t done that before. I receive about £18 an hour, or about £120 a day. I know people work a lot harder for a lot less so I’m really happy with that rate. I rent a room in a shared house with two other people for £500 a month including bills. A lot of my income goes on my car, which I need because of work. I often work outside of London so end up spending £200 a month on petrol. Car insurance costs £150 a month. I spend £250 to £300 a month on food and drink. I do eat a lot. Every morning I spend about £8 on food and drinks. I normally stop off at a petrol station and pick up a coffee and croissant. If I’m working on a big site, I’ll buy lots of coffees and food like sandwiches, sausages and chips. But if I’m working at a small place with no canteen, I’ll bring in Iranian food cooked at home. I’m good at saving. I’m single and don’t have many outgoings so I’m able to save about £1,000 a month. I’m saving to help me pursue my dreams. I want to go to university here in the UK. I’m constantly trying to learn – I spend about five hours a week studying. Over the past year I’ve studied for my maths and English language GCSEs plus English for speakers of other languages (Esol) courses. My aim is to build my savings so I can study civil engineering here and then later buy my own place to live. My dream is to set up my own construction firm. I’m feeling really happy. When I was living at the YMCA I wasn’t happy, I felt depressed and isolated. I thought that was my future. But thank God so many opportunities have come through. I’ve been able to study, learn English, fit in to British life, save money, pay my taxes, and I have a home to live in. But most of all, I’m free. For more information about Beam visit www.beam.org