Some of the best players in the Premier League have had to leave England and prove their worth elsewhere before their former clubs realised their mistakes. Kevin De Bruyne and Mohamed Salah were both discarded earlier in their careers, but they are now among the best players in the world. History could be repeating itself. Here are 10 players who were deemed surplus to requirements in England but are now excelling elsewhere in Europe. Even though his form and Roma’s form has dipped of late, Chris Smalling has undoubtedly been a success in Serie A. Dubbed “Smaldini” after his superb start in Italy, the Englishman has read the game well enough to rank fifth in the league for interceptions (2.1 per game), while ranking among the top 10 for pass accuracy (90.7%). Rating this season: 7.18 Another England defender considered dispensable by his club in the summer, Kieran Trippier had a difficult time at Tottenham last season but his departure – and the way he was not replaced – came as a surprise. His undoubted quality did not go unnoticed by Diego Simeone. Atlético Madrid are renowned for being among the most organised teams in football and their new right-back slotted in seamlessly before picking up an injury last month. He has created more chances than any other full-back in Spain and has made more tackles than any Atlético regular this season. Rating this season: 7.18 Islam Slimani was a regular feature in the football gossip columns during the January transfer window and it is clear to see why. The Algerian was Leicester’s record signing when he arrived at the club in 2016 but he never really found his feet in England, or indeed during his loan spell at Fenerbahçe last season. His form during his loan to Monaco this season has come as something of a shock then. He has eight goals and eight assists in Ligue 1 this season, meaning he is either scoring or setting up a goal every 67 minutes he is on the pitch, which is nothing short of sensational. Rating this season: 7.22 When Chelsea signed Thorgan Hazard from Lens at the same time as they signed his elder brother Eden from Lille he was considered little more than a comfort blanket for his esteemed sibling. Thorgan did not make a single senior appearance for the club and was shipped off to Zulte-Waregem in Belgium, before moving to the Bundesliga on loan. Borussia Mönchengladbach saw enough in one season to make that loan move permanent and last summer he joined Borussia Dortmund in a £23m deal. Having reached double figures for goals and assists for for Gladbach last season (10 apiece), he has four goals and nine assists for his new club so far this season – even though he has started just 15 games. Rating this season: 7.26 Jérémie Boga graduated from the Chelsea academy but his senior career at the club equated to one 16-minute cameo in a 3-2 defeat to Burnley three years ago. Since then Boga has traded one blue for another. He spent a season on loan at Birmingham before being snapped up by Serie A side Sassuolo in 2018. The tricky winger, now 23, has scored seven goals in Serie A this season; on top of that, only three players in Europe’s top five leagues have completed more dribbles than his tally of 97. Rating this season: 7.27 Joselu showed fleeting glimpses of his ability during his time in England – at Stoke and then Newcastle – so fans at St James’ Park had little to worry about when he joined Alavés last summer. However, the 29-year-old has returned to Spain and proven that he is a real handful. He has won the most aerial duels in La Liga this season by a distance – all while scoring nine goals. The striker’s form has earned him eight of our man of the match awards this season; only Lionel Messi has won more (10). Rating this season: 7.33 Mikel Merino is another former Newcastle player who is thriving back in Spain but fans will be more annoyed about his departure than Joselu’s. The young midfielder was never given a fair crack in the north east, starting 14 of 24 league appearances in the 2017-18 season despite averaging an impressive 3.8 tackles and 1.9 dribbles per 90 minutes. After a solid debut season with Real Sociedad, Merino – who is still only 23 – has been a revelation this season, bossing the middle ground both on the ground and in the air. A call-up for the Spain squad for Euro 2020 is becoming a real possibility. Rating this season: 7.33 Despite his scoring record – he is Belgium’s all-time top goalscorer and only 18 players have scored more goals in the history of the Premier League – Romelu Lukaku was unwanted by Ole Gunnar Solskjær at the end of his Manchester United career. He has silenced any critics since moving to Inter though. His late goal in the Milan derby at the weekend was his 21st goal for Inter this season. His conversion rate of 25% is excellent. Even though the burly striker has his flaws, Antonio Conte is maximising his many strengths where United ultimately failed. Rating this season: 7.53 Luis Alberto joined Liverpool from Sevilla for £7m in 2013, but he was never really given a chance in England. He spent just 258 minutes on the pitch across 12 appearances. Three years later, following loan spells at Málaga and Deportivo La Coruña, Liverpool sold him to Lazio for half of the price they bought him. He has become a star in Serie A. He has scored 18 goals and set up 30 more in the last three years and has even been linked with a move to Barcelona in recent times. Rating this season: 7.67 When Manchester United signed Angel Di Maria in 2014, the excitement among their fans was understandable. He scored on his home debut before netting a sumptuous goals at Leicester a week later and all was as it should be. However, the his form nosedived under Louis van Gaal’s strict defensive demands and – even though he picked up 11 assists in his one season with the club – United decided to cut their losses. In his first season at PSG he scored 10 goals and set up 18. The quality is inferior in Ligue 1, but Di María continues to shine. He recently reached double figures for assists for the seventh season in his career. Rating this season: 7.78 • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and ratings• Follow WhoScored and Martin Laurence on Twitter