David Runciman is wrong about the inevitability of Brexit (It was all a dream, Journal, 1 February) but highlights important lessons about skill and systems in politics. Leavers won because they had the skills, strategies and, above all, language that spoke to voters’ concerns about identity, immigration, the NHS and lack of control. They knew a referendum was necessary to leave the EU and a parliamentary majority was needed to make it happen, which brings me to political systems. The UK’s parliamentary system was severely tested, and will be tested again by the government’s ability to satisfy voters, negotiate trade deals and respond to demands for Scottish independence. City mayors and citizens’ assemblies also give politics new possibilities. Nothing is inevitable, so long as citizens have agency, skill and persistence to pursue a cause effectively. What we need from the Guardian is information and analysis to really understand what our fellow citizens are feeling (as John Harris and Gary Younge have provided) and how power works, in the City, government and globally, to learn how to create a just and sustainable world.Titus AlexanderAuthor of Practical Politics: Lessons in Power and Democracy • David Runciman reminds us that “An elected government, enacting its will through parliament, made the referendum happen.” He doesn’t mention that in debating the referendum bill in parliament, a suggested amendment was said to “make no sense” because the referendum was “merely advisory” – as of course it legally was, and as of course it was known to be by the then minister for Europe who said this. Runciman also reminds us that “Both main parties went into that election promising to respect the result of the referendum.” He doesn’t mention that respecting the referendum meant very different things for the different parties, as their manifestos made plain. In the event, only a very hard Brexit could eventually win in parliament. This was owed to the fact that the advocates of a very hard Brexit (members of the ERG and long-term Eurosceptics) all belonged to the party that managed, by a whisker and then by a landslide, to stay in government. I’d blame our exit from the EU on two things combined: 1) No thought has ever been given to what the terms should be of a referendum on a question which might lead to massive constitutional change in a country composed of four sub-nations; 2) Our first-past-the-post system for electing representatives. Our system served remainers ill. Despite this, I don’t think that one has to be under any illusions in order to think that it was worth a fight. Only in retrospect could the events of 31 January strike one as inevitable. YouGov polling now shows, as it has for a while, that 7% more people think that the decision to leave the EU was wrong than think it was right (with around 10% “don’t knows” admittedly). For some this will suggest that a different electoral system would serve the nation better. But you’ll probably only resonate to the suggestion if, like me, you’re fearful for the UK’s future and you find it deeply regrettable that we’ve come to be ruled by populists.Jennifer HornsbyLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition