As a blind man and his valet swap evidence of personal and universal collapse amid interruptions by an old couple who live in dustbins, Samuel Beckett’s Endgame projects an unnerving sense of nothingness, in heaven as it is on earth. But the play is not, as Beckett-sceptics claim, about nothing. While the Irish-French dramatist avoided historical or political specificity, the apocalyptic nihilism of Endgame surely reflects its composition in 1957, as the aftermath of the second world war overlapped with the new human brutalism of possible nuclear annihilation. Richard Jones’s visually and verbally vivid revival, with Alan Cumming and Daniel Radcliffe in charismatic tandem as master Hamm and boy-servant Clov, feels strongly aware that a world in which there is “no more nature” and tides appear to have stopped needs no nudging these days to reflect the new looming man-made Armageddon of environmental catastrophe that has made Greta Thunberg the biggest teenage superstar since Radcliffe. Those struggling to adjust to the British political climate may also be therapeutically amused by the last word spoken on Endgame’s blasted landscape being “Remain”. Over the years, Radcliffe has admirably worked at perfecting his stagecraft. To increasingly impressive vocal heft and variety, his Clov adds impressive comedic physical skills, deftly fulfilling the health-and-safety-taunting stage directions requiring a character with a walking disability to climb up and down stepladders and lean down into dustbins. Radcliffe and Cumming, whose ascetic, skeletal Hamm involves a prosthetic trick that creeps up on the audience, also smartly mine and time the lines to show what a high comic writer Beckett can be, as do Jane Horrocks and Karl Johnson as the garbage bin partners. Designer Stewart Laing’s choice of modern municipal wheelie bins for the old folks’ homes underlines that treating elderly people like rubbish also has contemporary relevance. The curtain-raiser is Rough for Theatre II, a rarely seen piece from the same period as Endgame. Beckett’s reputation as an ominous philosopher and word-player can overshadow his skill at stage pictures, of which this provides another, searingly realised by Jones and Laing. At a big, high, bright window, we see the back of a man who seems about to jump. His name is, in a typically deathly Beckett pun, Croker. On either side, at desks lit by erratic lamps, are Bertrand (Radcliffe) and Morvan (Cumming), apparently supernatural bureaucrats, working through Croker’s life files, assessing testimonies from those who met him. The sense of death angels presiding over the justification of a life suggest a feel-bad rewrite of Frank Capra’s 1946 film It’s a Wonderful Life. Jones’s staging contains shrewd visual echoes (dark suits, shadow) of a writer Beckett admired, Franz Kafka, and vocal allusions (rapid rough-posh banter) to Harold Pinter, who Beckett influenced. This production strongly has the feel of a lost cousin to Pinter’s The Dumb Waiter (1957), where temperamentally contrasting men attend another kind of death and which Pinter wrote at almost exactly the time Beckett worked on the first version of Rough for Theatre II. In both this fascinating curiosity and the more celebrated Endgame, Radcliffe and Cumming achieve the Beckett paradox of exhilarating bleakness. At the Old Vic, London, until 28 March.