Andy Farrell’s reign as Ireland’s head coach started with a narrow victory over Scotland in Dublin last Saturday that owed much to their opponents squandering a number of chances, not least Stuart Hogg, but he says that his players are high on confidence before this Saturday’s visit of the champions Wales. Farrell has made two enforced changes with Garry Ringrose and Caelan Doris ruled out by injuries they sustained against Scotland, and it says much about the strength in depth Ireland have developed that the two players he has brought into the starting line-up, Robbie Henshaw and Peter O’Mahony, are both Lions. “Wales are grand slam champions and World Cup semi-finalists,” said Farrell. “We know what is coming and we are excited. We are in a good place, brimming with confidence for what we know will be a really tough game. The players cannot wait to get back on to the pitch. “I don’t think their egos are bruised. They can’t wait to get back on the field. Training today was quick, it was intense, it was ferocious. We have a few things to fix as well and we’ll make sure we do that.” Ireland never got away from Scotland, opponents they had defeated comfortably at the World Cup and who had lost by double-figure margins since their victory in Dublin in 2010. “I had not seen them play that well for a long time,” said Farrell. “They were ferocious. If that happens again this weekend, we will have to manage it. We have picked a good team and even with the changes it has continuity. If we win a few more collisions, and win the race to the breakdown, then the creative side will come a bit easier.” Ringrose has been ruled out for the matches against Wales and then England in the third round after being replaced with a thumb injury last weekend while the No 8 Doris lasted four minutes on his Test debut before suffering concussion. The replacement prop Dave Kilcoyne also failed a head injury assessment one minute after replacing Cian Healy, but he has been named on the bench subject to his completing the return-to-play protocols; Jack McGrath is on standby. “Caelan had a bit of a knock previously this year,” said Farrell. “We do the right thing by young kids and make sure they are treated properly. I thought Peter did really well when he came off the bench. He was outstanding all week in training and it rolled over into his performance. It was the same with Robbie when he came on. They had both been tough selection calls.” CJ Stander moves from blind-side flanker to No 8 to accommodate O’Mahony while the back rower Max Deegan, another graduate from the Leinster academy, is set to win his first cap from the bench. “He’s got all the attributes of a great back-rower. You go into the unknown a little bit with Test match rugby but we feel he is ready and will give us another dimension,” said Farrell. Wales have not won in Dublin in the Six Nations since 2012, although they left with a draw four years ago. “They looked great against Italy, but I think everyone is getting carried away with their expansive game,” said Farrell. “It is great to watch and they are doing it really well, but what we saw over the last 10 years under Warren Gatland is still there, and rightly so. “Their kicking game is excellent, their kick-chase is good, their line speed is good. They have width across the line defensively, they are pretty clinical in the opposition 22 and they are a threat carrying the ball as well. We know what’s coming.”