The BBC broadcaster and former teacher Simon Warr has died from cancer aged 65 after announcing days ago he was in a hospice with a “very serious health condition”. On Thursday, he tweeted that he was unlikely to return to social media, while thanking his friends and followers for their support. Warr, who lived in west London, regularly appeared on BBC Radio Suffolk and was the headmaster on Channel 4’s reality documentary That’ll Teach ’Em, in which students experienced life in a traditional English grammar school over a summer. He also taught foreign languages at secondary school and was wrongly accused of historical child abuse in 2012 before being cleared of all charges in 2014. He expressed a hope that his legacy, as described in his book Presumed Guilty, would be raising “awareness of the human costs” of false allegations and wrongful convictions after his campaigning. “It is a comfort to know that my book Presumed Guilty has been useful for so many who have faced this ordeal and for their families,” he tweeted, adding that a close friend would make public the outcome of his health condition. A post on his Twitter account said on Saturday morning: “It is with great sadness that I’ve been asked to let all Simon’s followers know that he passed away early this morning at the age of 65 after a short battle with pancreatic/liver cancer. He was surrounded by his family, as well as the love and prayers of his many friends. “Simon’s family have asked me to thank everyone who sent him such kind messages of love, support and hope. Simon’s campaign for justice for the falsely accused will continue. He had just finished writing a new book. Funeral arrangements will be shared soon.” Fellow broadcaster Jeremy Vine tweeted that he was “very sad” to learn of Warr’s passing. “Simon Warr brought huge energy to every appearance he made [on] BBC Radio 2 and Jeremy Vine on 5, and there were many. He had an incredible zest and a passion for learning and debate.” He also praised his presenting style. “He was a tremendously loyal and very kind man whose abrasive on-air style belied his true thoughtfulness and compassion,” he said. “He loved to broadcast, to write, and above all to teach. Taken too soon, and far too quickly. RIP”