Petina Gappah was born in Zambia in 1971 and has law degrees from Cambridge, Graz University and Zimbabwe University. Her debut story collection, An Elegy for Easterly, won the Guardian first book prize in 2009 and was followed by The Book of Memory in 2015. Her gripping new novel, Out of Darkness, Shining Light, tells the real-life story of how the body of the 19th-century explorer and physician David Livingstone was transported through Africa by his staff so he could be buried in Britain. When did you first become interested in David Livingstone?When I was 16 – at school we did a new curriculum of African history and I became fascinated by the faithful companions who carried Livingstone’s body and I knew I wanted to write about them one day. I started this book in 1998 – I have a floppy disk that I’ve now framed from that year – and finished it in 2018, so it took 20 years, though in between I wrote other things. Initially, it was very much inspired by William Faulkner’s As I Lay Dying, and Livingstone’s voice was in there. But I ended up thinking: let me focus on his companions. What was your research process?Livingstone was an absolute gossip and his journals were valuable – he wrote about other people, but also about nature, ants, leaves. The most interesting snippets, I weaved into the story. I learned Swahili to write this book – it’s an amazing language. I lived in Zanzibar to write some of it. I did research at the David Livingstone Memorial Trust. It was so moving to see the room where he grew up with his family and to understand the poverty of his life. I think he connected with poor people in Africa because he himself came from a poor background. As a child, I wanted to be an explorer. I wanted to find the source of the Nile – I didn’t realise it had been found Tell me about the “shining light” of the title…I’m interested in goodness. I will write about dark things – injustice, a collapsed Zimbabwe – but I want goodness to shine through; the idea that beautiful things can happen out of horrible situations. The Book of Memory was about different kinds of love – and so is this book. It’s about loyalty, commitment, love – and all of those things are related to goodness. What it takes to be a good servant is something I’m fascinated by – I love The Remains of the Day. I am by nature a servant – a lawyer who advises people. For me it’s important to help someone shine, to use my skills to help them be the best they can. You powerfully create the voices of Livingstone’s servants…I’m a natural ventriloquist, a gift I got from my mother. Our entire family were ventriloquists in one form or another. My son and I used to read parts of Things Fall Apart in different accents. We love playing with voices. Do you see the role of novelist as being akin to being an explorer?It’s funny you should ask that as when I was a child I wanted to be an explorer. I wanted to find the source of the Nile, I didn’t realise it had been found. And I wanted to go the South Pole – I was obsessed with Captain Scott. In my own life now, journeys matter to me, a lot. I travel a lot. My most recent trip, which was mind-blowing, was a container-ship journey across the Atlantic from Dunkirk to Martinique and Guadalupe and back again. A whole month at sea with no wifi and some very good-looking sailors was amazing. It was great for my writing – I wrote a play and read Vikram Seth for the first time. What characterises a lot of the characters in my new book is wanderlust. What kind of reader were you as a child?I discovered books when I moved from the townships to the suburbs when I was aged about nine. I became obsessed. I used to read and walk at the same time, and once almost got run over by a car. I’ve written as long as I’ve read – I just wasn’t published for many years. Books are such an important part of my life – especially books found in libraries. I’m actually writing a memoir called Ten Libraries, about the libraries that have shaped me. My identity is bound up with books. Did you grow up in a bookish household?My father was an avid reader. He loved history. He read very little fiction, so when he read my new novel once, and then twice, he really interrogated me. I was a bit worried about him reading the sex scenes. I’m so thrilled that he got to read this book [Gappah’s father died the day before this interview took place]. It’s a shame that he won’t read my next book, which is about the arc of his life, but fictionalised. In many ways, his death was a release as his quality of life was deteriorating. In the Nigerian culture of mourning there’s a saying that after the age of 70 it’s a party – a celebration, not mourning. Who have been your greatest influences?Tsitsi Dangarembga opened up the idea that a black woman from Zimbabwe could write a book. There’s a whole generation of Zimbabwean women who are so grateful to Tsitsi for being a forerunner. Other inspirations are the writer Charles Mungoshi and Oliver Mtukudzi, whose music is often influenced by Shona poetry – both narrate beautifully the complexity of the Zimbabwean condition. What books are on your bedside table?I have quite a pile, some of which are related to projects I’m working on. I’ve got a biography of Hannibal the Carthaginian general, and a history of the Punic wars. I have the wonderful The Story of the Jews by Simon Schama. One of my characters in the novel I’m working on is a Jewish man from Vienna, so I’m researching Judaism. I’m reading a lot of plays, including works by Harold Pinter and Wole Soyinka. I’m rereading Middlemarch. I like to reread old and familiar books. Is there a classic novel you’ll take on your next long journey?The Mystery of Edwin Drood – the only Dickens novel I haven’t finished. Any guilty reading pleasures?Re-reading Joan Collins and Judith Krantz, who I used to read a lot when I was a teenager. Which contemporary authors do you most admire?Zadie Smith, Philip Hensher, Teju Cole, Samantha Harvey – for their work ethic and range. What’s next on your reading list?I’m really looking forward to Hilary Mantel’s The Mirror and the Light. What is your writing process?If I have a deadline I’ll suddenly find all sorts of things to do to avoid writing, but when I settle into it I’ll do slots of three to four hours. I’m a planner – I use a whiteboard. For this book I had charts showing where I’m going – if I can’t see where I’m going I find it difficult to get there. I also write to music: mbira music from Zimbabwe, opera and reggae – Bob Marley really fires me up. • Out of Darkness, Shining Light by Petina Gappah is published by Faber (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15