After half a decade at Olympiakos Omar Elabdellaoui is used to the wall of noise and pyrotechnics which light up the Karaiskakis Stadium but knows what effect it can have on opposing teams. Many a side have frozen in the red and white heat of the intimidating Athens atmosphere, with Arsenal the latest team to enter the theatre on Thursday night. Olympiakos are regulars in Europe and feel they could finally be on the verge of making the progress the team and their passionate fans desire. Elabdellaoui, the captain, was in the team that earned a 3-2 Champions League victory at Arsenal in 2015, helped by his late goalline clearance, and he hopes to have a huge influence again. “I’ve been here for some years now and we’ve always done better at home,” Elabdellaoui, 28, says from Athens. “We are always strong and that is because of our fans; the stadium goes wild every time, there’s a lot of passion and the atmosphere is always great. “It is difficult for teams to play here due to the atmosphere our fans make and it gives us extra drive. It catches some teams by surprise, even though all the players have played in big stadiums with big crowds before. It will be a big factor when we play at home against Arsenal.” Elabdellaoui, having come through the academy at Manchester City, has a special bond with England and facing a club such as Arsenal is living out the dreams he chased when leaving Norway for Moss Side aged 16. Although he impressed sufficiently to train regularly with City’s first-team squad, the right-back never made an appearance but did pick up a Mancunian accent. “I remember being an academy player at City and going to watch the first-team games every weekend, seeing all the great players, and it was a big dream for me to play in England, so it’s always special,” he says. “I feel English sometimes because of the years I spent there and it’s where I started my career, so I follow English football a lot.” A lot has changed in the five years since Olympiakos last faced Arsenal in Europe but one constant has been Elabdellaoui, apart from an eight-game loan at Hull. Olympiakos are top and unbeaten in the league, although they showed their vulnerability in the Champions League group stage at Tottenham, taking a two-goal lead in November, only to be defeated 4-2. At home two months earlier their own comeback had secured a point. “We drew at home against Spurs and we started really well away and played a good game even though we lost,” Elabdellaoui says. “We showed that when we are at our best and don’t make silly mistakes, we can compete and that definitely gives confidence and belief to everyone.” Sandwiched between the two legs against Arsenal is the small matter of playing PAOK in the Greek Super League. Two points separate the teams at the summit and the result could have a major say in where the title goes, which is increasingly important for Olympiakos having failed to win it on the past two occasions – a relative failure. “It’s a massive week; first we have Arsenal and we have big ambitions and we want to win and progress, so we are going to go all in there,” Elabdellaoui says. “But at the same time we are fighting to win the league. It’s a must-win game for us against PAOK, too. We want to go there and win to increase the gap. “We have the best team here in Greece but it’s one thing to say it, we have to go out there and do it. We’ve not lost a game in the league this season, we’ve played 24 and conceded nine so we’re having a really good season.” Elabdellaoui has not only interested Arsenal, who inquired about him in January, but also Crystal Palace, Aston Villa and Celtic. He could return to the UK this summer when his contract runs out. “I hear these things and get updated when these things happen. We have big goals as a team and so do I personally, as I want to do great things this season with Olympiakos: to win the league, the cup and have a good run in Europe. There are always rumours and I know other teams have shown some interest but that’s it for me. I’ve not paid too much attention.” There is more uncertainty about Elabdellaoui’s summer plans as Norway face a play-off for a Euro 2020 place. The defender also captains his country, who have their most exciting crop of players for decades. The 19-year-old Erling Braut Haaland and Martin Ødegaard are the standout names in the team and the youngsters regularly lean on their captain’s experience. “Haaland doesn’t look like he needs much advice at the moment,” Elabdellaoui says. “I am always talking to players and everyone in the team knows if they ever want to know anything or ask something they can always talk to me.” Elabdellaoui knows what it takes to beat Arsenal but doing it again could kickstart a four-month period that will potentially define his career, and would leave him with plenty more knowledge to impart.