Swiping idly through Instagram stories at the weekend, I was horrified to see a crime being committed. My usual flurry of macha lattes and toddler boomerangs was interrupted by home CCTV footage of a man stealing my friend’s cactus. Placed in a doorway in Clapham, south London, the cactus seemed to be thriving – or at least it was until the thief deftly whipped it from its pot. This was clearly a targeted attack; the villain knew what he was aiming for. It turns out he might have been part of a global crime wave. This week, two South Korean men in Cape Town were given heavy fines and suspended jail sentences after being found guilty of trafficking 60,000 miniature succulents from South Africa and Namibia. It was the fourth such conviction in the last few months. It seems the millennial appetite for sculptural green houseplant “pets” has reached its zenith. In an echo of the boom-and-bust disaster of tulip fever in 17th-century Holland, succulent insanity is well on its way to defining our own horticultural age. If I’m honest, I’m surprised it took this long. As a “millennial gardener” myself, I’ve witnessed the craze for succulents bloom (in a way that most succulents subjected to British temperatures and light levels rarely will) over the past decade. Having started about 2013, crassulas, kalanchoes and echeverias were filling supermarket shelves within a couple of years – frequently covered in glitter. These days, you can hardly go for a coffee without being forced to contemplate the imminent death of a wildly overwatered haworthia in the middle of the table. Millennials cling to succulents and houseplants because it is a tangible way of connecting with nature The thing to know about houseplant crazes is that, as with many other things we put in our houses, they are cyclical. Having tiny cacti and succulents in your room and stringing them up in macramé hangers was all the rage in the 1970s, when my mum first did it. Before then, cacti were popular among the 1930s Hollywood stars who moved out to Palm Springs. “Cactus rustling” has been a problem ever since, leading to the introduction of the anti-plant trafficking Lacey Act in 1981. Not that it did much: by 2018, so many towering saguaros were being uprooted by night in Arizona that rangers at Saguaro national park resorted to microchipping their cacti. This is all depressingly familiar territory for staff at London’s Kew Gardens, who grow three plants of every variety before putting any on display. In 2014 an impossibly rare miniature water lily was pinched from the glasshouses – even an appearance on Crimewatch couldn’t bring it back. Not that plant mania always drives us to crime. Often it’s merely a life-threatening activity. Much like those poor souls who fall off cliffs trying to capture the perfect selfie, a handful of young Victorian women plummeted to their deaths in the pursuit of an elusive fern specimen. Pteridomania, otherwise known as “fern fever”, was a popular obsession among teenage girls in the mid-19th century. Rituals included roaming the countryside with identification books and trowels before pressing their treasure using coffee-table books. Invariably, the countryside fauna suffered as rare plants were ripped out of the ground. The sadness of it all is that, behind these crazes, there usually lie good intentions. Millennials cling to succulents and other houseplants because it is a tangible way of connecting with nature that is absent from an increasingly screen-based world. Those Victorian young women had been given societal permission to go outside and engage, grubbily, with nature for the first time in generations. Both groups had to put up with shrinking gardens and unreliable rented accommodation – the quiet satisfaction of watching green leaves unfurl around the place was, in short, much needed. Like all animals, humans are hard-wired to react to nature. Exposure to the outside world has been shown to be so beneficial that in Shetland, “green prescriptions” are issued to those with mental-health conditions. What ends up in cactus criminality often begins with a simple, and understandable, craving for a little greenery. • Alice Vincent is an author and journalist