Philip Rivers has ended one of the most enduring relationships in the modern NFL, announcing he will leave the Los Angeles Chargers after 16 years. In a joint statement with the Chargers on Monday, the 38-year-old confirmed he will enter free agency this offseason. He has been with the team since joining them in 2004, when they were based in San Diego. “After stepping back a bit from last season, we reconnected with Philip and his representatives to look at how 2019 played out, assess our future goals, evaluate the current state of the roster and see if there was a path forward that made sense for both parties,” said the Chargers general manager, Tom Telesco. “As we talked through various scenarios, it became apparent that it would be best for Philip and the Chargers to turn the page on what has truly been a remarkable run.” Rivers holds nearly every significant quarterback record in Chargers history and passed for 59,271 yards and 397 touchdowns during his time with the team. However, his final season with the team was disappointing as the Chargers finished last in the AFC West. “I never took for granted the opportunity to lead this team out on to the field for 235 games,” said Rivers. “We had a lot of great moments, beginning in San Diego and then finishing in LA. I wish my teammates and coaches nothing but the best moving forward. I’m not sure what the future holds, but my family and I look forward to seeing what God has planned for us next.” Rivers was prized for his intensity and accuracy during his time with the Chargers, during which he was named to the Pro Bowl eight times, but was unable to lead them to a Super Bowl. In the last month he moved his family to Florida, increasing speculation he could join the Miami Dolphins or Tampa Bay Buccaneers. The Indianapolis Colts and Carolina Panthers have also been named as possible destinations. Other quarterbacks who could become free-agents this offseason include Drew Brees, Tom Brady, Jameis Winston and Teddy Bridgewater. Possible replacements for Rivers at the Chargers include Cam Newton and Brady, who would be returning to his home state of California.