There is something bewitching about the rich palette of colours in produce at this time of year: the deep pinks of radicchio and other bitter leaves; neon rhubarb; the ochre stains of blood oranges; the blue-black of cavolo nero – it is impossible not to feel delighted by such vivid shades lying on your worktop. With radicchio, I like to turn the pink to deep brown by roasting it, which also allows its flavour to develop. Paired with the sweet tartness of pomegranate, it is a sensation. If you don’t have aged balsamic vinegar, you might want to season the radicchio with a teaspoon of soft brown sugar before roasting. Prep 15 minCook 45 minServes 4 1 large bunch parsley, roughly chopped1 small bunch rosemary, leaves finely chopped2 fat garlic cloves, peeledSalt and pepperExtra-virgin olive oil4 lamb cutlets2 heads radicchio2 tbsp balsamic vinegar20 black olives, stonedSeeds of 1 pomegranate Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/gas 4. Start by marinating the lamb. Put half the parsley, half the rosemary, one garlic clove and plenty of salt and pepper in a mortar, and bash into a paste with a tablespoon of oil. Massage this into the lamb, so that it is generously coated, and set aside. Cut the radicchio heads in half and each half into four wedges, with the wedges attached to the core to keep them together. Put them in a roasting tray and drizzle with two tablespoons of oil, the balsamic vinegar and all but a tablespoon of the remaining rosemary. Season generously, then roast for about half an hour, until soft and caramelised at the edges. Vigorously chop the olives with the remaining garlic clove and the rest of the parsley and rosemary: it doesn’t have to be very finely chopped, but you don’t want huge chunks of garlic. Stir in four to five tablespoons of oil, followed by the pomegranate seeds. Taste and adjust accordingly. Heat the grill (or chargrill) for a few minutes until it is extremely hot, then grill the chops for two to three minutes a side, depending on how rare you like them. Serve the chops astride the roast radicchio, dressed with the tapenade. Creamy mash or buttered potatoes are nice partners. Try the roast radicchio and tapenade with a vegetarian-friendly cheesy polenta for a delicious meat-free alternative. The tapenade is also delicious with one to two anchovies bashed into it, and it goes deliciously with other vegetables, too – try grilled aubergine or roast leeks.