A 20-minute tram ride from imperial Krakow glides you increasingly smoothly out of town to the former “workers’ paradise” of Nowa Huta. You swap gilded spires, cobbled backstreets and tourists for peaceful tree-lined avenues and a masterclass in socialist realism. The Nowa Huta museum in the monumental former theatre documents the area’s short, action-packed history: “a job for everyone” in 1954 through the rise of Solidarity in the Lenin steelworks to the downfall of communism. That wasn’t in the Soviet master plan, but thanks for the parks and affordable housing!Martin Charlesworth The district of Śródmieście, or downtown, is a swath of land above Wrocław’s old town. To its east are the brutalist grandeur of Wrocławski Manhattan, the smattering of bars and restaurants around the university buildings (my favourite restaurant, once you get past the decor, is Warzywniak, which caters for vegans) and the culture centre at the Unesco heritage-listed Centennial Hall, surrounded by one of the finest urban green spaces in Poland. But what really makes the area a cut above the bars and architecture elsewhere in the city (and Świdnickie is a really honourable mention for its nightlife) are the cycle paths along the River Oder, wonderful in the summer.Emily Moore As a student I lived near Wilhelminapark in the Dutch city of Utrecht. It is a beautifully green area with gorgeous villas as well as typically Dutch narrow houses. It continues to be one of my favourite neighbourhoods in Europe: it’s very peaceful and tourists don’t seem to have discovered it yet. It is named after its large park, where my friends and I would go for picnics in summer, and adjacent are a number of tasteful cafes and restaurants, among them the lovely Parkcafé Buiten. Close by, you will also find the Rietveld Schröder House (€18/€9.50 in advance), an extraordinary example of De Stijl architecture and a Unesco world heritage site.Paula Kaanders Every week we ask our readers for recommendations from their travels. A selection of tips will be featured online and may appear in print, and the best entry each week (as chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet) wins £200 towards a stay at one of 3,000-plus Sawday’s properties in the UK and Europe. To enter the latest competition visit the readers' tips homepage Two stops beyond Madrid’s Atocha station in the south-east of the capital lies the sprawling barrio of Vallecas. A trip here will return you to an authentically Madrileño experience and the Madrid of yesteryear. Stepping out of Metro Portazgo, you’ll come straight on to the bar-lined Avenida de la Albufera in front of the stadium of football team Rayo Vallecano, which lends a lively atmosphere to the local tapas joints. Behind the main street there’s a good park known as Las Siete Tetas (Park of the Seven Tits) for its seven hills. Take a winding climb up to one of the peaks and be rewarded with the best vistas in Madrid and sunset over the city centre.Claire Unlike some of its flashy neighbours, Moabit in Berlin is still a few years off full gentrification so there’s still a nice mix of old family businesses (mainly around Turmstrasse) alongside the hip street food and craft breweries you find near the beautifully restored covered market of Arminius Markthalle. Lots of the old industrial buildings have had makeovers – the train depot was transformed into a great art space and an old meat factory became the Kulturfabrik, which hosts theatre, festivals and more. Fritz Schloss Park, in postwar years a dumping ground for bombing debris, offers plenty of green space alongside mini-golf, climbing walls and a spa. And adjacent is the Poststadion, which hosted football in the 1936 Olympic Games, where Germany was defeated by Norway in a match witnessed by Nazi leaders who were not best-pleased.Paul After the hustle and bustle of the old port of Marseille, head up the steep steps towards the peaceful Panier district of leafy squares and cobbled streets. Independent shops and restaurants reflect the city’s multicultural roots while cool cafes host theatre and live music, buzzing with an energising arty vibe at night. Old houses in pastel shades with fragrant flower baskets create an ambience of a Provençal village in the heart of a busy city. You almost expect to see the ghosts of Monet and Renoir setting up canvas and easel outside. Try fresh fish dishes at Le Refuge (22 rue du Refuge) from €12, menu chalked on a blackboard as you enter.Bill Cox A charming, working fishing port on a peninsula north-east of Dublin, Howth is easily accessible from the city centre by taking the frequent Dart train from Connolly station (30 minute-ride). You can stroll along the harbour and the pretty streets lined with pubs and restaurants all serving the freshest of the local catch, or rummage through the market for a range of artisanal goods and crafts. If you really want to blow the cobwebs away, spend an hour or two walking on Howth Head, a green and wild outcrop with stunning views and salty air, and watch the seabirds and sailing boats.Berni I lived in Vienna’s 9th district for two years, and it was a great halfway house between the city centre and the hills. But my favourite was the 19th, Döbling, with charming wine villages surrounded by vines where scenic hiking routes show off the best views over the city. Among lots of fabulous heuriger (wine taverns) where you can sit in the vineyard garden looking over vines quaffing a carafe or two, our favourite was Weinhof Zimmerman, for its lovely garden full of apple trees and its fine food. Another summer favourite was the Döblinger Freibad, an appealing open- air pool complex with huge lawns, free sunbeds and dappled shade.Martha The charming streets of Józsefváros are the veins pumping lifeblood into Budapest’s District Eight. An area once renowned for its chaotic energy and seen as somewhat dangerous has become one of the best areas to enjoy a drink, food or even just a leisurely stroll. Head over to Mikszáth Kalman Ter (named after revered novelist Mikszáth Kalman) for a bite to eat at fabulously decorated Zappa cafe or a coffee over at airy Lumen with its plethora of indoor plants. A short stroll away lies the baroque revivalist Szabo Ervin library, once the private home of aristocrats, whose gorgeous interiors certainly have a wow factor. Grab some traditional lunch at family-run Öcsi Étkezde and peruse the stunning art nouveau Iparművészeti Museum, among the oldest applied arts institutions in the world, with interiors inspired by Hindu, Mogul and Islamic design. Amy Midway between central Athens and the coast is the lush family-friendly neighbourhood of Nea Smyrni (tram from Syntagma to Aghia Fotinis, or an easy 25-minute walk). Its many squares are host to an interesting history: the neighbourhood gained its name from the former Greek city of Smyrna, now Izmir, from where refugees settled the area in the 1920s. Car-free Nea Smyrni Square is at the neighbourhood’s heart and is spectacular, with fountains, shops, restaurants, trendy cafes and bars to suit all ages, trends and budgets. With a plethora of outdoor entertainment during the summer, it’s a real find not on the typical tourist route. Venture beyond the square and you’ll find Nea Smyrni Alsos park, a large green oasis with aleppo pines, cypress and stone pines and good for strolling. It also has a jogging track, an outdoor gym and a cafe. David Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips