The Warrington centre Anthony Gelling has been suspended by the Super League team after being arrested on suspicion of wounding with intent. Gelling joined the club at the beginning of this season on a two‑year deal and the 29-year-old had played in the club’s opening two games of the Super League season. However the Auckland-born player’s future with the club is now in jeopardy after Warrington confirmed on Wednesday that he had been suspended with immediate effect. “Warrington Wolves can confirm that centre Anthony Gelling will not be available for selection pending a club investigation into conduct away from the club,” the club said in a brief statement, before adding that Gelling was “fully supportive” of the club’s internal investigation. Shortly afterwards Cheshire police said: “At 3pm on Saturday 8 February, police received a report of an assault at an address on Cronton Lane Mews in Widnes. A 29-year-old man was arrested on suspicion of wounding with intent. He has been questioned by detectives and released on conditional bail. Enquiries into the assault remain ongoing.” Gelling, a Cook Islands international who had previously won the Super League title with Wigan in 2016, joined Warrington from local rivals Widnes at the start of this season. He had previously spoken about making the most of his second chance in the top flight, having played in the Championship with the Vikings last season. However, he will be missing on Sunday when Steve Price’s side travel to Wakefield Trinity for their next Super League fixture and will not be able to play for the club until its investigation into the matter concludes, with the prospect of his contract being terminated. Meanwhile, Israel Folau, who has been in training with Catalans Dragons for more than a week, is in contention to make his debut for the club this Saturday against Castleford. Catalans are due to name their 21-man squad for the game at noon on Thursday, offering the clearest hint yet as to whether Folau will resume his rugby career for the first time since being sacked by Rugby Australia last May following a series of homophobic social‑media posts.