Three hat-tricks helped Manchester City to crush a youthful Ipswich Town 10-0 and cruise into the quarter-finals of the FA Cup. Pauline Bremer was the first to hit three, before the 18-year-old Jess Park and Georgia Stanway, who was shifted from her recent right-back berth into a more familiar forward role before the hour, joined her in the battle for the match ball. It was some good news to temper the bad couple of days City have had, with the men’s team handed a two‑season ban from Europe and a a €30m fine for misleading Uefa and breaking financial fair play rules. So worried were City of the narrative shifting from the game that all post-match questions had to be directed through the press officers. “I wanted to give some players games and I was really happy for them and proud, particularly for the young ones,” said the caretaker manager, Alan Mahon. “We probably could have had more, but that’s just me being a little bit critical, I always want more goals.” It took 25 minutes for Ipswich’s dream to die. With the Tractor Girls’ having set up with five at the back they had held out a swaggering City, just. But their first foray forward into their opponents’ box and their shape was ripped apart. A corner kick from Paige Peake was scrambled clear and Kiera Walsh collected inside the City half, turned, waited for Laura Coombs to get onside and slid her through. The forward fired low past Nikita Runnacles and the shaky defensive wall was breached. “First 15-20 minutes I was quite pleased,” the manager, Joe Sheehan, said. “We knew we’d sacrifice possession. It just so happens that we get a corner and it was the first time we were out of shape and they score from it. It was a sucker punch.” Ipswich play in the fourth tier, National League Division One East, but this was far from being equivalent to Pep Guardiola taking his side to face a League Two team. In women’s football the gap between leagues is much bigger. Instead this would be more akin to Kevin De Bruyne and co ripping apart the under-18 team of a League Two club. Six of Sheehan’s squad study at the independent St Joseph’s College sixth form as part of a dual careers programme. A tidy delivery from Lauren Hemp to Bremer led to City’s second, with the German cutting inside and firing underneath Runnacles. Shortly after, in a rare start, Park got in on the action, switching on to her right foot on the edge of the area and striking low to the keeper’s right. After the break the physical and technical superiority of City only got more prominent as Ipswich legs tired. Collecting the ball in the area Bremer fired high past Runnacles from a tight angle. With the Portuguese right-back Matilde Fidalgo handed some rare minutes, Stanway moved into a more traditional forward role and the impact was instant as Janine Beckie slipped the ball across the face of goal for the No 10 to poke home at the back post. With 25 minutes still to play Bremer had her hat-trick, latching on to a through-ball and slotting into the far corner. She then turned provider, flicking on for Beckie who laid off for Stanway to smash in. Despite the pummelling, Runnacles played a part in keeping the score lower, diving low to her right to push out a powerful strike from distance. Park, though, had other ideas, first slotting home from Stanway’s through-ball and then smacking a 25-yard effort high into the far corner to nab the game’s second hat-trick. “It’s all right. I did all right,” Parks said modestly. “Three goals and a few assists is decent.” Then came the third, with Stanway taking a chance to have a go from distance herself. It was a gruelling test for the Ipswich youngsters and amateurs. But it is also a place they can aspire to be. With the club holding a WSL academy licence in partnership with the FA a number of the squad ply their trade against the youth teams of WSL sides week‑in week‑out. Many of them play for England youth teams. If they keep progressing it is likely we will see a name or two filter up the leagues and this will not be their peak. “When you get out there there’s no hiding, you’ve got to try and compete but when you’re playing some of the best players in the world with a lot of teenagers it’s going to be tough,” Sheehan said. “But we’ve relished the challenge and it was a great experience.”