A US national in China has become the first foreigner confirmed to have died from the new coronavirus, while a Japanese man also died after experiencing symptoms consistent with the disease, authorities have said. Officials announced the death toll had risen to 724, with 86 more people dying in mainland China – the highest one-day jump so far. The toll is nearing the 774 killed worldwide during the 2002-03 Sars epidemic. It is a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals. Many of those initially infected either worked or frequently shopped in the Huanan seafood wholesale market in the centre of the Chinese city. New and troubling viruses usually originate in animal hosts. Ebola and flu are other examples – severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars) and Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (Mers) are both caused by coronaviruses that came from animals. The virus causes pneumonia. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. In severe cases there can be organ failure. As this is viral pneumonia, antibiotics are of no use. The antiviral drugs we have against flu will not work. If people are admitted to hospital, they may get support for their lungs and other organs as well as fluids. Recovery will depend on the strength of their immune system. Many of those who have died were already in poor health. Human to human transmission has been confirmed by China’s national health commission, and there have been human-to-human transmissions in the US and in Germany. As of 8 February, the death toll stands at 722 inside China, one in Hong Kong and one in the Philippines. Infections inside China stand at 31,161 and global infections have passed 280 in 28 countries. The mortality rate is 2%. Two members of one family have been confirmed to have the virus in the UK, and a third person was diagnosed with it in Brighton, after more than 400 were tested and found negative. The Foreign Office has urged UK citizens to leave China if they can. Five new cases in France are British nationals, and British nationals are also among the 64 cases on a cruise liner off Japan. The number of people to have contracted the virus could be far higher, as people with mild symptoms may not have been detected. Modelling by World Health Organization (WHO) experts at Imperial College London suggests there could be as many as 100,000 cases, with uncertainty putting the margins between 30,000 and 200,000. We don’t yet know how dangerous the new coronavirus is, and we won’t know until more data comes in. The mortality rate is around 2%. However, this is likely to be an overestimate since many more people are likely to have been infected by the virus but not suffered severe enough symptoms to attend hospital, and so have not been counted. For comparison, seasonal flu typically has a mortality rate below 1% and is thought to cause about 400,000 deaths each year globally. Sars had a death rate of more than 10%. Unless you have recently travelled to China or been in contact with someone infected with the virus, then you should treat any cough or cold symptoms as normal. The NHS advises that people should call 111 instead of visiting the GP’s surgery as there is a risk they may infect others. Health experts are starting to say it could become a pandemic, but right now it falls short of what the WHO would consider to be one. A pandemic, in WHO terms, is “the worldwide spread of a disease”. Coronavirus cases have been confirmed in about 25 countries outside China, but by no means in all 195 on the WHO’s list. There is no need to panic. The spread of the virus outside China is worrying but not an unexpected development. The WHO has declared the outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern, and says there is a “window of opportunity” to halt the spread of the disease. The key issues are how transmissible this new coronavirus is between people and what proportion become severely ill and end up in hospital. Often viruses that spread easily tend to have a milder impact. Sarah Boseley Health editor and Hannah Devlin The 60-year-old US citizen diagnosed with coronavirus died on 6 February at Jinyintan hospital in Wuhan, the centre of the virus outbreak, a US embassy spokesman in Beijing said. “We offer our sincerest condolences to the family on their loss,” the spokesman said. “Out of respect for the family’s privacy, we have no further comment.” A Japanese man taken to hospital with pneumonia in Wuhan died after suffering flu-like symptoms consistent with the coronavirus, Japan’s foreign ministry said. The man in his 60s was suspected of having been infected with the coronavirus but due to difficulties in diagnosing the disease the cause of death was given as viral pneumonia, the ministry said, citing Chinese medical authorities. As of midday on Thursday, 17 foreigners were being quarantined and treated for the disease in China, according to government figures. No updated figures were immediately available on Saturday. The only reported fatalities outside the mainland have been a Chinese man in the Philippines and a 39-year-old man in Hong Kong. Nearly 35,000 people have been infected by the new strain, which is believed to have emerged in a Wuhan market selling wild animals before spreading across China. The government has locked down cities that are home to tens of millions of people, among whom anger is rising over its handling of the crisis, especially after a whistleblowing doctor fell victim to the virus. The Chinese vice-premier, Sun Chunlan, visited quarantined Wuhan and instructed officials to take a “wartime” approach as they implement drastic measures, including combing the city for feverish residents. Hundreds of cases have emerged in nearly 30 other countries as scientists race to find treatments and a vaccine. Hong Kong has begun enforcing a two-week quarantine for anyone arriving from mainland China, under threat of both fines and jail terms. Most people will be able to be quarantined at home or in hotels but they will face daily phone calls and spot checks. Hong Kong has 25 confirmed cases and one death. The city lost 299 people during the Sars outbreak and a deep distrust persists of authorities in Beijing who initially covered up the outbreak. Hong Kong officials hope the new measures will virtually halt the flow of people across the border while allowing the city to remain stocked with food and goods from the mainland. In the last week Hong Kong has been hit by a wave of panic-buying with supermarket shelves frequently emptied of staple goods such as toilet paper, hand sanitiser, rice and pasta. The government has blamed unfounded rumours of shortages. Other governments have hardened their defences, with several countries banning arrivals from China and advising their citizens to avoid travelling there. Major airlines have suspended flights to and from China. Asian cruise ships have become a focal point as dozens of cases have been confirmed on a vessel off Japan’s coast. Sixty-four people onboard the Diamond Princess docked in the Japanese port of Yokohama have tested positive and other passengers have been asked to stay inside their cabins to prevent new infections. Another cruise ship carrying a passenger suspected of infection will not be allowed to dock in southern Japan, the government said. In Hong Kong, 3,600 people were confined onboard the World Dream, with eight former passengers testing positive for the virus. On the mainland, the death on Friday of a Wuhan doctor who was reprimanded by police after he sent warning messages about the virus in December sparked a rare outpouring of grief and anger on social media. Li Wenliang, an ophthalmologist who contracted the disease while treating a patient, was eulogised as a “hero” and people railed against “fat officials” and demanded “freedom of speech”. Videos shared on Weibo showed a small group of people blowing whistles in front of a floral tribute to Li at Wuhan Central hospital where he died. The government expressed its condolences and ordered an investigation. Chinese scientists claimed they may have found the animal source of the outbreak, based on genetic analysis, though their results have yet to be published. The coronavirus is thought to have originated in bats but passed through an intermediate host before infecting humans. The researchers have identified a coronavirus in pangolins that is 99% similar to the one causing the current outbreak. The US health department is working with the pharmaceutical firm Regeneron to develop a treatment using a class of drug that has boosted survival rates among Ebola patients. Two weeks ago Chinese doctors confirmed they had been giving anti-HIV drugs to coronavirus patients in Beijing, based on a 2004 study published after the Sars outbreak that showed “favourable” responses. Scientists around the world are also working to develop a vaccine, which experts say could take months.