We were all getting ready to go out when my wife pointed at the kitchen ceiling and said: “That’s getting worse.” And indeed it was. Our bathroom is leaking, and our ceiling is growing a patchwork of stains and fur. I found my wife’s timing extremely insensitive. She knows how much I hate issues to do with the house, and should have waited until we got back from our excursion. She might as well have pointed at the ceiling and said, “Do you fancy thinking about this all day instead of enjoying time with the family?” It looked serious enough to prompt immediate action. Immediate action wasn’t taken, however, and later that day we came up with the bizarre solution of showering away from the back wall of the cubicle, as that was probably where the water was leaking. This wasn’t based on evidence or science, but rather some meandering speculation while watching Netflix. This proved to be more annoying than I anticipated. My shower routine is: initial drench, step away from water to lather, back in to rinse, back out to shampoo, back in to rinse, before taking the shower head off the wall to focus the jets on troublesome areas. Recently, I was enjoying my shower, only to turn around and find my wife shaking her head at my failure to follow our agreed instructions. She must have been pretty determined to make me feel bad about this, as I would say watching me take a shower is, as a sensory experience, akin to watching a dog throw up. At this point, we decided to call someone in. This was an admission of defeat for me, as the shower was leaking only because the people who had originally put it in hadn’t done it properly. I knew it looked shonky from the moment they unveiled it, but decided that my untrained eye must be mistaken, and let it go. My wife pointed out that we should probably get them back to sort it. I texted the builder. He told me that he resented the insinuation that his work was subpar. I thought I was being a very brave boy by texting back to express my disappointment, and telling him I wouldn’t use him again. There is something about builders that always puts me on the back foot. There’s obviously the issue of them talking about an area of which I have no understanding, combined with my mystifying desire to convey to them that I do know what they’re talking about. For some reason, it becomes important to me that they think I’m a really knowledgable, and good bloke, which also means I will accept absolutely anything they say. We once had a builder fit a shower in a previous house, that started seeping water into the brickwork and led to a damp patch on our next door neighbour’s wall. When I eventually plucked up the courage to phone and tell the builder, he proceeded to explain that his job had been made difficult by the positioning of the shower and the type of bricks our house was built from. By the time the call ended, I had spent a couple of minutes apologising to him for the way our house was constructed, and asking him to do us a favour and remedy it. In the end, a new builder came in and took a look. After he left, I told my wife he seemed really nice and trustworthy, and would do a great job. She told me this is what I say about everyone. I actually think it might be easier if I fully train as a builder, rather than go through all this again.