At times it was brutal to watch. Do not be fooled by England’s late rally, this was a masterclass from France, utterly unfazed by Eddie Jones’s pre-match comments to mark a glorious start for Fabien Galthié’s bright young things. Their heroes were many: Antoine Dupont, the swashbuckling scrum-half, Charles Ollivon, the colossal captain and the irrepressible Bernard Le Roux to name just three. Chapeau too to Shaun Edwards, for France’s new defence coach left an indelible mark on this match. On social media former players from both sides were lining up to laud Edwards’s impact. Serge Betsen said that we could see his “footprint” – you sense he meant fingerprints but given the way France trampled all over England in the first half, perhaps not. Edwards will be most pleased with the defensive efforts either side of half-time. On two occasions England laid siege to the French line. On the second they had two scrum penalties but could not find a way through. There was another too, with 10 minutes to go and England desperately pushing for the most unlikely of comebacks. Take nothing away from Edwards’s colleagues because it would be trite to pick the one Englishman in their ranks and give him all the credit but it remains a mystery why he has never been employed by the Rugby Football Union. As kick-off drew closer you could sense something in the air. On the train to the stadium one French supporter decided to inform the rest of the carriage regularly that there were “a load of English bastards at the Gare du Nord”. It was done with tongue in cheek, smile on face but the hostility continued at the Stade de France. Owen Farrell and Jones were roundly booed by the crowd intent on having their influence on things. Clearly Jones’s pledge to bring “absolute brutality” had not gone down well here but there have been occasions in recent competitions when the hostility has gone missing from this great stadium. If its effect is for France to play like this then its return must be celebrated. Take France’s opening match of the Six Nations 12 months ago. They led 16-0 at half-time at home to Wales but capitulated after the break and lost. The biggest compliment this France side can be paid is that, bar a couple of nervous minutes after two wonderful solo tries from Jonny May, it never looked like happening again. For while you could reel off any number of cliches and stereotypes about the French, this was a performance based on control. It was not all edge-of-the-seat stuff, nor living by the sword. It was composed and ruthless. Calm when England were anything but. The scrum-halves provide a perfect contrast. Ben Youngs picked up from where he left off in the World Cup final whereas Dupont, seven years his junior, threatened whenever he had the ball in his hand. “He’s got an amazing future,” said Youngs, when asked about his opposite number a couple days ago. His present isn’t bad either, judging by the snipe he made down the left to set up Ollivon’s second try. With five minutes to go he gathered Willi Heinz’s kick over the top and just about took the ball back over his line. The nonchalance with which he flung his pass under pressure from England’s chasers was a delight, his tackle on Heinz soon afterwards ferocious. Dupont is always going to look good if he has front-foot ball to work with and for that his pack deserves huge credit. Jones had dismissed concerns that the absence of the Vunipola brothers left England light in the ball-carrying department but the gainline belonged to France here. All the more so when Manu Tuilagi made way with injury on 15 minutes, having already been blasted backwards by Le Roux. He, along with Grégory Alldritt, brought the brutality. Let’s not proclaim a new dawn just yet but this is some foundation to work with and if this level of collective commitment continues, surely an end to their 10-year wait for the Six Nations title beckons next month. Ollivon talked afterwards about how the “connection” of the squad was pivotal, while Galthié spoke repeatedly of “solidarity” and both traits have not always been associated with France of late. It’s tempting to offer a note of caution; to say that it would be typical of France to come unstuck somehow when Italy visit on Sunday. But let’s enjoy this performance first and foremost. And leave those stereotypes alone.