Alexander Tettey and Todd Cantwell shone in Norwich’s midfield while Newcastle’s Martin Dubravka made some very decent saves but many people’s highlight wasthe song serenading a sometime England left-back’s debut in black and white stripes. As the Tottenham loanee stepped off Steve Bruce’s bench, the Gallowgate End burst into an approving chorus of “Danny Rose, he loves fish and chips”. It was a reference to Rose’s reservations about the quality of southern chippies and their role as a driving force in his temporary transfer north-east. After 79 mainly frustrating minutes his introduction raised the widest, and most widespread, smiles of an anti-climactic afternoon. It concluded with Newcastle the subject of gentle boos yet somehow, perplexingly, up to 10th place and Daniel Farke’s sweet-passing Norwich rueing several misses on the part of Teemu Pukki whose profligacy left them stuck to the bottom, seven points adrift of safety. “Our performance was top-class,” said Farke, although his body language telegraphed an opportunity spurned. “The only thing missing was a goal. I was proud of how we played. We are only missing the quality of being absolutely brutal. To travel back with only one point is disappointing but our performance shows what is still possible.” Only Dubravka’s razor-sharp reflexes came between Farke’s easy-on-the-eye side and an early goal as Newcastle’s goalkeeper reacted smartly to repel Sam Byram’s header from Ondrej Duda’s corner. Byram would impress at right back, subduing the often talismanic Allan Saint-Maximin. While the former Newcastle goalkeeper Tim Krul – the recipient of a warm welcome from his former public – was hardly over-exerted, Dubravka soon found himself stretched to the limit as Pukki swivelled superbly before unleashing a rising shot which the goalkeeper did well to push over the bar. Krul got in on the saviour act, performing acrobatic wonders to stretch out a hand and somehow claw Joelinton’s goalbound header clear. That parry travelled as far as Miguel Almirón but the Paraguayan headed wastefully wide. It represented an extremely isolated, clearcut home chance and must have left Bruce wishing Almirón possessed Federico Fernández’s composure. Typically a pivotal, immaculately timed, tackle from the Argentinian denied Pukki after Farke’s forward homed in on goal. Once again the £6m Rafa Benítez buy from Swansea proved himself a vital component of Newcastle’s rearguard. Fernández was not involved in his side’s 3-1 shredding at Norwich in August, when Pukki registered a hat-trick, but there remained a sense of déjà vu about the quality of much of the visitors’ passing and movement. Although Bruce’s post-Carrow Road reversion to a more stabilising, if deep-sitting, back three has prompted a considerable defensive improvement, Newcastle remain appreciably less fluent in possession than Tettey, Cantwell and friends. Admittedly they did improve a little once Valentino Lazaro, the Austria winger borrowed from Internazionale, began strutting his stuff at right wing-back after making a bow from the bench. But it took yet another key save on Dubravka’s part to come between Pukki and a goal following a potentially costly Jamaal Lascelles mistake. Rose’s introduction briefly lightened the mood but the jeers which greeted the final whistle reflected a strange week on Tyneside dominated by a supposedly imminent £340m Saudi Arabian takeover that now seems as much of a mirage as Bruce’s avowed aim of implementing a passing game. “We gave the ball away far too cheaply,” he acknowledged. “The only positive was not getting beaten when we’d played so poorly.”