The book I am currently readingI’m the chair of the 2020 Comedy Women in Print prize so I’m reading my way through dozens of submissions. The book that changed my lifeThe Beauty Myth by Naomi Wolf. I came of age in the so-called “post-feminist” era when feminism felt like a dirty word. Obviously, the world was still wildly unequal but I didn’t have the language to articulate my feelings. This book opened my eyes to the countless insidious ways that women are undermined by comparison with some unachievable physical ideal. The book I wish I’d writtenSo many! Behind the Scenes at the Museum by Kate Atkinson. The Poisonwood Bible by Barbara Kingsolver. The Surface Breaks by Louise O’Neill. Cold Comfort Farm by Stella Gibbons. I could list hundreds. The book that influenced my writingFabulous Nobodies by Lee Tulloch and Heartburn by Nora Ephron. Both are confessional, conversational and comic. The book that changed my mindProbably something by Philip Roth (I can’t remember which one, they all seemed the same). In my 20s and 30s, I obediently read the books widely touted to be works of genius. I was repulsed by their depictions of women but I thought the fault must be mine. Maybe I just wasn’t clever enough? Then it dawned on me that all these “works of genius” were written by men and recommended by men. Now nobody gets to tell me what literature is good and what is bad. These days I trust my own judgment. The last book that made me cryGravity Is the Thing by Jaclyn Moriarty. The last book that made me laughPretending by Holly Bourne. The book I couldn’t finishOh there are oodles of them! There was a time when I felt obliged to plough on because I was afraid of abandoning the characters in some sort of literary limbo-land. Now my feeling is that life is short, so I don’t feel guilty about giving up on a book that simply isn’t for me. The book I’m most ashamed not to have readAshamed? Wow. Why would I be ashamed? There are far too many “shoulds” attached to reading – I read for pleasure, for escape, for insight into the lives of others. I don’t read to learn a lesson and my heart breaks for readers who feel a book should be “worthy”. Such petty, anxious snobbery is a result of people feeling intellectually insecure and there’s no need for it. The book I give as a giftAt the moment, I’m giving every woman I’ve ever met Three Women by Lisa Taddeo. To read women articulating their sexual desire in such an honest, carnal way is refreshing and empowering. My earliest reading memoryAged about six, in bed, late at night, glued to my Enid Blyton, my dad telling me to turn off the light and me promising that I would but continuing to read because I just couldn’t bear to stop. My comfort readCrime. Isn’t it mad that reading about terrible things can be so comforting? (But I understand that it’s because crime novels always have a pleasing resolution.) Favourites include Liz Nugent, Jane Casey, Susie Steiner and Tana French, Denise Mina, Nicci French, CL Taylor, Anne Cleeves and Andrea Carter. • Grown Ups by Marian Keyes is published by Michael Joseph. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.