Andrew Trimble began his Ireland career in front of a raucous capacity crowd in Dublin in 2005, when he replaced Brian O’Driscoll in a Test match against Australia. His most recent game of rugby was last November, when he toiled for his childhood club Coleraine in the muddy confines of junior rugby against Limavady in front of a handful of dog walkers. Trimble won 70 caps for Ireland and 299 for Ulster, but that was then and this is now. In the same way that he has swapped winning the Six Nations and beating the All Blacks for the simplicity of social rugby, he must start from the bottom as an entrepreneur. Trimble is now using his experiences as a player to spearhead Kairos, a technology company that helps clubs and athletes streamline information, organise their time better and improve their performance. “I was lucky when I look back,” he says. “So many young players have difficulties getting into the Ulster setup, but my journey was relatively smooth. My life from a very young age was really defined by rugby. It becomes your identity and I loved everything about it. For me, rugby was always linear and straightforward. Life as an entrepreneur is just the opposite. It’s up and down, non-linear and in truth it can be mayhem. My wife only needs to look me in the eye to know how my day has been, whether good or bad, and there’s definitely been some pretty bad ones.” Trimble has always thrived in an organised environment. In the minutes before games, he took solace from the fact that he had given everything to his preparation. By noting the extra physio sessions, kicking sessions and time in analysis, he reassured himself that he had left nothing to chance. He had covered every bit of revision and was confident about his performance. He found a kindred spirit in former Ireland coach Joe Schmidt. “It’s not a surprise that I played the best rugby of my life under Joe. He was a big big catalyst for changing how I played rugby. I saw great value in the way he prepared teams. There was a lot of information to process but he brought it together in a way that empowered you as a player to get better and take responsibility for your own performance.” Under Schmidt’s leadership, Trimble saw a strong correlation between preparedness and performance. Yet, when he returned to club rugby, he noticed that players often struggled to keep on top of all the information they were given. He received emails about medical appointments, team meetings and community visits, which he had to dig through to find the relevant PDF that hold him where he had to be and when. In his final years as a player Ulster, he thought about that deluge of information and wondered if he could pose a solution to the problem. “When you think about it, it’s quite unbelievable that in sporting organisations across the world there’s never really been a consistent way of communicating information. Some of the greatest football teams in the world are still scanning in PDFs and sending emails or WhatsApps to players to tell them where they need to be. I had similar experiences, trying to improve my performance and form, but also wondering where I needed to be – say, for a media or medical appointment.” Trimble understood the problems facing athletes more than most, so turned his attention to fixing them. “My business partner and I started doing the research, asking professional teams all over the UK and Ireland, and they all had the same issues – with the players having no freedom to engineer their own performance or access central information.” Trimble’s tentative steps as an entrepreneur began in his penultimate year at Ulster in 2017. He completed a master’s in finance and, once he established that clubs and players were craving software to centralise information, he started building it. Having been an athlete himself, he recognised that Kairos had to put the player at the forefront, helping them to schedule their own medical appointments, analyse their own training data and remain in direct contact with their coaches. “A simple example I can think of is when football or rugby teams play a game at the weekend, generally there’s a clinic available at 8am or 9am on a Monday for injured players. Sometimes you have professional adults sitting around on a first-come, first-served basis for 40 minutes, when they could easily be in contact with the medical professional to book the appointment themselves in a suitable slot with this technology. I always felt that, if you treat athletes like schoolchildren, then you’ll inevitably get bad performances. We want them to have more ownership and accountability on every part of their game.” Did his training as a professional athlete help prepare him for life in business? “It’s tough, there’s no doubt about it. There are some days I have felt absolutely bulletproof. There’s other days you must pick yourself off the floor. I think that my ability to cope as a professional athlete has helped me mentally – like how do you respond when your form is down and you’ve just been dropped? There have been similar lessons from setbacks for us. You cannot let your head drop too long. I’m learning everyday in a corporate environment that you can’t get too high, but equally you can never get too low.” Various teams – including Ulster and the Northern Ireland football team – have already used the software and Trimble is currently engaged in talks with clubs in England, Ireland and the US. No day is the same, as he juggles work in Belfast with looking after three young children at home. Yet, despite the significant challenges, he is grateful that his transition from the rugby field to the office felt so natural. “Every player is different, but I can honestly say that I loved almost every bit of my rugby career. I used to finish a season and go away with my wife on holiday and after three weeks I was dying to get back out there. But, by my final season, I would go in and do my work professionally, but I knew I had reached the end. I had no wish to go on. I was lucky I always had a life outside of rugby, doing a degree in theology, a master’s in finance and then the business. It helped to always give me that perspective that there was something else there. The hardest thing for any player is when you are so invested in rugby, it can be very scary to leave that all behind. I was lucky that I was absolutely ready to take that step.” Trimble’s days of captaining Ulster are over but he is still helping the club. Instead of doing it on the pitch, he is producing software that will give the next generation of players the chance to fulfil their potential. • Jonathan Drennan and Andrew Trimble are on Twitter