Terry Hands, who has died aged 79, spent more time with, and did more productions for, the Royal Shakespeare Company than either its founder, Peter Hall, or Hall’s successor, Trevor Nunn. He joined the company in 1966, acted as joint artistic director with Nunn from 1978 to 1986, then took on the top job alone before handing over to Adrian Noble, whom he had encouraged, in 1991. Immensely popular within the company, though often underrated outside it, Hands was a classicist who directed Alan Howard as most of the Shakespearean monarchs, including all of them in the seven-play history cycle running from Richard II through the three Henrys and Richard III. He kept a far lower profile than either Hall or Nunn, and was passionately committed to every aspect of the company’s work; he became an especially good lighting designer of his own productions. A defining image of his style might be that of Howard, truculent and trumpet-tongued, stained in blood, sweat and tears, clad in black leather and isolated in a spotlight as Henry V. Nunn (with John Caird) led the RSC of the 1980s to glory on Broadway and beyond with The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby and Les Misérables. Meanwhile, Hands quietly shepherded Antony Sher towards his great performances as Richard III and Marlowe’s Tamburlaine. He relished the company’s new London home in the Barbican, with fantastic, visceral productions of Peter Nichols’s Victorian opium war panto Poppy (1982), Anthony Burgess’s brilliant 1983 translation of Cyrano de Bergerac, with Derek Jacobi giving his defining performance as the long-nosed, lovelorn purveyor of panache in a setting of operatic splendour, and Peter Barnes’s Red Noses (1985), a sensational, brutish comedy of medieval clowns (led by Sher) entertaining the mass victims of the Black Death. His one bid for Broadway big bucks, the musical Carrie (1988), based on the Stephen King horror novel and the 1976 film, was a spectacular disaster. One of the most dispiriting 90 minutes of my life was spent trying to compose and file a review in a hotel bedroom while a first-night fireworks display lit up the River Avon in a false show of celebratory high spirits. Following his departure from the RSC he had a few years of freelance activity around Europe and in Japan before settling down as director of Clywd Theatr Cymru in Mold in 1997 – “halfway up a hill, surrounded by sheep,” as he said, having answered an SOS call from Flintshire council as the theatre was on the brink of economic implosion and closure. He stayed there until 2015, reviving the theatre’s fortunes in a repertory of standard classics and modern plays, and leaving a legacy of an expanding pool of associate Welsh artists. But he never lost contact with the RSC, and was always engaged, and available for advice, as an emeritus director. Born into an army family in Aldershot, Hampshire, Terry was the son of Luise (nee Köhler) and Joseph Hands. He was educated at Woking grammar school and Birmingham University, where he took a degree in English under the tuition of John Russell Brown, who became his lifelong friend. He then trained at Rada (1962-64) before co-founding – with two Birmingham colleagues, Peter James and Martin Freeman, and Martin Jenkins (who became a well-known BBC radio producer) – the Liverpool Everyman theatre in Hope Street, on the site of a non-conformist chapel. He directed Wilde, Shakespeare and Osborne, and – a clue, perhaps, to his later black, baroque style – the surreal and sexy Fando and Lis, by the Spanish provocateur Fernando Arrabal. He was recruited by Hall in 1966 to run the RSC’s Theatregoround company, the root of all subsequent RSC work in studios, schools and on tour. He became an associate director in 1967 and made his Stratford-upon-Avon debut in 1968 with The Merry Wives of Windsor. Over the next five years, before embarking on the history cycle with Howard, he mounted memorably flamboyant productions of Pericles, Thomas Middleton’s Women Beware Women, Ben Jonson’s Bartholomew Fair, Jean Genet’s The Balcony and TS Eliot’s Murder in the Cathedral. These all led, in different ways, to his spectacular 1974 production of Peter Barnes’s The Bewitched at the Aldwych theatre, about Spanish attempts to produce an heir to succeed the inbred Carlos II, played by Howard. Hands’ work in the 1980s was equally energetic, despite his increasing administrative responsibilities. He said of his last five years with the company that he had spent 75% of his time making money, raising money and saving money, instead of directing plays. Still, he managed a superb Othello (1985) with Ben Kingsley and David Suchet and a fine The Winter’s Tale (1986) with Jeremy Irons as Leontes, as well as a scorching British premiere of Ingmar Bergman’s Scenes from a Marriage (1988), with Howard and Penny Downie tearing each other apart. In 1989, he directed the first new play to be presented in the Swan (opened by Nunn in 1986), Peter Flannery’s Singer, in which Sher played a 1960s slum racketeer based on the life of Peter Rachman. In 1990 he summoned up a magical Love’s Labour’s Lost with Ralph Fiennes as Berowne and John Wood stealing the show as a wittily decrepit and strangely seigneurial Don Armado. Hands’ time at Clwyd was eclipsed, in the later years, by the advent of National Theatre Wales in 2010, though there was no crossover in the kind of work, or indeed performers, that each enterprise promoted. One of his Welsh RSC actors, Owen Teale, made a big success with him in Clwyd of both Macbeth and Under Milk Wood, and Nicol Williamson, lurching through King Lear in 2001, declaimed all the right lines, though not necessarily in the right order. Hands never worked in film or television, but staged several operas, including Parsifal at Covent Garden in 1979. In Paris, he was for a time a consultant director at the Comédie-Française, and was honoured as a Chevalier des Arts et des Lettres. He was made CBE in 2007. He developed an abiding passion for Liverpool FC in his Everyman days and, after leaving Clwyd, maintained his home in the Denbighshire hills, which he loved. Hands’ first marriage was to the soprano Josephine Barstow, in 1964; they divorced three years later. In 1974 he married the actor Ludmila Mikaël. They had a daughter, Marina, also an actor, and divorced in 1980. He had two sons, Sebastian and Rupert, with the actor and dancer Julia Lintott, his partner for eight years from 1988. In 2002 he married the director Emma Lucia, and she survives him, along with his three children. • Terence David Hands, stage director, born 9 January 1941; died 4 February 2020