Time after time Elinor Barker travelled to track World Cups and world championships early in her career, competed – usually with some success – and then arrived at the final day. She would then sit in the stands with her teammates and watch the men competing in the Madison relay event, a complex, highly demanding endurance race run in teams of two that places huge demands on bike-handling skills as well as speed and stamina. Barker could not figure out why she and her fellows did not have a race of their own. Like other women who had come through the Great Britain talent development system, Barker had ridden Madison as a training exercise but she was not permitted to do it internationally. “I would be in the stands watching the men, wondering why I was watching and not down the track centre either warming down after racing the event myself or at a medal ceremony or something,” she says. “How could our programme be lacking such an exciting race? It’s a good spectator event, great to watch and great to ride.” The Madison was a well-established part of the men’s calendar, with a long tradition going back deep into the 19th century when six-day indoor races were established. But it was not until after the Rio Olympics that women’s events were put on the international calendar, finally creating parity between the sexes almost 60 years after women’s world championships were instituted. This coming week, Barker is down to ride the event, together with Neah Evans, at the track world championships in Berlin as part of her run-in to the inaugural Olympic title in Tokyo. It is news to Barker that the women’s keirin was also introduced within relatively recent memory, in 2002. “I’d never thought about it. That gives me a lot of hope that soon we won’t be talking about the Madison, that it will be just another event. I’m still baffled that women’s Madison is so new, it’s only recently come into events like the Six Days in the winter.” The event has moved on since she rode the first world championship in 2017. “There’s a huge difference between an entire peloton trying a new race for the first time, something entirely new, compared to when a men’s pairing join something that men have been doing for a century. “It’s been a huge learning curve. It’s about the practical part, getting to know each other, figuring out how the races are won, playing with taking laps or scoring points and timing the changes tactically. For a brand new event it can’t be any other way.” The championships begin on Wednesday. The Welsh racer will also tackle the points race and the team pursuit, with the latter taking priority together with the Madison. That means racing on four days but she has few concerns. “The best worlds I rode was 2017, with a gold and two silvers and my best day there was the last one.” It is seven years since she made her world championship debut in Minsk, while still studying for her A levels; with four world championship golds since then and an Olympic team pursuit title in Rio, she is a senior rider in the team at 25 but it does not really feel that way. “I still feel glad to be there, terrified at how big the races are, but it’s my eighth worlds so I know the drill. I know a bad [training] effort a few weeks before doesn’t mean bad racing. Anything can happen, which can be both comforting and nerve-racking. I’ve had enough experience to say the run-in has been good. I’ve been illness- and injury-free. It’s been uneventful, which is nice.” Barker’s health and her cycling have been transformed since she had surgery to mitigate endometriosis, a condition she says threatened to end her career. “I don’t know how much longer I would have been able to compete if I had not had the operation. What was affecting my racing was prolonged periods of constant uncomfortable pain. It felt never ending. It took three or four years to get a diagnosis but the average is seven, so I’m glad it didn’t go on any longer.” Last year, in Poland, Barker’s gold in the scratch race was GB’s lone success at the worlds but the team pursuit – for men and women – has always been seen as the race that shows a nation’s collective strength. Barker has raced through the women’s event’s expansion to 4km and four riders and again the delay in achieving parity seems bizarre. “That and the Madison means a bigger squad, more riders in with a shout, more opportunities, so it’s more competitive,” she says. Times have plummeted since the event expanded. Barker recalls “sitting in a room with 4min 10sec for the 4,000m on a blackboard and thinking: ‘No chance’” – yet that was the world record she and her teammates set in Rio. Great Britain have been in the medals every year bar one since it was introduced in 2008 but they are hardly in a comfort zone as it is six years since they won gold at a world championships. “We don’t compare ourselves to other squads but what drives us is not exactly a conveyor belt but riders constantly coming through with the legs and the talent. That pushes us on all the time. There is never any room for thinking we will definitely get a medal. “The first battle is to get selected and then it’s only a week before the worlds so there is no time to get complacent.”