Stuart Hogg (capt) Mostly looked nervous and was lucky to get away with a second-half fumble. One searing run and clever kick, but shaky overall. 5 Sean Maitland Found it impossible to get involved in attack on a day when quick ball was nonexistent. Did his defensive duties capably. 6 Huw Jones Mostly anonymous in attack just like the rest of the back line, which went with the territory on a tricky afternoon. 5 Sam Johnson One superb surge in the first half – a rare occurrence on a day that none of the backs had the chance to display their skills. 6 Blair Kinghorn A couple of bright moments in the first half, but inaccuracy at crucial moments in the second half cost his team. 5 Adam Hastings Showed some nice touches early on, and boosted Scotland’s attacking game but could never really establish any control. 6 Ali Price Dealt with the rain and wind exceptionally well for the most part and was a nuisance in attack, but mostly on back foot. 7 Rory Sutherland Lost the battle at scrum time, an area which England increasingly dominated but provided a running threat in the loose. 6 Fraser Brown A poor display in the lineout, although it is hard to be too critical given the conditions. Failed to get on top in the scrum. 5 Zander Fagerson Carried strongly and combatively and asked some difficult questions of England’s defence in some fearsome collisions. 7 Scott Cummings Coughed up the penalty that led to England’s first score of the match. The lineout misfired through no fault of his own. 5 Jonny Gray Never afraid to smash into contact and brought a typically high workrate – but lost collisions when it counted. 6 Jamie Ritchie Crunched into a couple of very big tackles and fronted up, but the back-row battle was decisively won by the opposition. 6 Hamish Watson Occasionally effective at the breakdown but was outfought overall by the superiority of the visitors’ forward pack. 6 Magnus Bradbury Another player that toiled constantly. No lack of effort, including some strong carries, but a tough afternoon overall. 6 Replacements: Stuart McInally (for Brown, 51) Shored things up 7, Ben Toolis (for Cummings, 55) On the back foot 5, Chris Harris (for Jones, 55) Struggled to make impact 5, Allan Dell (for Sutherland, 59) Helped hosts’ cause 7, Simon Berghan (for Fagerson, 59) Always going backwards 5, Nick Haining(for Bradbury, 74) n/a. George Furbank  Tried to make an impact with a couple of ambitious kick-chases. Unspectacular, but an improvement on debut in Paris. 6 Jonny May Extremely solid under the high ball, combined with typically strong and dynamic carrying. Very impressive on a filthy day. 8 Jonathan Joseph Struggled to make any kind of mark as an attacking force with no service but didn’t let anyone down with his defensive duties. 6 Owen Farrell (capt) Failed to adjust goal-kicking to conditions early on but found his range in the second half. Mixed tactical kicking, at best. 6 Elliot Daly One strong burst first half but like so many of the back division, found it hard to make any real impression. Some solid catching. 6 George Ford The odd flash of brilliance with his tactical kicking, but far from flawless overall. His second-half kick led to field position for try. 6 Willi Heinz His kicking from hand was badly hampered by the fierce wind, but reasonable enough service when England kept the ball in hand. 6 Mako Vunipola Provided plenty of ballast at scrum time and brought a huge work rate and tackle count, too. Personified England’s power. 7 Jamie George An extremely difficult day for lineout throwing, just as it was for his opposite number, but good at scrums and in the loose. 6 Kyle Sinckler Scrummaged well, displayed decent ball skills, produced some thunderous tackling and added valuable work at the breakdown. 7 Maro Itoje Massive work rate and huge tackle count. Effected turnovers and led by example – played his part with a big shove for the try. 9 George Kruis Operated well at the lineout, as usual, and contributed to England’s dominance up front in an arm-wrestle of a Test match. 7 Lewis Ludlam Provided muscle and dynamism combined with the odd moment of indiscipline. One crucial first-half turnover before early exit. 7 Sam Underhill Strong in the tackle, forced turnovers and won penalties thanks to his physicality and intelligence. An impressive day. 8 Tom Curry Teamed up with Underhill and Ludlam in an world-class back-row display. Won collisions and a nuisance at rucks and mauls. 8 Replacements: Courtney Lawes (for Ludlam, 51) A top-class option off the bench 8, Ellis Genge (for Vunipola, 56) Scored the crucial try that set England on road to victory 9, Ben Youngs (for Heinz, 58) His composure counted 8, Ben Earl (for Underhill, 65) Strong in the tackle 7, Joe Launchbury(for Kruis, 70) Did his job, added power 7.