So just the 88 points behind now. Saracens’ great escape had been turning into an interesting narrative, but recent developments in the saga that needs no introduction means they can rack up as many of these bonus-point wins as they like. It will not make any difference. That said, when a team who do have clear-cut motivation at the other end of the table travel with a full squad to take on Saracens’ reserves and suffer a pummelling such as this – and do not be deceived by Sale’s two breakaway tries in the last 10 minutes – the suggestion is that this Saracens squad will find motivation where none should exist. Sale could have pushed deeper into the top four, but for all their eye-catching recruitment of late – and form – they appear shy of the real deal for now. “The last three or four weeks have been difficult,” said Saracens director of rugby Mark McCall. “We’ve been trying to resolve everybody’s situations. But we’re starting to emerge from that. Most people are clear now about what’s going to happen. They are committed to each other and I think you saw that today.” Storm Dennis did his thing. The conditions were not apocalyptic, but the wind from the south was enough to rattle the posts as much as it did the visitors. Saracens played it masterfully. The subsequent celebrations at another win looked no different from those in the days when Saracens were not on -72 points. There may be nothing left for them to play for in the Premiership, but the players’ instincts remain sharp, as was demonstrated in the very first minute. Show a decent rugby player a path to the tryline and he will take it. Rhys Carre was that decent player. An overthrown Sale lineout landed in his arms – and he ran. Very fast and very hard. A try after 42 seconds. Saracens spent the first half playing into the elements. Of their subsequent three penalty shots at goal, all successful, one was taken by their long-range specialist, Alex Lozowski, from 35 metres out. But Alex Goode was back at the back. Few players are as clever. His kicking game was far smarter than anything Sale could contrive. The visitors did finish the half with a lovely try. It was literally the first time any of their three-quarters had touched the ball, but what touches they would supply. An inside ball released No 8 Dan du Preez on a gallop, and he found Sam James in support who released Byron McGuigan for a euphoric run to the line. A 14-10 lead at the break flattered Sale, despite that wind at their backs. Sure enough, they were in trouble from the outset of the second. Some fine interplay between the impressive Toms, Woolstencroft and Whiteley, paved the way for some more Goode magic. Rotimi Segun was over in the corner for a rare 10-point try. McGuigan was penalised for some verbals, and Manu Vunipola, who had just converted from the touchline, knocked the subsequent penalty over from the centre spot. Nick Isiekwe edged Saracens closer to that latest pointless point, when he scored after his own chargedown of Will Cliff’s attempted clearance. The “bonus” point was secured with quarter of an hour to play, when Richard Barrington drove over after sustained territorial pressure. At 36-10, Sale played their way close to a bonus point of their own. Even if both of their late tries owed their genesis to Saracens fumbles, they were taken well. Dan du Preez looks the pick of the latest wave of South Africans to have swept in through their doors. He finished the first, before his brother Rob was on hand to finish the second. They remain in third with everything to play for. An uninformed observer, though, might have thought the other lot did.