Thibaut Courtois Saved a Jesus effort from close range in first half but could have done better on the Brazilian’s goal 6 Dani Carvajal Lost possession a few times early on and his clumsy challenge on Sterling won City a late penalty. 5 Sergio Ramos As the last man he was sent off for a tug on Jesus towards the end and will now miss the second leg. 6 Raphaël Varane The Frenchman had a couple of nervy moments in the beginning. Not the force he once was. 6 Ferland Mendy Did a solid job defensively but was unable to create much going forward. Missed a late chance. 6 Luka Modric Unable to exert his influence on the game as City dominated the game and won the midfield battle. 5 Casemiro Spread the ball impressively initially and cleared one effort off the line but grew increasingly sloppy. 6 Federico Valverde One of the success stories of the season for Real but this was one of his quieter games. Booked. 5 Isco Preferred to Bale but had not created much before suddenly scoring the opener after an hour. 6 Karim Benzema Often forced wide to the right and left and had very few touches. Still nearly scored with a header. 5 Vinícius Júnior Real’s best player. Showcased his incredible technique and worked extremely hard defensively. 7 Subs Gareth Bale (for Vinícius Júnior 75) 6, Lucas Vazquez (for Isco 84) 6, Luka Jovic (for Modric 84) 6. Ederson Outstanding save low to his right from a Benzema header in first half. No chance on the goal. 7 Kyle Walker At his energetic best. Did well against Vinícius but should have cleared before Isco scored. 7 Nicolás Otamendi Always seems to have a mistake in him and his difficult pass to Rodri led to Real’s goal. 5 Aymeric Laporte Looked comfortable before suffering another injury and having to go off after half an hour. 6 Benjamin Mendy Did well without excelling and his booking for a foul on Modric means he will miss the second leg. 6 Riyad Mahrez One of City’s most dangerous players on the night but could not make the most of his half-chances. 7 Ilkay Gündogan The game suited him, his careful ball retention helping City establish their dominance in midfield. 7 Rodri The former Atlético player was a calming influence in midfield as always. Lucky not to be booked. 6 Bernardo Silva Showcased his impressive close control at times but unable to break free to threaten Courtois. 6 Kevin De Bruyne Superb in an unfamiliar role high up the pitch and was rewarded with an assist and a goal. 8 Gabriel Jesus Almost a left-back at times but worked extremely hard and got the crucial first goal with a header. 8 Subs Fernandinho (for Laporte 33) 7, Sterling (for Bernardo Silva 73) 7.