The RFU’s decision to slash funding for teams in the Championship – the second tier of English rugby union – will have sent shudders through rugby league clubs below the Super League. Central funding for the 12 clubs in the Championship will be slashed by nearly 50% from next season, down from £530,000 to £288,000 per club, with no guarantees beyond that. The 14 clubs in the second tier of rugby league – also called the Championship – also rely upon central funding and they too have nothing nothing set in stone after next year. There are considerable similarities between the two leagues. Their members range from established top-flight clubs who do not want to be there (Newcastle Falcons in union and Widnes Vikings in league) to minnows who are punching way above their weight, some of whom are thrilled to be at that level (such as Ampthill in union; and Oldham, Swinton Lions and Whitehaven in league) and others who dream of going a step higher (Ealing Trailfinders in union; Toulouse Olympique and Featherstone Rovers in league). The aspirational are full-time; the satisfied are part-time; and some are a hybrid. Most rugby league clubs in the second division contribute hugely to the sport, providing men’s, women’s and youth teams, as well as various community projects. Other clubs have little but a first team that is watched by three-figure crowds, seemingly making a negligible contribution to the sport. However, even those clubs provide players with pathways to the top. Two years ago, Matt Ashton was playing for Rochdale Mayfield, an amateur club with deep roots in the town. Ashton moved to Swinton last year and tore up the Championship with a try-a-game season that earned him a transfer to Warrington, one of the sport’s richest clubs. His upward curve has continued with a couple of splendid games in the top flight already. The RFL recently introduced a “return on investment” element to central funding, whereby the more clubs bring to the sport, the more money they are given back. Championship clubs with small gates, no junior, female or physical disability teams, and little community presence, are in danger of being left behind. However, the Championship is a breeding ground for not only players, but for coaches, managers, physios and referees. The league gives them the chance to test themselves in environments that range from low-key to high-octane, from a few hundred spectators watching Oldham at Stalybridge to thousands of fans urging on Toulouse Olympique at Stade Ernest-Wallon. The Championship offers variety of experience, intensity and opportunity. Second-tier rugby league clubs have at least been promised one promotion place, even if the Super League expands to 14 clubs in 2022. The RFU’s decision to cut funding for second-tier union clubs merely cements what is already in place: a 13-team elite consisting of the 12 clubs in the Premiership and whoever has just been relegated. For years the relegated team has retained their equal share of funding and they almost always bounce straight back up – Newcastle Falcons, who were relegated last year, have won all 11 of their games so far this season. The new plan will make the gap in wealth even vaster and make it even more difficult for clubs to break into the elite. There are other implications for rugby league, given that four union clubs in the Championship groundshare with league clubs. London Broncos play on the same ground as Ealing Trailfinders, who are currently second in the RFU Championship behind Newcastle Falcons – who play on the same ground as league club Newcastle Thunder. Coventry, who share the revamped Butts Park Arena with rugby league club Coventry Bears, may also make the play-offs. With Yorkshire Carnegie (who groundshare with Leeds Rhinos) miles adrift at the bottom of the Championship, mid-table Doncaster Knights – who are coached by dual-code guru Clive Griffiths – could well be the only northern club in union’s second tier next season. There is speculation that Ealing and London Scottish are considering leaving the Championship for the multinational Pro-14 instead. What price Ealing deciding to partner the Broncos in a bid to reach Super League and pulling up a seat around at least one of rugby’s top tables? Watching the NRL 9s from Perth brought a welcome serving of sun last weekend to rain-lashed Blighty, and a few familiar faces. Former Warrington star Kurt Gidley was one of several retired stars given a run out, the 37-year-old starring in Newcastle’s thrashing of the Warriors, while Corey Parker took it steady for the Broncos and Pat Richards made little impact for Wests Tigers. Huddersfield reject Matt Frawley made his debut for Canberra alongside England’s Elliott Whitehead and former Super League players Ryan Sutton, Sam Williams, Iosia Soliola and Mick Oldfield. Ex Hull KR pivot Zach Dockar-Clay was called up by Manly, while Brayden Wiliame and Scotland’s Euan Aitken helped the Dragons to the final, where they were beaten by the Cowboys, who had the tournament’s breakout star in 18-year-old full-back Hamiso Tabuai-Fidow. While their father Matty resisted the urge to put his hand up, Cooper Johns was lively alongside Cameron Munster for Melbourne and brother Jack Johns got a chance with the Rabbitohs. Both could play for Italy this autumn, courtesy of their mother. The first three weeks of the new Reserves Championship has thrown up some interesting names. Despite several clubs sharing reserve team projects with dual-reg partner clubs, a plethora of internationals have cropped up on minor league pitches. Tonga centre Mahe Fonua, Aussie star Albert Kelly and Ireland’s Lewis Bienek have played for Hull; Salford fielded an international centre duo of Ed Chamberlain (Ireland) and Elliot Kear (Wales) along with Krisnan Inu, Ryan Lannon and Jack Ormondroyd; Joe Arundel has been among the tries for Wakefield; Warrington have been giving Dec Patton gametime at half-back; and Wales centre Rhys Evans played for Leeds. In the pick of last weekend’s games, Morgan Escare, Dom Manfredi, Chris Hankinson and Joe Greenwood helped Wigan to a 28-4 victory over an equally familiar Hull KR side that featured Ethan Ryan, Nick Rawsthorne and Joe Keyes. Credit to Newcastle for beating London 14-10 with a fully homegrown team, with Rupert Civil – my new favourite name for player – grabbing the winning try. As usual, the opening rounds of Super League have attracted strong attendances despite the wretched weather. Scanning the 2019 attendance statistics in the Rugby League Yearbook, Leeds remained the game’s biggest drawcard, averaging 12,727 to the new-look Headingley despite another woeful season by their standards. Wigan were down to fourth on 11,432. Toronto Wolfpack had the sport’s ninth highest attendances (6,988) and will surely rise – unless their miserable start to life in the Super League continues. What is most remarkable is the solid consistency to attendances. In Super League, only promoted London’s crowds changed by more than 1,000, just Warrington and Salford by more than 750. It was the same in the Championship, where only two clubs’ attendances altered by more than 500. All hail Widnes, whose crowds only fell by 681 despite their relegation in 2018 – an astonishing statistic given the drop in away followings at Naughton Park. Bradford drew more fans to crumbling Odsal to watch a mediocre Championship club than Grand Finalists Salford did to the AJ Bell – and twice as many London Broncos, whose average crowd was just over 2,000 – the second lowest of their 23 top flight campaigns, and 20th in the 2019 rankings. I spent last weekend dodging Storm Dennis in Aldeburgh on the Suffolk coast, where Mrs NHR and I got chatting to a retired couple in a cosy Adnams pub. The woman revealed she was from Hull and within seconds we were in earnest discussion about her roots east of the river, her brother’s family being Black and Whites exiled in Leeds, and the legacy of Clive Sullivan. I made the case that Sullivan would be far more famous if he had lived beyond his 42 years, a poster boy for integration and diversity: a black Welshman scoring the winning try and lifting the World Cup as Great Britain captain. Flicking through Rugby League Journal in our rented cottage, there were photos from the 1960s to the early 1980s of a plethora of black stars: Yorkshiremen Ellery Hanley and Henderson Gill, South African David Barends, Aussie George Ambrum, Jamaican-born Des Drummond, and Welshmen Billy Boston and three of Colin Dixon, all in the same issue! It was a reminder of how unusual that was in British sport at the time, how rugby league was so far ahead of the curve. It makes the current challenges smart rather. Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook