Why are the UK’s cities so full of ugly new-builds? You see them everywhere now, next to railway tracks in Manchester and in London’s outer boroughs. Clunky-looking blocks of flats, clad with panels in depressing shades of yellow and grey, with a bland coffee shop or supermarket at the bottom. They make city skylines look like a sad, knock-off sci-fi: a bootlegged copy of Blade Runner with the pixelated graphics of SimCity 2000. Rain stains soon streak the cladding. The glass balconies, with their battleship-style metal handrails, are fated to be scarred with grime. And that’s just from the outside. Inside they’re often a horror show of low ceilings, missing plug sockets and dodgy sewer pipes. But to understand why they’re here, we need to see these new-builds not as the result of architects taking leave of their senses, but as symptoms of a rotten property market. Sure, there are architects churning out the dimensions for these miserable homes, but it’s the government and private developers who are really to blame. The developers in particular are the ones making a mint off the housing crisis, aided and abetted by buyer schemes. Designed by George Osborne, help to buy sees the government lend first-time buyers up to 20% (40% inside London) of the cost of a new-build interest-free for five years. Shared ownership lets you buy part of a property – a new-build or building resold via a housing association – then pay to rent the rest of it as you incrementally buy more of it. New-builds for first-time buyers are hot property. So why build something that can last for decades and accommodate a growing family or a mix of demographics when you can get in, build something vaguely building-shaped, and move on knowing investors or government-subsidised buyers will snap it up? Those depressing facades are cheap, quick to install and a shortcut to a well-enough insulated house to pass planning muster. Retrofitting existing buildings or including affordable housing eats too far into developers’ profits. There’s 20% VAT on refurbishing old buildings, so unless it’s turning a heritage building into expensive luxury flats, there’s more money in building new. Section 106 obligations, where developers have to build affordable homes in return for planning permission, can be wormed out of if it affects the bottom line. The lucky – or perhaps unlucky – ones using help to buy and shared ownership programmes think they’re buying security, when really they’re inches away from the quagmire of negative equity: these new-builds rarely retain their value, since the next crop of potential buyers can just pick an off-plan apartment from the newer development next door. Many of these blocks will be demolished once the new-build premium evaporates and the poor quality becomes apparent, but developers won’t move on from this salted earth school of architecture. They get to make a profit, free from strict regulations, as it keeps them looking endlessly useful to politicians who need to be able to boast about the number of houses being built on their watch. John Prescott, who famously has little time for this rapacious breed, had a good go with the short-lived commission for architecture and the built environment (Cabe), founded in 1999. For 12 years Cabe’s top architects and experts denounced bad design. An audit undertaken by Cabe in 2005 found that 94% of new housing schemes in the north of England failed to “measure up on design quality”. But Cabe had no legislative power – its main weapon was naming and shaming – and it was canned in 2011, when the coalition government removed its funding and merged it with the Design Council, which developers are equally free to ignore. The latest government commission sent to puzzle over ugly developments is Building Better, Building Beautiful. It got off to an inauspicious start by appointing the late Roger Scruton as chair. Scruton had written several books detailing his distaste for any architect who didn’t crumble to dust last millennium. Its report Living with Beauty, published last week, does a lot of hand-waving over the causes of ugly development syndrome. The report’s suggestions are mainly “asking them to build nicer things, if it’s not too much trouble”. But it doesn’t have to be like this. The government’s latest beauty commission has joined the chorus asking to scrap the tax on retrofits, which would make converting existing buildings into housing cheaper and – if help to buy was ditched or redesigned – an option for first-time buyers. In Europe, architects are winning some of the industry’s most prestigious prizes with refurbished housing schemes. The UK has plenty of young architects who are bursting with radical and exciting ideas for sustainable and adaptable housing. These are resources to invest in. To adapt William Morris, if the market hasn’t provided us with housing that’s beautiful or useful, maybe it’s time to make it. We’ve shamed and we’ve begged: now it’s time to legislate against corporate developers who put profits over people. Bin help to buy, scrap tax on retrofits, make section 106 non-negotiable, get councils hiring more in-house architects and prioritise local and resident-led housing schemes. To get a beautiful city, you need beautiful ideals as well as buildings. • India Block is assistant editor at Dezeen