Not since Henry VIII first got that glint in his eye has such fuss been made over an urge to start chopping, but here we are: critics the world over are wringing their hands over the length of Hilary Mantel’s much anticipated The Mirror & the Light, which is due out next week. “Even professed admirers of Mantel may find it hard to finish,” Prospect’s review read, suggesting that people who have waited eight years for the third book in a trilogy may not be invested enough. Many other reviews have also suggested (politely, and often underneath glowing praise) that the book, longer than Wolf Hall and double the size of Bring Up the Bodies at roughly 900 pages, needed more of an edit. I say roughly – almost every review has made mention of the page count and somehow also come up with a different figure to marvel at: 863 pages in the Independent, 912 in the Telegraph and “almost 900” nearly everywhere else, while the New York Times weighed the US edition as a mere “nearly 800 pages”. Regardless of heft, pre-orders in the UK for The Mirror & the Light have long passed Margaret Atwood’s The Testaments, showing what an event it is with readers, though Mantel’s willingness to write expansively has won her both prizes and detractors. James Naughtie, chair of the Booker judging panel the year Mantel won for Wolf Hall, later said the decision to give it the award was “based on the sheer bigness of the book”, whereas Susan Bassnett claimed that she was “yet to meet anyone outside the Booker panel who managed to get to the end of this tedious tome”. But Mantel has also since sold more than 5m copies of Wolf Hall and Bring Up the Bodies, and was also the first ever Booker winner to make it to the top 10 of the PLR, which ranks public library loans. There is a line of arguments that, after just a few years of being exposed to the evils of 24-hour news and Candy Crush, human beings have rapidly devolved to become distracted, gibbering wrecks with hobbled attention spans. (Notice how this argument is most often made by a) snobs and b) people who talk loudly about the Golden Age of Television and somehow find hours and brains in each day for Netflix.) Interestingly, research has also shown that books are also getting longer. If you struggle to finish big books, there is plenty of advice out there. US librarian and critic Nancy Pearl once laid out the “Rule of 50”: if you’re 50 years old or younger, give a book at least 50 pages before giving up on it; if you’re over 50, subtract your age from 100 and use that number instead. (Pearl seems to believe senior citizens may feel more anxious than young whippersnappers about unread books as mortality looms.) But for those who want to conquer long books like an English king conquering Boulogne, here are some tried and tested tips for sticking with a doorstopper. 1 Set goals – but do take breaksHaruki Murakami once wrote a short story called Sleep, about a woman who discovers she no longer needs it and uses her extra time to finally bash through Anna Karenina. We can’t do that – but we can dedicate the time by setting a daily goal, even if it seems small to you, say 20 pages. That way, you’re never so far away from it that you lose track of the plot and then your interest. Read after me: it is OK to not read books like an excited tween on a Harry Potter release date. 2 Love your phone? Put your book on itPrint lovers, stay with me here – lugging a big hardback around is not tempting for everyone. If you tend to stare at your phone a lot, you can also stare at a book; handily, you can combine the two by installing an ebook app. I tackled Lucy Ellmann’s 1,000-pager Ducks, Newburyport as a PDF and while it took me two months to finish on my commute, I did do it – and all without blaming it for putting “undue stress on my upper musculature”, as one Washington Post critic did. And my print copy looks pristine on my shelf. 3 Accept that not all books are for everyoneOften, people marvel to me that they couldn’t finish The Luminaries by Eleanor Catton or Moby-Dick after spending weeks with them, but got through Patrick Rothfuss’s Kingkiller Chronicles or The Lord of the Rings in a few days. That you couldn’t get to the end of À la Recherche du Temps Perdu doesn’t mean you don’t have the patience for a long book – it just means it wasn’t for you. That’s fine. But don’t blame Proust.