The debutant Steven Bergwijn will rightfully claim the headlines for Spurs but the contribution of Tottenham’s current third-longest serving player against Manchester City should not be forgotten. Hugo Lloris made one of the saves of the season to deny Sergio Agüero in the first half, somehow getting a big toe to turn a deflected shot on to the post, before he also denied Ilkay Gündogan from the penalty spot (the fourth spot-kick City have missed in their past six). Lloris rode his luck – he was clearly off his line when palming Gündogan’s effort away and fortunate not to concede another penalty when challenging Raheem Sterling for the rebound – but his performance is a reminder that the World Cup-winning captain is a big-game player. His return to form in time for the Champions League knockouts bodes well for José Mourinho. Michael Butler • Match report: Tottenham 2-0 Manchester City Liverpool hit a few more milestones on Saturday – including a 20th consecutive Premier League home win that opened up a 22-point gap at the summit, the biggest lead witnessed at the end of a day’s play in English top‑flight history – but Jürgen Klopp took greater satisfaction from several key players hitting their stride. Fabinho rediscovered his rhythm in the second half as he continued his recovery from injury, while Mohamed Salah and Roberto Firmino flourished as an awkward afternoon became a procession. And Firmino created three of the goals to overtake Salah, Andy Robertson and Sadio Mané on Liverpool’s assist list this season. “He is just exceptional,” Klopp said. “But even a player like Bobby needs an address where he can send the ball. How he uses the skills of his mates is special. I do not know a player like him.” Andy Hunter • Match report: Liverpool 4-0 Southampton Chelsea could have had a commanding lead in the first half at Leicester on Saturday but they were scruffy in the final third, which has been the case too often this season. If they slip out of fourth spot then critics – and possibly Frank Lampard – will point to their failure to sign a striker last month. But is Lampard making the best use of the ones available to him? Tammy Abraham, who hurt his ankle against Arsenal, did not look in top condition at Leicester and it is hard to believe Olivier Giroud would not have been sharper. But the Frenchman, having been denied a move to clubs who would have used him, was not in the squad. He must not be impressing Lampard in training, though Abraham relishes working with him. “He’s like a big brother to me,” the 22-year-old said. “His attitude has been great. In training we are always doing finishing and we have a competition after training as well. He has been encouraging many of the young lads.” Paul Doyle • Match report: Leicester 2-2 Chelsea Manchester United were again amateurish under the high ball as the Harry Maguire-Victor Lindelöf centre-back axis failed to deal with regulation crosses put in by Wolves’ João Moutinho. It is a curiosity given that Maguire’s forte is supposedly the basics of defending and Lindelöf’s technical prowess is meant to complement this. Even stranger, then, that the Swede should talk up a display in which he and Maguire might have allowed at least three goals from aerial deliveries. Lindelöf. “He’s a fantastic player – we train every day [together] and play a lot of games now so for every game that we play we get better and better. Hopefully we can keep improving. They didn’t create a lot of chances, and we kept another clean sheet.” Regarding the latter point: only just. And, given United’s difficulty in scoring, they really have to tighten at the back. Jamie Jackson • Match report: Manchester United 0-0 Wolves Jefferson Lerma has enough bookings to build a yellow brick road, 66 across the past four and a half years (22 in a Bournemouth shirt) and, as much as Eddie Howe would rather the Colombia midfielder was not suspended for the trip to Sheffield United on Sunday, he is equally loth for Lerma to lose his edge. Lerma was superb against Aston Villa until he received his first red card for Bournemouth after picking up the second of two cautions for fouls on Jack Grealish, retribution which his manager felt was a consequence of the player’s reputation. “I think some of the bookings this season have been very harsh,” Howe said. “I think other players wouldn’t have ended up with the same punishment that he has. Unfortunately for Jeff he has put himself in that position and it is very difficult I think to change people’s opinions. I think referees are looking out for him.” Ben Fisher • Match report: Bournemouth 2-1 Aston Villa Burnley have never beaten Arsenal in the Premier League and, perhaps more remarkable still, this was Sean Dyche’s first point against them in 10 attempts. It probably felt more glass half‑full than half‑empty, all the more so because this fixture came at the end of a challenging sequence. Burnley could have found themselves among the relegation candidates had they failed to take anything from games against Leicester, Manchester United and Arsenal, yet they ended up with a more than respectable seven points. “That’s a really healthy return and the players can have a rest now before we start again,” Dyche said. “They deserve it. There’s some tough challenges in the Premier League and we’ve shown we can hold our own against some of the best teams around.” Paul Wilson • Match report: Burnley 0-0 Arsenal Dean Henderson’s form in goal for Sheffield United – the clean sheet at Selhurst Park was his ninth in the Premier League this season, the joint-most in the division – has brought him international recognition with England but Gareth Southgate might well be advised to keep his eye on another member of the Blades’ defensive unit. Though Henderson has excelled, clean sheets are not down to a goalkeeper alone and United are among the Premier League leaders in terms of shots against, allowing fewer than 12 per game on average. The Republic of Ireland international John Egan in the heart of defence has been key to that, but perhaps even more vital have been the contributions of Jack O’Connell on the left of the back three. The 25-year-old, excellent again in south London, surely can not be too far away from Southgate’s thoughts. John Ashdown • Match report: Crystal Palace 0-1 Sheffield United For prolonged periods it was hard to discern that Norwich were bottom and Newcastle en route to 10th but, as Steve Bruce acknowledged, the Premier League is all about “small margins”. A combination of an excellent goalkeeper in Martin Dubravka and the sensible decision to revert to Rafael Benítez’s five‑at‑the‑back system promises to keep Newcastle safe but Bruce’s side do not score enough goals to feel properly secure. Benítez’s successor believes a lack of midfield creativity – and possession – explains why the £40m Joelinton has scored only one league goal all season, and he has a point. Even so, Tynesiders remain puzzled as to why he prioritised reinforcing midfield above recruiting a striker last month. Bruce did not bid for Jarrod Bowen, who eventually left Hull for West Ham, claiming he was “no better” than forwards he already possessed. Newcastle fans wonder if he was right. Louise Taylor • Match report: Newcastle 0-0 Norwich The relegation battle is increasingly intriguing and Watford are right in it. They are in 19th place, two points from safety, with a negative goal difference surpassed only by Norwich. After the Hornets’ start to the season, this should not be surprising – but such has been Nigel Pearson’s impact it’s sometimes easy to forget. Watford endured a second consecutive defeat on Saturday against Everton and, as against Aston Villa, it didn’t feel like the right result: 2-0 up and cruising, Watford should have gone on to win. But bad marking and, with the late winner, risky play from a high defensive line were punished ruthlessly by Carlo Ancelotti’s men. Such mistakes cannot be repeated and – with Manchester United, Liverpool, Crystal Palace and Leicester in their next five games – Pearson’s relegation challenge has only just begun. Paul MacInnes • Match report: Watford 2-3 Everton The manner of West Ham’s collapse here left them scratching for positives but there was a clear one in their midfield debutant, Tomas Soucek. The 24-year-old Czech looks cut out for better sides than this and was particularly instrumental in a first‑half performance that should have set them up for a comfortable win. Soucek is an imposing figure at 6ft 4in and won most of his aerial challenges in an enjoyable midfield battle; even more important was the energy he offered in an all-action display that could have brought a goal. His early header, well saved by Mathew Ryan, came from a free‑kick he had won with a dynamic burst into space. There is much more to come from Soucek but the worry is that, with a devilish set of fixtures ahead, he will have to wield an extraordinary influence if a traumatic end to the season is to be avoided. Nick Ames • Match report: West Ham 3-3 Brighton