What were you hoping for?A great date, a great anecdote, or both. First impressions?Oops, should have dressed up more… What did you talk about?The Blind Date meta-commentary: how was your photoshoot? What will the Guyliner say? Peep Show, and whether we were Marks or Jeremys. Personal finance (but in a fun way). Any awkward moments?I feel like he was maybe taken aback when I went for the amaro shot (there was biscotti!) and he ordered a proper dessert. Good table manners?If the rule is that you only notice them if they’re bad, I didn’t notice his. Best thing about Ben?He is obviously super smart, but wears it lightly. He is a big Love Island fan – my favourite people go high and low. Would you introduce him to your friends?He’d slot right in. Describe Ben in three wordsEngaged, warm, insightful. What do you think he made of you?A fellow authority on tick-induced meat allergies. Maybe a bit intense. Did you go on somewhere?The bus, for the hour-long journey home – just as well we got on. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I actually had a brilliant time, and the best conversation I’d had in ages. But I felt that the connection was more of interests and sensibility than romantic. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?I know everyone says this and doesn’t mean it, but I would genuinely like to be friends. What were you hoping for?To find a connection with someone beyond a first date. First impressions?Wow… Elle is beautiful in a classically English way, like Emma Watson. She comes across as intelligent and engaging. What did you talk about?Niche dog breeds, the Antipodes, the joys of Camberwell. Any awkward moments?When she went for a formal handshake but I’d gone in for a hug. Despite knowing my date’s name was Elle, I thought she said hers was Zoë – and that I might be on the wrong date. Good table manners?Excellent. She sliced her ravioli elegantly. Best thing about Elle?I’m not sure if I’ve ever met someone quite as eloquent – not really surprising given her job, I guess. Would you introduce her to your friends?Definitely. Describe Elle in three wordsCharming, lively, impassioned. What do you think she made of you?I’m not sure there was a romantic connection, but I think we got on really well. It was a bit of a shock to see the restaurant closing around us. Did you go on somewhere?Does sharing the front seat on the 42 bus home count? And... did you kiss?No… perhaps her handshake was a sign of things to come. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Order more wine. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?I’d be keen to as friends. • Elle and Ben ate at Emilia’s Pasta, London E1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like‑minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com