Hundreds of Canadians are anxiously awaiting evacuation from the Chinese city of Wuhan, the centre of the coronavirus outbreak, amid bureaucratic delays. Canada announced late on Sunday that it had chartered an aircraft to evacuate 304 citizens from the city of Wuhan in the Hubei province. All of the visas for crews have been approved, but the Canada is awaiting final approvals from Beijing, officials said on Monday. It is a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals, or possibly seafood. New and troubling viruses usually originate in animal hosts. Ebola and flu are examples. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars) and Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (Mers) are both caused by coronaviruses that came from animals. The virus causes pneumonia. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. In severe cases there can be organ failure. As this is viral pneumonia, antibiotics are of no use. The antiviral drugs we have against flu will not work. If people are admitted to hospital, they may get support for their lungs and other organs as well as fluids. Recovery will depend on the strength of their immune system. Many of those who have died are known to have been already in poor health. Human to human transmission has been confirmed by China’s national health commission. As of 3 February, 361 people have died in China, and one in the Philippines. Confirmed infections in China are 17,238, and the official Chinese figures include Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau. Outside of China, infections stand at more than 150. Two members of one family have been confirmed to have the virus in the UK, after more than 160 were tested and found negative. The actual number to have contracted the virus could be far higher as people with mild symptoms may not have been detected. Modelling by World Health Organization (WHO) experts at Imperial College London suggests there could be as many as 100,000 cases, with uncertainty putting the margins between 30,000 and 200,000. There were fears that the coronavirus might spread more widely during the week-long lunar new year holidays, which start on 24 January, when millions of Chinese travel home to celebrate, but the festivities have largely been cancelled and Wuhan and other Chinese cities are in lockdown. Unless you have recently travelled to China or been in contact with someone infected with the virus, then you should treat any cough or cold symptoms as normal. The NHS advises that there is generally no need to visit a doctor for a cough unless it is persistent or you are having other symptoms such as chest pain, difficulty breathing or you feel very unwell. No. The spread of the virus outside China is worrying but not an unexpected development. It increases the likelihood that the World Health Organization will declare the outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern on Thursday evening. The key concerns are how transmissible this new coronavirus is between people and what proportion become severely ill and end up in hospital. Sarah Boseley Health editor and Hannah Devlin The plane will first land in Hanoi, Vietnam, and then travel onwards to Wuhan. Evacuees will be flown to the Trenton air force base in the province of Ontario, where they will be quarantined for a period of 14 days. Anyone showing symptoms of the virus will not be allowed to board the plane. Canada has also secured access to a second plane if needed, the foreign minister, François-Philippe Champagne, said in a briefing on Monday. The number of citizens requesting evacuation from China has climbed dramatically as the scope of infection also increases. Canada has said only citizens who entered China on Canadian passports will be permitted to board the plane, probably preventing permanent residents from leaving Wuhan. There is no indication the delay in evacuating citizens is tied to the chilled diplomatic relations between Beijing and Ottawa, stemming from the extradition proceedings of a Chinese telecoms executive. Instead, the delay appears tied to a closure of airspace over the city of Wuhan, part of a mass quarantine of the region by Chinese officials. The United States, Australia and the UK all evacuated citizens from the city last week. Japan is planning its fourth evacuation flight this week, its foreign ministry said on Sunday. The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the Wuhan coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine. The UN agency advises people to: Despite a surge in sales of face masks in the aftermath of the outbreak of the coronavirus outbreak, experts are divided over whether they can prevent transmission and infection. There is some evidence to suggest that masks can help prevent hand-to-mouth transmissions, given the large number of times people touch their faces. The consensus appears to be that wearing a mask can limit – but not eliminate – the risks, provided they are used correctly. Justin McCurry In a rare moment of praise, China’s foreign ministry lauded Canada’s decision not to place restrictions on Chinese residents entering the country. “Canada believes the entry ban has no basis, which is a sharp contrast to the US behaviours,” spokesperson Hua Chunying said during an online press conference. In contrast, the US and a number of other countries have advised against travel to China and banned entry by foreign citizens who have travelled to the country in the last 14 days. There are currently more than 17,000 cases of the coronavirus worldwide. The vast majority of the 361 fatalities have been inside China, with only a single death in the Philippines on Sunday. Canada has publicly said the risk to its citizens remains low. There have been four confirmed cases in the country, with the first case already released from hospital.