Protesters across Canada have blocked access to road shipping ports and commuter rail lines in support of Indigenous groups fighting the construction of a pipeline on their traditional territory. Early on Monday, police arrested several activists in Vancouver, who were part of a group that has blocked access to four shipping ports in recent days. The protests are part of a nationwide show of support for the embattled Wetʼsuwetʼen hereditary chiefs in the province of British Columbia – and for the 21 Indigenous activists who have been arrested since Thursday on We’tsuwet’en lands. The chiefs have steadfastly refused to allow Coastal GasLink to construct part of its 670km natural gas pipeline through their traditional territory. “You are not welcome here! This is #Wetsuweten territory! We are unarmed. We are peaceful... You! Are invaders!” Eve, holding an Eagle feather, stands off with RCMP tactical units at Gidimt’en checkpoint moments ago. RCMP appear to be moving in. #bcpoli #cdnpoli #WetsuwetenStrong pic.twitter.com/yg7ZPO5Nxr But last year, the British Columbia supreme court dealt a blow to the We’tsuwet’en, granting an injunction in favour of Coastal GasLink, which it said has suffered irreparable harm as a result of sustained opposition to the project. The chiefs maintain they never ceded land title to the province or federal government and thus maintain jurisdiction over the territory. The C$6.6bn (US$5bn) project has the support of 20 elected First Nations councils along the proposed route. Five of the six elected band councils in the Wet’suwet’en nation also support the pipeline. But We’tsuwet’en chiefs say the authority of these groups only applies to reservations – not traditional territory. On Friday, members of the Tyendinaga Mohawk territory in Ontario parked a dump truck with a snowplow blade near a rail line, halting the Toronto-Ottawa corridor, one of the busiest commuter rail lines in the country. Dozens of trips over the weekend were cancelled. “[We’tsuwet’en] never had a treaty with Canada. Canada can’t claim it’s their land unless they have a purchase receipt with the crown,” the group said in a statement. “Our position is they are our brethren. We have a relationship with them, and we support them in protecting their territory.” Via Rail, which operate the country’s commuter rail line, said it would not resume service until the situation in resolved. “We are aware that this situation, which is unfortunately beyond our control, has an impact on our customers and we apologize for the inconvenience this situation is causing,” the company in a statement issued on Sunday. Canadian National, which owns the rail line, won a court injunction on Friday to end the protest – but has not yet enforced the injunction. In Victoria, Indigenous youngsters have occupied the province’s legislative building and lit a ceremonial fire, calling for an end to Royal Canadian Mounted Police operations against the We’tsuwet’en. The protests in British Columbia and Ontario come as the RCMP are expected to arrive at the Unist’ot’en camp on Monday. The largest of the blockades, Unist’ot’en, was constructed as a checkpoint in 2009 and is now the site of a permanent healing centre. It is unclear how many people are at this camp. Police have already dismantled two camps in recent days using heavy machinery.