The film producer Harvey Weinstein is expected to call several more witnesses on Monday in his New York rape trial, which is nearing its conclusion well ahead of schedule. Weinstein, 67, has pleaded not guilty to raping a former aspiring actor, who the Guardian is not naming as she has not indicated publicly if she is happy to be identified, and to sexually assaulting former production assistant Miriam Haley. Since 2017, more than 80 women have accused Weinstein of sexual misconduct. Other accusers have testified at the trial. The producer, whose films include The English Patient and Shakespeare in Love, has denied any non-consensual sex. His trial is a key moment in the #MeToo movement in which women have accused powerful men in business, entertainment, media and politics of sexual misconduct. The trial began on 6 January and was predicted to last up to two months, but it appears lawyers could deliver their closing arguments as soon as this week. Weinstein faces life in prison if convicted of predatory sexual assault, the most serious charge against him. Taking the witness stand last week, Lauren Marie Young, 30, testified that after Weinstein groped her in a Beverly Hills hotel room bathroom in 2013, there was another woman there who did nothing to stop it. Mexican model Claudia Salinas, Young said, closed the door behind her and the former movie mogul and “was standing right there” when Young managed to get out. Salinas, now 38, is expected to offer her own version of events on Monday. She appeared in the 2009 Weinstein-produced film Crossing Over, with Harrison Ford. Weinstein‘s lawyers have said they also plan to call two friends of the woman he is charged with raping: a Hollywood talent agent and a Brazilian actor who lived with the woman in Los Angeles, who were on the March 2013 trip to New York City during which she alleges Weinstein raped her at a midtown Manhattan hotel. Prosecutors rested their case last Thursday after jurors heard testimony from six women accusing Weinstein of sexual assault, including the alleged rape victim, Haley and Annabella Sciorra, who said Weinstein raped her in her home in the early 1990s. Weinstein’s team began by calling Paul Feldsher, a close friend of Sciorra around that time. Feldsher testified that Sciorra told him she had done a “crazy thing with Harvey”, which he understood to mean a sexual encounter, and gave no indication that it was non-consensual. Feldsher appeared surprised during cross-examination when a prosecutor presented him with texts he had sent Weinstein since October 2017, in which he promised the former producer his loyalty and harshly disparaged Sciorra and other accusers, calling them a “dog pile of actresses”. The defense case continued on Friday with testimony from Elizabeth Loftus, a professor at the University of California, Irvine and well-known expert on memory who testified that memories could be distorted over time.