Our Twenty20 World Cup uniforms have just arrived and it’s pretty special to be able to read Australia on that shirt. We’ve just come off a hard-fought tri-series win, but we’re so ready to begin our campaign. It has been a long series for what was only five games of cricket. But it was a great series for Australia, not just in terms of getting the win, but also having the opportunity to come together as a team. At the start we weren’t sure what to expect, because we hadn’t played together for so long. It was really beautiful to realise how much we’ve missed each other and then to get the confidence of that time together against quality opposition. It was also good to come up against teams that truly exposed our current flaws. We’d rather be going through this process now and trying to fix things than figuring it out in the middle of the World Cup. It will be a challenge for us to go all the way – we’re seeing the gap well and truly closing in women’s cricket – so it won’t be easy, but we’re definitely going to put it all out there. We need a few more partnerships with the bat and our fielding has to improve. We learnt a lot from the tri-series, and it was a bit of a bonus to play each team twice. We won’t get that in the World Cup, where we will have to adjust on the fly. Our preparations now are centred around making sure we have plans A through to E, so we’re ready to face whatever is thrown at us. We come up against India again in the first game, which is an interesting challenge, because we’ve just played them three times. I’m having to come up with plans for Smriti Mandhana; she’s their key player and someone who can really take the game away from us very quickly. The wins against India weren’t convincing, so we need to focus on how we execute our plans for Smriti and other key players like Harmanpreet Kaur. Shafali Verma is another who has shown her intent from ball one. It shows that this is where our game is going; she’s only 16 and she can hit a long ball, as I found out when I got put over the sight screen. From my point of view, I’m focusing on getting my length right. I’m a swing bowler and I often get a little bit ahead of myself with trying to swing the ball too much and so I pitch the ball too full. I’ve been absolutely punished the last two weeks whenever I’ve drifted even remotely full. I’m a pretty nice pace to hit, so I can’t quite scare the batters like some of the other bowlers do. I’ve got to deceive them in other ways, whether that’s with length, swing or a slower ball. Although we haven’t played our best cricket this series, one thing I’m really proud of is the grit we’ve shown. We had to fight for those wins, especially in our last game against England and then in the final against India. We were able to show the kind of grit we’re going to need in a World Cup. There are going to be teams that get on top of us, they’re going to come out hard like India did. And we’re really going to have to scrap for those wickets. We know our fielding hasn’t been where it could be and we’ve made a lot of errors. We didn’t bat well throughout the entire innings in the final, but we still managed to scrape a win. We did the same thing against England. No matter what happens in any game, we’ve got a fire in our bellies and we will never go down without a fight. There’s so much to work on, but I’m really looking forward to playing in a home World Cup. Just having my family and friends around is going to make it so much more special for me. We’re not feeling the pressure at all. We know there will be a bit more media attention on us than if we were playing overseas, but we’re ready for that and really looking forward to seeing big crowds get around us. I think the fact that it’s a standalone tournament is really exciting. I’d love to see people come out in droves to support us and then go out to the men’s tournament at the end of the year and be able to say the atmosphere was just as incredible at both of them.