The Duke and Duchess of Sussex will no longer use the word royal, as in their “Sussex Royal” branding, a spokeswoman for the couple has said. The spokeswoman said: “While the duke and duchess are focused on plans to establish a new non-profit organisation, given the specific UK government rules surrounding use of the word royal, it has been therefore agreed that their non-profit organisation, when it is announced this spring, will not be named Sussex Royal Foundation. “The Duke and Duchess of Sussex do not intend to use ‘Sussex Royal’ in any territory post-spring 2020. “Therefore, the trademark applications that were filed as protective measures, acting on advice from and following the same model for The Royal Foundation, have been removed.” The couple said on Wednesday that their lives as working royals will end on 31 March when they stop representing the Queen and become financially independent. Harry and Meghan will move to North America, but sources have stressed they “will be in the United Kingdom regularly” and retain the same charitable goals, supporting causes from the Commonwealth to mental health. The duke and duchess will attend the Commonwealth Day service at Westminster Abbey on 9 March, likely to be their last official appearance as working members of the monarchy, with the Queen and other senior royals. The event is normally attended by the Prince of Wales, Duchess of Cornwall and Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, and is a major engagement in the Queen’s calendar. Harry and Meghan registered the website sussexroyal.com in March 2019, where the couple’s plans for future their roles in the monarchy and relationship with the media were detailed. The SussexRoyal Instagram account, started in April 2019, has since amassed 11.2 million followers. On Tuesday, the Daily Mail quoted an anonymous source as saying: “In many ways, this is inevitable, given their decision to step down. But it must surely come as a blow to the couple as they have invested everything into the Sussex Royal brand. The Queen would have had little choice, however. “The Sussexes’ original plan – of being half-in, half-out working royals – was never going to work. Obviously, as the Queen has made clear, they are still much-loved members of her family. But if they aren’t carrying out official duties and are now seeking other commercial opportunities, they simply cannot be allowed to market themselves as royals.” On Friday evening, Harry and Meghan updated their website sussexroyal.com expanding on the statement issued by their spokeswoman. Under “additional details” it reads: “While there is not any jurisdiction by the Monarchy or Cabinet Office over the use of the word ‘Royal’ overseas, the Duke and Duchess of Sussex do not intend to use ‘Sussex Royal’ or any iteration of the word ‘Royal’ in any territory (either within the UK or otherwise) when the transition occurs Spring 2020.”