When Novak Djokovic’s garrulous coach, Goran Ivanisevic, and his longtime confidant, Marian Vajda, cancelled their press conference at the last minute here on Friday, suspicions grew that the Serb was more worried than he wanted to let on about Dominic Thiem. The defending champion, normally so open, has been seen only fleetingly since beating Roger Federer in the semi-finals on Thursday and has said nothing publicly since immediately after that match. If Djokovic is concerned about his team giving away even the smallest detail about his preparation for Sunday’s final, he must be nervous – which may be no bad thing – or it could make him over-cautious. The young Austrian, meanwhile, will surely grow in self-belief. They will meet for the 11th time and, while the seven-times champion is the odds-on favourite, nobody is dismissing Thiem’s chances. He has won four of their past five matches, including a tough three-setter on the hard court of the O2 Arena in London in November, and arrives in his third slam final hitting the ball with greater venom and precision than at any time in his career. Nicolás Massú, the Chilean coach who joined up with Thiem a month before he beat Federer at Indian Wells last year, said: “I always loved his tennis. His shots, the speed of the ball, it is amazing. He’s the complete player.” He sees Thiem taking his basic game – including the one-handed backhand fashioned by his previous coach Günter Bresnik four years ago – on to different surfaces and lifting his performance against the best players. “Reaching two slam finals [both on the clay of Roland Garros against Rafael Nadal], it helps, for sure. Sometimes it doesn’t matter which slam, because the surface changes. But the experience is important, when you play against the best players in the world.” So Djokovic has good reason to be wary of his assured and single-minded opponent, whose impressive semi-final win over his rival and friend, Alexander Zverev, was loaded with the usual cross-border baggage that exists in sport between their countries. To have beaten Nadal in the quarter-finals and then lost to a younger opponent from Germany would have been unpalatable. Now he reaches higher still and his determination will surely not be lost on Djokovic. When Thiem decided at the start of this tournament that his brief association with Thomas Muster was not bearing fruit – confirmed when he was pushed to five sets in the second round by the unseeded Australian Alex Bolt – he cut him from the team. It seemed ruthless and hasty from the outside but it was his decision, with input from his father, Wolfgang, himself a coach. “We had some meetings in Vienna [in November],” Thiem Sr revealed on Friday, “when we were thinking to add him for certain tournaments, especially for his experience, because he won the French Open and was world No 1. He’s also Austrian. “But after two weeks here [when Thiem won one of his three matches in the ATP Cup in Sydney], Dominic said: ‘It doesn’t fit.’ He had experience and he was a really good player but, for me, the most important thing is that the coach understands what the player needs and not that the coach wants to make a copy of himself. “Dominic is already 26 years old, so he has his personality. This was the main point. Dominic needs someone who gives him space to develop, to play his game. He also needs advice, but short. “If you have someone who says too much, who is too much into it, then it doesn’t work. Hopefully he’s mature enough now. It was unlucky that it was during a grand slam tournament. On the other side, you have to try it out in such an important tournament. There were no bad words. It didn’t work and that’s it.” As Massu sees it, Thiem was right to end his relationship with Muster, Austria’s finest player of the Open era. “The most important thing is confidence. You are alone in this sport. You have to take decisions.” The decisions he must take on Sunday will be more instant: whether to move inside the court against Djokovic’s serve, say, or stay rooted to the baseline, from where he not only generates awesome power, but can move laterally to better handle the Serb’s quick change of angle. While Thiem has taken a few matches to hit a rhythm, Djokovic has been on fire from the start. His only minor scare arrived in the first round, when his concentration lapsed for a set against the dangerous Jan-Lennard Struff. He did not drop a set after that and having to dig himself out of a hole in the first set of his semi-final against Federer reminded him of the struggle. That three-set win was important in many ways, not the least because it sent the message out to Federer that his tally of 20 majors is under threat. Djokovic would move to 17 slam titles, two behind Nadal, were he to beat Thiem. For now, he has to worry about Thiem (or not, if the signals are wrong, although complacency has never been his problem). Keeping the title would return Djokovic to No 1 in the world above Nadal and after his scorching start to the year in the inaugural ATP Cup he would be providing the sort of platform that underpinned his greatest season, in 2011. It would be asking a lot to expect Djokovic to string together 41 wins in a row, including a combined 10-1 log against Federer and Nadal, but if fit and motivated he remains the best player in the world on every surface but clay.