Buveur D’Air is making a good recovery from the shocking foot injury he sustained at Newcastle in November and is expected to resume his career in the next jumps season. Nicky Henderson, his trainer, shared the news at his traditional pre-Cheltenham media morning where, had the horse been just a little bit more lucky, he would have been one of the most talked‑about animals and a probable favourite for the Champion Hurdle. An accident at the second-last obstacle of the Fighting Fifth Hurdle caused Buveur D’Air’s injury and has kept him on the sidelines since. A splinter of wood several inches long became lodged in one of his front hooves after he bashed through the top of the hurdle and remained in place as he took several strides on landing. The pain is believed to have contributed to his shock defeat at odds of 2-13 that day. As the splinter damaged an especially sensitive part of the hoof known as the coronet band, there have been fears that Buveur D’Air’s racing days could be over. But Henderson said the injury is healing well and the horse is in good form and being prepared for a long summer break at the Irish stud of his owner, JP McManus. “He’s got a lot of growing over of the hoof to do but he’s got all summer to do that,” the trainer said. While that incident robbed Henderson of his most obvious Champion Hurdle contender, he has remarkably assembled a team of five for the race at the Festival next month, headed by Epatante and Pentland Hills, currently the first two in the betting. Call Me Lord, Fusil Raffles and Verdana Blue may also line up, prompting a suggestion that Henderson might emulate Michael Dickinson’s Gold Cup feat of 1983 by training the first five to finish. “Pigs might fly,” retorted the trainer, who is always at his most fearful of things going wrong with the Festival just three weeks away. “We’ll probably have a game in the yard, we always do something like that: ‘Name the order they finish in.’ I suspect nobody’ll get it right. But they’re all in good form. As the impressive winner of the Christmas Hurdle, Epatante’s chance needs little elaboration. Some point to her flop at the last Festival, when supposedly one of Henderson’s best chances, as evidence that she cannot act around Cheltenham, but the trainer believes she was undermined by the flu-related need to vaccinate the previous month, which he thinks affected four or five of his runners a year ago. Henderson does not hide his affection for Pentland Hills, the Triumph winner last year but winless this season. His palate has been cauterised in an effort to ensure his clean‑windedness. “I doubt if it’ll make any difference. But there’s just something there. Both times he’s come to win his race and hasn’t finished it off as well as it looked as if he was going to.” Musselburgh2.00 Oscar Clouds 2.30 First Account 3.00 Nineohtwooneoh (nap) 3.35 Duke Of Navan (nb) 4.05 Dear Sire 4.35 Dr Hooves 5.05 Grumpy McGrumpfaceSouthwell5.30 Luscifer 6.00 Loulin 6.30 Zapper Cass 7.00 Moonraker 7.30 Stormy Bay 8.00 Accessor Fusil Raffles has also had a downbeat season but Henderson hopes he can persuade racing’s rulers to restage the Kingwell Hurdle, lost with Wincanton’s card last weekend, at Kempton on Saturday, which would allow him to have a trial race. The trainer put in a good word for each of his Champion contenders but Sir Anthony McCoy, prowling the Lambourn yard unseen by most reporters, said: “There’s only one horse in that race,” a reference to Epatante, who carries the colours of his longstanding employer, JP McManus. Altior has just been ticking over since his recent win at Newbury but Henderson has every hope of another Champion Chase success. He also has a live Gold Cup contender in Santini and passed on word from the jockey Daryl Jacob that Bristol De Mai was thought to be near the top of his game when beaten by Santini last month. “There’ll be a lot of improvement on that run,” the trainer said. “He’s come back bouncing.” He dodged a request to name his best chance but said he hoped Shishkin would settle his nerves by winning the Festival’s first race, the Supreme Novice Hurdle.