Sir Elton John has said he is “deeply upset and sorry” for cutting short a concert in New Zealand after being diagnosed with a mild form of pneumonia. The musician, 72, was performing at Auckland’s Mount Smart Stadium on Sunday when he lost his voice and broke down in tears on stage. In footage shared by fans on social media, he is seen crying as he is escorted from the stage while thousands of concertgoers give him a standing ovation. John posted on Instagram a short while later: “I want to thank everyone who attended tonight’s gig in Auckland. I was diagnosed with walking pneumonia earlier today, but I was determined to give you the best show humanly possible. “I played and sang my heart out, until my voice could sing no more. I’m disappointed, deeply upset and sorry. I gave it all I had. “Thank you so much for your extraordinary support and all the love you showed me during tonight’s performance. I am eternally grateful. Love, Elton xx.” According to one fan on social media, the singer had told the audience earlier in the show: “My voice has completely gone, I’m so sorry.” He was tended to by a medic for about five minutes earlier in the set and continued to play before he was forced to stop. The American Lung Association describes walking pneumonia as a “non-medical term for a mild case of pneumonia”. Generally called atypical pneumonia, it can be caused by bacteria or viruses; symptoms, including a cough, fever, chest pain, mild chills and a headache, are similar to that of a bad cold. Symptoms are usually mild enough for a sufferer to be able to continue their daily activities. Lesley Warwick, from Auckland, who attended the concert, told PA Media: “I was so sad for Sir Elton – the show was fantastic and he gave it everything he had. Before his first song he forewarned the audience that he had been diagnosed with walking pneumonia earlier in the day but he was going to give it his best shot to get through the show. “Kiwis are a very understanding and compassionate lot – he was given a standing ovation as he left the stage. Don’t Go Breaking My Heart played and the audience sang the lyrics as he left.” John was due to perform two more concerts in Auckland on Tuesday and Thursday as part of his last tour, Farewell Yellow Brick Road. His Auckland show came less than a week after he won an Oscar along with his longtime writing partner, Bernie Taupin, for best original song for their Rocketman track (I’m Gonna) Love Me Again.