Israel Folau’s return to rugby began with a try-scoring debut for Catalans Dragons. The Australian scored with his first touch and had French supporters on their feet every time he had possession in his side’s 36-18 defeat of Castleford, but there was no escape from controversy as there were reports a visiting fan was prevented from flying a rainbow flag. The 30-year-old Folau’s religious views on homosexuality led to him being banned from rugby union in Australia but he made an immediate impact as he sought to restart his playing career in Super League. “That’s what we want from Israel, nothing else,” said the Dragons coach, Steve McNamara. “We have signed a very talented player and he showed that today. Everybody deserves a second chance. “There has been a lot of media attention on the club this week and I am pleased with the way the players went about their job. I hope we can move on now and just concentrate on the Rugby League. “The plan all along was to get him on the field and play the game. We’ll look at the way we deal with all the other issues later. When I sign a player I judge him on his playing abilities, not on his religious or political beliefs.” McNamara denied any knowledge of allegations that a Castleford supporter was stopped from displaying a rainbow flag at the stadium and a club spokesman said he, too, was unaware of any issues. Any attempts by Castleford to steal the headlines were thwarted by the Dragons as early as the second minute when James Maloney found a gap for Sam Tomkins to stride behind the posts. Then Folau collected a high kick from the heavens, delivered by Josh Drinkwater, to touch down, with Maloney’s conversion making it 12-0 on six minutes. Derrell Olpherts hit back with an 80-metre dash from a clever in-goal collect and restart by the scrum-half Danny Richardson, who converted. A Maloney penalty in front of the posts on 24 minutes put Les Dracs back on track and, 10 minutes from half-time, Tomkins fielded a high kick 10 metres from his own line and found winger Fouad Yaha. He raced 60 metres and released the centre Samisoni Langi for a stunning strike. A Cheyse Blair try and Richardson’s conversion made it 20-12 at the break but after half-time the Dragons capitalised on a penalty 20 metres out and Tomkins twisted and turned over the line, Maloney scraping the post with his conversion. Olpherts was sent to the sin-bin for delaying a quick restart and 12-man Castleford struggled. When Tomkins struck on the left to release Langi, it was Yaha who again took advantage. James Clare clawed back some points for the Tigers, with Richardson adding the conversion to make it 30-18, but Sam Tomkins scored a late try, with Maloney’s conversion wrapping things up at 36-18. Catalans now have a two-week hiatus because of their postponed fixture against St Helens, who face Sydney Roosters in the World Club Challenge on Saturday, although the Dragons are trying to rearrange their delayed match against Wakefield Trinity for some time next week. As for Castleford’s coach, Daryl Powell, he was pragmatic about the defeat. “It had nothing to do with the media hype around this game,” he said. “We just got beat by a stronger performance by a well-organised team tonight. Catalans are a good side and it’s always difficult coming here but tonight they were by far the better team.”