In the past I shared Simon Jenkins’ admiration for the “raw vitality of America’s constitution” but, in the light of recent events, I cannot agree with his assertion that “it works. It keeps the melting pot stirred, and above all it sustains a stable nation” (It wasn’t the Senate that saved Trump, Journal, 7 February). In former years the separation of powers enabled the legislature to act as a formidable check on presidential power, but last week the Senate’s pusillanimous acquittal of the president demonstrated that this is no longer the case. Theoretically, the federal judiciary can also act as a major check on the executive. However, under Trump and his allies in the Senate, the federal courts are becoming overwhelmingly conservative, a tendency due to be further advanced if, as seems most likely, he is re-elected. In fact the US constitution, like ours, is proving to be deeply flawed. To add to the problems noted above there is the second amendment – an archaic remnant from an earlier age that facilitates the gun carnage on America’s streets. And what of representation in the Senate that gives two seats to Montana, with a population of little more than a million, and the same to California, with a population of close to 40 million?Dr David MervinEmeritus reader in politics, University of Warwick • The US constitution relies on reasonable people behaving reasonably, whereas Trump and his inner circle continue to demonstrate that unreasonable people behaving unreasonably can get away with a lot if they shamelessly ignore conventions and do violence to the truth. But the Trump years are merely an extreme variant on a political system that is corrupt to its core. America is run by big oil, big pharma and other huge conglomerates whose money buys the political decisions that suit them through lobbying. How else can American gun laws, crafted in the days of flintlock muskets, be explained when there is overwhelming evidence that they give rise to horrendous acts of violence? Supreme court judges (and others) are appointed on political grounds, and can create warped judgments for a generation or more. Simon Jenkins at least recognises that the electoral college system has long outlived any usefulness it may have had, when California and Wyoming each have two senators. Our own unwritten constitution is equally flawed but in different ways, as is currently being amply demonstrated by the government. Alan HealeyBaschurch, Shropshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition