You might have hoped that any commentary around a new drama about Nazis trying to establish a fourth Reich in modern-day America would not need include the word “timely”. But we are where we are. Hunters (Amazon Prime) is that timely, too-resonant series. Created by newcomer David Weil and executive produced by comedy and horror specialist Jordan Peele, it was inspired by the real-life Nazi hunters of the mid-20th century and Operation Paperclip, the US government’s covert recruitment after the war of around 1,600 German scientists, engineers and technicians – including many former Nazis – to try and gain the US an edge over the Soviets in the cold war and the space race. Set in 1977 New York, during the Summer of Sam, it tells the tale of supersmart young Jewish Brooklynite Jonah Heidelbaum (Logan Lerman), who has set aside dreams of college to work and deal weed to support the beloved grandmother (Jeannie Berlin) with whom he lives. We first see him passionately debating the nature v nurture origins of Darth Vader’s diabolism as he and his friends leave a showing of Star Wars, which is handy as he will soon be caught up in 10 episodes of prestige TV exploring similar issues. When his grandmother is killed by a masked intruder she seems to know (“You can’t hide,” Jonah hears her say before she is shot), Jonah is taken under the wing of none other than Al Pacino. Pacino plays Meyer Offerman, a friend of the grandmother’s and a fellow concentration camp survivor who had saved her life when their ghetto was liquidated. He is also, it emerges – if you have managed to avoid all the publicity around Pacino’s new TV role – the leader of a motley band of trackers-down and killers of any Nazis who survived the war and made new homes in the US. Woven around this main plot strand is the investigation of the murder in Cape Canaveral of an elderly Nasa scientist, gassed in her own shower. Millie Malone (Jerrika Hinton) is a black, female FBI agent suffering all the travails that come with working for a white boys’ club in late 70s America, and is given the case mainly to get her out of her boss’s hair. Meanwhile, in suburban Maryland, an outbreak of stylised violence occurs when the undersecretary of state, barbecuing in preparation for a poolside party, is recognised by a guest’s new girlfriend as “the butcher of Arlem”. As he is played by the ineffably creepy Dylan Baker (whose magnificent turn as suspected killer Colin Sweeney in The Good Wife left a slime trail across the mind of anyone who saw it), there is no question of mistaken identity. Then he pulls out a gun and shoots everyone dead. “I’m so glad I didn’t gas you in the camp,” he sneers before he murders his unmasker. “This is so much more delicious. What a hungry boy I’ve been. We’ve all been.” Herein lies the problem with Hunters. It’s too cool and self-conscious for its own good, and seems to revel in any and all deaths on screen, regardless of whether the victims are “guilty” or not. You assume, because of the subject matter, that knotty questions about whether it is possible to be a righteous killer, a good man who murders to good ends, will be raised – but there is little sign by the end of the first 90-minute episode that this is so. Hunters’ part-pulp sensibility frequently veers into hamminess – and that’s on top of the discomfort arising from taking this approach to a historical trauma the size, weight and fathomless depth of the Holocaust. This misjudgment is perhaps of a piece with the decision to cast Pacino as Offerman, over any number of equally qualified big-name Jewish actors. It’s not wrong, in any ineluctable sense but it does inspire a fleeting sense of unease and a feeling that moral duties may not be being discharged as fully as they should. A similar anxiety arises during what we’ll call the chess scene – a flashback to an elaborate atrocity in Auschwitz recounted by Offerman to teach Jonah a slightly obscure life lesson. I’ve done as much research as time and emotional resources will allow and it seems to be a horror invented – in quite some detail – for the story. Is this OK? In an already questionable setting, my gut instinct is that it’s not. It felt like exploitation – maybe fetishisation – and part of a cloud of doubt that settles over the whole.