Rachael Healy Tue 4 Feb 2020 15.34 GMT


Last modified on Tue 4 Feb 2020 17.20 GMT Anyone who’s had a night out in Newcastle knows it’s friendly, fun and feels as if anything could happen. The comedy here is no different. Tyneside has given us Ross Noble, Sarah Millican, Lauren Pattison and, for those of a certain age, Ant and Dec’s sketches on SMTV Live. To kick off the Guardian’s new series about regional senses of humour, I’m here to watch Your Aunt Fanny, an all-female sketch group who are rising stars of Newcastle’s comedy scene. The seven met on a youth programme at Live theatre and found they all had the same sense of humour. Each show is, they say, “a mint night out … and people might leave a little bit less sexist”. Their sketches draw on real encounters and overheard conversations, giving audiences a flavour of local characters, while “always punching up”. You’ll meet a couple of old Geordie pigeons, office lasses who struggle to stay professional and a poet who’s got a lot to say about her ex-partners. Most of all, like a night on the toon, everyone’s having a great time. “We make each other laugh so much,” Jackie Edwards says. “It creates a lovely atmosphere in the room.” When we meet for dinner and drinks at a pub, our booth is filled with laughter as I hear their take on “nice guy” culture, what makes Newcastle taxi drivers so funny (“They always tell us: ‘Don’t do anything I wouldn’t!’” Lydia Brickland explains) and why dressing as a window in one sketch became Brogan Gilbert’s favourite role (“She looks amazing with it on,” Katie Powell says). All of Your Aunt Fanny’s shows sold out last year and Geordies clearly have an appetite for comedy. Newcastle is home to the only Stand Comedy Club outside Scotland and there are independent standup nights in theatres and pubs across the city. “The north-east has a rich tradition of alternative or surreal comedy,” says Seymour Mace, who performed his first standup gig here in 2000. “We seem to be good at being daft.” He has a monthly improvised show at the Stand and pops up at other nights, including Matt and Hal’s Gag Reels – a film-themed live panel show. Mace is known for on-stage experimentation. His 2015 Edinburgh Comedy award-nominated show Niche As F*ck! featured lip-sync, jingles and puppets. He grew up in Jarrow. “There’s a famous local character called Jarrow Elvis,” he says. “He’s just an old bloke who said Elvis appeared one night and told him to continue his legacy. I don’t know how that would go down in other parts of the country, but in Jarrow, he became a huge celebrity. I love characters like that.” Mace’s fellow surrealists Lauren Stone and Liberty Hodes run A Comedy Night That Passes the Bechdel Test, soon to celebrate its third birthday at Alphabetti Theatre, a cosy venue that champions local talent. “The stereotypical Geordie friendliness translates into the comedy,” says Hodes, who adds: “There’s definitely a strain of weirder comedians too.” Hodes and Stone book mostly local acts for their diverse mixed-bill nights. They compere and encourage performers to take risks. “Maybe [because] of the tradition of absurdism in the north-east, people are willing to give it a go,” says Stone. This extends to their own performances, where they’ve built the world’s longest lipstick, sandwiched themselves between bread slices and stripped off jumper after jumper to a “sexy” soundtrack. Stone says: “We play a lot with uncertainty. We’re happy to be awkward and hold that awkwardness.” Standup Raul Kohli, whose BBC Sounds series, Comic Sanskrit, features anecdotes from his Newcastle youth, agrees: “If you look at the north-east circuit, it’s a hub for indie experimental geniuses.” Kohli thinks Geordies are skilled at turning even dark subjects into jokes: “The sense of humour can be brutal.” But, as with Jarrow Elvis, local eccentrics – Paul Gascoigne’s infamous appearance at Raoul Moat’s hideout or the man who threw a python across a chicken shop – are at the heart of local humour. “You see a lot of crazy people doing crazy shit,” he says. “It naturally lends itself to comedy.” Kohli’s own material plays on his Geordie-Indian heritage. “The north-east is one of my favourite places to gig, because there’s certain jokes I can do that just don’t travel,” he says. Although his fringe debut, Newcastle Brown Male, didn’t need much explaining, a bit about an imagined restaurant called the Pure Raj (a pun on “radge”, meaning a mood, an angry person or something extreme) is loved by Newcastle crowds, but baffles elsewhere. Creative communities everywhere suffer from the pull of London, and Newcastle’s no different. Kohli and Hodes split their time between the two but feel loyal to the north-east. “People don’t forget Newcastle, they always come back,” says Hodes. Mace has lived and worked in London and Manchester, but came back to Newcastle around a decade ago. “A lot of talent outside London gets ignored,” he says. Newcastle has “a sense of community and support”, he thinks. Stone, who is originally from London, says: “It’s generous up here … people are more willing to be excited about each other’s work.” Channel 4 recently commissioned a series of comedy shorts here, bringing together comedians, producers and film-makers from around town. Kohli’s first of three is out now, while Your Aunt Fanny’s sketch will be released soon. The group are writing their next show, Muff Said. Much of their work has been inspired by the people of Newcastle and they say they will continue to challenge Geordie stereotypes. “We enjoy celebrating our identities – that sometimes involves laughing at yourself,” says Edwards. Her troupe-mate Matilda Neill agrees: “That’s quite a Geordie thing – you don’t take yourself too seriously, but you also have a toughness and a confidence. You laugh at shit situations.” Your Aunt Fanny are at Vault festival, London, 8-9 February. Seymour Mace is at the Stand on 9 February. A Comedy Night That Passes the Bechdel Test celebrates its third birthday at Alphabetti Theatre on 14 February.