With the final results still missing, it’s as if the Iowa caucus never happened, largely nullifying what has been for decades the most important contest in the presidential nomination system. Despite the chaos, the Buttigieg campaign decided to claim the winner’s cup based on internal results, displaying a strategic shrewdness that probably allowed the campaign to salvage at least some of what would have been a massive momentum effect from his “dark horse” victory. The days after the Iowa caucus, as the state’s Democratic party struggled to determine the winner, Pete Buttigieg surged in New Hampshire polls and his fellow Democratic primary competitors treated him with a newfound respect at Saturday’s debate at Saint Anselm College in Manchester, New Hampshire, training their sights on the new frontrunner. But with New Hampshire’s primary still pending, important questions remain about Pete Buttigieg’s viability for the party’s nomination outside the safe confines of two states that are both poor representations of the Democratic party’s modern voter coalition. Up till now, Buttigieg has struggled to win over voters of color, and the Beltway narrative has centered around his problematic record on race relations as mayor of South Bend, Indiana, to explain his failure to gain traction. Without a doubt, this frame has had some effect on Buttigieg’s ability to gain traction with black voters, although it’s important to note it’s an issue he shares with several of his peers. But narratives such as this can be powerful, especially when they are echoed in media circles. Voters rely heavily on signals by pundits: public opinion generally flows from elites and opinion leaders down to the public. Once they become set, these types of narratives can be all but impossible to escape. In 2016, I demonstrated how successful Donald Trump was with making the “Crooked Hillary” nickname stick. Public opinion data showed that despite a much cleaner Politifact “Truth-O-Meter” scorecard than her opponent, voters overwhelmingly described Hillary Clinton, not Donald Trump as a “liar”. Biden’s weak performance through the primary, both in terms of fundraising and debates, has been buoyed up until Iowa by a heightened risk aversion among voters keen to remove Donald Trump from office. But voters have begun to see the once-safe Biden as risky and voters seem anxious about Trump’s ability to tarnish Biden via his son Hunter Biden. For some voters, the memory of what the Republicans did to Hillary Clinton via their investigative power in the House over the Benghazi embassy attacks is fresh in their minds. Voters are no longer sure that Joe Biden and his 40+ year Senate record are the safest route back to the White House. But the party’s mainstream seems even more uneasy about nominating Bernie Sanders, a self-described democratic socialist. The question that remains to be seen, and won’t be answered until states with more representative electorates begin voting, is which faction, the mainstream or the progressives, have more sway this cycle. Primaries, even the presidential kind, are notoriously low-turnout affairs. The people who do tend to turn out in primaries care passionately about party politics. In this polarized era, this has increasingly advantaged candidates that party elites find terrifying, like Sanders. But if turnout is high, if there is heightened participation due to angst about Trump and more moderates and Independents vote in the Democratic primary because there is no competitive Republican primary, perhaps the mainstream faction will have an edge. Although overall turnout in Iowa vastly underperformed the historic turnout analysts expected, youth turnout did increase over 2016, no doubt helping Sanders. If support for Biden continues to collapse and Buttigieg comes out of New Hampshire as the mainstream faction’s frontrunner, his path to the nomination will be rockier than similar candidates in previous cycles, and not just because of the threat he’ll face from Sanders. With Amy Klobuchar earning more than $2.5m the night of the New Hampshire debate and Mike Bloomberg rising in the polls in South Carolina and across the Super Tuesday states, it is looking increasingly likely that a Biden collapse will produce a trifurcated mainstream vote, complicating the pathway for Buttigieg, or any other of the mainstream candidates to secure enough delegates to clinch the party’s nomination. In that scenario, Sanders may be advantaged and would almost certainly be if Warren was to withdraw from the race. Ultimately, it may be Bloomberg, not Biden that subverts Buttigieg’s already historic bid for the Democratic nomination. Bloomberg, like Buttigieg, has a complicated relationship with voters of color. But unlike Buttigieg, he has experience and a campaign war chest the likes of which we’ve never seen. At the end of the day, what voters are looking for the most in their nominee is reassurance that their long national nightmare will end and that is the message Bloomberg is selling. And he has all the money in the world to bankroll the effort. Rachel Bitecofer is a senior fellow at the Niskanen Center. She is an assistant director of the Wason Center for Public Policy, Department of Political Science at Christopher Newport University.