Heavy rain and strong winds are continuing to lash much of the UK as Storm Dennis shut down roads and railways and led to warnings of “life-threatening” floods in south Wales. Towns and villages north of Cardiff were told by the Met Office they could be completely cut off “perhaps for several days” as more than a month’s worth of rainfall fell in 24 hours. In Pontypridd, parts of the town centre were completely underwater on Sunday morning as flood water damaged homes, submerged cars and cut off surrounding roads. There were more than 200 flood warnings in place for much of England, Scotland and Wales as government agencies scrambled to prevent a repeat of the widespread damage and disruption caused by Storm Ciara last weekend. In West Yorkshire, parts of the Calder valley that were badly hit last week breathed a sigh of relief on Sunday morning as river levels did not rise as high as feared. In Mytholmroyd, the River Calder rose to 2.8 metres overnight – just short of the three metres that would top the makeshift flood defences installed in recent days. Soldiers from the 4th Battalion, Royal Regiment of Scotland, were drafted in to Calderdale and Ilkley on Saturday to protect residents against the expected deluge from Storm Dennis – and their efforts appeared to have paid off. Calderdale council has asked the government to treat the weather as a national security threat akin to terrorism for its flood-prone valleys after it was hit by four floods in eight years. The council’s chief executive, Robin Tuddenham, has written to the government asking for “tier one” status to make the region the highest priority for national security, putting the area on a similar footing to the City of London, which faces a terrorism threat. In the 24 hours to 7am, Tredegar in south-eastern Wales received 105mm of rain, while the fastest gust recorded in same period was in Aberdaron where 91mph was recorded at 6pm on Saturday. About 170 flights had been cancelled as of Sunday morning, affecting at least 25,000 passengers, with disruption from Edinburgh airports to Heathrow and Southend. In Scotland, two people had to be rescued after their car was swept off the road near Newcastleton in the Scottish borders, where a number of flood alerts were in place. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency’s (Sepa) highest warning level remained in force for Newcastleton and Hawick on Sunday after advising some residents to leave their homes. The Met Office has issued amber alerts – meaning people must be prepared to change plans and protect themselves and their family from the storm – for parts of Yorkshire, Wales, Devon, East Sussex and Kent. The Met Office forecaster Greg Dewhurst said heavy rain and strong winds would continue to lash large parts of the UK on Sunday before moving north to Scotland and Northern Ireland. The M54 westbound was closed at Telford due to flooding, along with the A616 around Stocksbridge in South Yorkshire and the A52 between Stragglethorpe and Gamston in the east Midlands, Highways England said. The worst effects of Storm Dennis were felt at sea on Saturday, with two bodies pulled from the waters off the Kent coast. One man was found off Herne Bay and declared dead at the scene, while another died after falling from an oil tanker. His body was found near Margate.