Welcome back, then, England. Just about. On a muggy, fun, celebratory day in Johannesburg England beat South Africa by three wickets, limping over the line an unexpectedly nerve-shredding finish. The victory was England’s first in ODIs since the World Cup final and enough to draw the three match series 1-1. This was an angsty, slightly tortuous performance from Eoin Morgan’s team rather than a champion one – and a victory almost thrown away by an alarming late collapse. It took the impressively calm Joe Denly and the perky Tom Banton to guide England’s chase of 256 from the middle-order. Banton was agreeably positive at the right time from No 6 before edging behind on 32. Denly went for a fine but frustratingly not-quite-there 66. After which wickets fell in a heap, three in the space of 16 balls, as Lungi Ngidi bounced back from a poor start and bowled with venom in partnership with Lutho Sipamla. It was left to Moeen Ali to apply a genuinely anxious final gloss. He was 17 not out after he swatted the winning runs through the leg-side with almost seven over to spare. England’s best quality was their tightness in the field, with a performance based around partnerships. The debutant Saqib Mahmood and Tom Curran bowled impressively with the new ball. The greybeards Moeen and Adil Rashid bossed the middle overs. Mahmood, who has death bowler written through his action and method, was bafflingly under-used at the end. The Wanderers is a captivating place to play and watch cricket, a grand old mix-and match bowl of corrugated stands and craning tiers, shadowed by the hills and foliage beyond. It was a melodic sea of charity-day pink by mid-morning as England won the toss and chose to bowl first on a pitch that was all beige and green segments, like a section of rustic paving. Mahmood, Moeen and Rashid came into the England team. South Africa brought back Ngidi. Spare a thought for Bjorn Fortuin, who did not bat, bowl or field in the last game at Kingsmead, but was dropped. Thanks for coming Bjorn. In a refreshing change of tack, England kicked off with two genuine new-ball bowlers. Mahmood clocked 87mph with his second delivery. At the other end Quinton de Kock played and missed repeatedly as Curran zipped it around. But it was Mahmood who made an impression, with a sprinter’s run-up, and a springboard action that draws the most from his whippy frame. It is not hard to see why England have given him a pace-bowling contract. He found just enough movement to trim the off bail of Reeza Hendricks and leave South Africa 23 for one at the end of the eight over. Temba Bavuma appeared at No 3 and De Kock brought up the fifty partnership for the second wicket with a beautiful flicked six off the hip. Time for the spinners. Rashid’s fifth ball to Bavuma was a wonderful, dipping, fizzing googly that struck him right in front. At which point the game tied itself in knots. South Africa reviewed. The footage arrived, but with only half the tech. Bavuma walked off eventually. From that glitch: a moment of farce. The next ball was another googly that struck Rassie van der Dussen in front. South Africa seemed to have no reviews left. He wandered off. But wait. South Africa did have a review, reinstated due to inadequate use of the snick-register. Van Der Dussen marched back, reviewed and reached the correct decision by the weirdest path. De Kock once again played with a disarming sense of ease, going to his off 62 balls before falling to Rashid. With the score at 140 England brought long-on up, inviting the stroke over the top. De Kock took it on and was beaten by the dip as much as the turn, the ball whizzing past his airy drive and pinging back middle and leg, a high-class piece of deception. The 200 arrived with six overs left. At which point David Miller began to slash and carve and clip in earnest. He finished on 69 off 53 and looked like he had plenty more to add. England needed 257 to square the series, an overwhelmingly gettable score on a fast, true surface. Ngidi opened up with a wild first over, and in his second Jonny Bairstow took him apart like a man pulling the petals of a stricken daffodil, reeling off a run of six, four, six, four, all slapped square of the wicket as Ngidi missed his length, his line and everything else in between. Bairstow flicked a straight ball from Sipamla to square-leg. Roy looked fretful en route to a run-a-ball 21. Morgan came and went, looping an in-between pull-hoick back to the impressive Beuran Hendricks. Steadily England’s middle-order right-handers rebuilt. Joe Root gave it away when he was set, caught at leg-slip by Bavuma for 49, the ball after the bowler, Tabraiz Shamsi, had moved him there. From there a slightly perilous jog became a stroll and at the last a stumble over the line.