French police searched the offices of one of the country’s biggest publishers on Wednesday for material written by an author at the heart of a paedophile scandal. Investigators were looking for unpublished manuscripts and extracts from books by Gabriel Matzneff, who is under investigation for rape. The material was reportedly kept in a safe at the Paris offices of the Gallimard publishing company. The search on Tuesday came a day after police investigating accusations that Matzneff sexually abused a child under the age of 15 appealed for witnesses and “victims” to come forward. Matzneff is also facing legal action over some of his writing, in which he has described relationships with teenagers, including boys he met during visits to the Philippines. In this separate case, the anti-paedophile organisation L’Ange Bleu (Blue Angel) is suing Matzneff for “glorification of pedophilia”. The case will be heard in September by a court specialising in cases concerning the freedom of the press and expression. Under this procedure, the onus is on the organisation bringing the legal case to collect proof. L’Ange Bleu plans to cite three articles that appeared in two French news magazines – l’Os and l’Express – and in Le Parisien newspaper that relate to his relationship with Vanessa Springora. Springora, a publisher, wrote that she was groomed by Matzneff, with whom she had a sexual relationship in the mid-1980s, when she was 14 and he was 36 years her senior. In her book, Le Consentement (Consent) Springora described how she was seduced by the literary award-winning Matzneff and how this had left lasting scars. Matzneff, 83, who won the prestigious Renaudot prize in 2013, has never made any secret of his penchant for sexual relations with adolescent girls and boys. Nevertheless he has long been tolerated and admired in French cultural circles and was at times supported by the political establishment at the highest levels. Springora had indicated she did not intend to bring a criminal complaint against Matzneff, but the Paris prosecutors have opened an investigation of their own accord. Rémy Heitz, the public prosecutor, said that beyond the events described by Springora, the investigation would “work to identify all other eventual victims who could have been subjected to crimes of the same nature in France or abroad” to ensure there were “no forgotten victims”. In France it is against the law to have a sexual relationship with anyone under the age of 15. Gallimard said last month after the scandal broke that it was stopping the sale of Matzneff’s works.