As Storm Dennis caused chaos throughout the UK on Saturday, there was another tempest brewing in Ealing. The Rugby Football Union’s decision to cut its funding to Championship teams by 50% has caused widespread rage throughout the second tier and beyond. As Ealing Trailfinders beat Bedford Blues 38-5 amid appalling conditions, the debate was briefly brushed aside. However, for those seeking refuge from the gale in the clubhouse it was the talk on everyone’s tongues. “I think it’s disgusting,” says Sherry Curtis, an Ealing fan of four years. “My initial reaction was well, that’s an easy way for the RFU to ring-fence without actually ring-fencing. Everybody suffers. It’s an awful thing to do and a sad day for rugby.” The cut is likely to affect Championship clubs significantly. They may have to offload players or even go part-time to cope. “It’s the RFU and Premiership throwing the Championship under the bus,” says Daniel Jenkins, another Ealing fan. “I think it’s going to have massive repercussions. You have to think about the sustainability of these clubs in terms of attracting people through the gates. But, if you lose the quality players on the pitch, it’s harder to get supporters along. They rely on selling drinks at the bar and food in the clubhouse. The amount being cut is significant. It feels like a disregard for the Championship.” The Championship has acted as a springboard for players to play in the Premiership and gain national recognition, with several members of England’s World Cup squad experiencing spells there. The England captain, Owen Farrell, was on loan at Bedford in his early career. “The Championship is such an important feeder to the Premiership with so many opportunities for players, clubs and communities to develop and grow,” says Jenkins. “It’s going to slash a huge amount of opportunities for young players across the country.” “It’s such a key developmental area,” adds Andy Barwell, a Bedford fan of 30 years. “With less money and less support players are going to say, ‘Where’s my career going? I’ve got to have a roof over my head and put food on the table.’ It looks as if the RFU is suggesting players go through the A league and academies, but we all know there are late developers, late starters. “It just feels a bit underhanded. There are unanswered questions. Does it mean the club will go into demise or staff made unemployed? It’s making it even more difficult to get promoted and it seems like the Premiership is the tail wagging the dog really rather than the other way around. It’s definitely a betrayal. “I went to Scotland v England last week but I’ve come back thinking why am I chasing around watching England when they’re doing this? It’s not in the spirit of rugby.” Ealing have had a remarkable rise over the past two decades. Backed by the Trailfinders’ founder, Mike Gooley, who has invested around £25m, they have climbed from amateur London leagues to the verge of England’s top flight, which makes the cuts harder to take. “It’s effectively killing the dream and it is going to kill the competition,” says Peter Blackman, the club’s mini-rugby chair. “Look at Exeter, that is a fantastic example. They built for years in the Championship. It’s sad they want those doors to shut now.” “It’s closing the sport off to the masses and becoming elitist. You’re only going to be able to access it through university or top-end schools. The RFU is almost cutting its nose off to spite its face,” Curtis says. Sonya Hobbs, who has been involved with Ealing for 15 years, is worried about the Championship. “If there isn’t the investment, I can’t see how it will survive. The money cut was almost a lifeline for a lot of clubs. Ealing have always had that ambition to make it to the Premiership and, if the funding had stayed the same, I think they could’ve got there. If you take that funding away, will it work and can you financially carry on? We’re lucky we have that patron but other clubs don’t have that.” “I can see it becoming a much more incestuous set-up,” says another fan who does not want to be named. “It’s like having redundancy hanging over your head when you’re working for a company being taken over. There will be a mental impact on players. I would say to the RFU: ‘What are your objectives?’ All I can see is short-term financial gain which will destroy development.” Despite the furore the atmosphere and spirit at Ealing remains resilient. “The club means so much. The culture here is exceptionally strong. It’s a community hub,” Jenkins says.