England have recalled Keaton Jennings and Ben Foakes for the two-match Test tour of Sri Lanka next month. Jonny Bairstow has been rested from the squad, while Jimmy Anderson and Moeen Ali miss out for different reasons: Moeen is not ready to resume his Test career, Anderson is still recovering from his rib injury. The recall of Jennings for the first time in a year is the most notable selection, a case of the selectors picking players for specific conditions. He scored a debut Test hundred in Mumbai, and a fine 146 not out in Galle in November 2018. His most recent innings in any kind of cricket was in September, a duck at Old Trafford against Leicestershire. But he averages 41 in India and 46 in Sri Lanka, albeit the latter is based around one innings. Sceptics might suggest these are numbers any Test batsman would expect, rather than a case of a startlingly effective outlier. Others might question the basic process of lumping India and Sri Lanka together as one cricketing landscape, given they remain separate nations with separate lineups and separate conditions. For Jennings Sri Lanka presents an opportunity to push his case for selection not just as a South Asian specialist but across all conditions. “ I wouldn’t speculate about Test matches in six months’ time,” said Ed Smith, England’s national selector. “However, I would say that Keaton’s recall fits with what we need in this circumstance which is top-order depth with experience of playing in those conditions.” As it stands, with Rory Burns missing the tour because of an ankle injury, Jennings, Dominic Sibley, Zak Crawley and Joe Denly will compete for three top-order batting spots, with Denly’s part-time leg-spin thrown in the hat as an extra bargaining chip. Bairstow’s omission is consistent with his status as squad player in need of a rest after playing in all formats recently. Smith spoke of Bairstow simply needing to take his chances when they come in red-ball cricket. “There is a general understanding that players who are extremely busy in the IPL and international calendar, they don’t always get much chance to play domestic or even tour first-class matches. “However, the best plan for Jonny is to perform at a very high level whenever those opportunities come along. Opportunities for him in South Africa were scarce – he just got one Test match – but obviously if he can grab those opportunities when they come around, that is his best way forward.” Jos Buttler retains his place despite averaging 21 in the last 12 months and passing 50 once in 19 innings. The selection of Foakes covers a situation where England might prefer a high-class specialist wicket-keeper. Buttler has at times been a porous presence standing up to the stumps against spin. Foakes made his Test debut in Galle in November 2018 and scored a first innings century The strong suggestion from England is that Buttler remains first choice, with a great deal of emphasis placed on “continuity”. “He is a very talented player and he’s very highly regarded inside the team,” said Smith. “I think there is a lot of support for Jos’s talent.” Joe Root (Yorkshire, capt), Dom Bess (Somerset), Stuart Broad (Nottinghamshire), Jos Buttler (Lancashire), Zak Crawley (Kent), Sam Curran (Surrey), Joe Denly (Kent), Ben Foakes (Surrey), Keaton Jennings (Lancashire), Jack Leach (Somerset), Matthew Parkinson (Lancashire), Ollie Pope (Surrey), Dominic Sibley (Warwickshire), Ben Stokes (Durham, vice-capt), Chris Woakes (Warwickshire), Mark Wood (Durham) The fast bowling is in the hands of Mark Wood, Stuart Broad, Chris Woakes and Sam Curran. Given England’s stated policy of rotating their fast bowlers there is a possibility Broad and Wood might play one game apiece. Woakes and Curran would look to be contesting one spot. England will have three spin bowlers of diverse methods on tour: Jack Leach, Dominic Bess and Matthew Parkinson. The fact none of these spinners is centrally contracted is indicative of the open nature of selection. Adil Rashid has very strongly ruled himself out of contention. Moeen is still not mentally ready to resume full-time red ball cricket. The two-match series offers the chance to pick up points in the World Test Championship, so England will be keen to start well, something that has been an issue on recent overseas tours. Two warm-up matches are scheduled before the first Test, which begins on 19 March.