Months ago, I received some exciting news that came with one small condition: contractually, I was not allowed to discuss it. It should have made no material difference to the opportunity, but for someone who has become accustomed to divulging the minutiae of her day online, it did. Being unable to caption a social media post with, “I’m happy to announce that …” made me a touch less happy about it. In the same way that Instagram has fostered an “If you didn’t post those macaroons, did you even eat them?” climate, it can often feel the same for milestones and successes. Not all social media updates are a cynical display of showboating: we live in a time where there is a lot to be angry about, so we must take every opportunity to relish a well-deserved pat on the back. Announcements keep friends in the loop and professional ones can even court potential employers, as accounts increasingly act as an informal, digitised curriculum vitae. But social media has irreversibly changed our relationship with good news; the thrill of announcing an opportunity is, at times, more thrilling than the opportunity itself. Social media has altered how we interact with everything – fast fashion is booming because of self-consciousness at being seen in the same outfit in more than one photo, while venues base their decor on its Instagrammability. We undoubtedly make decisions while fantasising about how our Twitter followers will react when the news drops. It has been interesting to consider whether I post things because, although I may not be that excited about them, someone else may be. There is an unspoken anxiety about keeping up with the avatar next door in this race to announce things – I almost can’t fathom that when I got my GCSE results, I considered them something to tell only friends and family. Journalists are particularly guilty (see how I still managed to make an announcement at the start of this column?), but, generally, the pressure to build and maintain a personal brand is growing. As personal brands increasingly encroach on our personal lives, the lines between the two continue to blur, meaning a title change on LinkedIn becomes a metric for measuring self-worth. Social media is inherently competitive, an invisible scoreboard looming in the sky. It is pride at our accomplishments that sees us mentally counting down the days till we can coyly post, “So, I did a thing …”, as much as it is a crushing fear of irrelevance. I am, of course, not remotely above it: as soon as I get the chance, I’ll leap at the opportunity to be very publicly “thrilled” by my news. But being gagged has forcibly reminded me that, as the old saying goes, sometimes no news is good news.