Last year something odd happened. Public satisfaction with the National Health Service dropped to levels not seen since 2007, and it was the cause of much political feuding. Despite the Conservatives being in charge of the English NHS when it experienced underfunding, an escalating staffing crisis and a failure to meet waiting-time targets, opinion polls suggested the party, under Boris Johnson, was more trusted to care for the health service than Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour. There are many reasons why that was, not least Mr Corbyn’s lacklustre election campaign. But Mr Johnson’s controversial hospital visits, derided as public relations, undoubtedly cut through even though, sadly, that is exactly what they were. In the G7, UK health spending per person is now the second lowest, way behind France and Germany. With GPs acting as gatekeepers to expensive hospital treatments, the NHS is being driven into providing a fragmented service at a low cost, but with long waits for A&E care, cancer treatment and planned operations. The lesson from this might be that public opinion can be turned towards or away from a policy, however disastrous, with a few words used to distil complexity down to a convincing message. Hence Mr Johnson says, whatever the evidence otherwise, that “the NHS will always be my top priority”. He is building on the Brexit narrative arc of “we send the EU £350m a week – let’s fund our NHS instead”. Repositioning the Conservatives to be the party of the NHS is therefore both daring and necessary for Mr Johnson, not least because his chief adviser admitted that the public think most Tory MPs “don’t care about it”. But there has been no change of substance. Mr Johnson’s NHS “long-term plan funding bill”, to enshrine in law an extra £34bn a year by 2024, is a sleight of hand inflated by inflation. If his cash injection into the NHS is considered in real terms, the actual increase is £20.5bn – the amount announced by Theresa May back in the summer of 2018, to mark the 70th birthday of the NHS. At the time, the Health Foundation described the extra money as “simply not enough to address the fundamental challenges facing the NHS, or fund essential improvements to services that are flagging”. Mr Johnson has raised expectations with his victory. He will have no one else to blame if he cannot prove the “doomsters and the gloomsters” wrong. Last week the National Audit Office questioned the NHS’s financial sustainability and warned of “an increasing risk of harm to patients” because of disrepair in its estate. It’s worth noting that Tory health secretaries claim to champion patient safety against a secretive NHS bureaucracy, a clever argument with more than a grain of truth in it that signals there’s more to endangering life in a hospital than just austerity. But the NHS is so central to political life, it is unlikely that even a propagandist as persuasive as Mr Johnson can render the evidence of system breakdown irrelevant in the court of public opinion for very long.