For as long as she can remember, Shahanaz has been running from cyclones. Her family first fled their home in 1970 when it was hit by the devastating Cyclone Bhola, considered one of the deadliest cyclones in history. An estimated half a million people perished, including Shahanaz’s grandparents. It was a cyclone that triggered a civil war, such was its impact, and prompted the events that would later lead to Bangladesh’s independence. Today, natural disasters continue to shape the politics of social, cultural and economic life in Bangladesh. Situated on the Bay of Bengal, its unique geography forms one of the largest deltas in the world; a dense network of tributaries made up of the Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna rivers, making the country particularly susceptible to extreme weather events. This is further exacerbated by socioeconomic factors, such as poverty, population density and a high dependence on agriculture. The IPCC predicts that by 2050, approximately 27 million people in Bangladesh will be at risk due to the effects of rising sea levels. Shahanaz at her home on the banks of the Kirtankhola River Shahanaz, now 32, has settled in Barishal, south-central Bangladesh, where the cyclones are never too far behind and there are a significant number of slum dwellings. To date, she has lived through six major cyclones. “Moving constantly from one place to another is exhausting,” she says. “Nowhere feels like home.” She currently lives in a rickety hut made from scrap metal and bamboo, which has been illegally erected on the bank of the Kirtankhola River. When Shahanaz isn’t in danger from cyclones or crippling floods, she is faced with the constant threat of eviction. These dire living conditions also meant her son almost died of typhoid. Climate change affects everyone, but not everyone is affected equally. Due to their limited access to resources and decision-making processes, women in Barishal are among the most vulnerable. With high existing levels of poverty and inequality, climate change is intensifying the everyday challenges that women and girls already face. As the community struggles to cope with the rising frequency of natural disasters, girls are increasingly at risk of early marriage, trafficking and child labour. To address such gender-specific issues, Shahanaz, along with 23 other women, have recently come together to form the Hatkhola Women’s Squad. On a cool, dry winter’s morning, they gather at a small concrete building in the middle of their slum in Barishal. Handwritten scrolls of action plans hang from the wall as Josna, 37, the leader of the squad, provides an update on hygiene concerns. Josna leads the Hatkhola Women’s Squad A lack of adequate toilet facilities in the slum is a particular problem for menstruating women and girls. “There are no washrooms for adolescent girls,” says Josna. “When they have their periods, they don’t have any space to change.” She describes the cramped conditions families find themselves in; with brothers, sisters, parents and grandparents often living under the same roof, and only one bathroom between them all. Josna is a mother of three, a wife, and a force for change. Like many women in Barishal, she left school at a young age to help support her family. She noticed early on in life that women were not involved with decision-making and was determined to change that. “Why should I stand on the sidelines?” she says. “Wherever I went before, I used to sit at the back behind the leader. Gradually I thought no. If men can sit at the front, then so can I.” Today, Josna is president of the Hatkhola community disaster management committee for the Bangladesh Red Crescent Society, where she manages dozens of volunteers working to address key issues affecting their community. Her team is focused on developing the area; improving roads, drains, washrooms and toilet systems, as well as training people in disaster preparedness. The Hatkhola Women’s Squad has received training from the Bangladesh Red Crescent Society, with support from the British Red Cross on disaster management and how to be prepared for when the unthinkable happens. So, when Cyclone Bulbul made its way to Barishal in November 2019, the women were ready. The squad was pivotal in making sure those most at risk were protected, including children, the elderly and pregnant women. One of the latter was Kobita, 18, who sits nearby cradling her newborn in a flimsy blanket. Kobita was eight months pregnant when Cyclone Bulbul hit. “My body was in so much pain that I could barely move. I was terrified for my unborn child – I didn’t think that we’d make it.” As the water levels started to rise and swept under the tin doors of her hut, Kobita began to panic. Ankle-deep in water, she suddenly heard the mic from the local mosque crackle. But instead of the usual adhan – the Muslim call to prayer – a loud, echoey voice declared a state of emergency. Luckily, the Hatkhola Squad soon arrived and slowly escorted Kobita to the emergency shelter. “We keep a list of the most vulnerable,” says Josna. “Kobita was a priority, so we got to her as soon as we could.” The Hatkhola Women’s Squad worked tirelessly through the night, making sure everyone in the slum reached the shelter. They carried small children for those who were struggling and provided regular reassurance to terrified families. After the cyclone had passed, the women helped clear the debris and return families back to their homes. They also arranged for local donations of dry food for the needy and vulnerable. Nur Jahan with her daughter Tisha, 10 The Hatkhola Women’s Squad offers more than just a safe space for women to learn and grow. Many are raising families alone, left by husbands who had no option but to migrate for work. Some leave for Dhaka or Chittagong, while others head to the Gulf states – more than 700,000 Bangladeshi migrant workers arrived in countries such as Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Oman last year alone. Nur Jahan, 25, says her husband left for Oman seven years ago and hasn’t returned since. “We’ve been married for 13 years but I’ve only seen him for half of that,” she says dejectedly. “My daughter has forgotten what her father looks like.” Nur Jahan joined the Women’s Squad simply to make friends, but being surrounded by strong, resilient women has increased her own self-confidence. “On my own, I can achieve only a little. Together we can achieve so much more.” Nur Jahan and Tisha make carton clips to sell The transformative work of these women has inspired others to join. Nipa, 20, is one of the younger members of the group and sees it as an opportunity to challenge cultural stereotypes. “It’s not common for women to help in such a physical way during an emergency,” she says. “I feel like I have much more respect now. Being a member of the Hatkhola Women’s Squad means that I am taken more seriously.” Nipa’s father agrees wholeheartedly: “Without the support of women, no family can prosper. I’m 100% sure that women are the future success of this community.” And the women also received praise from the local police. Officer Abu Bakar Siddik says: “The Hatkhola Squad were critical in getting the early warning alerts to the community. We hope this will inspire more women in Barishal to get involved with future search and rescue missions.” The British Red Cross campaign, It Starts With Her, is helping women in Barishal to learn new skills, improve their lives and make their communities more resilient to disasters. Through UK Aid Match, every pound you give to the British Red Cross up to the value of £2m will be doubled by the UK government. With your help, they can support thousands of strong women – and, as a result, their communities – to be even stronger. To donate, visit donate.redcross.org.uk