One teenager wants to know when you’re ready to have a baby. Another wonders if he’ll ever be accepted as black and gay. A third complains about the older generation writing off the young as stupid screen addicts. All of them want to know about having sex for the first time. Georgie Coles, Rosie Doonan and Kylie Perry of Paper Birds have gamely offered to answer these questions and more. Trying to fill the vacuum left by the Just Seventeen problem page, they wrote to groups of young people around the country with a promise to listen to their concerns. Ask Me Anything, an emotionally powerful show, is their response. But something is amiss. At first it feels as though they’re just teasing us, delaying their answers to these niggling questions for dramatic effect. They filibuster entertainingly, bantering with the audience, revisiting their own teenage years through a make-believe sitcom and joining in with Doonan’s soul-baring songs about becoming a mother. We do get direct answers to some of the questions, but although the performers appear to be edging towards an honest sharing of their own experience, they are also evasive. And so they should be: their conceit is flawed. Society is not divided between those with questions and those with answers. We are all flailing about, improvising, making it up as we go along. Yes, you can ask these women anything, but the longer their performance goes on, the more they realise there’s only so much they can tell you. From a technical point of view, Jemma McDonnell’s production is razor sharp. The AV design by the Media Workshop mixes WhatsApp chats with Alexa-style interjections and recorded interviews, all with startling precision. Cleverly, the show spins on its axis and redefines its own terms. The grownups can offer empathy, a kindly ear or a shoulder to cry on, but solutions are harder to come by. Their call instead for a conversation – a genuine exchange – feels humble, mature and quietly radical. At Live theatre, Newcastle, until 8 February. Then touring.