Carlo Ancelotti will demand much more from Everton in time but can take immense satisfaction from departing for the mid-season break with more Premier League points in the bag than Marco Silva managed this season. The Italian’s latest three came on a testing afternoon against Crystal Palace and elevated Everton, in the relegation zone when Silva was sacked in December, to seventh. Bernard, on his 50th Premier League appearance, Richarlison and Dominic Calvert-Lewin scored the goals that improved Everton’s return to 17 points in eight league games under their new manager. Silva managed to produce 14 from 15 matches before his necessary dismissal. For Roy Hodgson, however, the misery continues. Palace posed several problems throughout, Christian Benteke was finally and deservedly on the scoresheet, but they were easily punished once again. Palace started brighter, denying Everton time to settle with intense pressing and sharp passing, only to suffer the fate that befalls so many struggling teams when conceding from their opponents’ first meaningful attack. Ancelotti had been visibly irritated by his team’s passive opening but the quality of their unexpected breakthrough lifted the entire mood inside Goodison. Bernard took the applause for a fine finish but Theo Walcott merited as much credit for his work in the buildup. Walcott came into the contest on a high following last weekend’s late winner at Watford. The confidence showed when he received Gylfi Sigurdsson’s pass on the right, broke clear of Patrick van Aanholt with a quick change of feet and whipped over a superb cross into the heart of the Palace penalty area. Bernard, arriving unmarked behind Calvert-Lewin, swept an emphatic volley beyond Vicente Guaita. It was the 50th Premier League assist of Walcott’s career but also his last contribution of the game. The in-form winger pulled up with a hamstring injury shortly afterwards and was eventually replaced by Djibril Sidibé. Eventually, as Sidibé had forgotten to put on his left sock before coming off the bench. One job Djibril, one job. The glares he received from Ancelotti and Duncan Ferguson for delaying the substitution while Everton continued with 10 men were something to behold. Hodgson’s team, confidence fragile after a worrying run of three wins in their last 17 league games, were briefly deflated. Everton could not capitalise as their opponents struggled to regroup and aided Palace’s recovery with unconvincing defending and errant passing. Van Aanholt struck a post through a crowd of blue shirts minutes before Bernard’s breakthrough and Wilfried Zaha almost broke in behind Lucas Digne as the visitors regained momentum before the interval. Jordan Pickford saved well at Zaha’s feet and the winger’s appeals for a penalty against Séamus Coleman in the resulting scramble were rightly dismissed. Palace again started strongly after the restart and this time they found reward. Pickford was off his line quickly and bravely to prevent James McArthur equalising early in the second half after Everton defenders had squandered several opportunities to clear inside their area. There was no escape from Palace’s next attack, nor any hiding place for the England goalkeeper after Benteke levelled with his first goal since April and first from open play for two years. The Belgium international easily beat the recalled Michael Keane to a header before setting off for the Everton area. Zaha played a perfectly weighted ball into the path of the former Liverpool striker who drove low and hard past Digne plus Pickford’s weak guard. The goalkeeper had both hands behind the shot but it sailed under him at the near post. The visitors almost took the lead when Richarlison headed a Van Aanholt corner against his own crossbar. Instead they were punished by the Brazilian when he restored Everton’s lead in devastating style. Richarlison was played into space down the left by Calvert-Lewin but still had plenty to do before troubling Guaita in the Palace goal. He made the task look simple, attacking Gary Cahill at pace and cutting inside the back-tracking defender before finding the far corner with a precision strike. Pickford atoned for his error when he denied Benteke what appeared a certain second with a point-blank save from the striker’s powerful header. A key save. Everton were rarely disturbed again. Sigurdsson was close to scoring a superb individual goal after waltzing past several Palace defenders only for Guaita to save. With two minutes remaining Calvert-Lewin confirmed victory when he converted from two yards out after Richarlison’s towering header from Digne’s corner struck the bar.