Deontay Wilder controversially taunted his rival Tyson Fury about his mental health battles in a fiery press conference in readiness for Saturday’s WBC heavyweight title rematch, a change in tone from much of what went before. The pair kicked off their final media event with a shoving match. When that died down and the pair sat to discuss the bout, Wilder wasted little time before mocking Fury’s well-documented issues with depression and taking his own life. Fury had previously claimed Wilder’s stock and profile was only thanks to the rivalry with him and as the slanging match continued, Wilder said: “He should not dare to say that he got me into big-time boxing. If he does, I’ll slap him. “Don’t you ever forget that when I found you, you were strung out on coke. You were like a big house, contemplating killing yourself. Don’t you ever forget who brought you to big-time boxing. I brought you back, dragged you back, I put food on your table for your family to eat and I’m doing it again for a second time. I’m the one who sells the pay-per-view and tickets. They come to see me.” Fury, unsurprisingly, took Wilder to task over the taunts about taking his own life. “I was the man who beat Wladimir Klitschko,” the Englishman said. “I gave you your biggest payday. You’re a bum – nobody even knows you in your own country.” Responding to more goading about taking his own life, Fury said: “And that’s the man you take on? A man thinking about killing himself? You thought you were getting an easy victory, didn’t you? Well it didn’t work out – I came back and kicked your arse all over.” Earlier, as the two men walked on to the stage, Fury got right in Wilder’s face, singing and taunting the American champion. That included him dancing and gyrating his body up close while also singing Chumbawamba’s 90s hit I Get Knocked Down – in reference to his impressive resurrection after being floored heavily twice in their 2018 draw. Wilder kept his composure until finally losing his patience and pushing Fury away, with the challenger then replying in kind before security staff quickly waded in. “Wilder is very nervous,” said Fury. “I can see his jumper going in and out from the big heart beat pounding out of his chest. He’s terrified. He’s nervous as hell. He doesn’t know what to expect, and he’s getting knocked out.” The American responded with laughter at Fury’s repeated claim that he will end the fight in the second round. “When I knock you out, go do stand-up comedy. You’ve got a career there. You’ve got pillows for fists and that’s why I kept running through you.”