Even if it makes a novel change from repeatedly seeing Mauricio Pochettino linked with his job, Ole Gunnar Solskjær is unlikely to be too impressed with gossip doing the rounds in Italy suggesting Max Allegri has reached an agreement to replace him at Manchester United. Since leaving Juventus last summer, the 52-year-old has been on sabbatical and rejected approaches from several Italian clubs, but Corriere dello Sport say he has a deal in place to take over an unspecified English one. Despite them having a managerial vacancy since the departure of Colin Calderwood, we’re going to hazard a guess that Max won’t be taking over at Cambridge United any time soon. That low murmur you can hear coming from the Emirates, is the sound of ongoing talks between Arsenal’s bean-counters and representatives of Bukayo Saka. With the club trying to tie their teenage winger down to a long-term deal, his “people” are almost certainly using reported interest from Manchester United and Liverpool as leverage to get their client more bunce. German magazine Kicker say Manchester United had a January approach for Corentin Tolisso rejected by Bayern Munich, who had originally deemed the French midfielder surplus to requirements but decided not to let him go because they were a little short on numbers due to injuries. United may move for the player again come season’s end, but will face competition from Arsenal, Juventus, Napoli and Atlético Madrid. By selling Tolisso, Bayern hope to raise funds to pay for Bayer Leverkusen’s 20-year-old midfielder Kai Havertz, who regular readers of the Rumour Mill will know has long been a Liverpool target and features prominently on Jürgen Klopp’s summer shopping list. Rumour Mill staple Jadon Sancho remains a young man in big demand, with Liverpool becoming the latest Premier League club to express their interest in signing the 19-year-old winger from Borussia Dortmund. The Bundesliga outfit are unlikely to let him go for a penny less than £100m, what with United, Chelsea and his former club Manchester City all interested in offering him a return to Blighty. As they prepare to sell Sancho, Dortmund are one of several big clubs understood to be keeping tabs on 16-year-old Birmingham City prodigy Jude Bellingham, who is also getting the getting the glad eye from Chelsea and – you’ve guessed it – Manchester United.Liverpool are looking to bolster their attacking options by signing RB Leipzig striker Timo Werner for around £45m. The Germany international will not be joined at Anfield by former Liverpool playmaker Philippe Coutinho who feels his future lies elsewhere. Aaron Ramsey has endured a quiet season at Juventus since joining on a free from Arsenal in the summer. The wales midfielder could leave Serie A with the Gunners, Chelsea, Manchester United and Liverpool all keen on acquiring his services. Frank Lampard is lining up a plethora of deals with £150m at this disposal. Chelsea are already closing on Ajax’s Hakim Ziyech and could bring back Jeremie Boga from Sassuolo where the Frenchman has impressed.  