Before this year, Heather Knight had only one T20 half-century to her name. Now she has four, not forgetting her first three-figure score in the format, hit here in Canberra on Wednesday. Her purple patch has arrived at just the right time for England, it seems: Friday’s effort – a 47-ball 62 – was the batting cornerstone of England’s 42-run win against Pakistan. “I’ll be disappointed to leave Canberra,” Knight said after the match. “I’m enjoying batting further up the order and shaping the innings for the team. I try to be there at the end and score at a decent strike rate.” Knight aside, it was the England bowlers who once again got the job done, bowling Pakistan out for 116 with two balls remaining. The best figures of the day went to Sarah Glenn (three for 15), who continues to deceive opponents with her stump-to-stump leg-spin, putting a big dent in the Pakistan chase by having both Javeria Khan and Iram Javed bowled in successive overs following the powerplay. “I’m enjoying it,” Glenn said of her time in Australia, during which she has taken 10 wickets across four tri-series matches and three World Cup encounters. “I’ve grown up always bowling stump to stump, I don’t naturally get much turn, so I like the extra bounce that you can get out here.” Glenn’s performance came after the Pakistan captain Bismah Maroof – who had top-scored in Pakistan’s exciting win against West Indies on Wednesday – became Katherine Brunt’s first victim of the tournament, her attempted ramp shot failing to come off. Anya Shrubsole – who finished with three for 25, taking her 100th scalp in T20 internationals in the process – then helped wrap things up with wickets in successive deliveries in the 19th over, including a beautiful slower ball that told for Aliya Riaz (41), the only Pakistan batsman to show much fight. The result puts England second in their group, with only one remaining hurdle, their match against West Indies on Sunday, standing between them and the semi-finals. Nonetheless, there will be much to mull over for a side for whom reaching the semis was really the minimum expectation. England’s eight-batsman strategy is grounded in the idea that Amy Jones and Danni Wyatt are best utilised up top, while Tammy Beaumont at No 6 allows them to “finish big”. Arguably that strategy failed on both counts here, with England failing to do enough to leapfrog South Africa’s superior net run rate and go top of their group. Early on, England were once again in trouble, with Jones and Wyatt falling in the powerplay – Jones in the very first over of the innings, trapped lbw by Diana Baig. Wyatt was saved from a similar fate two overs later, when Pakistan wrongly decided against reviewing a ball that had rapped her on the back pad and was shown to have been hitting the top of the stumps. However she failed to capitalise on her reprieve and fell cheaply, sending up a catch to point to leave England 47 for two in the sixth over. At the back end of the innings, a flurry of wickets also cost England the chance to finish strongly. Four wickets fell for 15 runs in the final three overs, with Beaumont surviving only four deliveries. Fortunately for England, Knight’s determined effort to prop up the innings had already done enough damage. Arriving at the crease in the sixth over, she shared a 34-run stand with Nat Sciver, followed by a half-century partnership with Fran Wilson – the England captain the dominant partner in both cases. Pakistan will be ruing a number of missed opportunities to dismiss her. Knight was put down no fewer than four times, the first when she was on 32, while Wilson (who scored a run-a-ball 22) was also dropped when still in single figures. Of the Pakistan fielders, only the keeper Sidra Nawaz – whose Sarah Taylor-esque stumping off a leg-side wide saw off Sciver for 36 when she looked in sight of a third consecutive half-century – was blameless in defeat.