Five years ago, the folk band the Young’uns were approached after a gig with a story for a song – and it was one hell of a story. Duncan Longstaff shared the experiences of his father in the 1930s, hoping that it might have the makings of a tune or two. It ended up inspiring an album of 17 songs and a two-hour stage show. Somewhere between gig and storytelling, The Ballad of Johnny Longstaff interweaves Young’uns songs, spoken narration and audio recordings of Johnny relating events. We hear how he took part in the hunger marches as a teenager, joined the labour movement in London, fought for the right to roam in the British countryside and squared up against Oswald Mosley’s blackshirts at the Battle of Cable Street. And, as fascism spread across Europe in the mid-30s, Johnny’s principles took him to Spain to fight against Franco’s forces in the civil war. It is the perfect material for folk songs: the story of a working-class hero, a humble man of the people, full of struggle and romanticised bravery. In the great tradition of protest music, the Young’uns transform Johnny’s adventures into rousing anthems about dignity, equality and solidarity. In songs such as Carrying the Coffin, using the much recycled tune of abolitionist marching song John Brown’s Body, the band place themselves and Johnny in a long lineage of progressive struggles. Bandmates Sean Cooney, Michael Hughes and David Eagle are self-deprecating about the fact that they are not actors. At times they are awkward, uncertain or out of sync with the expressive animations projected on to screens behind them. Gradually, though, the power of Johnny’s remarkable story takes over. This is not always the most theatrical of shows, but director Lorne Campbell knows when to let the narrative speak for itself. As fascism once again begins to stir across Europe, this is a timely and moving reminder of the men and women who stood in the streets and trekked across mountains, saying: “You shall not pass.” • At Northern Stage, Newcastle upon Tyne, until 22 February. Then touring until 16 May.