“Green eyeshadow” and “wearable” are not words I’d normally write in the same sentence. I also recall questioning the existence of yellow eyeshadow. But I’ve changed tack. With a little skill, this Mark Fast SS20 look won’t be lost in translation. For a fresh, ethereal finish, don’t be heavy handed. Apply the green across inner lids and blend around the outer corners. Dip a damp brush in yellow eyeshadow and blend it over the top lid. Avoid rich colours on your lips (a nude keeps it modern) and limit blush to barely there. Pretend you’re a Monet rather than a Rothko and you’ll nail it. 1. Urban Decay Wired Pressed Pigment Palette £39, lookfantastic.com 2. Sleek Nano Brow Disc £7.99, boots.com 3. NARS Single Eyeshadow £17, narscosmetics.co.uk 4. Illamasqua Cream Blusher £23, illamasqua.co.uk 5. Lipstick Queen Nothing But The Nudes Lipstick £22, spacenk.com You’d think because I travel so much for work, I would be proficient at packing. But I am not. My strategy is: throw everything in a case, force it shut and don’t forget your passport, foundation or hair products (buying foundation for darker skin tones and afro haircare while abroad is near impossible). At best it’s inefficient – particularly when it comes to skincare products. When your skincare wardrobe starts to make the Korean 12-step beauty regime look half-hearted, you realise you’ve become a bit ridiculous. So if like me, you want a cleanser that works without taking up space, try Eve Lom’s Cleansing Oil Capsules. Admittedly, I was reticent about using them. I have tried capsules in the past and found most are fiddly and long-winded with not enough product in them. These biodegradable pods, however, are easy to open and don’t splatter; and unless you are wearing heavy makeup, one capsule is enough to wash your face with. The cleanser itself – a non-greasy oil formulated with eucalyptus, hops, cloves and omega fatty acids – is a light alternative for those who find the original classic cleanser too heavy. The oil removes grime, unplugs pores and keeps the skin hydrated for 12 hours – the perfect travelling companion. Now I just have to sort out the rest of my packing… Eve Lom Cleansing Oil, £55, spacenk.com Glow getter The first launch from makeup entrepreneur Huda Kattan is this fine pineapple and papaya exfoliating scrub. Preps skin brilliantly for makeup. Wishful, Yo Glow Enzyme Scrub, £34, boots.com Switch off, switch on The digital age is negatively impacting the bedroom. This ylang ylang and patchouli blend activates areas of the brain associated with relaxation and pleasure. This Works Love Sleep Pillow Spray, £30, thisworks.com Taking root This powerful serum – formulated with edelweiss native cells and ginger root – has been clinically proven to fortify the scalp, which in turn helps to minimise hair loss. Kérastase Genesis Serum, £49, kerastase.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.