Novels set around the Mediterranean tend to unfold over a summer, and involve newcomers to the area (often from colder climes) having seminal experiences, often of a sexual nature: André Aciman’s Call Me by Your Name, Deborah Levy’s Swimming Home, Françoise Sagan’s Bonjour Tristesse. The Med is where young people go to discover something about themselves, or to be set free from some private grievance. In Marina Kemp’s debut, Marguerite Duras is a 24-year-old Parisian running from her past, who has taken a job as a live-in nurse in a remote Languedoc village. Her charge is the cantankerous Jerome Lanvier, a once-tyrannical patriarch, now bed-bound bully, dying alone in a grand old house. The locals all nurse secrets of their own: there is Henri, the closeted farmer; his odious wife Brigitte, who aches silently for children unconceived; and Iranian Suki, bearing up under years of corrosive Islamophobia. Kemp opens in the off-season, when the land is “winter-bitten”, building slowly towards summer’s taut midpoint, its evenings filled with cicada song. The texture of her setting is loosely sketched: olive trees are “silver-green”, the forest’s live oaks and wild thyme “dripped and crackled like fire” after rain. These details, though sparse, are enough to plunge the reader into the warm south, where expectations lean towards the shedding of inhibitions, and clothes. The novel does not disappoint on either front: Marguerite finds romance beyond the house’s walls, and the narrative accrues an easy grace, moving towards an ending that lingers like a long summer twilight, throwing up big questions on life and how best to live it. One of the books’s greatest strengths lies in its descriptions of caring for an elderly person: the patient’s misdirected rage, their loss of dignity. Kemp relays these descriptions bluntly, which makes them all the more moving. After a bad bout of vomiting, Jerome is like “a boxer, strung out backwards on the ropes”; then, asleep, “he looked like the dead mouse she’d once found in the pantry”. He taunts and manipulates Marguerite, but needs her to lift him to the bedpan. This unwavering, unerotic intimacy is as refreshing as it is rare in fiction. All told, Nightingale is a deft debut; gritty, unsentimental but deeply moving, aglow with compassion. • Nightingale by Marina Kemp is published by 4th Estate (RRP £12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.