The popular veteran Definitly Red is among the favourites for the Grand National, following a wide-margin victory at Kelso on Saturday. Now an 11-year-old, Brian Ellison’s game steeplechaser was unlucky to be knocked out of the Aintree race three years ago and will be given the chance to complete some unfinished business with the £1m contest on 4 April. “I’ve backed him for the National,” Ellison said in the winner’s enclosure. The North Yorkshire trainer is presumably on at the 33-1 that was available until Definitly Red’s success. The chestnut was immediately cut to a top price of 20-1, with most firms going 16-1 or shorter. “I’ve always thought the race would suit him, as he’s a proper stayer,” Ellison said. “He’s got plenty going for him, he’s got a nice weight, 10st 12lb, but you need luck.” Definitly Red had none of that in the 2017 National, for which he was two points off being favourite but lost all chance when The Young Master fell in front of him at Becher’s Brook. Danny Cook was shot up in the air and managed to come back on the horse’s back, only to find the saddle was no longer there, having slipped sideways. Stuck in the middle of the pack, the pair were obliged to jump the next before pulling up. “There’s no such thing as a free pass in the National, but he’s got a massive chance,” Ellison said. Alluding to the horse who has won at Aintree for the past two years, he said: “I hope we can spoil the Tiger Roll party.” Definitly Red warmed up for the 2017 National by winning Doncaster’s Grimthorpe Chase. This year’s renewal turned into a procession in extremely testing conditions, Captain Chaos plugging on dourly to beat Worthy Farm by 54 lengths. Earlier at Doncaster, the 13-year-old Gino Trail showed renewed enthusiasm on his first start for Fergal O’Brien, winning for the first time in two years. Almost nine years after his first point to point, he made every yard of the running and could line up next in the Cheltenham Festival’s Grand Annual. Newbury’s card scheduled for Saturday was abandoned due to waterlogging after significant overnight rain. An inspection is scheduled for Sedgefield’s Sunday card, while Chepstow has already given up on its Monday race-meeting. Wetherby, which also has a Monday fixture, is described as “borderline raceable” with more rain forecast. Sedgefield2.10 Amlovi (nap) 2.40 Strong Glance 3.15 Gangster (nb) 3.45 TheHorsechesnut 4.20 The Paddy Pie 4.50 DarlynHuntingdon2.20 Isolate 2.50 Go As You Please 3.25 Royal Pagaille 3.55 Ibleo 4.30Tegerek 5.00 That's The Truth 5.30 George Of Naunton The inaugural Saudi Cup was won by Maximum Security, famously disqualified for interference when he won last year’s Kentucky Derby. He took the £7.5m first prize in the extraordinarily valuable Riyadh race, which has been met with some cynicism and accusations of sports-washing from racing’s followers in Britain and Ireland. Benbatl finished third, preventing a sweep of the places for American-trained runners. Magic Wand, representing Aidan O’Brien, was well beaten on a dirt surface that probably did not suit her.