Last Monday, the Apple iPad turned 10. On 27 January 2010, Steve Jobs walked on to the stage of a San Francisco auditorium carrying with him the answer to years of fevered speculation. “Everyone at the event that day knew why they were there,” wrote John Vorhees, “and what would be announced”. Jobs acknowledged as much up front, saying that he had a “truly magical and revolutionary product” to unveil. “Last time there was this much excitement about a tablet,” observed the normally sober Wall Street Journal, “it had some commandments written on it.” This was three years on from the launch of the iPhone, the device that really transformed Apple into a tech giant, so everyone thought they knew roughly what the new device would look like – a bigger block of aluminium and glass with a touch-sensitive screen. Over at Microsoft, where the Windows team led by Steve Sinofsky were watching the live stream, they definitely knew what to expect. After all, Microsoft had been experimenting with tablets for years: a tablet, to them, was a portable slab which had a keyboard and a stylus. The tech media, for their part, also “knew” two things: the new device would be Apple’s answer to the cheap netbooks that were then the sensation du jour and, knowing Apple, it wouldn’t be cheap. In the event, all these expectations were wrong. There definitely was room, Jobs explained at the beginning, for a device somewhere between a laptop and a phone, but it would only be worth having if it was better at doing certain key things: web browsing, email, photos, video, music, games and ebooks. Then he walked over to an armchair, sat down and unveiled the iPad. And in everything that followed, his colleagues who came on stage to do demonstrations also sat in the chair. With hindsight, the semiotics of this should have been clear: this was not a device you would ever use at a desk; it was intended more for consumption than for creativity. The other significant message was the starting price: $499 – half what the audience had expected. For four years, sales of the device rocketed, peaking at 26.04m in the first quarter of 2014 and declining gently thereafter to their current level of about 45m a year. In its first decade it’s been through seven generations and spawned Mini, Air and Pro variations. During that time there has been incessant – and fruitless – speculation about whether the iPad was destined to make Apple’s Mac line of laptop and desktop computers obsolete. This is a reflection of the fact that Apple’s notorious secretiveness nurtures a cottage industry of creative interpreters reminiscent of the western Kremlinologists who fruitlessly attempted to divine the machinations of the USSR during the cold war – and with about as much success. So far, the truth is that the Mac range seems to be doing fine and is still being upgraded. Obsolete it definitely isn’t. I’ve owned and consistently used several generations of iPads since 2010. What I’ve observed is the usual Apple progression from elegant but barely adequate first release to increasingly refined and highly functional later versions. This was true for the company’s watch, for example, which is now on its fifth iteration and pretty good. Likewise for the iPhone. It’s also true for the iPad line. I bought the first model in the first week it became available and found it disappointing. It was fine for media consumption (video, audio, music, ebooks) but useless for real work. This was largely because it lacked an ecosystem of apps that matched my workflow. Gradually, however, this deficiency was remedied as iPad versions of the tools that I use on my laptop began to appear. So I could start writing a document on a Mac and then continue working on it on the iPad when away from base – something that was really useful because, from the outset, the battery life has consistently been better than that of any laptop. But while the iPad I use today is significantly better and more functional than its 2010 predecessor, it’s still not a replacement for a laptop. Anything that involves multitasking – combining content from a variety of applications, for example – is clumsy and nonintuitive on the iPad, whereas it’s a breeze on a Mac. Given that user-interface design has traditionally been one of Apple’s great strengths, this clumsiness is strange and disappointing. Somewhere along the line, as veteran Apple-watcher John Gruber puts it, the designers made “profound conceptual mistakes in the iPad user interface, mistakes that need to be scrapped and replaced, not polished and refined”. Steve Jobs’s tablet may have come a long way, but it’s still a work in progress. In praise of prosody Crediting Poetry – that’s the title of Seamus Heaney’s wonderful Nobel lecture – on the Nobel Foundation’s website. Listen to the experts The National Cyber Security Centre’s summary of its security analysis for the UK telecoms sector makes for interesting reading. Brooks on Biden “Joe Biden is stronger than you think”: that’s the headline – and gist – of a striking contrarian New York Times column by David Brooks.