It is 11 years since the show formerly known simply as 10 Years Younger last aired. Back then it was on Channel 4 and briefly hosted by Myleene Klass, but for ever associated with her predecessor, the specs-ellent Nicky Hambleton-Jones. These were the days of Trinny and Susannah’s boob squeezes and “Dr” Gillian McKeith’s miracle mung beans, when looking good meant submitting to the bullying instruction of a questionably qualified TV presenter. Whether audiences were browbeaten or merely bored, makeover shows fell out of favour until Queer Eye’s surprisingly sensitive reboot on Netflix. Now BBC One is launching its first one for 15 years – You Are What You Wear, with Rylan Clark-Neal – and 10 Years Younger is back, too, this time on Channel 5 and under a new guise as 10 Years Younger in 10 Days. But has the scruffy old bag let herself go? If that sounds harsh, remember, we are being invited to pass exactly such judgments on the two women in the first new episode. Gail is a farmer from Northumberland and Sarah is a dog-walker from somewhere down south, but according to the new presenter, Cherry Healey, they share one defining quality: “People who care more about animals than they do themselves.” The show’s method for assigning initial age estimates has not changed. It involves dressing the participant in her least flattering outfit, then taking her to a busy public area and inviting criticism from passersby. It is out of earshot, you would hope, but these guys don’t hold back. “Hair needs a good sorting out,” says one woman with a curl of the lip. “Looks a bit dowdy,” frowns another. “Her skin … I can see it’s old and saggy,” offers a man in an anorak. Surely, if a woman these days wants to hear what 100 mean strangers think of her face, hair and body she can just go on Twitter? On Twitter, though, you rarely get a load of new clothes, a great haircut and thousands of pounds’ worth of cosmetic treatments for your trouble. Evidently some women – and the participants are still predominantly female – judge this to be a fair trade-off. Perhaps it’s also lower risk than it was back when Hambleton-Jones juggled both presenting and styling, resulting in a few disasters that still live on in YouTube infamy. Now Healey hands over to Gemma Sheppard, a TV stylist in the Gok Wan tradition, who wears a cravat and dutifully employs the fashion singular, as in: “You are never too old for a dungaree.” Crucially, though, Sheppard can deliver a changing-room pep talk with a warmth that has often eluded her predecessors. So maybe the show has gained wisdom in lieu of wrinkles? Much is made of the fact that the cosmetic interventions are now nonsurgical (the dentist Dr Uchenna Okoye is the only survivor from the original run. She hasn’t aged a bit). But “nonsurgical” does not exclude all manner of injections, plumps and peels, not to mention credulous claims made for an algae face mask that should raise eyebrows (Botox allowing). At one point Sarah is semi-scolded by the cosmetic physician for being “very naturally expressive, and that’s what’s causing the lines”. Good tip there, ladies: if you want to stay forever young, simply avoid expressing any human emotion. When, eventually, the women get a good look at their new selves in a full-length mirror, both seem delighted, as well they might be. Sarah is a season-three Carrie Bradshaw (when she was straightening her hair and cheating on Aidan) crossed with a lesser-known Kardashian cousin; she’s working it. Gail, meanwhile, has transformed into a luminous synthesis of Tilda Swinton and Grace Kelly. The effect is genuinely ethereal, until Healey brings us all crashing down to earth with the comment: “I can’t believe you’ve ever had your hand up a cow’s bottom!” Still, at the risk of sounding like an absurdly ego-boosting drunk girl in a nightclub toilet; Gail, babes, you were beautiful just as you were! You too, Sarah! Some women aim to look flawless 24/7, others choose to invest their finite energies in their work, their families or their livestock. All of the above are fine. Sure, change out of the stained tracksuit if you are going somewhere fancy, but I believe anyone not currently in the throes of a severe mood disorder would do so anyway. Maybe Gail and Sarah are depressed? Maybe some underlying trauma has burdened them with more than the usual share of niggling insecurities. But then, we wouldn’t know, because 10 Years Younger’s stuck-in-the-2000s, “looking good = feeling good” philosophy prevents any more useful conversations from taking place. Where’s Queer Eye’s Karamo Brown with a deep’n’meaningful when you need him?