Brighton have been chopping and changing, looking for a formula that might help them beat the drop. They remain outside the relegation zone by three points and have a better goal difference than their rivals. But they have not won since December and, ever since, the team has gone through a number of permutations from 3-5-2 to 4-4-2 and others in between. On Saturday they started in a 4-1-4-1 with Davy Pröpper anchoring midfield behind Aaron Mooy and Pascal Gross. By the time the game ended there were two up top and two wide midfielders at full-back. In the end it worked, with one substitute, Alireza Jahanbakhsh, firing over the cross that Adrian Mariappa turned into his own net for Brighton’s equaliser. But it was a close-run thing. Brighton are still looking for an approach they can rely on. They will need to settle on one soon. Paul MacInnes • Match report: Brighton 1-1 Watford Such is Everton’s turnaround under Carlo Ancelotti that Europe now occupies their thoughts and not the relegation battle that loomed under Marco Silva. No one, least of all their new manager, is overplaying the quality of recent performances or the calibre of their squad, however. Richarlison is the exception on both counts. The Brazil international produced the key moment of Saturday’s win over Palace – the superb second goal that made it 17 points from eight league games under Ancelotti – and another commanding display that brought rich praise from a manager who knows world-class potential when he sees it. “He has to improve,” said Ancelotti. “He has to play with more consistency but he shows fantastic quality at counterattack and as a striker. It depends on him but he can be a world-class player.” Andy Hunter • Match report: Everton 3-1 Crystal Palace Bournemouth returned from Bramall Lane empty-handed but the performance of Ryan Fraser should provide more than a crumb of comfort. The winger was revitalised against Sheffield United, influential in helping Bournemouth open the scoring through Callum Wilson before carving out a couple more openings. Fraser, out of contract in the summer, recently said he had taken his eye off the ball as a result of being distracted by transfer speculation – “I didn’t play for the team, I’m honest enough to admit that” – but in that same interview he said he would endeavour to put that right. Fraser was much improved in victories against Brighton and Aston Villa and was Bournemouth’s best player in defeat on Sunday. How Eddie Howe, whose side travel to Burnley after the winter break, could do with Fraser finding peak form between now and May. Ben Fisher • Match report: Sheffield United 2-1 Bournemouth Hanging on the side of Sheffield United’s Kop is a large banner featuring a picture of the Blades’ captain mid celebration and a to-the-point message: “Billy Sharp scores goals.” Which is true, or at least has been for the vast majority of his career, and has certainly been the case as United have climbed the divisions in this his third spell at the club. The 34-year-old has not been prolific this season but then he has not had much game time, that is until recently. Having made one start before Christmas, Sharp has been in the first XI in United’s last three fixtures and, though his goal against Bournemouth was his first since the opening day, his all-round performances have been excellent. With David McGoldrick returning to fitness and Lys Mousset providing the assist for John Lundstram’s winner, Chris Wilder has a tricky – but welcome – selection problem heading his way. John Ashdown • Match report: Sheffield United 2-1 Bournemouth As Leeds sank to a fifth defeat in six games on Saturday the obvious response was to marvel at yet another late-season collapse from a Marcelo Bielsa side. But Bielsa gets enough attention: credit should instead go to the Nottingham Forest team who are currently everything Leeds are not: resolute, ruthless and gathering real momentum. Sabri Lamouchi may not preach the snazzy football of his more illustrious peers but he has put together a tireless outfit, who are nine points better off than at this stage last season, and his use of Joe Lolley as a high-pressing destroyer on Saturday was proof that he is no mug when it comes to tactics either. Crucially, though, his team do not let nerves get to them. Of their seven games against the rest of the current top six, Forest have won four, drawn two and lost just one – and that due to a freak Matt Phillips goal on the opening day. But now a pivotal week looms: on Tuesday Forest take on Charlton under the lights at the City Ground, where a win could take Lamouchi’s side to second, and after that, it’s away to the leaders. They’re not out of the woods yet. Alex Hess • Match report: Nottingham Forest 2-0 Leeds Alexander Isak’s start at Real Sociedad was a slow one, scoring just twice in his first 16 appearances for the Basque club following his move from Borussia Dortmund. Since mid-December, however, he has netted 13 in 12 games including against Real Madrid in the Bernabéu to earn a Copa del Rey semi-final spot and winning the derby against Athletic Bilbao on Sunday. Still only 20, the Swedish striker is finally living up to the hype which earned him a move to the Bundesliga in 2017. Having failed to have an impact at Dortmund, he now seems even more determined to prove his worth. The Swede’s form has made helped Real Sociedad to sixth in the table, a cup semi-final and primed him to lead his country’s forward line in this summer’s Euros. Plenty of youngsters have drifted away after an ill-advised big-money move early in their career but Isak has used the warning to his advantage. Will Unwin Internazionale reminded Manchester United what they were lacking on Sunday night, as Alexis Sánchez and Romelu Lukaku both put in impressive displays to help turn the Milan derby on its head. The Chilean did brilliantly to assist Matías Vecino, getting in behind the Milan defence with an intelligent run and then setting up his teammate for the easier chance, despite having the opportunity to shoot himself. Lukaku was a constant danger for Inter, eventually getting his reward late on thanks to clever movement at the back post from where he carefully guided a Victor Moses cross into the corner. If United’s management had dealt with the duo better they could have been doing the same at Old Trafford but instead Ole Gunnar Solskjær is left to rely on inferior players. Will Unwin •Match report: Internazionale 4-2 Milan