In a quintessentially English cliche that a cosmopolitan intellectual might not appreciate, he had a good innings. George Steiner, the most distinctive literary and cultural critic of his time, died at his home in Cambridge last 3 February at the age of 90. He had what was, by any standards, a glittering career – as a writer, academic and public intellectual. Starting as the Gauss lecturer at Princeton in 1959, he was professor of English and comparative literature at the University of Geneva between 1974 and 1994. He also held visiting professorships at Yale and New York University and was Charles Eliot Norton professor of poetry at Harvard for 2001-2002. He was an honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, an honorary fellow of Balliol College, Oxford, was awarded the Chevalier de la Légion d’honneur by the French government and the King Albert medal by Belgium. In 1998 he received the Truman Capote Lifetime Achievement award in literary criticism, and in the same year was elected fellow of the British Academy. He wound up as the first Weidenfeld professor of comparative European literature at Oxford and extraordinary fellow of Churchill College, Cambridge. Stellar stuff. And yet the strange thing was that George always saw himself as an outsider. This was partly a legacy of his family background as a secular Jew. He was born in 1929 into a wealthy family in Paris, where his father, Frederick, was an investment banker who had moved to France from Vienna a few years earlier, having accurately read the runes of antisemitism. In 1940, Frederick moved the family to New York as the Nazis tightened their grip on France, and George was educated at a French lycée there, and afterwards at the University of Chicago, which he rightly perceived as being less hostile to Jews than the more traditional Ivy League institutions. After graduation, he did an MA at Harvard and then won a Rhodes scholarship to Balliol, where he did a DPhil, following which he went to work for the Economist in London. From there, he returned to academia – first to Princeton, then to Churchill College, where he was one of the founding fellows of that new institution, established as the national memorial to the wartime prime minister. It didn’t help that whenever he gave a public lecture in Cambridge, it was to packed audiences In the ordinary course of events, George would have been appointed to a teaching post in the Cambridge English faculty. But he never was, and therein lies the other part of his story: he remained for the rest of his life “merely” a college fellow rather than a university teaching officer. There was something in his polymathic erudition and his flamboyant, multilingual literary style that seems to have got up the noses of his faculty peers. He was, perhaps, too much of an old-style central European intellectual, spoke too many languages, ranged too widely over too much literary and philosophical terrain. George was not the kind of scholar who crawls along the frontiers of knowledge with a magnifying glass. At any rate, he was often disparaged in academia as much as he was admired outside it. “The trouble with Steiner,” one bitchy Oxford don is said to have remarked, “is that he’s clever enough not to have to be a charlatan.” Or, as a reviewer of one of his books put it: “His bracing virtue has been his ability to move from Pythagoras, through Aristotle and Dante, to Nietzsche and Tolstoy in a single paragraph. His irritating vice has been that he can move from Pythagoras, through Aristotle and Dante, to Nietzsche and Tolstoy in a single paragraph.” It didn’t help, either, that whenever he gave a public lecture in Cambridge, it was to packed audiences. And of course there was the small matter that for 30 years he was the chief book critic of the New Yorker, a post that carried with it remuneration far in excess of the stipend of a Cambridge professor. And, for a few years in the 1990s, he wrote book reviews for the Observer. I first met George in the 1980s, when I was a TV critic. At the time, Channel 4 was running a high-IQ chatshow called Voices, in which the host, the poet and critic Al Alvarez, batted around ideas with a panel of prominent public intellectuals. One evening, I watched, mesmerised, as George fluently extemporised for 10 whole minutes – without notes, hesitation or much repetition – on the question of whether an authoritarian political system can produce more artistic creativity than the “free” west. My review included a riff on a literary phenomenon – the Steiner sentence – a formidable expressive work that came, perfectly formed, with an ancillary apparatus of footnotes, subordinate clauses and scholarly asides, and went on long after the programme had come to an end, the lights had been switched off and the entire production crew had gone home to bed. And having dispatched the review, I too switched off and went to bed. A few days later, a postcard arrived from George inviting me to lunch at the Green Man in Grantchester, where we had an enjoyable, convivial conversation. Thereafter, we met occasionally for dinner in our respective homes in Cambridge. It was an unlikely friendship. As an engineer versed in “computery”, I was the embodiment of a modernity that he loathed and, to be honest, I was slightly in awe of his erudition. Yet we got on well and it was always a joy to run into him in town. My nicest memory is of meeting him one day in the street. He was beaming with excitement. “Something wonderful has happened,” he announced. “You’ve won the Nobel prize for literature?” I asked. “No, even better than that,” he replied. “I’ve been invited to do Desert Island Discs.” It was true, and thanks to BBC Sounds it’s available online. If you to want to know what George was like, dig it out and have a listen.