When James Burke, the New York judge presiding over the sexual assault case against disgraced movie mogul Harvey Weinstein, spoke to potential jurors about the upcoming trial he tried to make one thing clear. “This trial is not a referendum on the #MeToo movement,” he told them “It is not a referendum on sexual harassment. It is not a referendum on women’s rights.” But the way the case unfolded says differently. No matter what Burke told the jurors, Weinstein, 67, is seen as a symbol of the at least 201 men who have been stripped of their power and influence after allegations of sexual assault and harassment that have poured out since 2017. Even though the #MeToo movement was rarely referenced in court, the issues it raised were front and center of Weinstein’s trial. The Weinstein trial put before a jury the two polarized sides that have emerged from the #MeToo movement. One hopes to prove that women could be sexually assaulted regardless of what they consider extenuating circumstances, such as carrying out and developing relationships with an alleged perpetrator. The other argues such interactions only show the sex was consensual – it was the women’s choice to interact with Weinstein. They did not have to go up to the hotel rooms. The women are going after Weinstein today because they want his money or they regret the relationships they had with him. “We have created a society of celebrity victimhood status,” said Donna Rotunno, Weinstein’s lead attorney and known critic of the #MeToo movement, in an interview with the New York Times. “We have created a society where women don’t have to take any responsibility for their actions. And we have created a society where if we say believe all women, that means we’re not supposed to question anyone at all.” Weinstein’s trial focused on the accusations of three women on five counts – two of rape, one of forcible sexual assault and two of predatory sexual assault. Weinstein has denied all charges. The judge allowed three other women to testify as “prior bad acts” witnesses to the predatory sexual assault counts, which means the perpetrator assaulted more than one woman. But the powerful stories told by witnesses in the courtroom acted as a counter-balance to Rotunno’s point of view. From its origins, the #MeToo movement has always been about power and those who use it to commit sexual violence. While there have been other trials after the #MeToo movement emerged, such as the trial of actor Bill Cosby, gymnastic coach Larry Nasser and the high-profile hearing of US supreme court justice Brett Kavanaugh, Weinstein’s trial brought to court #MeToo in its purest form. Through their line of questioning, the prosecution encouraged the women to explain why they developed relationships with Weinstein despite having no romantic or sexual feelings toward him. The women painted a picture of how Weinstein promised opportunities to read scripts that could lead to big movie roles or the chance to help him produce his work behind the scenes. One of the two main witnesses, who the Guardian is not naming because she has not indicated publicly whether she is happy to be identified, said she believed meeting Weinstein was so advantageous to her career that it was actually a message from God. “I had given up a lot to be in Hollywood,” she said. “I thought God was blessing me for having met him and committing myself to my dream. I thought it was a blessing.” The jurors witnessed dramatic recollections of what trusting a powerful man like Weinstein led to. Annabella Sciorra, an actor who testified on behalf of one of the predatory sexual charges, demonstrated how Weinstein pinned her hands above her head when he raped her after he barged through her apartment in the early 90s. Miriam Haley, a former production assistant on Project Runway, broke down in tears when she described how Weinstein pushed her down on to a bed, took out her tampon and performed oral sex on her, despite her protests. Though they never mentioned the #MeToo movement by name, Weinstein’s defense team took on a strategy of flipping the narrative of #MeToo on its head. His lawyers emphasized to the jury that the former producer does not deny any sexual interactions with the accusers happened, rather they were consensual engagements. It is not Weinstein who influenced the women who accuse him of abuse, they argued, rather the women wrongly manipulated Weinstein because of the power he held to further their careers. Any sexual interaction was consensual, even if transactional. As evidence, Weinstein’s team brought forth multiple emails from each of the two main witnesses that showed they kept in touch with Weinstein after their alleged incidents and had agreed to meet him again. Haley, one of the key witnesses, continued to email Weinstein about potential job opportunities in the years after he allegedly assaulted her in 2006. The second key witness ended up in a complex relationship with the former producer for years after he allegedly raped her in 2013, saying Weinstein had a “Jekyll and Hyde” personality. “He could be the most charming, informative person, he could lift you up to anyone he introduced you, behind closed doors it would be dependent on if I gave him what he wanted,” she said. The witness would take him up on invitations to exclusive parties around awards season. After visiting Weinstein in his hotel room in 2016, the accuser sent him an email that said, “Thanks for everything. I feel so fabulous and beautiful.” She said during cross examination that the email was likely triggered by Weinstein saying something nice to her. Sexual assault cases are notoriously difficult to prosecute because of the complex dynamics that can exist in a relationship between abusers and victims. Members of a jury may be reluctant to prosecute a person if they doubt the honesty of their victim. There are “all these kinds of issues that have absolutely nothing to do sexual assault yet continuously rear themselves into the issue because they remain underlying within society’s issues,” said Dalia Racine, a former prosecutor and attorney adviser at Aequitas, a not-for-profit organization that focuses on gender-based violence and human trafficking cases. “There is some basis in sexism, in traditional roles, that maybe are still steeped within our society.” In attempt to dispel commonly held myths about sexual assault victims, prosecutors representing Weinstein’s accusers brought in to testify Barbara Ziv, a forensic psychiatrist who specializes in victims of sexual assault and has testified in more than 200 cases, including the trial of actor Bill Cosby. Ziv showed the jury a powerpoint presentation titled “rape myths” and said it is common for victims to not report their assault to the police, to refrain from physically fighting back during their assault and to keep in contact with their abusers after their assault. “It is common – it is, in fact, the norm – to have contact with [the assailant],” Ziv told the jury. “That contact can range from text messages to email exchanges, to continuing to have a relationship with them or developing a relationship with them.” While Ziv also did not mention the #MeToo movement, her testimony echoed the lesson the movement’s advocates have been trying to preach: how survivors end up in situations that lead to an assault, or how they respond to their assaults, and how that adds up to complex dynamics that do not change the fact the assaults happened. To emphasize that point, a group of about 100 women gathered outside the courthouse at the end of the first week of the trial for a flash mob protest to perform an anti-rape anthem. “It’s not my fault, not where I was, not how I dressed,” they chanted. What the Weinstein trial will mean for #MeToo still remains to be seen as the ramifications of the case play out over time. Some hope it will pave the way for more cases against powerful offenders and encourage victims to come forward in the notoriously difficult arena of sexual assault claims. “The system, although not perfect, I think is the best option out there. We just need to figure out how to make it more equitable in … the human application of the system,” said Racine, the former prosecutor. It also stood to serve as a symbol for something very potent. While many men whose actions have been exposed by #MeToo have paid a professional price, few have actually lost their liberty. Jail time as a form of justice in the era of #MeToo has also largely been unseen, but Weinstein’s trial stood to change that. On the first day of the trial, actress and activist Rose McGowan said at a press conference: “That we’ve come to this moment of justice is staggering. The trial means so much to so many.”