The art world has the National Gallery; drama has the National Theatre. Now poet laureate Simon Armitage is putting plans in motion for a National Poetry Centre “headquarters” in Leeds. The National Poetry Centre is intended to be a public space with an extensive poetry collection, several rehearsal and performances spaces, and a cafe, where literary events can be held, writers can exchange ideas, and visiting authors can stay. It is backed by Leeds city council, the University of Leeds and Leeds 2023 – a year-long celebration of arts and culture in the city. Armitage, who began his 10-year stint as poet laureate in 2019 and is also the professor of poetry at the University of Leeds, said that it was his “very ambitious” goal to “bring poetry into line with other national art forms” during his tenure and that he hoped the new institution would “develop an international reputation in accordance with the status UK poetry holds abroad”. “Poetry is one of our most ancient and proudest artistic endeavours, steeped in tradition, history and ritual. It’s also undergoing an incredible renaissance, particularly in relation to new generations of writers and performers across diverse backgrounds who have found in poetry a way of articulating their concerns and expressing their feelings,” he said. He added that poetry needs a home in the UK, like the Center for Fiction or Poet’s House in New York, and that he hoped it would be “a place where poets can borrow or buy books, perform readings, showcase their work, get on with their writing, teach, eat, drink, debate, argue, research, host classes, organise conferences, publish magazines, access the internet and run workshops”. Armitage and supporters are now working to identify a site and secure funding. Leeds 2023 creative director Kully Thiarai said the intention was for the new centre to be open in time for the city’s celebrations in three years. “The serious business of finding the right site, raising the funds and creating something quite extraordinary that can welcome all our communities can now begin,” said city council leader Judith Blake. Armitage said he believes the centre needs to be outside London. He described Leeds as an ideal location, being “accessible, central, dynamic, contemporary, future-minded, people-oriented, community-aware and committed to cultural regeneration”. Poet Sandeep Parmar said she was encouraged by the plans, and the gesture of support for international poets. “Poets writing and reading across borders, cultures and languages have always nourished their national traditions and this is needed now perhaps more than ever,” she said. “A new National Poetry Centre, one that is based in the North, will stand alongside and no doubt empower those dedicated poetry organisations and communities who have been working across this region for decades.”