To prepare for a salary negotiation at one former job, Lauren Chilcote consulted a hostage negotiator. She read Never Split the Difference by Chris Voss, a former international kidnapping expert for the FBI. “I put so much time and effort into preparing myself for going into battle,” Chilcote said. When Chilcote started at her current company, she did not need any of those mercenary skills. Before she even finished interviewing, she knew what her salary would be. In fact, she knew everyone’s salary at the company. And today everyone knows how much she is making as a senior designer: $142,000 a year, to be precise. Chilcote works at Buffer, a firm of 86 employees that produces a tool for managing social media accounts. In 2013, it started a policy of publishing every employee’s salary online in an effort to ensure fairness, including gender parity. Anyone with an internet connection can find the salaries in a Google spreadsheet, complete with the employee’s first name, position and city of residence. But what is it like when everyone knows what you take home? And in a society of closed-door salary negotiations and obscure promotion paths, can greater openness at companies like Buffer eliminate the gap between men and women? The reality is a bit more complicated. Women in the workplace still on average earn only $0.82 for every $1 earned by men, for reasons such as discrimination, a bias against working mothers, and the fact that women are concentrated in jobs that pay less than those where men predominate, according to the American Association of University Women. The pay gap tends to be higher for African American, Latina and Native American women. Government workers are used to their salaries being posted online for all to see – and while in private industry the gender gap is 29%, in the federal government it has fallen to 13%. Now there is a growing movement calling for women to share wages with each other – what the New York Times calls the “salary whisper network”.  In early 2015, the first year for which Buffer documented gender pay gap data, men on average earned $100,868, in comparison with women’s $97,500, a difference of 3.45%. Introducing salary transparency was “grounded in this idea of fairness”, said Gascoigne (current salary: $280,500). “In the early days we were quite extreme in our approaches. It was really all in or all out.” In the month after the salaries went up in January 2013, Buffer had 2,886 job applications, more than doubling the 1,263 it received in the 30 days prior to the announcement. This is hardly surprising: as the spreadsheet shows, salaries at Buffer are substantial. A software engineer starts at $98,750 and a director of engineering earns $179,046. Customer advocates tend to make the least, with a base salary of $60,810. Salaries are calculated based on a formula that takes into account an employee’s experience level and their cost of living compared with San Francisco. There is no negotiation and no bonuses. Courtney Seiter, head of the People team, which oversees company culture and human relations, joined Buffer a few months after the salaries appeared online, lured in part by this policy. It adds an extra wrinkle to her interpersonal relations. Although she considers her $132,836 salary “normal” by California standards, Seiter said this figure can seem high for where she lives in Nashville, Tennessee. With her friends, it remains curiously unspoken. “I figure they know my salary, but we never talk about it, which is kind of weird,” she said. “My parents think it’s really bizarre but they find everything about Buffer bizarre.” At work, knowing her salary is common knowledge, shirking off is a far more complicated proposition. “It can light a fire under you to ensure you’re worth what you’re earning,” she said. For product manager Mia Hamano, having her $147,290 salary online “was initially weird, but if you’re curious about how much your friends make, you’re going to go to Glassdoor and put in their job and location anyway”, she said. Community strategist Arielle Tannenbaum used the spreadsheet to negotiate a raise when she was recently promoted, from $83,279 to $96,643. “That objectivity in the process gave me more leverage,” she said. “I don’t have to wonder if I’m earning enough or if I’m valued differently from my teammates.” Research suggests that salary transparency can boost productivity, with a caveat. In a study examining its impact at a multibillion-dollar bank in Asia with 2,060 employees, Ricardo Perez-Truglia and Zoë B Cullen found that employees tended to work harder when they discovered their manager earned more than they thought. When they learned their peers earned more, however, employees’ performance and hours spent working decreased. What’s more, “people like transparency but only some forms of transparency,” said Perez-Truglia, an economist and assistant professor at the University of California, Los Angeles. In a separate study of 755 employees at the bank, he and Cullen found most employees were reticent to share salaries unless they could do so anonymously. The researchers asked employees how much money they would need to be paid to reveal how much they make to five co-workers; 38% refused to share their salaries even for $125. “They actually value their privacy more than they value information,” he said. Openness can influence gender parity, according to a recent analysis of the effects of the Netherlands’ 2006 Act on Gender Specific Pay Statistics, which mandates that companies of over 35 employees publish data about gender wage gaps. From 2003 to 2008, the divide shrank a modest 7%, to 17.5%, at firms that were required to report their pay data, and they notched more female hires and promotions. At companies that did not have to share this information, the gender gap remained at 18.9% . Wage transparency, it seems, may be just one ingredient in addressing pay inequality. The willingness to negotiate a salary and the rate at which someone climbs the ladder have an even stronger influence, said Perez-Truglia. “The vast majority of the gender gap is related to promotions. More men are in higher positions so they make more money,” he said. “In that sense, it’s difficult for me to think that transparency can do a lot.” So at Buffer, has it worked? Men at the company today receive an average annual salary of $124,979, while women earn $111,615, according to January 2020 data obtained by the Guardian but not yet released. This 12% gap is over three times more than the gap in 2015. One reason is the company’s “diversity debt”, a concept proposed by former venture capitalist Andrea Barrica, which holds that companies can be in the red from years of hiring a fairly homogeneous population. “Early on, we did hire more men than women due to our inclination biases,” particularly for high-paying technical positions, said Gascoigne, “and both founders were male, so we do have a lot of diversity debt”. When Katie Womersley joined Buffer four years ago as a front-end engineer earning $85,676, for instance, there were two female engineers on a team with 18 men. “I was excited because there was one other woman,” she said. “In my previous experiences, I had been the only woman.” Now she leads Buffer’s engineering team and makes $220,500. But most of the 18 men who were on the engineering team when Womersley was hired are still there. In total there are 21 male engineers and 13 women, and many of the men who joined earlier are now in senior positions, earning more than many of the women. The gender pay gap at Buffer is for this reason widest on the engineering team (36%), which is the highest-paid in the company on average, followed by the product team (33%). The difference is slim for customer advocacy and marketing positions (3%) as both women and men occupy senior jobs. For the People/Finance team, which includes accountants and administrators, the gender gap is reversed, as there are seven female team members and one male. All of this means that while the total number of female employees at Buffer has grown more than 65% in the past year, with 40 women and 46 men now at the company, fewer women in senior roles still translate to an overall gender pay gap. A way to close this gap, and the company’s biggest challenge, is hiring women for senior roles and retaining women in technical positions, said Seiter, who authored Buffer’s most recent analysis of the problem. Women leave the tech industry after two to five years, often due to systemic problems such as gender-based discrimination. In Silicon Valley, 87% of surveyed women heard “demeaning comments from male colleagues”, and 60% of women in tech “reported unwanted sexual advances”, according to the 2016 Elephant in the Valley report, based on testimonies from over 200 women who had over 10 years each of experience in the tech industry. Buffer is taking what steps it can. In its job listings, it emphasizes that potential employees do not need every qualification for a job. Women tend to only apply for jobs where they fit 100% of the qualifications. Men typically apply if they fulfill 60% of criteria, according to a Hewlett Packard internal report. “We have the privilege to dig into the nuances” of what influences gender parity, Seiter said. “We need to make sure that all people have the same opportunities to advance.”