Selhurst Park has never been a particularly happy hunting ground for Steve Bruce. Almost 20 years since he walked out on Crystal Palace when they were top of the table in the Championship so he could rejoin Birmingham, a stunning free kick from former Sunderland player Patrick van Aanholt condemned Newcastle to a costly defeat that leaves them dicing with danger at the bottom end of the Premier League table. Bruce was struck by a missile coming off the team coach on his first return to this stadium in 2001 and refused to attend the post match press conference. But while attitudes in this part of the world towards the former Manchester United captain have softened in recent years, he will be disappointed that his current side showed a lack of desire against opponents who appeared desperate to finally record their first victory of the new decade. Given that these teams had mustered just 47 goals between them all season in the Premier League, no one who came to south London on a blustery afternoon expected this to be a classic. Yet with the threat of relegation lurking still for both Roy Hodgson and Bruce, the importance of their respective sides ending poor runs could not be underestimated for both managers. Palace’s slide down the table since they had last tasted victory against West Ham way back on Boxing Day has caused some supporters to look nervously over their shoulders. Yet despite starting the day as the division’s lowest scorers, there was certainly no lack of effort from the home side as they bombarded Newcastle’s goal in the opening 20 minutes only to find Martin Dubravka in inspired form. The save to deny Gary Cahill’s header from a corner was only marginally better than his athletic leap to deflect Scott Dann’s effort onto the crossbar less than 10 minutes later. Even Dubravka would have been helpless to do anything about Christian Benteke’s header soon afterwards had the Belgium striker managed to hit the target from point blank range. Somehow Newcastle survived the onslaught but appeared to be lacking in confidence following the 4-0 thrashing against Arsenal last weekend. Having failed to score for 23 matches, Bruce resisted the temptation to drop £40m record signing Joelinton from his attack and the Brazilian produced the visitors’ only shot on target of a tepid first-half display. Van Aanholt’s arrowing free kick just before the break which left Dubravka grasping at thin air was therefore a fair reflection of Palace’s dominance. The energetic Jordan Ayew was unlucky not to double their lead at the start of the second half when he struck the outside of the post following Van Aanholt’s cross. Newcastle have not won on the road in the Premier League since the start of December and continued to look toothless in attack even with Allan Saint-Maximin pushed up in support of Joelinton. It took some last-ditch defending from James McArthur to clear a dangerous cross from Danny Rose in a rare attack, while Ayew again drew the best from Dubravka at the other end following good work from Wilfried Zaha. Bruce threw on former Palace striker Dwight Gayle in a bid to salvage something from the game but Newcastle’s day ended on another sour note when Valentino Lazaro was shown a needless red card in injury time for hauling back Zaha when he was clean through.