“Why does the president get to give his own job evaluation?” Trevor Noah wondered on the Daily Show of Donald Trump’s State of the Union address, delivered on Tuesday night. “It’s strange – it’s like you’re in the middle of firing someone who’s belligerent at work but then you get interrupted by their birthday party.” Trump mostly stuck to the script, said Noah, which included plenty of falsities. “No Trump speech would be complete without an absolute, blatant lie,” he said. “And for tonight’s address, Trump went with an old classic: that he’s the champion of healthcare.” Trevor reacts to Trump's State of the Union address. #SOTU pic.twitter.com/b0vm3rmqxA At one point, Trump promised an “ironclad pledge” to “always protect patients with pre-existing conditions”. “Really?” said Noah. “That lie is so extreme that if he was Pinocchio he would’ve impaled Mitch McConnell in his seat. “Here’s the truth: Trump tried to kill protections for pre-existing conditions when he went after Obamacare, and right now – right now! – his administration is in court trying to kill it again,” Noah continued. “So him claiming to be the champion of protecting pre-existing conditions is like the coronavirus being like: ‘I love Chinese people, I really do.’” Finally, Noah addressed one of the night’s most viral moments: Nancy Pelosi ripping her copy of Trump’s speech in half after he concluded. “I feel like every year she finds a new way to show Trump just how little she thinks of him and his speech,” said Noah. Last year was the sideways clap, this year, the speech rip. “Trump better pray he doesn’t get another State of the Union,” Noah said, “because at this rate, next time she’s just going to show up and throw vegetables at him during the speech.” Stephen Colbert responded live to Trump’s State of the Union speech on Tuesday night, in an updated version of his Don and the Giant Imspeech segment. The theme of Trump’s address was the Great American Comeback, which is a “nice title”, said Colbert, “but I want to point out: tonight he never actually said the great American comeback: I know you are, but what am I?” Colbert surveyed the night’s attendees, including Melania Trump, Mike Pence and Chief Justice John Roberts, who is currently presiding over Trump’s impeachment trial in the Senate – “yet another American forced to work two jobs in Trump’s economy”, Colbert said. Trump declared that “the years of economic decay are over”. “But the years of mental decay have just begun,” Colbert continued, imitating the president. “Where is Kansas City? Where is Missouri? I’ll never know.” “A record number of young Americans are now employed,” said Trump, boasting of the economy. “Mostly campaigning for Bernie,” Colbert added. In sum, Trump “made up a lot of stuff, like saying that he was trying to protect pre-existing conditions”, said Colbert. “I think he assumes that our pre-existing condition is amnesia that he tried to destroy protections for pre-existing conditions.” At the end of his speech, Trump tried to strike an uplifting tone, recalling America’s ancestors who “vanquished tyranny and fascism”. “And in just three years,” Colbert imitated, “I’ve brought those last two back.” In Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel reacted to the many self-aggrandizing exaggerations and lies in Trump’s State of the Union, though “in fairness to the president, why should we expect him to deliver the State of the Union when he doesn’t even know the state of Kansas City?” he said, referencing Trump’s Super Bowl blunder. Trump’s theme was the Great American Comeback, focusing on the economy and stock market, “which is a little like the captain of the Titanic going: ‘Yeah, have you tried the shrimp?’” Kimmel said. Kimmel also picked apart Trump’s promise to protect those with pre-existing conditions, “which is something I will definitely remind him of when he most certainly does exactly the opposite of that. It really is brazen, how he just says things and then does the opposite of them.” Kimmel took particular issue with Trump awarding the nation’s highest civilian honor, the presidential medal of freedom, to conservative radio host Rush Limbaugh. “Today is Rosa Parks Day, and this is a medal they gave Rosa Parks – tonight, Rush Limbaugh got it,” said Kimmel. “And then, Trump turned his plan to cripple public schools into what was basically a gameshow,” as he surprise-awarded one African American student the opportunity to go “to the school of your choice”. The gameshow theatrics – Trump also surprise-reunited a soldier and his wife – “was like an Oprah’s favorite things show, but without Oprah”, said Kimmel.