This isn’t a traditional Welsh cawl – it’s more a combination of cawl and Irish stew. I like mine cooked just long enough for the potatoes to break down and naturally thicken the stew. I also add a little Worcestershire sauce, because it reminds me of eating stew as a kid – my grandma used to put brown sauce on everything. Prep 30 minCook 1 hr 30 minServes 4 1kg diced lamb, neck for preference2 litres lamb stock (or chicken stock)2 carrots, peeled and diced2 onions, peeled and diced1 swede, peeled and diced2 leeks, diced and washed800g waxy potatoes (we use ratte), peeled and cut into roughly 2.5cm-square pieces2 bay leaves2 sprigs rosemary and 6 sprigs thyme, tied together into a bundle1 pinch ground cuminSalt and black pepper10ml Worcestershire sauce (optional) Put the lamb in a large, heavy-based saucepan. Pour in the stock and bring to a boil, skimming off any impurities that rise tothe surface as it bubbles away. Turn down the heat to a simmer, then add all the vegetables, the bay leaves, fresh herb bundle and cumin, and season generously. Simmer until the lamb is tender and the potatoes are starting to break down – about an hour – then turn off the heat, check the seasoning and add the Worcestershire sauce, if using. Serve in bowls with warm, crusty bread spread with plenty of salted butter. Prep 10 minCook 15 minServes 4 as a starter or snack 50g butter50g plain flour1 tsp ready-mixed English mustard 400ml beer – we use our own pilsner1 tsp Worcestershire sauce260g Welsh cheddar, grated 2 egg yolksSalt and black pepper4 slices sourdough Melt the butter in a saucepan, add the flour and cook, stirring, for five minutes, until the mix comes together into a roux. Add the mustard, beer and Worcestershire sauce, cook for five minutes more, then fold in the cheese and stir until melted. Turn off the heat, leave to cool a little, then beat in the egg yolks one by one, until smooth, and season to taste. Switch the grill to medium-high. Spread the cheese mix all over one side of each sourdough slice – I prefer it quite thinly spread – then pop under the grill and cook until bubbling and browning in places: two to three minutes. If you’ve any of the cheese mix left over, put it in an airtight container in the fridge, where it will keep quite happily for a few days for when you next fancy a rarebit. Prep 10 minCook 2 hrMakes 8, to feed 4 50g butter100g leek, white part part only, finely sliced and washed175g caerphilly, grated 225g fresh breadcrumbs1 tbsp chopped flat-leaf parsley1 tbsp chopped chives½ tsp thymeSalt and black pepper1 egg, beaten20ml milk1 tsp wholegrain mustardVegetable or rapeseed oil, for deep-frying For the coating50g flour, plus extra for dusting1 egg40g milk60g panko breadcrumbs Melt the butter in a heavy-based saucepan on a medium heat, then sweat the leek, stirring often, until soft but not coloured – about 10 minutes. Turn off the heat and leave to cool. In a bowl, mix the cheese, breadcrumbs, cooled leeks and the herbs, and season generously. In a second bowl, mix the egg, milk and mustard until well combined, then pour into the cheese bowl and mash everything until it comes together into something resembling a dough. Lightly flour a worktop, turn out the dough and divide into manageable pieces. Roll each piece into a long, 2.5cm-thick sausage, then cut into 8cm lengths to make about eight sausages in total. Now for the coating. Get three bowls ready, and put the flour in one, whisk the egg and milk in another, and put the panko in the last bowl. Roll the sausages first in the flour, then in the egg mix and finally in the panko, to coat, and shake off any excess. You can now put them in the fridge until you want to eat (they freeze very well, too). Fry the sausages, ideally in a deep-fat fryer, at 170C for three minutes, and serve hot with your chosen chutney or sauce – red onion or piccalilli are my favourites. Prep 15-20 minCook 30 minServes 4 50g butter3 leeks, white parts only, diced and washed1 onion, peeled and finely diced1 stick celery, destringed and cut into thin slices2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped400g potatoes, peeled and diced – a good all-rounder such as maris pipers or agria (we use Koffmann’s)400g fish stock or light chicken stock100g double cream500g smoked haddock, skinned, pinboned and dicedSalt and black pepper4 poached eggs, to finish (optional) Melt the butter in a heavy saucepan over a medium heat and, when it foams, add the leeks, onion, celery and garlic, and saute, stirring regularly, until soft but not coloured. Add the potatoes and stock, bring to a simmer, then leave to cook over a gentle heat for 10 minutes, until the potatoes are soft. Leave to cool slightly, then transfer to a blender and blitz until the soup is silky smooth. Return the soup to a clean pan, stir in the cream and diced haddock, and cook gently for a further two minutes. Remove from the heat, season to taste – it may not need any – then divide between four bowls. Top each with a poached egg, if you like (and I do), and serve at once. ⁃ The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US. • Recipes by Tommy Heaney, chef/patron of Heaneys in Cardiff.