Considering the end of what passes for the Scottish title race generally coincides with the elimination of all the country’s fitba teams from European competition around the end of August, the re-emergence of the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers as something vaguely resembling a force to be reckoned with has turned recent convention on its head. As we approach Valentine’s Day (you’d forgotten, hadn’t you? Don’t worry, there’s still time), both they and the Queen’s Celtic find themselves in Big Vase’s knockout stages, looking forward to eminently winnable ties against Braga and Copenhagen, respectively. On the domestic front, however, what had until recently looked a commendable O’Rangers effort to stop their Old Firm rivals from winning a record-equalling ninth title in a row has finally hit the skids. While the Queen’s Celtic were opening another can of whup-@ss to make it 17 wins in 18 games elsewhere, O’Rangers blew a one-goal lead to snatch defeat from the jaws of victory at Kilmarnock. Now 10 points off the pace with a game in hand that their recent patchy form suggests is anything but a foregone conclusion, this capitulation from a team – whose fans are vocally against surrender of any kind – has left their manager $tevie Mbe questioning their psychological fortitude. “I thought we had the mentality and the characters to sustain a push,” said the man who has well-documented previous in the field of bottling title races. “We’ve got some issues at the moment but I’m responsible for them. I put this group together. I coach them. They are my tactics and decisions. So I’m not going to sit here and try and force any blame in any other direction than myself.” While one of his more recent predecessors was once roundly lampooned for standing in bushes arguing with disgruntled fans, $tevie has developed a habit of not beating around them when addressing his team’s shortcomings. Asked if his side could still win the title, he didn’t mince his words. “Very, very tough,” he said. “You’ve got to look at the form of other people that are relentless right now.” By other people, he was of course referring to the relentless Queen’s Celtic, who put five without reply past the relentlessly awful Hearts. “Unfortunately the way he left is so unacceptable that a constructive collaboration with him in such a form cannot continue … This is not acceptable. Maybe you can do it as a teenager but in the business world among adults, such things should not happen” – Hertha Berlin’s major investor Lars Windhorst isn’t best pleased at Jürgen Klinsmann’s swift resignation, getting rid of him from the club’s board too. The latest Football Weekly Extra podcast is right here and it’s an important one. Meanwhile, tickets are also on sale for the next live show in London. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/02/13-56250-gnl.fw.20200213.jf.announceArchie.mp3 “Re: TV programmes missing out the best bits of football (yesterday’s Fiver). I remember, in the early days of Tyne Tees Television, a match at St James’ Park which Everton won 5-2. Tyne Tees’ highlights show failed to show three of Everton’s goals. In one case, after the ball had clearly gone approximately three feet over the Toon goal-line, Frank Clark despairingly hoofed it into the ‘popular’ end. The commentator said: ‘Great excitement here at St James’s Park! It’s either a goal or a throw in to Everton.’ Professional broadcasting at its best” – Thomas Dunn “I was shocked to see in yesterday’s News, Bits and Bobs that Blackpool had sacked Nigel Grayson. After spending several minutes checking to see if: a) Simon Grayson’s real name was Nigel; or b) Blackpool had at some point hired Simon Grayson’s brother/father/son/third-cousin Nigel and then sacked him, it finally dawned on me that this was just your normal day-to-day Fiver incompetence. It did provide me with a bit of distraction from my workday though, so thanks for that” – Chris VanDuyn (and 1,056 others). “Can’t believe I hadn’t heard of Jon Moss and his record store (yesterday’s Fiver). Given his predilection for indie music, I suspect he would loves VARklife by Blur or the Oasis classic I Hope, I Think I Blow. Although, if his tastes stretch to the Manics, maybe Refrything Must Go? No?” – Pete Hackleton. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Thomas Dunn. Hakim Ziyech’s move from Ajax to Frank Lampard’s Chelsea is now a #donedeal, with the fee potentially rising to €44m. Pep Guardiola is setting some scenarios in place early should Manchester City go out to Real Madrid in Big Cup: “If we don’t beat them, OK, the chairman or sport director [will come] and say: ‘It’s not good enough, we want [Big Cup], I’m going to sack you.’” Having signed Ben Gibson from Middlesbrough for £15m, Burnley have sent him back to train on Teesside. “There’s a private angle to it, which will remain private,” growled Sean Dyche. “He’s still a Burnley player, though.” Fleetwood boss Joey Barton has been charged by the FA after being sent off for a second time this season, in Tuesday’s win at Wycombe. It’s well worth catching Emma Mitchell’s howitzer of an equaliser for Spurs in their 2-2 WSL draw with Everton. And Tottenham have criticised the Oxford English Dictionary after it expanded its definition of the word “yid” to include a “supporter of or player for” the club. “We find the OED’s definition of the word misleading given it fails to distinguish context, and welcome their clarification,” said the club. ♬♬♬ Ballboy. ♬♬♬ Ballgirl. ♬♬♬ Hannah Jane Parkinson. ♬♬♬ Here we go! Nick Ames gets his chat on with Arsenal winger Reiss Nelson. This Country’s Charlie Cooper talked Ben Fisher through his football obsession. Suzy Wrack has found out how Disney can help girls get into football. Jason Humphreys on the Bundesliga title race. Virgil van Dijk was a snip at £75m, according to Paul Wilson. Classic YouTube, you say? Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!