Well done to Andy Beckett (The centre can hold, but only if it challenges the status quo, Journal, 8 February) for articulating the recent failures of the political centre to ask hard questions of itself rather than blaming Jeremy Corbyn or lamenting populism. The centre has complacently stayed in the 1990s and failed to recognise that global economic growth can no longer provide for all. Small surprise that it was deserted in a variety of national elections and in the 2015 and 2017 Labour leadership contests. It’s pleasing to hear that those who promote the “middle ground” are beginning to recognise the need to challenge inequality. They could take this further by clearly distinguishing between corporate globalisation, which has disproportionately benefited an elite, and the genuine progressive international cooperation that we all desire. The centre is nevertheless still key to building the coalitions that lead to political success, but if we want to see a progressive government the centre must recognise, like the left, that it cannot win on its own. What is required is a constructive and radical coalition between a firm, principled democratic left and the progressive centre. This is a point that seems to be recognised by the current Labour leadership contenders, but which of the four can deliver it? Whoever is elected will be under immediate pressure to ditch the left, but this will ultimately result in ineffective opposition. Rebecca Long-Bailey, coming from both the left and north, is in by the far better position to resist such pressure and provide effective leadership. The centre should see this positively and recognise through Long-Bailey’s suggestion that Angela Rayner should be deputy and praise for aspects of Blairism that she is willing to reach out to all sections of the party in a manner that promises real hope.John BirdDover, Kent • Andy Beckett’s piece on the need to somehow reform centrist politics is actually part of the very problem it purports to call out. To talk of a political centre ground presupposes that the other terms Beckett relies on – leftwing, radical right, etc – continue to articulate meaningful distinctions when the evidence of recent general elections suggests they do not. In 2019 lifelong Labour supporters rejected Corbyn and his associates not because of their particular ideological commitments but rather because they are ideologues. In the main they voted for Boris Johnson instead. Now Johnson shows all the signs of being a very poor public servant indeed, but at least pursuing ideas for their own sake will not get in his way. He is at least capable of public service in a way that the ideologue is not. Finally, the Tory party has its share of ideologues; but, whatever they may think, they do not call the shots. Dr William DixonCity, University of London • Andy Beckett says Bright Blue seems “submissive to the right”. I can assure him it is submissive to no one. We have clear centre-right principles, but are proudly and fiercely independent, both in our ideas and funding. Beckett is right that centrists need to stop complaining about the current state of politics, and instead concentrate on offering new, inspiring ideas. But, when they are, journalists have a responsibility to ensure they are discovered and reported on. There are plenty of good centrist ideas out there – from my organisation and others. He mentions that Bright Blue simply proposes more deregulation. But this is based on a few blogs on our website by our thoughtful members. Our main body of work is the production of rigorous and detailed research reports, which takes my talented team months – sometimes years – to produce.Ryan ShorthouseDirector, Bright Blue • Andy Beckett describes right to buy as a “Thatcherite” policy. It was Hugh Gaitskell’s 1959 Labour manifesto that pledged that “Every tenant will have a chance to buy from the Council the house he lives in”. Then Ted Heath’s 1970 Tory manifesto promised to encourage local authorities to sell council houses to their tenants so that “tenants of today will become the owners of their own homes tomorrow”. Margaret Thatcher merely fulfilled the promises made by others.Dr John DohertyVienna, Austria • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition