The singer Rebecca Black has opened up about her struggle with depression following the release of her viral hit Friday nine years ago. In an emotional social media post to honor the anniversary, Black wrote about feeling “ashamed of herself” and “afraid of the world” during the height of her fame in her early teens. Black, who faced serious online bullying following the 2011 song’s success, wrote: “Above all things, I just wish I could go back and talk to my 13-year-old self who was terribly ashamed of herself and afraid of the world. To my 15-year-old self who felt like she had nobody to talk to about the depression she faced. To my 17-year-old self who would get to school only to get food thrown at her and her friends.” The 22-year-old also touched on struggling to move on from Friday and create new music, writing: “To my 19-year-old self who had almost every producer/songwriter tell me that they’d never work with me. Hell, to myself a few days ago who felt disgusting when she looked in the mirror!” pic.twitter.com/lcua4H076t “I’m trying to remind myself more and more that every day is a new opportunity to shift your reality and lift your spirit. You are not defined by any one choice or thing. Time heals and nothing is finite. It’s a process that’s never too late to begin.” Despite its popularity Friday was critically panned, and went on to become the subject of numerous online parodies and memes. Black has described enduring attacks and insults – during a 2011 TV appearance, she shared an anonymous online comment she had received that read: “I hope you cut yourself and I hope you get an eating disorder so you’ll look pretty, and I hope you go cut and die.” Black’s Twitter post quickly gained traction, receiving more than 41,000 retweets by Tuesday afternoon. “I am just so blown away and confused and grateful at the messages you guys have been sending to me in response to this,” Black wrote in response to the outpouring of affection. “I could have never imagined support like this.”