So it is done. On Friday night, 47 years of British membership of the European Union and its forebears came to an end. It was a moment that will irrevocably shape the course of our nation’s history, but in quite what direction it is impossible to tell. The paradox of Brexit lives on. Britain has taken a monumental decision from which there is no retreat in the foreseeable future. And yet, three and a half years on from the referendum that heralded our departure, nothing of substance about what it means for our future has been resolved. Brexit continues to be defined by its champions’ hostility to the EU, rather than a realistic vision of what we could become. For some, it is a new beginning; for others, a historic mistake. Some are jubilant at the prospect of a sovereign nation unbound; others grieve for the enforced separation from allies and from the values the European project represents. Where joyful pride and optimism soar, so too in equal measure do hearts sink at narrowing horizons and a shrivelled vision of greatness. Generationally and geographically, Britain remains as divided as ever on Europe. The prime minister’s responsibility is to chart a course that can heal divisions and bring the UK together. That is the rhetoric that infuses his every speech. But the smoke signals point to a different approach. Boris Johnson, they suggest, continues to see Brexit through the prism of the ideological project he used to catapult himself into Downing Street. Britain now faces the same existential choice it did this time last month, or indeed for the past three years. The act of leaving the EU has only made it more urgent. Is our country to be more closely aligned to the diplomatic and economic worldview of our closest neighbours and allies, with whom we have a shared legacy of beliefs, instincts and values? Or will we try to hitch our wagon to a global superpower like the US, or even China, whose approaches to rights and standards are so fundamentally different to our own? The promise from the Brexiters was always that no such choice is necessary, that Britain has the economic clout to be a superpower in its own right, to dictate its own terms of trade to the rest of the world. Realists who challenge this fantasy stand accused of talking down the country. But loving your country surely has to involve more than harking back to a glorious imperial past. Here in the present, we face tough decisions about our post-Brexit future. The trade-off at the heart of Brexit remains as immutable as ever. We can stay close to the EU, following its rules in order to minimise the economic impact of Brexit, but now without a say over them. Or we can go for a bare-bones agreement of the sort Johnson will outline in a speech tomorrow, along with a set of churlish demands for the next stage of negotiations. The decisive parliamentary majority Johnson secured at the end of last year means he could easily choose the more pragmatic and unifying path. But he seems determined instead to govern as if he were in hock to the hard Eurosceptic flank of his party. His Brexit vision is riddled with flaws. “Take back control” was a great campaign slogan, but it means little in an interconnected world that renders 19th-century notions of sovereignty hopelessly outdated. Our economy is not large enough to allow Britain to dictate its terms of trade to competing economic giants and huge trading blocs. The question is not whether Brexit Britain will become a rule taker, but whose rules we will be obliged to obey. For the Conservative hard right, the whole point of Brexit was to achieve closer alignment with the low-tax, low-regulation United States. Pressure to lower food standards and relax NHS controls on drug prices is inevitably where hard Brexit and a US free-trade deal leads. Moreover, the economic costs of a hard Brexit will be felt most sharply in less affluent areas of the country. Far from “levelling up”, a Canada-style free-trade deal of the kind the prime minister will champion in his speech will widen regional inequalities, already among the highest in Europe. Worst of all, it undermines the Good Friday agreement, which created a fragile peace in Northern Ireland that was predicated on both Ireland and the UK being part of the single market and customs union. That alone should be enough to seek a relationship that avoids any need for a customs or regulatory border on Ireland or in the Irish Sea. Johnson’s withdrawal agreement shows he has no qualms about putting that in peril. A hard Brexit will also give succour to the movement for Scottish independence. The price of realising the Brexiter fantasy of a “clean break” with Europe may well be the imminent breakup of the United Kingdom. Brexit will also fundamentally alter our role in the world. Britain’s most pressing diplomatic challenge will be how to deal with the US at a time when there has never been a more hostile president. Trump lobbied for Brexit because he regarded it as in America’s interests. He saw in it the potential to weaken Europe, while rendering Britain more compliant with American demands. Trump has already demonstrated that he expects high fidelity, if not subservience, from Britain in his approach to Iran and Palestine. Which side will Britain choose if Trump decides to ramp up US tariffs and sanctions with the EU? In the coming months, Britain will have to pick a careful path in the shadow of an increasingly for-or-against-us president. US bullying over the Huawei “security risk” and digital taxes on the technology giants is a sure sign of things to come. The other big challenge concerns Britain’s future dealings with China and other authoritarian regimes such as Russia, Brazil, Israel, Turkey and some of the Gulf states. The government covets a trade deal with China and investment from Beijing, but how will it trade off China’s bulging chequebook with its deplorable record on human rights and free speech? And how would greater cooperation sit with a US that is increasingly hostile to China? If Johnson creates a diplomatic gulf with Europe through the course of the Brexit negotiations, it would be to our peril. Britain could find itself caught between two superpowers without the protective shield of European solidarity to fall back upon. Brexit will also have an impact on our political system. The root causes of the Leave vote are complex and multifaceted, but in some areas of the country it was motivated by a sense of alienation from Westminster and a growing disenchantment with the regional inequalities created by decades of deindustrialisation and compounded by 10 years of austerity. This should have long ago prompted some deep political shifts towards meaningful economic reforms to rebalance the economy and a refashioning of our constitutional settlement to relocate power closer to people’s lives. But Johnson and the Vote Leave crew now running Number 10 look set to take precisely the wrong lessons from the past three years. Like Tory chancellors before him, Sajid Javid is set to reinforce spending cuts. Even as he promises new investment for the north, Johnson is hell-bent on pursuing the hardest of Brexits that will widen regional gulfs and wreak havoc with our manufacturing industries. He will no doubt take last year’s election result as an endorsement of the effectiveness of his political strategy: putting out untrue claims about his opponents, blaming them for events that happened on his party’s watch, and avoiding scrutiny from parliament and the media. At least the size of his majority means he can no longer blame others for his ineffectiveness and incompetence. If, in a decade, Britain is still suffering the ill effects of a hard Brexit, the responsibility will lie with him alone. We may have left the EU. We may have severed our formal ties with its political institutions and processes. But we have not left Europe. Britons will continue to holiday on the continent, to work and study there, to fall in love there. Britain has always been able to enjoy the benefits of its island status, and its status as a bridge between the US and continental Europe. But in unmooring us in an unstable world, Brexit will – regrettably – increasingly force us to make a choice between our European neighbours a few miles east across the English Channel, and a distant and unpredictable power across the Atlantic. We have always acknowledged that the EU is imperfect and far from beyond reproach. It faces huge challenges of its own: to resolve, for instance, its divisions over immigration and population movements and to find the right trade-off between economic integration and democratic legitimacy. But there is no more successful example of transnational cooperation by liberal democracies in the face of challenges that have no respect for national borders, from climate change to microbial resistance, from curbing the power of giant multinationals to avoiding devastating global conflict. Britain’s success and security is no less dependent on a robust and flourishing union of European nations after Brexit than it was before. And so we wish our European allies and neighbours nothing but the best. We can hold on to the knowledge that our ties of history and culture, of hearts and kinship, cannot be severed with a tawdry light show, a smirking boast and a toast. They are vital bonds that, with tending, will endure and, we hope, one day, with good grace and rediscovered wisdom, will be reinvigorated to the benefit of us all.