Pajtim Statovci, born in 1990, is a Finnish-Kosovan novelist who moved from Kosovo to Finland with his family when he was two years old. His first novel, My Cat Yugoslavia, won the prestigious Helsingin Sanomat literature prize for the best Finnish debut. In 2016 he won the Toisinkoinen literature prize, awarded for second novels, with Crossing, the story of two teenage boys trying to leave post-communist Albania. In a review in the New Yorker, Garth Greenwell compared its main character, a pathological liar who exploits assumptions about victimhood, to “another queer criminal, Patricia Highsmith’s Tom Ripley”. In 2018 Statovci won the Helsinki writer of the year award. Crossing is out in paperback next month. Your first novel, My Cat Yugoslavia, featured a racist, homophobic talking cat. Why did you turn away from magic realism in Crossing?There’s something very liberating about magic realism. It doesn’t care about rules. But operating inside the universe of a magic realist novel can be hard for both writer and reader: it’s so easy to get lost in the pool of metaphors. In Crossing I wanted to tell a more rational story. In this book there’s a fair amount of fear, violence, desperation and unfulfilment, which stems from a sense of not belonging, and shame. Was that your own experience?At the age of seven I started attending a Finnish school. Even though I didn’t have my own memories of life in Kosovo, to my peers I became the face of my culture as the media kept covering the stories of tragedy and violence. I didn’t want pity. I learned that it’s one thing to say you are French or English, and another to say you come from a country with a wounded history. To not stand out, I tried to hide my Albanian background [his parents are Albanian]. It’s the starting point of Crossing. The two boys of the book, pierced by the same shame, spend their lives trying to run away from it. One of them, Bujar, ends up stealing other people’s lives, hopes and dreams. We can’t pin him down. He’s a victim but also an aggressor…One of the biggest challenges in creating this shape-shifting, trickster-like character was: how much can the reader digest? It’s sad that it’s rather common for victims of oppression to adapt to it. It takes so much more strength to fight for what is right, and many people don’t have the fortitude for it. Violence follows violence. People who are victims of violence sometimes become guilty of violent acts. Does writing about migration bring any particular responsibility?The two protagonists of Crossing believe life in a western country is better than their life outside it. I wanted to show the brutality of being forced to start over in a new place, having to battle against prejudice. I’ve been asked countless times about the gratitude I feel towards Finland for giving me and my family shelter. I’m grateful, of course. But demanding gratitude is hurtful because it ignores the traumas of one’s personal life. The requirement of gratitude many migrants face feels so dismissive, unfair and disrespecting. I don’t tell a story to preach. But you can’t control how readers read: when I published my first book in Finland, there were pieces about me and my work saying things like “to a migrant Finland is cold and racist”. At one point in the novel Bujar enters a reality show talent contest…Being on television used to be an achievement; the cameras weren’t filming just anyone. Then the people behind the camera started shooting ordinary people and presenting them in more and more alarming ways. There’s one show where a group of couples travel to a remote island where they are tested on whether they cheat on their loved ones… I don’t know what’s more worrying: that people are treated like this, that people want to take part, or that viewers keep consuming these stories. I wanted to dive into this world with a character who is aware of the mechanics by which producers carefully select a point of view. Bujar makes up a backstory he thinks they want, and participates in the competition as someone else after they reject him when he auditions as himself. Crossing’s original Finnish title translates as Heart of Tirana…That wasn’t ambiguous enough in English. When my US editor called to tell me he had Crossing in mind, I immediately said yes – this word in all its meanings truly captures the essence of a book about shifting borders, fluid identities, about the complexity of gender, sexuality and nationality, and the right to self-definition. Tell us which other Finnish writers we should be reading.Rosa Liksom, Olli Jalonen and Sofi Oksanen are all fascinating and highly original. Liksom’s novel The Colonel’s Wife [about a Nazi sympathiser’s abusive marriage], just released in English, is really powerful. I saw the play based on it here in Helsinki. It’s unbelievable how much a person can put up with under certain circumstances. What are you reading at the moment?I just finished Sally Rooney’s Conversations With Friends – I know, I’m late to the party – and I absolutely loved it. Frances, Bobbi, Melissa and Nick felt like my best friends. The ending was just perfect. I can’t wait to get my hands on Normal People. On my nightstand there’s The Gospel of Eels by Patrik Svensson, just translated to Finnish from Swedish; it’s published in English soon. I recently read Elizabeth Strout’s My Name Is Lucy Barton. So alluring and heartbreaking; I’m going to read all her books. Which books inspired you to write?Harry Potter and Robinson Crusoe were my favourites as a child. I’ve been inspired by so many writers: Kafka, Kertész, Toni Morrison, Hanya Yanagihara… I hope I’m never in this situation, but if I had to choose one book to read for the rest of my life, it would probably be Bulgakov’s The Master and Margarita. Obvious, perhaps, but it’s so rich, and every time I’ve read it – which is many – I’ve found new layers. • Crossing by Pajtim Statovci is published by Pushkin Press (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15