Designed to streamline benefits payments and make them easier to navigate, universal credit has met with fierce opposition since its protracted and troubled rollout. This three-part series opens in Peckham Jobcentre, where more than 1,000 people visit each day, including former NHS worker Rachel, who is living precariously during the five-week wait for her first universal credit payment. It is a humanising look into the real-life consequences of political choices. Ammar Kalia Josie d’Arby presents this curious mix of the saucy and the sedate: a 120-minute life-drawing class, taking place in real time. Audiences at home will be encouraged to get the easel out and draw along at home, with advice from award-winning artists, plus a separate, clear shot of the nude subject on screen at all times. Ellen E Jones The last of this four-part documentary series telling the stories of four families from across the UK. This one focuses on 31-year-old Vinnie Nailor from Milton Keynes, who has spent most of his adult life behind bars. Now, he wants to go straight to set an example to his six kids. Can he cope with a regular job? Ali Catterall This harrowing but essential series continues to highlight the remarkable work done – under extreme pressure – by Britain’s mental health professionals. In this penultimate episode the team are faced with a terrible dilemma: is it safe to send a potentially suicidal teenager home? Phil Harrison Eleven years on from its last series, the ensemble cast of lesbian characters returns to find Bette running for mayor of Los Angeles, Alice and Nat co-parenting in a modern family with Nat’s ex Gigi, and Shane coming back to the city. It’s sex, lies and systemic inequality. AK Despite the party scenes, this documentary does a good job of showing the dangers of the drug GHB in a balanced way. “It’s almost too good,” says one masked user who sings its praises, while doctors hammer home the message that it is easy to overdose. And DJ Jackmaster offers a cautionary tale of acting out under the influence. Hannah Verdier Byzantium, 1.20am, Film4 In a bleak English seaside town, Gemma Arterton’s sex worker Clara supports her 16-year-old daughter Eleanor (Saoirse Ronan) in a guesthouse called Byzantium. Their past seems to be a closed book, until we discover that the pair are actually 200-year-old vampires, with an angsty mum-daughter thing going on. PJH International One-Day Cricket: South Africa v England The first ODI of the three-match series from Cape Town. 10.30am, Sky Sports Main Event Athletics: World Indoor Tour Third meeting of the series from Düsseldorf, Germany. 6pm, Eurosport 1 FA Cup Football: Fourth-Round Replay Match for a place in the final 16. 7.15pm, BT Sport 1