In his column last week (“The threat to Johnson’s ‘national revival’ will come from within his own party”, Comment), Will Hutton sees an “opportunity for a revived Labour opposition, if only it can accept that the party’s future lies in championing the liberal pro-EU forces in Britain’s metropolitan cities and university towns, rather than just hankering after a working-class ‘base’ ”. But can he really be serious? Isn’t this precisely what the pro-Remain Liberal Democrat party did and got wiped out at the last election? If the Labour party does not try to recover its working-class vote in the north of England and especially in Scotland (its historical heartland) then will it be a Labour party at all? The answer is that it won’t, but, rather, it will have become the Liberal Democrat party in all but name and will deserve to be wiped out at the next election accordingly.Dr Kenneth SmithLondon E2 Nick Cohen raps the knuckles of the Labour party leadership for refusing “to engage in honest self-criticism” (“Labour’s hierarchy should be full of shame – but they just sound smug”, Comment). However, he makes no mention of the 19th-century academic Benjamin Jowett who made such a refusal almost respectable. Jowett is widely credited with giving the advice “never apologise, never explain”. If a party leadership was to make an apology today it would feel obliged to make demeaning self-criticisms tomorrow. In 1887, the Liberal politician Sir William Harcourt declared: “We are all Socialists now.” In 2020, we are all Jowettists now.Ivor MorganLincoln One of the problems since the 2016 referendum has been finding out, even among closeish friends, who was a Brexiter and who wasn’t (“A bottle of bubbly or hiding under the duvet… how we spent the last EU night”, News). But last Friday, eight of us Remainers sat down to a pre-leave supper of well-loved food and drink from some of the European countries that are fortunate enough to be staying, a meal that took us past the 11pm deadline. Most of the group were around to vote in the original referendum in 1975 and our thoughts were for our children and grandchildren who will not have the opportunities that membership has given to us and for which we are thankful. We toasted their future in hope.Jan ClarkDaventry, Northamptonshire  By refusing to allow witnesses to testify against Trump the Republicans have proved conclusively that their motives are purely political, precisely the criticism they levelled against the Democrats’ concerns for democratic principle (“A smoking gun didn’t persuade Republicans to ditch the president”, Analysis). This self-righteous mindset, which brushes aside all rational judgment, echoes that of our own dear Brexiters. In both cases, their deeds will come back to haunt them.Steve GoochRobertsbridge, East Sussex Diana Buttu paints a monstrous picture of Israel (“What we Palestinians think does not matter – all that matters is Israel”, Comment). But if what she writes reflects the reality, then why are so many (to quote her) “Palestinians in Israel” opposed to their towns being part of a Palestinian state? Attitude surveys by top Israeli pollster Camille Fuchs found the following: when non-Jewish Israelis were queried about how they identify themselves, 6% responded Israeli, 49% said Arab-Israeli, and only 18% said Palestinian. Non-Jewish Israelis were also asked: “How comfortable do you feel being yourself in Israel?” Some 85% answered that they felt comfortable.Barbara SopkinNetanya, Israel We write to explain the situation concerning the master of Birkbeck College, University of London (“Top geneticist ‘should resign’ over fraud by laboratory team”, News). In October 2018, the outcome of a final UCL hearing formally drew this long-running case involving publications at UCL to a close. This hearing found that Professor Latchman’s management of his UCL research programme was not at fault. The hearing followed two investigations into publications from Professor Latchman’s research group at UCL, which both concluded that Professor Latchman had no knowledge of, or involvement in, the image manipulation identified. Birkbeck is an independent institution within the University of London. Professor Latchman is a successful master of Birkbeck and we have full confidence in his integrity and competence.Sir Andrew Cahn, chair of governors Birkbeck CollegeBaroness Joan Bakewell, president Birkbeck College Robin McKie presents a well-balanced debate about the modern zoo (“Zoos – is it time we shut them down?”, Special Report). While the arguments for the conservation work done by the “big boys”, eg, Chester and London, are well made, it should be mentioned that the small zoos also have a role. I am a director of one of the smallest and poorest zoos in the UK. Despite our size and poverty, we have four species of fish from Mexico that are extinct in the wild. We are the only zoo in Britain with these species and one of two in Europe. We are breeding relatively large numbers of them and hope to eventually return some to the wild. When challenged recently by one of the more active anti-zoo lobbyists as to why we weren’t returning them I had to explain that our chances of success would be greater if we waited until the streams and pools from which they originally came had water in them again. On a larger scale, there are, of course, more animals that we could return if the wild was ready.Chris MoiserTropiquaria ZooWatchet, Somerset Spot on, Nick Pritchard, in his comment about Sunderland University withdrawing its humanities courses (Letters). Thank you for putting us in our place as “little more than a training college”. Long live academic elitism/snobbishness.Dave Schofield (ex-training college student)Heptonstall, West Yorkshire For many families like ours, Andrew Neil’s risible attack on Horrible Histories is another good reason to love it (“Andrew Neil attacks ‘anti-British drivel’ of BBC’s Horrible Histories”, News). Neil is spouting anti-British drivel because he doesn’t understand that a nation that can’t laugh at itself hasn’t got the self-confidence that being patriotic demands. Horrible Histories is a modern and enjoyable version of 1066 and All That, written in the 1930s and epitomising British traditions of using humour to understand things with our famous self-deprecation. We have learned things we had forgotten or didn’t know in the first place while enjoying Horrible Histories with our grandchildren and, as they approach their teen years, use the programmes to take forward discussions on the way events of the past help us avoid mistakes in the future.Teresa Murray and Derek MintonRochester, Kent