England may have lost the first one‑day international emphatically in Cape Town, but Chris Jordan is adamant a make-do-and-mend bowling attack can show the bite that characterised the World Cup winning XI. In the aftermath of Tuesday’s defeat Eoin Morgan had hinted at his own frustration that England were unable to “create pressure” in the field. Injury and squad rotation had deprived the captain of his high-pace first-choice attack, while Adil Rashid, the most – and indeed only – successful leg‑break bowler in England’s white‑ball history was replaced by the tyro Matt Parkinson. Jordan is confident the incumbents can provide more incision in Durban on Friday. “What is pressure? I don’t really view it that way,” said Jordan. “At the end of the day we’re all here for a reason, we’re all here because we have various skill-sets that are good enough for international cricket. Those other guys have different attributes to us but it’s all about trying to be as effective as possible on that day.” Temba Bavuma had been discomfited by England’s bowlers in the fourth Test at the Wanderers, but looked entirely at home on a slower pitch against a more temperate attack. By contrast England’s adrenal white‑ball top six struggled to find fluency, although Jordan denied South Africa may have hit on a formula to blunt the world champions’ aggression. “Over the last four years we have played on so many different surfaces, in so many different conditions and managed to overcome it. So I don’t think it matters in which conditions we play because we back ourselves to be smart enough and our skill level to be high enough to navigate through those situations. I don’t think the surface matters, to be honest.” For Jordan, Newlands provided a first ODI appearance in three years, a recall he described as “a nice surprise”. His presence reflects some fine displays in the shortest form, where Jordan has a good chance of playing alongside his fellow Barbados‑born England fast bowler Jofra Archer at the T20 World Cup in Australia later this year. “Yeah, [that would be] very exciting. I’ve only played once with him, on his debut in Cardiff. It would be nice to play a lot more cricket for England with him. I’m looking forward to it.” Jordan also confirmed Archer was relaxed about his recuperation from his elbow injury. “I speak to him quite regularly. I would say he’s a pretty laid‑back character as you all know by now. He’s not sweating on it too much, it is what it is, it’s part and parcel of cricket, it’s part and parcel of life. I think these sort of moments will strengthen him and stand him in good stead going forward. “He’s the sort of guy that wants to play every single game for England and show what he can do. [It is] frustrating for him but it is part and parcel of being a professional character, you will pick up niggles, some you can play with, some you can’t. I just wish him a speedy recovery.”