Sir Tom Stoppard, Britain’s most celebrated living playwright, believes he may have written his last play. Leopoldstadt, which opens in London’s West End on 12 February, telling the story of a Jewish family in Vienna as the 20th century begins, is the work that has moved him most, and, he will reveal this week, may mark his final contribution to theatre. “I am slowing up. This one took longer to write,” Stoppard, 82, will say on Tuesday when he is interviewed by John Wilson on BBC Radio 4’s Front Row. “And the other thing is, what on earth can you write about after that? When I finished Leopoldstadt I thought, ‘I can’t go through all that again’. Four years tend to go by between my plays, so I will be 86 or 87 before I write another, and I wondered whether people who are 87 do have plays on. It seemed a bit implausible,” said the writer of the critically acclaimed Travesties, The Real Thing and Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead. Inspired by his own Jewish heritage, the new play is directed by fellow playwright Patrick Marber. It centres on the Jewish quarter of Vienna that gives the play its name, as fascism rises across Europe and threatens the newly found security of its inhabitants. The topic proved unexpectedly emotional for Stoppard, he admits. “It stole up on me. I didn’t think, ‘I must finish this off and have people sobbing’, but in the end I was sobbing myself,” he said. “I feel a bit foolish sitting there and I have to stop myself making a public spectacle of myself, crying at my own play. I mean, I wrote it. I ought to have some sort of writer’s objectivity. It has not happened before. Honestly, nothing I have written has had that effect on me.” It was not until the early 1990s that Stoppard discovered the extent of his Jewish heritage and the death of many relatives in Nazi concentration camps. After the war, his mother married her second husband, a British army officer, and moved to England from Singapore to start a new life. “I once asked my mother to write down what she remembered and she said ‘wrongly or rightly, I decided to draw a line and never looked back’. So she never practised as a Jew.” Stoppard finally heard the truth from the daughter of one of his mother’s cousins. “She said, ‘What do you mean, how Jewish are you? You are Jewish!’” He discovered that his mother’s sisters and all four of his grandparents had been killed. “The thing that I feel I still need to explain to myself, let alone to anyone else, is that I didn’t go up to [my mother] and say, ‘what is all this about then?’ I felt she would feel I was rebuking her. “She had her own reasons for not talking about it. And so we never did talk about it in any comprehensive or deep way, which I think I regret now.” The playwright also tells Wilson that at the time he started to plan the play in 2017, discussion of antisemitism had not yet returned as a current political issue. “I did not sniff the air and say to myself, ‘Now is the time for a play that celebrates the costs of being a Jew.’”