Hugo Lloris Brilliantly denied Agüero with his feet and saved Gündogan’s penalty. Loves frustrating City from 12 yards. 7 Serge Aurier VAR penalised his rash tackle on Agüero in the Spurs area but he kept Sterling quiet. 6 Toby Alderweireld Strained to keep track of Agüero’s movement at times but Belgian held the back four together. Booked. 7 Davinson Sánchez A solid performance from the Colombian, who had a good understanding with Alderweireld in the middle. 7 Japhet Tanganga Youngster coped well in the one-on-one duels with Mahrez. Tested by De Bruyne’s clever movement. 7 Harry Winks Battled to stay with De Bruyne’s runs. Passing was off but he got Zinchenko sent off. 6 Giovani Lo Celso Argentinian worked hard and showed flashes of class when he had the ball. Encouraging. Booked. 7 Son Heung-min Improved after swapping roles with Moura at half-time. Took Tanguy Ndombele’s pass and settled the game. 7 Dele Alli Lucky to avoid serious injury after being caught by Sterling and struggled before being taken off. 6 Steven Bergwijn Workrate impressed the crowd and became an instant hero with a stunning volley on his debut. 8 Lucas Moura Struggled as a makeshift striker in the first half. Moved to the right and created Bergwijn’s opener. 6 Subs Tanguy Ndombele (for Alli 70) 7, Érik Lamela (for Bergwijn 70) 6, Eric Dier (for Lucas Moura 84) 6. Ederson The Brazilian had nothing to do until Spurs scored with their first two efforts on target. What a strange game. 6 Kyle Walker Too slow on the ball at times. Sent one crossfield pass out of play and made little impact in the final third. Booked. 6 Fernandinho Stopped Son’s early surges with some fine tackles. Unlucky to deflect the forward’s shot past Ederson. 7 Nicolás Otamendi The Argentinian had nothing to worry about when it was 11 v 11. Less convincing after the red. 6 Oleksandr Zinchenko Cost City the game. Already on a booking when he needlessly felled Winks for a second yellow. 4 Rodri Classy at times and sloppy at others. Still adjusting to the pace of English football. Booked. 6 Riyad Mahrez Promised so much but delivered so little. Awful corner led to Zinchenko’s red card. 5 Kevin De Bruyne Made life difficult for the Spurs midfield. Did not deserve to be on losing side. 6 Ilkay Gündogan Excellent in possession but his penalty was poor. Blazed over an open goal on the stretch. 6 Raheem Sterling Fortunate to escape red after fouling Alli. Should have set up Gündogan. Out of form. Booked. 5 Sergio Agüero Uncharacteristically wasteful in the first half, although he won City’s penalty. Substituted after the red card. 6 Subs João Cancelo (for Agüero 64) 6, Gabriel Jesus (for Mahrez 72) 6, Bernardo Silva (for Sterling 84) 6.