Wayne Rooney faces a fifth-round reunion with Manchester United after Derby overcame Northampton 4-2 at Pride Park on Tuesday night. Rooney scored the fourth goal from the spot as the Championship side held on to defeat their League Two opponents, earning a home tie against the team for whom he scored a record 253 goals in 559 appearances. Andre Wisdom opened the scoring for the home side midway through the first half and Duane Holmes made it 2-0 before half-time. Nicky Adams pulled a goal back for the Cobblers just after the interval but Jack Marriott and then Rooney gave Derby a comfortable cushion before Sam Hoskins’s late penalty reduced the deficit once more. Lee Camp was Birmingham’s hero as the Championship side clinched a fifth-round place on penalties against Coventry. Camp saved penalties from the substitutes Liam Walsh and Jamie Allen as Birmingham won 4-1 in a shootout after twice coming from behind in a 2-2 draw after extra-time. Harlee Dean’s spot kick sealed victory, while the substitutes Lukas Jutkiewicz, Jeremie Bela and Gary Gardner also netted from the spot to enable Birmingham to book a trip to Leicester in the last 16. Dean made it 1-1 in the second minute of time added on, and a hopeful cross by Bela in the 120th minute saw Birmingham draw to cancel out goals from Amadou Bakayoko (50) and Max Biamou (114). Reading claimed a dramatic shootout victory over Cardiff to book a fifth-round home tie with Premier League Sheffield United. In a game that finished 3-3 after extra time, Josh Murphy and Robert Glatzel struck either side of the interval for Cardiff before Omar Richards and the substitute Andy Rinomhota forced another 30 minutes. Murphy pounced on a Gabriel Osho mistake to poke home his second and restore Cardiff’s lead, but Yakou Méïté forced penalties four minutes from time. Reading won the resulting shoot-out 4-1 as Garath McCleary, Osho, Jordan Obita and Sone Aluko gave the Royals a 100% return from the spot and Cardiff’s nerve buckled as Aden Flint and Will Vaulks missed.