Many of us dream of moving into a heritage building. But Olive Ryan didn’t – even before she saw the ghosts. Monte Cristo Homestead, the huge Victorian house built by pastoralist Christopher Crawley in 1884, had fallen into disrepair when Olive’s husband Reginald fell in love with it during a trip to Junee, New South Wales, in the mid-1950s. But it took him eight years to convince the owners to sell. “All the time we waited,” says Olive. “I used to hope it would fall down – but, 57 years later, I’m still here.” It looked like there was a light coming out of every window, even though there wasn’t a pane of glass in the place With three daughters in tow – and Olive five months pregnant with a fourth – the Ryans camped in the ruined dining room, sleeping on blow-up beds and eating at a picnic table. “The wind used to howl down the staircase,” the now 89-year-old remembers. “And the bats used to fly in.” When, soon after their arrival, they returned late from town, Reginald stopped the car suddenly on the drive. “It looked like there was a light coming out of every window, even though there wasn’t a pane of glass in the place. I said to my husband, ‘I don’t want to go up there!’” “He said, ‘Well, that’s where we are living now.’ “And by the time we got up there, all the lights had gone out!” Today, the homestead is beautifully restored, decked out with high-quality period furniture. Olive’s son Lawrence, who manages Monte Cristo, says the old building requires constant attention. He operates a bed and breakfast there, and runs ghost tours for visitors. “That’s the benefit of being in a place like this. You get to share it with world.” As for Olive, the occasional spook doesn’t bother her now. Lawrence says: “‘Oh, yes. Mum still sees things in here or hears a name called out. But she chooses not to believe because she has to be here by herself sometimes. And she reckons that’s better than having to think about it too much.” “I’ll just carry on until I kick the bucket,” Olive says. Victorian Trades Hall in Melbourne contains its share of spectres but Matt Kunkel, who lives in a two-bedroom cottage on its roof, has never seen the woman said to haunt the corridor below his house (though he adds, ‘‘My cat does often just stare off into space at things.”) After winning the eight-hour day, the Victorian union movement constructed a wooden Trades Hall and Literary Institute in 1859. The stone edifice dates from 1875, with the “workers’ parliament” deliberately designed to rival other Melbourne landmarks such as the Town Hall or the State Library. The building always employed a caretaker, a role that the old Watchmen, Caretakers and Cleaners Union defined to allow sleeping (as distinct, Kunkel explains, from the nocturnal vigilance expected from a watchman). Such roles were once common: Trades Hall folklore maintains that previous caretakers used their laundry on the roof to signal relatives working in the same role at the Eastern Hill Fire Station. Marcella Pearce, who wrote of life in the building after her father Joe Bell took the job in 1930, exulted the federation-style cottage as a “penthouse in the sky”. Kunkel doesn’t go quite that far – the old structure swelters in summer and stays frigid in winter – but acknowledges the location can’t be faulted. “I’m living a pretty charmed life.” Some 1,500km away, opal miner John Dunstan feels similarly about his unusual Coober Pedy domicile. “My underground home is like a castle,” he says. “It’s got 50,000 tumble bricks inside. The doorways are all arched. Beautiful! And it stays the same temperature all year round.” Dunstan followed his father into the opal fields of South Australia where he has searched for gems for 54 years. Like most Coober Pedy locals, he lives in a dugout cut from the side of a mountain. “It goes way back to 1915 when the first miners came here. They were living in tents and little shanties and they found the summers here were way too hot for them. They knew it was nice and cool in the mines. So some of them dug an entrance so they could live there.” Coober Pedy’s underground structures include pubs, churches, motels, bookstores and, of course, homes. Dunstan swears he couldn’t live any other way. “When I leave Coober Pedy to go away for a break I feel like a fish out of water because every little street noise here wakes you: cars and bloody sirens and even the birds. In the dugout there’s no sound. Beautiful! It’s dark; it’s cool and quiet. Once you get used to living in an underground house, you would never want to swap.” Tom Dacy also occupies a historic home designed for extreme temperatures. Digital communications at Mawson Station might have eased the isolation of 14-month stint in Antarctica but access to Facebook can’t temper the ferocious weather. “We’ve had plenty of times throughout the year when the wind has been blowing 100 knots outside and the blizzard is so bad you can’t see that there is no visibility at all,” he says. “So you’re confined to the one building or to buildings nearby.” Established in 1954, Mawson was added to the commonwealth heritage list in 2004 as the oldest continually occupied station of the Antarctic circle. Dacy, employed as Mawson’s mechanical supervisor, says history is never far away. “We still see some of the old dog sleds that the guys used to sled up and down the coast.” He describes his own quarters as “just like any sort of room you’d have in your own house” – except, of course, for the wonders that surround it. He lists some of them. “Being able to see emperor penguins up close and personal: they’re just such big, majestic birds. During the middle of winter, the sun goes down for about three weeks and we’re in darkness, with just a bit of twilight. The sunsets in winter, which just look like the whole sky is on fire. And then the aurora lights over the top of the station, flickering and floating like waves.” Not quite ghosts but magical all the same. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.