In a setback to their hopes of reaching the T20 World Cup semi-finals, England suffered a dramatic final-over defeat in their opening match against South Africa at Perth on Sunday. With South Africa, chasing a 124-run target, needing seven runs from the final four balls, it came down to a battle of experience: England’s Katherine Brunt against South Africa’s Mignon du Preez, playing in her 100th T20 international. It was the latter who came out on top – walloping a 67-metre six straight over backward square leg, before pulling the next ball for four to take her side across the line with two balls to spare. It is only the third time that South Africa have ever got the better of England in the shortest format. “It’s nice to finally beat them in an ICC tournament,” Du Preez said. “This is the seventh one I’ve played in and we’ve never got close before. We’ve always known how strong we are and that within the team we have matchwinners but we had a monkey on our back.” “I’ve played enough games in my career to be able to step up in crucial moments and I think to finally do that and contribute to the team is really special.” The result means England are likely to need to win every one of their remaining group matches to reach the semi-finals. “It puts the pressure on,” Natalie Sciver said. “The quality of the teams overall for this T20 World Cup has stepped up a notch.” South Africa had been well on course at 90 for one in the 16th over, with Marizanne Kapp and Dane van Niekerk having racked up an 84-run partnership after their bombastic opener Lizelle Lee fell early in the chase; but Sarah Glenn’s maiden World Cup wicket looked like it might have spoiled the party – Kapp sending a drifting ball straight back into the hands of the young leg-spinner, after amassing a 33-ball 38. Van Niekerk departed four balls later, four runs short of a half-century, caught by Tammy Beaumont at point attempting to cut Sophie Ecclestone. Ecclestone’s second wicket again looked like it might be decisive, removing Chloe Tryon with a quicker ball off the last ball of the 19th over that slid past her defences, after the power-hitter had racked up 12 quick runs. Du Preez, though, calmly finished the job. Despite the close nature of the result, England’s tactics of playing eight batsmen, with Tammy Beaumont dropping down to No 6 (both adopted under their new coach Lisa Keightley), are likely to come under the spotlight after this performance. Opener Amy Jones had looked in fine form early on, attacking the left-arm spin of Nonkululeko Mlaba with a couple of lofted drives; all four of England’s boundaries in the powerplay came off her bat. She came unstuck, however, trying to repeat the feat against the considerably more experienced Kapp, instead sending it into the hands of Tryon at mid-off, dismissed for a 20-ball 23. Four balls later – having faced just four deliveries in the opening four overs – Wyatt over-egged the pudding in her keenness to get going, popping the first ball of Ayabonga Khaka’s spell up into the hands of Lee at point. From there, wickets continued to fall all too regularly, leg-spinner Van Niekerk making a decisive intervention with the ball at either end of her four-over spell. She first removed the in-form Heather Knight, courtesy of an excellent effort by Shabnim Ismail running round from long-on, and later the frustrated Fran Wilson, also caught in the deep after England mustered just one boundary between the eighth and 15th overs. Only a late-dash 41-ball half-century by Sciver dragged their effort up towards respectability. “We were a bit short with the bat – we didn’t get quite enough runs unfortunately,” Sciver said. “As a batting unit we are not quite aligned – there’s a few things we need to tweak. “Hopefully we can go out in the next game at Canberra and play positively and play with freedom.”