When we arrived in Dubai a week ago to cover the UAE Tour there was a heightened awareness of coronavirus; the airports looked a little emptier and there seemed to be more people than usual wearing masks to cover their nose and mouth. The masks varied from surgical to the type tradesmen utilise. One man even walked through baggage claim with an old oxygen ventilator mask dangling around his neck like an accessory. Some of my journalist colleagues voiced their concern during the tour, referencing websites that documented the spread of the virus. I admittedly made light of it and told them not to worry. We travel globally, covering bike races every year in a multinational bubble. Someone has always got a cold. But when I woke up at 2am on Friday from a bad dream and discovered a worse reality – I panicked. We were in lockdown. The glass entrance doors to our hotel had been closed shut. There were reports that two people at the race had been affected by coronavirus and that the tour had consequently been cancelled. Having started in Dubai, we were now in Abu Dhabi where we had travelled after stage five on Thursday, welcoming a change of scenery after six nights in a business hotel. There are about 600 people working at the race and in Abu Dhabi we were divided between three hotels among an enclave of accommodation around the F1 Yas Marina Circuit. Some 120 journalists and race organisation personnel went to one hotel and most riders and team staff to another within walking distance. At 10pm on Thursday journalists received a brief email from a race coordinator advising us not to leave the hotel “under any circumstances” and, at the request of local authorities, to “be available”. A few messages were exchanged between reporters on WhatsApp about what it could mean, and someone suggested coronavirus, but I shrugged it off and went to sleep as we were meant to be heading out at 7.30am the next day. It could have been anything; a sheikh rolling past, or a race security measure. I understand the Israel WorldTour team that was competing here had a detail following them due to regional politics. At 1.30am the Abu Dhabi Sports Council had issued a statement saying the week-long UAE Tour, with two stages remaining, had been cancelled because two Italian “participants” had been diagnosed with Covid-19. When I woke up the link to the Sports Council statement had been shared between journalists. I changed quickly and went down to the lobby hotel as an American colleague I knew was there, working to find out more. When I got to the lobby just before 3am, a handful of reporters were sat in armchairs typing, and three key race organisers were standing across from the hotel entry that was now an impassable boundary. Shortly afterwards we received an official statement from the tour organisation that confirmed the race had been cancelled and clarified two Italian staff members from one team had tested positive to Covid-19. The statement read: “The Ministry of Health and Prevention said that all the race’s participants, administrative staff and organisers will be examined through the continuous periodic screening being conducted, and all needed procedures, including quarantine measures, will be taken”. As I read, Arabic music from a wedding reception downstairs mixed with the drunken giggles of men and women returning from last drinks at the hotel bar. Medical staff began to carry out tests at the teams’ hotel almost immediately and took hours. Riders recounted visits from authorities in hazmat gear before they were asked not to speak to media. Yet some of us are friends. We had breakfast at the hotel buffet but then came the order: stay in your rooms. Radio silence ensued before a media release that confirmed Adam Yates would win the shortened race. It wasn’t what people wanted to know. There were bigger, unanswered questions. A Dutch reporter shared a photo of an ambulance outside and two people completely covered in white protective clothing, highlighted by bright orange stripes. Cycling stakeholder RCS, an Italian group that oversees the tour, didn’t have answers. Everyone was waiting on the advice of government and local authorities apparently. We were told around noon that a lunchbox would be brought to us, but I went to the lower ground floor to be tested, leaving my phone behind as requested, before it arrived. We went down in groups, signing a consent form that included a clause limiting reporting on the process. A hotel guest, who found me on Twitter, said they didn’t have to be screened but were advised during the day not to roam the hotel, and would be treated to a complimentary buffet at dinner. However, those connected with the race were given the same directive as at lunch: stay in your room. Dinner – a brown paper bag filled with a cold pasta salad and bread – was delivered by room service wearing a hair net, face mask and latex gloves. People in the race are communicating via messages and social media. I was told the tests conducted at our hotel would take six hours to finish and we’d likely get results six to nine hours after that. I’m still in my hotel room, and I’m still waiting. Sophie Smith is a freelance Australian cycling journalist