The Credit Suisse chief executive, Tidjane Thiam, has been ousted after losing a boardroom battle that escalated after a spying scandal engulfed the Swiss bank last year. The bank’s board announced on Friday that it had “unanimously accepted” the 57-year-old’s resignation and that Thomas Gottstein, the head of Credit Suisse’s home business in Switzerland, will take over as chief executive. The board also gave its full support to the chairman, Urs Rohner, to complete his term until April 2021. Thiam and Rohner have been in conflict since it emerged the Zurich-based bank had hired a corporate espionage company to follow Iqbal Khan, the former head of the bank’s wealth management division, while he was on leave from Credit Suisse before taking a job at rival UBS. Credit Suisse insisted it was a one-off incident but then months later admitted a second executive had been tracked by private detectives. Thiam, who has said he had no knowledge of the spying incidents, had earlier this week appeared to have the upper hand in Rohner’s attempt to oust him, gaining the backing of several top Credit Suisse shareholders. However, on Friday he said he had agreed with the board to step down as chief executive. “I had no knowledge of the observation of two former colleagues. It undoubtedly disturbed Credit Suisse and caused anxiety and hurt. I regret that this happened and it should never have taken place.” Thiam will step down after presenting the bank’s annual results next week. The news of his departure sent Credit Suisse’s share price down 4% in early trading. Rohner said: “Tidjane has made an enormous contribution to Credit Suisse since he joined us in 2015. It is to his credit that Credit Suisse is standing on a very solid foundation and has returned successfully to profit. Credit Suisse is in good health and we have a deep bench of talent which can build on his achievements.” Khan, who was seen by some as a possible heir to Thiam, discovered the surveillance last year in an extraordinary confrontation following a car chase through Zurich. Rohner initially supported Thiam, who had a bitter rivalry with Khan, but when it emerged that a second executive had been surveilled, relations between the two became strained. An investigation by an external law firm cleared Thiam and resulted in Pierre-Olivier Bouée, the chief operating officer and Thiam’s closest ally, being fired over the Khan affair. It also emerged that a private security consultant who had helped Bouée organise the spying had apparently killed himself.