When John-Luke Roberts scored an Edinburgh fringe success with the absurdly titled All I Wanna Do Is [FX: GUNSHOTS] With a [FX: GUN RELOADING] and a [FX: CASH REGISTER] and Perform Some Comedy! in 2018, it seemed like a breakthrough for the veteran oddball. It was a cracking show, a passionate defence of nonsense disguised as an inventory of 24 hitherto unknown Spice Girls. I expected a Comedy award nomination to follow – but it didn’t. Eighteen months on, Roberts remains a determinedly cult concern – now touring with his follow-up show and delivering one of his kooky fringe projects at London’s Vault festival. What would a breakthrough even look like for such a comic? On the one hand, Roberts clearly has the chops to entertain a mass audience. All I Wanna Do … may have been a paean to Roberts’ beloved laughter of not-understanding, but it was also packed with easy-to-enjoy Vic’n’Bob-style idiocy and bulletproof jokes from a skilled one-liner merchant. “Is it a sign of a misogynist society,” runs one gag in his current touring show, “that we call them BOOBS and not HURRAYBS?” You can’t argue with that. On the other hand, the man who curates Terrible Wonderful Adaptations – a portmanteau format in which teams of alt-comics bring un-adaptable literary texts to the stage – is obviously drawn more to the eccentric than the mainstream. At a time when standup became (for some) a lucrative career choice rather than a refuge for misfits, Roberts set himself up as a one-man finger-in-the-dyke against the blandification of comedy – instituting, for example, the “life-risking” cabaret night Alternative Comedy Memorial Society (web address: noblefailure.org) promoting the types of acts and activities to which Live at the Apollo doesn’t quite stretch. He presented Terrible Wonderful Adaptations last weekend at Vault festival. At its first gig, I watched Roberts and his pals wrangling Syd Field’s movie bible Screenplay: The Foundations of Screenwriting on to the stage. Joz Norris demonstrated the three-act structure with an audience member and a cuckoo clock. Thom Tuck dramatised Field’s sixth chapter Endings and Beginnings and Luke Rollason turned chapter 17, After It’s Written, into a Gaulier-style clown riff on the writer’s sensitivity to criticism of his material. Those were the successful bits; one or two other chapters were more described than adapted. It had the air of a show on which time had not been lavished – with the in-for-a-penny spirit being both a weakness and, often, part of the fun. I enjoyed Roberts’ contribution most of all. There’s a whole show, surely, in his Syd Field caricature, a smug movie seer with a visor, talking authoritative bullshit about how stories should be told. Mind you, character comedy might not be Roberts’ bag: I’m not sure it could contain his multitudes. The show he’s currently touring, After Me Comes the Flood (But in French), is another technicolour caper through the man’s bag of comedy tricks. Declaring distaste for comedy’s dependence on surprise, he’s printed his every single punchline on an upstage canvas. Does comedy suffer if we can see the laugh-lines coming? Far from it: much of the pleasure here comes from watching Roberts jump through the hoops he’s set himself, constructing the gags that justify this or that convoluted punchline about medieval typography or the history of science. It’s catnip for comedy geeks – but might it frighten the primetime horses? Silliness is one thing; there’s an audience for that. But erudite silliness – witness Roberts’ long sketch about Nietzsche falling in love with the abyss – is more niche. And it’s true that Roberts’ work can sometimes feel like an academic exercise in being funny, rather than the act itself. There’s a slight edge to him as a performer, too – something behind the eyes – a judginess perhaps (of himself, us, or the whole act of being a comedian?) that militates against uncomplicated good cheer. But for those of us who like a bit of complication, Roberts is a great talent to have around. After Me Comes the Flood doesn’t quite match its predecessor. One joke imagines savoury tic-tacs – and this show is all tic-tac and no savoury, a barrage of DayGlo lunacy that can start to feel undifferentiated. But it still teems with ideas, even the most casual of which match for invention the best of many another comic’s material. The joke about the wrist and neck perfumes; the joke that envelopes its teller; the running gag mocking solo multi-roling performance conventions – this is terrible, wonderful tomfoolery from an act who leads the charge for alternatives to the mainstream comedy. • At Soho theatre, London, 20-22 February. Then touring until 21 March.