Four Ocado bosses are sharing an £88m windfall after a bonus scheme pegged to the online grocer’s share price paid out. The company’s chief executive, Tim Steiner, was the biggest winner, raking in £54m, while the finance director, Duncan Tatton-Brown, and chief operating officer, Mark Richardson, both banked £14m. Luke Jensen, who runs its tech business, Ocado Solutions, got £6m from the scheme. The men were handed the shares in 2014 under a five-year “growth incentive plan” which measured Ocado’s share price growth relative to the FTSE 100. Once Steiner’s salary and other bonuses are taken into account his pay packet for 2019 added up to £58.7m. In 2018 Steiner, one of Ocado’s founding directors, was paid £4m. His shareholding in the company is worth £295m. The details of their pay bonanza were published in the company’s annual report. After making little progress initially, the company’s share price has rocketed over the past two years. The shares, which were changing hands for about 250p in November 2017, are now worth £12.54 after Steiner sold its grocery-picking expertise to nine foreign supermarket chains. Ocado is now worth £8.9bn, largely because of the success of Ocado Solutions, with the company dubbed the “Microsoft of retail”. The company had faced a revolt over pay at its 2019 shareholder meeting when a quarter of investors voted against the remuneration report. However the remuneration committee had decided not to change pay policies which were “appropriate to incentivise and retain a highly entrepreneurial” management team, its chairman Andrew Harrison said in the annual report. In fact top executives were awarded a pay rise for 2020 to ensure they remained “motivated”. Ocado reported an annual loss of £214.5m – up from a £44m loss in 2018 – which it blamed partly on last year’s devastating warehouse fire in Andover, Hampshire. Total sales increased 9% to £1.8bn in the year to 1 December. The loss reflected £94m of one-off charges, the bulk of which related to Andover, which is now being rebuilt. While Ocado is fully insured, there is a time lag before it receives the full payout. Steiner said that despite the headline losses the underlying performance of the business was very encouraging. The first overseas depots – belonging to Groupe Casino of France and Canada’s Sobeys - would soon be open, which would be a “milestone” for the Hatfield based group. Work has also begun on other sites in the UK as well as in the US and Sweden. Ocado has now received orders to build 30 of its robot-powered warehouses around the world. The sudden influx of orders has forced the company to expand rapidly, taking on 1,300 new staff last year, around half of whom were computer programmers and engineers. This year the company plans to spend more than £600m fitting out new distribution centres. Last year Marks & Spencer paid £750m for 50% of Ocado Retail, the UK subsidiary that currently has a supply deal with Waitrose. That arrangement finishes at the end of August, when it will be replaced by M&S. Ocado said preparations for the switchover were well underway and reiterated that its product range will be bigger, cheaper and of better quality under the M&S deal.