Former friends Pep Clotet and Garry Monk met at St Andrew’s in a topsy-turvy game. The two fell out after Clotet, previously Sheffield Wednesday manager Monk’s assistant, replaced him at Birmingham’s helm. A Jacob Murphy own goal put the hosts ahead but Barry Bannan found the bottom corner from range to level. Birmingham retook the lead through Lukasz Jutkiewicz, only for Fernando Forestieri to cancel that out from the penalty spot. Murphy made sure he scored at both ends, to put the Owls in the driving seat, but Clotet’s side looked set for victory until Scott Hogan popped up with a 91st-minute equaliser to make it 3-3. Second-placed Leeds once again won by a single goal thanks to Pablo Hernández’s strike against Reading. Top of the table West Brom made light work of Bristol City to win 3-0 at Ashton Gate but the visitors did have Romaine Sawyers sent off. Nottingham Forest and QPR settled for a goalless draw after Joe Worrall’s header was ruled out when the wind blew the ball off the corner quadrant just before the set-piece was taken. Blackburn were on course for an impressive win at Brentford, taking a two-goal lead thanks to two Adam Armstrong goals, only for Ollie Watkins and Saïd Benrahma to perform a fine comeback for the hosts. Just inside the playoff spots sit Preston, who battled back against Hull. Mallik Wilks put the Tigers ahead but Paul Gallagher levelled from the spot and then substitute Alan Browne got on the end of a Jayden Stockley cross to complete the turnaround. Swansea are still in with a shout of a top-six finish and proved their quality by defeating Huddersfield 3-1 at home. There were some vital wins at the other end of the table. Wigan just got the better of Millwall after Shaun Hutchinson turned the ball into his own net. Barnsley also took victory against Middlesbrough thanks to a single goal, theirs coming courtesy of Conor Chaplin but the Tykes are still five points from safety. Luton are nestled at the bottom of the pile, with their latest loss coming at Charlton. Lyle Taylor’s fine finish opened the scoring, only for Harry Cornick to almost immediately equalise. Taylor kept his cool from the spot just after the hour mark and George Lapslie sealed the points late on. Stoke maintained a three-point gap on the relegation zone after downing Cardiff 2-0. Callum Paterson netted an own goal and Joe Allen’s scrappy effort put the result beyond doubt. Brentford 2-2 Blackburn, Barnsley 1-0 Middlesbrough, Birmingham 3-3 Sheffield Wednesday, Bristol City 0-3 West Brom, Charlton 3-1 Luton, Leeds 1-0 Reading, Nottingham Forest 0-0 QPR, Preston North End 2-1 Hull1, Stoke 2-0 Cardiff, Swansea 3-1 Huddersfield, Wigan 1-0 Millwall Rotherham stay top after Ben Wiles’ last-gasp winner at Accrington Stanley. Freddie Ladapo put the visitors ahead, only for Jordan Clark to strike down the other end soon after. Wiles, however, headed home in injury-time to secure victory. Second-placed Coventry earned victory in Lancashire, defeating Rochdale 2-1. Michael Rose got things going by heading a well-worked corner beyond the goalkeeper. Matt Godden doubled the lead, with Aaron Wilbraham netting a consolation. Sunderland cruised to victory over Bristol Rovers, but only after Abu Ogogo was sent off. Lynden Gooch, Charlie Wyke and and Luke O’Nien all scored as the Black Cats made the most of the one-man advantage. Wycombe battled to a 3-1 victory over Tranmere, leaving Rovers eight points adrift of safety. Southend and Bolton look certainties for relegation, with both losing again. Sol Campbell’s side lost by the odd goal in five against Burton, while Bolton were defeated 1-0 at MK Dons. Fleetwood leapfrogged Portsmouth to move into the play-off spots after Callum Connolly struck the only goal of the game. Jerry Yates set leaders Swindon on their way to a 3-1 win over Grimsby with a close-range finish. Diallang Jaiyesimi added a second before Luke Hendrie diverted the ball into his own net. Crewe sit a place below, following a routine victory over local rivals Macclesfield. Chris Porter converted a penalty and Stephen Walker scored his first goal in professional football after a superb pass from Charlie Kirk. The Alex went above Exeter, who went a goal behind within a minute at Northampton. Vadaine Oliver’s early goal was added to by Sam Hoskins’ penalty. Stevenage are still rooted to the bottom after losing 2-0 at Crawley in Alex Revell’s first game in charge. Carlisle 2-2 Morecambe, Cheltenham 1-0 Mansfield, Crawley 2-0 Stevenage, Crewe 2-0 Macclesfield, Leyton Orient 2-2 Oldham, Newport 2-1 Bradford City, Northampton 2-0 Exeter, Plymouth 0-0 Cambridge, Salford City 1-2 Colchester, Scunthorpe 1-0 Forest Green, Swindon 3-1 Grimsby, Walsall 2-2 Port Vale