Moeen Ali has been named captain of the Birmingham Phoenix men’s team for the inaugural season of The Hundred. The England all-rounder grew up less than two miles from Edgbaston and, though he left Warwickshire in 2006 to further his career, he remains one of the second city’s most recognisable sporting residents and a role model for its British Asian community. Moeen, who captained Worcestershire to the T20 Blast title in 2018 and last year’s runners-up position, said: “Every time that I come to Edgbaston it takes me back to some great first memories of coming here at a very young age. “I grew up in this area and to be the first men’s captain of Birmingham Phoenix in a new and inclusive competition that will reach out to communities and welcome them in is very special for me. “We’re a tight-knit city in Birmingham. We have so much around us that brings the people together, no matter who you are or your background. I know how much of a uniting game cricket is and as a leader of the Birmingham Phoenix that is something I definitely want to promote.” Moeen, who will earn a £10,000 captaincy bonus on top of his £125,000 deal as one of the team’s local icon players, was awarded the role by the team’s head coach, Andrew McDonald, in preference to another Birmingham-born England cricketer in Chris Woakes and New Zealand’s Kane Williamson. McDonald said: “Moeen is a fantastic all-rounder and has the experience and temperament to lead the team. He started his cricket journey here at Edgbaston from a young age, so it feels fitting that he will captain the men’s Birmingham Phoenix team. “He’s involved in the local community in Birmingham and I know how much of a popular figure he is at Worcestershire too so I’m sure his efforts on and off the field will help inspire the next generation from our region and beyond to get involved in cricket.” It remains to be seen what the move means for Moeen’s Test career, with the all-rounder currently on a self-imposed break from the longest format and The Hundred clashing with Pakistan’s Test series in England this summer. Moeen is due to begin a spell with Multan Sultans in the Pakistan Super League this week, having turned down a spot on England’s upcoming tour of Sri Lanka, and will then spend the early part of the home summer playing in the Indian Premier League. Moeen’s close friend and England teammate, Adil Rashid, is another whose Test ambitions are currently on hold. The leg-spinner, who is a local icon player for the Headingley-based Northern Superchargers, has now signed a new white-ball-only contract with Yorkshire for next season and will not play in the County Championship.