The BBC’s first director general, Lord Reith, believed that one of the purposes of public service broadcasting was to be a unifying force, “making the nation as one man”. Almost a century later, and despite many predictions of its demise, the BBC remains an overwhelmingly trusted institution, cherished by the British public. Last December, 17.1 million sat down to watch the Gavin and Stacey Christmas special, making it the most watched scripted show of the past decade, and well over 90% of the population consumes BBC content every week. Yet against a backdrop of criticisms that the broadcaster has failed to keep pace with evolving lifestyles, it now faces an existential political threat: last week, Nicky Morgan, the culture secretary, floated the abolition of the licence fee that funds it, from 2027 onwards. The case for investment in public service broadcasting is as strong today as it was a century ago. From the production of quality news, to the creation of shared cultural anchors, to the fostering of new British creative talent, the BBC has enriched the fabric of our cultural life over the decades, and through its reporting has helped to speak truth to power. Watched and admired around the globe – BBC One was rated highest for quality in an international survey of 66 television channels – it is an important source of soft power on the world stage. Although far from perfect, it is a hugely important institution that helps hold the political establishment to account Its detractors argue that state-subsidised broadcasting simply crowds out other players that would flourish in a free market. That is wrong on many levels. Some of the BBC’s most important output, including much of its news reporting, children’s programming and local radio, would not be replicated by the free market, particularly at a time when advertising revenue is shrinking. The BBC’s public service mission positively influences what gets produced by the rest of the market and economic research shows that public service broadcasting boosts commercial production. Yet the BBC’s great strength – its freedom to produce content that is not dictated purely by market forces – is also inevitably a weakness. It can use that freedom to create market-shaping programming ahead of its time, But it also lacks the short-term market pressure to evolve. Ofcom has warned that the BBC risks a “lost generation” unless it can retain and engage younger viewers, who are consuming a shrinking amount of BBC content as they turn to streaming services on mobile devices. But it is struggling to do so. While it has, for example, secured changes that allow it to keep programmes on the iPlayer for longer and launched the BBC Sounds app to showcase more audio content aimed at younger viewers, it is far from certain whether this is enough to secure its long-term sustainability. But the most immediate threat is undoubtedly political. Boris Johnson has fashioned his attacks on the BBC out of two strands of Conservative ideology. The first is the free market ideology of the right. But added to the mix is the toxic populism that Johnson has embraced in his campaign for No 10. Attacks on the BBC fit neatly into the narrative that he is championing the interests of the people in the face of a corrupt elite and they have been amplified by the Brexit-supporting parts of the press that would stand to gain commercially from the BBC’s demise. And so, in the wake of David Cameron’s 2015 decision to force the BBC to take on the cost of free TV licences for the over-75s – or scrap them itself – Johnson has launched a rushed consultation on decriminalising non-payment of the licence fee. This would cost the BBC an estimated £200m in revenue on top of cuts already made. There are arguments in favour – criminalisation is a more punitive sanction than for non-payment of household bills, although it is worth noting that prosecution for non-payment cannot itself result in a criminal record or imprisonment. But decriminalisation would need to happen in the context of more widespread reform to secure the BBC’s financial future, rather than as a backdoor attempt to undermine public service broadcasting. In the face of these political threats, the BBC has not always helped itself. Its news coverage has come in for a significant amount of unfair criticism in recent years, even as levels of public trust in its reporting remain high. An organisation as large as the BBC is bound to make mistakes that, under the spotlight of intense scrutiny, feed into conspiracy theories about intentional bias from all sides. But the defensiveness of its executives in response to good-faith critique of its editorial decisions has the unfortunate effect of further fuelling attacks rather than shutting them down. Ofcom has repeatedly highlighted that the BBC is not doing well enough on diversity and there is a lack of transparency about the way in which it deals with complaints; these issues were highlighted in high-profile failings last year, including the manner in which the BBC chose to defend itself against Samira Ahmed’s successful equal pay claim and its poor handling of a viewer complaint about impartiality in relation to Naga Munchetty’s discussion of her experiences of racism. Last month, BBC News announced the bizarre decision to scrap Victoria Derbyshire’s show and to reduce the resources available for original investigative reporting for programmes such as Newsnight despite the fact that these aspects of news coverage have some of the biggest public-interest benefit. But although the BBC is far from perfect, it is a hugely important cultural institution that helps hold the political establishment to account. Johnson has a clear agenda in undermining it. It has never been more important to defend it in the face of these attacks.