Are you conversant with Aeschylus’s gadfly? Wittgenstein’s beetle? Kafka’s “monstrous insect”? We can add to the list Sophie Ward’s ant. This creature, one of Ward’s characters believes, has separated itself from its colony to bore through her eye and penetrate her brain. This is, on the face of it, impossible, and the episode inaugurates the novel’s debate concerning reality and our capacity to know it. An epigraph quotes Catherine Earnshaw’s famous speech in Wuthering Heights describing dreams that “have gone through and through me, like wine through water, and altered the colour of my mind”. In Love and Other Thought Experiments, Ward proposes to alter the colour of her readers’ minds. Rachel and Eliza are married soulmates considering parenthood. For Rachel, the ant experience is real. It hurts. But it hurts more when her beloved wife, a scientist, cannot believe her. Perhaps the whole thing was a bad dream, Eliza tentatively suggests. But Rachel is adamant: “I know the difference between sleeping and waking. I felt the ant go into my eye ... If you love me, you will trust me.” The ant and its ontological status begin to loom over their entire life together, initiating a dialectic only love can hope to resolve. The ant is, as Eliza thinks, a “small thing and a big thing in one word”. How can one credit anything so illogical? With its advent, somehow the decision is made for Rachel to become pregnant. Simultaneously a tumour swells in her brain. She incubates life and death, a paradox that spreads throughout the labyrinthine complexities of the narrative to come. Ward’s ingenious fiction debut stands in a tradition of philosophical fiction: Voltaire’s Candide, Sartre’s Nausea. It sets out to be intellectually provocative; to tease, vitalise and liberate our thought processes. For readers innocent of philosophical terminology, a prelude explains: “Thought experiments are devices of the imagination used to investigate the nature of things.” Nine sections are each prefaced by a riddling thought experiment, from “Pascal’s wager” (a bet on the reality of God, an early step towards probability theory) to “Descartes’ Demon” (the device of a demon who questions our knowledge of reality). What are the limitations of reason? Can a computer know love? What might a bat feel? What if we could share a brain? Are there plural worlds? These experiments introduce each phase of Ward’s tale of love and loss, narrated from the perspectives of Rachel and Eliza, Rachel’s mother (confusingly called Elizabeth), baby Arthur, Arthur’s dad and his husband Greg, not forgetting the ant itself. They disrupt – and are intended to disrupt – the flow of the narrative. Think, they advise you, stand on the other foot, turn the glass upside down. But the success of Ward’s venture inevitably depends on the quality of the writing. This is often moving, exuberant and sensitive. We care about her characters and share their hopes and fears. Ward’s investigation and practice of empathy is easily the best thing in the book. Reading Love and Other Thought Experiments, not least the virtuoso chapter in which the narrator impersonates the ant’s thought processes, I couldn’t help recalling George Eliot’s squirrel in Middlemarch. “If we had a keen vision and feeling of all ordinary human life, it would be like hearing ... the squirrel’s heart beat, and we should die of that roar which lies on the other side of silence.” For me, the most powerful chapters are the fourth and fifth, which compose a kind of central diptych: the narrative from the ant’s viewpoint, followed by Rachel’s meditation, in extremity, on her “partnership” with the creature, which had “crawled in to her eye one night and changed her life”. The first is a dark divertimento in which Ward exercises gifts of bravura wit and imagination. The sagacious ant, drawn by the scent of decay, in feeding on Rachel’s tumour exercises – against readerly expectation – a benign function. Its mind, invading Rachel’s, is at the mercy of her experience, knows her intimately, receiving her brain’s flood of “colour and sensation”. It digests as much of the tumour as it can, extending her life. The ant becomes Rachel, who absorbs it into the colour of her deepest self: “We are one.” This is a figure for the terrifying but ultimately benign power of empathy itself. If it cannot cure mortality, it can die trying. • Stevie Davies’s Arrest Me, For I Have Run Away is published by Parthian. Love and Other Thought Experiments is published by Corsair (RRP £14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.