This was my look for the ITV Gala in 2016. I am wearing a Maison Margiela dinner jacket that I put shoulder pads in, trousers by Zara and boots from Yves Saint Laurent. I have got a Chanel clutch, Marks & Spencer gloves – and I made the scarf on the morning of the gala. I remember thinking it needed something else, but I had no time to go home or go shopping. I was working at This Morning and there was an old dress that had been hanging around for months, so I added some fringing I found in their haberdashery department. I have worn that scarf probably more often than anything else in my wardrobe. I love stuff that is homemade and has a story behind it way more than buying couture or designer. One of my favourite shirts is from Asos: it is blue flannel and I embroidered loads of words on it – most of them are too rude for me to wear it on TV. My weight yo-yos a lot – I go from very thin to slightly overweight. It happens naturally, but it would be ridiculous if I didn’t practise what I preach, which is that it doesn’t matter, as long as you feel happy in the clothes that you are wearing. I am very lucky that I have got that mentality; there is always something in my wardrobe that I want to wear and I don’t take fashion too seriously. I remember going to work, years ago, head to toe in beige. Beige jumpers, beige trousers, a beige gilet – I looked like a Ford Cortina. I have got a picture of it – it’s hideous! But it doesn’t bother me because clothing should be fun. I look to a lot of women for my own style inspiration. I love the androgyny of Tilda Swinton, as well as my good friend Fearne Cotton’s style and Alber Elbaz, the former creative director of Lanvin. My accountant is also one of the coolest dressers – she is really into Japanese/Korean tailoring. When we have a meeting, I have to call ahead to check we are not dressed the same. I recently received an MBE for services to fashion and social awareness, which was a massive accolade for me. I am from a council estate in Leicester and never set out to be a stylist or a social activist. These things happened organically and to be honoured for them feels amazing. How to Look Good Naked is on Wednesdays at 9pm on Really from 4 March.