Verona produced a huge upset by coming from behind to beat Serie A leaders Juventus 2-1 at the Stadio Marc’Antonio Bentegodi on Saturday, inflicting a third defeat of the season on the Italian champions. Cristiano Ronaldo set a new Juventus record by scoring in a 10th consecutive league game to put the visitors in front after 65 minutes. Yet Ivan Juric’s side left the visitors stunned as Fabio Borini struck an equaliser before a late penalty from the substitute Giampaolo Pazzini completed the comeback. Juve remain on top of the table on 54 points, but Internazionale will draw level with them if they beat Milan on Sunday, and third-placed Lazio will go one point off top if they win at Parma. Verona moved up to sixth place on 34 points, stretching their unbeaten run to eight games. “What we need to realise is that winning is not to be taken for granted,” the Juventus coach, Maurizio Sarri, said. “We have to work harder, get dirty when we need to and not rest on our laurels. This team is accustomed to winning comfortably in recent years and we have to get it into our heads that we can’t afford to waste points.” Elsewhere in Italy, Atalanta’s hopes of requalifying for the Champions League received a boost as they came from behind to record their first away victory at Fiorentina for 27 years. Duvan Zapata and Ruslan Malinovskyi scored their goals as they came from behind to win 2-1 and move clear in fourth place. Torino lost 3-1 at home to their fellow strugglers Sampdoria. Bayer Leverkusen scored twice in two minutes to complete a thrilling comeback as they beat Borussia Dortmund 4-3, denying their visitors the chance to go second in the Bundesliga table. Kevin Volland swept a shot past Roman Buerki and into the far corner to give Leverkusen the lead in the 20th minute, but Mats Hummels deftly headed home from a corner to put the visitors back on level terms two minutes later. Emre Can then gave Dortmund the lead with a wonder strike in the 33rd minute, picking the ball up well outside the box before unleashing a brilliant dipping shot that curled into the net past the despairing dive of Lukas Hradecky. Undeterred, Leverkusen were back level two minutes before half-time as Dortmund failed to clear a corner and Volland struck his second goal of the game. Dortmund went ahead again in the 65th minute with a superb team goal, the ball worked quickly in from the right before Achraf Hakimi set up Raphaël Guerreiro for a simple side-footed finish. The visitors looked to be cruising to victory until goals from Leon Bailey and Lars Bender on 81 and 82 minutes suddenly put Leverkusen back in the driving seat, and Dortmund failed to recover from the one-two punch. The defeat left Dortmund third in the table on 39 points from 21 games, three points behind the leaders Bayern Munich, who play second-placed RB Leipzig (41 points) on Sunday. Leverkusen remain fifth on 37. Earlier in the day, Paderborn’s Klaus Gjasula scored a superb header to earn them a 1-1 draw away to Schalke while a Robin Quaison hat-trick gave Mainz a 3-1 victory over Hertha Berlin. A Luca Waldschmidt penalty gave Freiburg a 1-0 win at home to Hoffenheim, while Wolfsburg had Marin Pongracic sent off as they drew 1-1 with Fortuna Düsseldorf and Marius Bülter scored twice as Union Berlin beat second-from-bottom Werder Bremen 2-0. In Spain, Levante beat Leganés 2-0 in the early match before Getafe underlined their ambition to qualify for the Champions League by outplaying their direct rivals Valencia in a 3-0 home victory. Getafe’s 37-year-old striker Jorge Molina broke the deadlock by netting on the rebound in the 58th minute and doubled their advantage in the 67th, waltzing past three Valencia defenders before firing home. Molina’s strike partner Jaime Mata added a third goal in the 88th minute after Valencia’s new signing Alessandro Florenzi had been sent off with a straight red card. The victory was Getafe’s fourth consecutive league win without conceding a goal and tightened their hold on third place in the standings, leaving them on 42 points after 23 games. Valencia are five points behind the Madrid side in fifth. Real Valladolid and Villarreal drew 1-1 and Atlético Madrid beat Granada 1-0 in the late game.