It is the beginning of the 1960s and dark magic seems to be occurring in the village of Much Deeping in Surrey. Rufus Sewell plays Mark Easterbrook, a man haunted by the sudden and mysterious death of his first wife, and when a list with his name on is found in the shoe of a dead woman, along with others who had subsequently died, his once idyllic world begins to unravel. Sewell is wide-eyed and convincing as a man becoming increasingly untethered in this adaptation of Agatha Christie’s 1961 novel. Ammar Kalia Two years since marine biologist Monty Halls and his family travelled to the Galápagos islands, they return to witness what effects the climate crisis is having on one of the most fascinating ecosystems on the planet. First up, Monty witnesses the volcanic power that created them. Ammar Kalia Rob Bell follows six abandoned rail routes. In the first of this new series he is in Matlock to explore “perhaps the most unlikely and outrageous railway line ever built in Britain”: an express route between London and Manchester, cutting across what is now the Peak District national park. Ali Catterall Just when the six remaining candidates didn’t think they could take any more, they are required to take some more. The finale of this brutal SAS hazing boasts one of the most dangerous underwater tasks ever featured in the series. Followed by more swearing and, eventually, some catharsis for everyone concerned. Phil Harrison Breach Theatre’s play, based on the transcripts of the 17th-century trial in which the pope’s favourite painter Artemisia Gentileschi accused the artist Agostino Tassi of rape, is given a visceral TV dramatisation. It is shocking to note the similarities to today’s trial tactics. AK After cleaning up at the Baftas, will 1917 sweep the board at the Oscars, too? Expect lots of love for the war epic in any case, with gongs also bound to go to Parasite, Joker and perhaps Greta Gerwig’s Little Women, which, disappointingly, failed to get a nomination for best director. Hannah J Davies Nightcrawler, 11.15pm, BBC Two There is something vampiric about Jake Gyllenhaal’s starey-eyed ghoul Lou Bloom, who learns to make a living feasting on human blood: he is a freelance TV cameraman, turning up to film the gory results of crime and car smashes. Dan Gilroy’s assured debut is a violent, queasily satirical drama. Paul Howlett Six Nations Rugby Union: France v Italy 2.30pm, BBC One. England’s victors take on the underpowered Italians. Premier League Football: Manchester City v West Ham 4.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. A clash from the Etihad Stadium. Women’s Super League Football: Manchester United v Chelsea 4.15pm, BT Sport 1. At Leigh Sports Village stadium