Four Turkish soldiers and at least six Syrian government troops have been killed as the two sides traded fire in Syria’s Idlib province, in a significant escalation in the battle to control the country’s last opposition stronghold. Turkey has sent a military convoy across its southern border into Idlib in an effort to stem the bloodshed caused by a ferocious regime assault on the area in the past two weeks under the cover of Russian airstrikes, which have driven 700,000 civilians to the Turkish border. Artillery shelling on Turkish positions near the flashpoint town of Saraqeb early on Monday caused four casualties and injured nine more soldiers, the Turkish defence ministry said, adding that 30-35 troops fighting for Bashar al-Assad had been killed in retaliatory attacks. The war monitor the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights put the number at six. While Turkey has intervened militarily in Syria three times to date in cross-border operations against Islamic State and US-backed Kurdish-led forces it regards as a terrorist threat, Monday’s clash was a rare direct confrontation against Assad’s troops and allied militias. Turkey, which backs some rebel groups in Idlib and is home to about 4 million Syrian refugees, is unwilling to open its border to more. Further fighting risks a serious escalation in the nine-year conflict. Speaking on Monday, the Turkish president said the operation in Idlib was ongoing and reiterated a warning to Assad’s backers in Moscow not to stand in the way of the Turkish action. “Those who test Turkey’s determination regarding Syria’s Idlib with such treacherous attacks will realise their mistake,” Recep Tayyip Erdoğan told reporters before his departure from Ankara for Ukraine. Idlib and the surrounding countryside are nominally protected by a de-escalation agreement brokered by Moscow and Ankara in 2018. Fighting in the area has steadily worsened, however, since Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), al-Qaida’s former Syrian affiliate, emerged as the dominant group in the area last year. Damascus and Moscow say the HTS takeover legitimises the campaign against Idlib as they are targeting terrorists not covered by the ceasefire deal who have bolstered attacks on government-held Aleppo. Aid agencies and rescue workers, however, say airstrikes have demolished dozens of hospitals, schools and other civilian infrastructure, and warn that Idlib’s population of 3 million is at risk of the conflict’s biggest humanitarian crisis yet.