The head of the civil service must urgently investigate why Boris Johnson’s communications director banned certain journalists from a briefing on the EU with senior government officials, Keir Starmer, the Labour leadership frontrunner, has said. Starmer warned that the decision to exclude some of the media from a briefing with David Frost, the government’s chief trade negotiator, had “undermined the civil service’s ability to comply with its core values of integrity, objectivity and impartiality”. In a letter to Mark Sedwill, the cabinet secretary, Starmer said: “The media’s access to the prime minister’s chief negotiator should not be determined by political favouritism.” Starmer asked Sedwill to investigate urgently and “provide assurance that such an incident will not happen again”. The furore occurred in the foyer of 10 Downing Street on Monday afternoon when selected journalists were invited to a briefing and others were excluded. Those not invited – from the Mirror, HuffPost, PoliticsHome, Independent and others – were asked by security to stand on one side of a rug and those allowed in were asked to stand on the other side. After Lee Cain, No 10’s communications director, said the uninvited journalists must leave the building, the rest of the group collectively decided to walk out. Among those who joined the boycott were the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg, ITV’s Robert Peston, Sky’s Beth Rigby and political journalists from the Sun, Telegraph, Mail, Financial Times and Guardian. Afterwards, a No 10 source said there had always been a practice of briefing an “inner lobby”. Journalists disputed that there was any precedent for government officials being dragged into selective briefing. Starmer said the decision should be investigated under the civil service code as Frost is a civil service appointee. “The actions of the prime minister’s director of communications, whois a political appointee, are deeply disturbing,” he said. “I am concerned that they have undermined the civil service’s ability to comply with its core values of integrity, objectivity and impartiality. Equally, banning sections of the media from attendingimportant briefings about important matters of government is damaging to democracy. “For instance, the government’s post-Brexit trade plans are matters of national importance. The media’s access to the prime minister’s chief negotiator should not be determined by political favouritism.” Michael Gove, a senior cabinet minister, refused to comment on the decision or say what he as a former journalist would have done in the same situation. He told Sky News that he did not know the full circumstances but he was sure the dispute could be sorted out.