Instrumental in helping Liverpool race into a 22-point lead at the top of the table, Roberto Firmino has established himself as a firm Anfield favourite since arriving from Hoffenheim four and a half years ago. As they wake up to the aftermath of Storm Ciara on this cold Monday, Liverpool fans will be unimpressed with reports Bayern Munich are preparing a £75m summer bid for the beaming Brazilian. With Liverpool reported to be in the box seat to sign RB Leipzig striker Timo Werner, Bayern believe they might be prepared to listen to substantial offers for Firmino and have notions of fielding him alongside another of their targets, Leroy Sané of Manchester City. Favourites to land Werner from Leipzig, Liverpool are also hoping to bolster their midfield options by signing Kai Havertz from Bayer Leverkusen, although the Star would have us believe that in the event of failing to land his man, Jürgen Klopp could attempt to mastermind a surprise return to Anfield for Philippe Coutinho. Two years on from his departure, the Brazilian is currently on loan at Bayern from Barcelona. Speculation that Chelsea have already agreed a deal with Ajax to sign André Onana this summer suggests Kepa Arrizabalaga’s future at Stamford Bridge is less than assured. The young Spanish goalkeeper was dropped by Frank Lampard for Chelsea’s most recent match against Leicester and it remains to be seen how he will react to this career setback after having the entirety of the winter break to stew on it. Chelsea are also reported to be keen on Everton’s Brazilian winger Richarlison, while the agent of their midfielder, Jorginho, says his client is open to a reunion with Maurizio Sarri at Juventus. Weekend reports suggest the Italian champions are open to letting Aaron Ramsey leave after just one season at the club. Arsenal like the cut of Le Havre midfield dynamo Pape Gueye’s jib, but will face competition for the League 2 star’s signature from Sevilla, Milan, Valencia and Udinese. Lille’s 22-year-old central defender Gabriel Magalhães also features on Arsenal’s summer shopping list and it is understood he would cost them or any other suitors around £30m. Meanwhile in Portugal, Sporting winger Rafael Camacho is wanted by Manchester United and Everton, having previously spent time as a boy with Manchester City and Liverpool.