What a series, what a run chase and what a crick in the neck watching the ball sail through the Centurion skies. With its short boundaries and much-vaunted “thin air” SuperSport Park is a place for hitting sixes. There were 28 of them on an afternoon when cricket was transformed into a game of the skies and England chased down South Africa’s 222 in thrilling fashion. The decisive hand came from Eoin Morgan, who walked out with the third T20 international slipping away at 140 for three in the 13th over and just kept on pumping the ball over the rope. He ended on 57 not out off 22 balls with seven sixes, all but 10 of his runs scored on the leg-side as he targeted that boundary with relentless precision. At the end of a wonderfully enjoyable series England emerged 2-1 winners. This was billed as preparation for the T20 World Cup in Australia. The high-tempo brilliance of England’s batting suggests they have a chance of going far. It might also be one to watch from behind the sofa. “If I can manage to be there at the end, I’d back myself to be good enough to get guys over the line,” Morgan said of that stunning chase. “It creates belief that you can chase down anything and it reinforces what our method is in chasing big totals down. It’s a reference point to what we can do.” At the start of the day Quinton de Kock had won the toss and opted to bat. Heinrich Klaasen replaced Jon‑Jon Smuts in South Africa’s XI. Joe Denly was unwell, replaced by Dawid Malan for his first game on tour. This ground was a baking hot place in the midday sun, the grassy banks thronged like a riviera beach in August. England began with Moeen Ali from the Hennops river end. His first ball was flayed through the off-side. His fifth was lifted over mid-on. It was that kind of day already. Mark Wood saw his first ball spanked over mid-off for a clean, cloudless six by De Kock, a shot simply pulled out of the air by this mind-bendingly brilliant striker of a ball. Pitches like this are often described as roads. This was something else, a four-lane super-smooth autobahn. There was almost an audible gulp from England’s bowlers as South Africa’s fifty came up in 3.4 overs. Enter Ben Stokes, who has a happy habit of taking wickets in his first over. De Kock was deceived by an off-cutter and caught at deep square-leg. Next over Adil Rashid took out Temba Bavuma for a sparkling 49 with a lovely wrong ’un that snaked in between bat and pad. At 100 for two off 10 overs Klaasen introduced himself. When in Centurion, send for a brawny-shouldered Afrikaner. Klaasen plays for the Titans here. He knows the angles, the pitch, the sounds. Early on he went straight or over midwicket. Later he bent his knees and carved behind point. He went to 50 off 25 balls, pulling a slower ball for his fourth six to get there. He was out skying Tom Curran to Stokes at mid-off for a fine hometown 66 off 33. England will perhaps regret a lack of control with the ball. Wood was wild on the highveld. His first 12 balls went for 39 runs. Only Curran looked in control of his variations. He bowled one sensational dot ball in the 17th over, a back-of-the-hand slowie that Dwaine Pretorius could only watch, watch some more, and then block. And so to England’s last batting innings of the tour, with licence to come out swinging. Jason Roy was caught early on trying to hit the ball to Lesotho. Jos Buttler looked frantic, swatting and swiping, but still picking the gaps. He got to 37 off 19 balls without seeming to find the middle once. On came South Africa’s banker Tabraiz Shamsi to bowl his hunched left-arm wrist spin. Buttler took one look and brought out the scimitar, swiping four then six. At 81 for one off seven overs England were slightly ahead. Buttler’s fifty came up with a run-down to third man, a player good enough to lead a vertiginous run chase even when he is finding his way back to form. He departed ramping one up in the air just after the hundred had come up in the ninth over. Malan walked out for his first proper bat since January and scratched about for an angsty 11. Jonny Bairstow went to a quick-fire 64 before missing a slower ball. When he plays like this there is a beautifully murderous quality to his hitting. England needed 78 off 37 balls with Stokes and Morgan at the wicket and a need to pump the throttle from a standing start. Morgan did so with breathless intent, standing coiled at the crease and hitting five of his first 15 balls for six. The chase had been cut to 33 off the last 18 balls. Andile Phehlukwayo had been hard to get away. Stokes picked his moment, twice hammering sixes over wide mid-on, the second into the car park, a ridiculous piece of hitting that turned the game decisively. Morgan pumped another six over deep midwicket’s fingertips, then lifted another miles back to go to his half-century, as good a finisher’s innings as you will see. Moeen smashed the first ball of the last over past mid-off. England had got there with legroom to spare.