The first vaccine targeting China’s coronavirus could be available in 18 months, “so we have to do everything today using available weapons”, the World Health Organization chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has said. Speaking in Geneva, he said the virus had been named COVID-19, explaining that it was important to avoid stigma and that other names could be inaccurate. Under a set of guidelines issued in 2015, WHO advises against using place names such as Ebola and Zika - where those diseases were first identified and which are now inevitably linked to them in the public mind. People’s names - usually the scientists who identified the disease - are also banned, as are “terms that incite undue fear” such as “unknown” or “fatal”, the WHO said. Tedros asked countries to be “as aggressive as possible” in fighting the coronavirus on Tuesday. “If the world doesn’t want to wake up and consider the virus as public enemy number one, I don’t think we will will learn from our lessons,” he said. “We are still in containment strategy and should not allow the virus to have a space to have local transmission.” The virus has killed more than 1,000 people, infected over 42,000 and reached some 25 countries, with the WHO declaring a global health emergency. Addressing scientists at the first international conference on combating the virus earlier on Tuesday, Tedros warned that the virus was a “very grave threat”. “Viruses can have more powerful consequences than any terrorist action,” he told reporters later. About 400 scientists were taking part in the two-day international meeting in Geneva called to review how the virus is transmitted and possible vaccines against it. “We are not defenceless,” Tedros said, adding: “If we invest now... we have a realistic chance of stopping this outbreak.” Participants will also discuss the source of the virus, which is thought to have originated in bats and reached humans via other “intermediary” species such as snakes or pangolins. WHO sent an advance team to China this week for an international mission to examine the epidemic. It was unclear, however, whether the team would be able to visit Wuhan, a city in central China which has been under lockdown after the outbreak was registered in a food and live animal market in the city. No specific treatment or vaccine against the virus exists, and WHO has repeatedly urged countries to share data in order to further research into the disease. “That is especially true in relation to sharing of samples and sequences. To defeat this outbreak, we need open and equitable sharing, according to the principles of fairness and equity,” Tedros told the scientific conference. He said he hoped the scientists could agree a roadmap “around which researchers and donors will align”. Several teams of experts in Australia, Britain, China, France, Germany and the United States are racing to develop a vaccine - a process that normally takes years. Efforts to come up with a vaccine are being led by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), a body established in 2017 to finance costly biotechnology research in the wake of an Ebola outbreak in West Africa that killed more than 11,000 people. Ultimately, however, scientists may end up in the same situation they were during the 2002-03 outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) - which died out before a vaccine could be fully developed. A close cousin of COVID-19, SARS spread around the world and killed nearly 800.