If Manchester City are to sell Leroy Sané to Bayern Munich, they will ask for Serge Gnabry to be part of the deal. The former Arsenal winger never did much during his time in England, famously being deemed not good enough for Tony Pulis’s West Brom during a forgettable loan spell, but the Germany international could be the man to liven up Pep Guardiola’s squad. We will be all hanging our hats on the summer transfer saga of Paul Pogba battling to leave Manchester United. Soon Mino Raiola will run out of things to say, having already had a go at Ole Gunnar Solskjær and then tried to make up. Paul’s other man in the media is brother Mathias, who previously played for Crewe and Wrexham. The striker says his sibling definitely wants out of Old Trafford, to no one’s surprise. Mathias has played for nine clubs in his time so knows a thing or two about transfers. Arsenal are hopeful of tying down versatile left-sided player Bukayo Saka, who only has 18 months left on his current contract, to a five-year deal. The 18-year-old has been linked with moves to Manchester United, Bayern Munich and Liverpool, which has forced the Gunners to act. Manchester United are back on the hunt for a director of football following another miserable January transfer window. Antero Henrique, formerly of Paris Saint-Germain and Red Bull’s head of sport Ralf Rangnick are the current names being considered by Ed Woodward and his merry band of men. The list of suitors for Birmingham City’s 16-year-old star Jude Bellingham is growing by the week. At the moment, Manchester United, Barcelona, Real Madrid and now Chelsea all want to dip their hands into their pockets to splash out on the talented midfielder. Former Middlesbrough forward Martin Braithwaite is inching closer to his inexplicable €20m move from Leganés and Barcelona due to the Catalans having run out of fit strikers. Meanwhile Giorgio Chiellini, 35, is set to extend his contract with Juventus for another year and Stoke City’s record signing Gianni Imbula is in talks with Lokomotiv Moscow over ending his underwhelming spell in England.