Magnus Carlsen, the world champion, has signed a controversial new two-year sponsorship deal for 2020-21 which could put the Norwegian, 29, on a collision course with the global chess body Fide. Carlsen’s agreement is with the Malta-based Kindred Group, which owns the sports betting firm Unibet, where chess is one of its specialities. Unibet sponsored the 2014 Stavanger elite tournament but, because promotion of foreign gambling companies is illegal in Norway, they did so under the banner of “No Logo Norway Chess”. Carlsen will be the Unibet “global ambassador”, wearing its logo and promoting it everywhere except at home due to Norwegian law. Already last year he supported Kindred in its unsuccessful attempt to forge a link with the Norwegian Chess Federation. After that his own club, Offerspill, accepted its €400,000 backing to support young Norwegian talent. Indications from reader comments on major chess websites are that many fans view the choice of a gambling firm as lacking in gravitas for a world champion. For several years previously Carlsen’s uncontroversial sponsor was the Norwegian investment bank Arctic Securities. Fide’s international director, Mohamed Al-Mudahka, raised an immediate red flag. The Qatar grandmaster, whose wife, the former world women’s champion Zhu Chen, is Fide’s treasurer, tweeted: “You can forget about this logo in Fide events.” The implication is that Carlsen could be on a collision course with the global chess body if he tries to promote Unibet during his world title match in November. Reality will be more complicated but may become clearer once the host city for the 14-game, €2m series, and the winner of the candidates in Ekaterinburg are known. Carlsen has not signed a Fide contract for the championship match and there is an unspoken implication that in extreme circumstances, with no agreement, he could go it alone. To counter that, Fide’s preferred candidates winner is probably the US favourite Fabiano Caruana, who is current No2, all-time No3, and the narrowly defeated 2018 challenger. Caruana closed his rating gap to Carlsen to 20 points with his runaway victory at Tata Steel Wijk aan Zee. Since Carlsen has announced he is taking time off “to break and regroup”, Caruana will have a serious chance to capture the No1 rating if he wins by a clear margin over 14 games in Ekaterinburg. There are precedents for the clear No1 champion acting independently. In the pre-Fide era both Emanuel Lasker and Alexander Alekhine made their own match deals, bypassing strong opponents such as Akiba Rubinstein and a return match Alekhine v Jose Raoul Capablanca. In Soviet times, a return match clause excessively favoured Mikhail Botvinnik. Bobby Fischer negotiated unsuccessfully with Anatoly Karpov for the “Absolute World Championship of Chess Professionals”. Garry Kasparov also wanted to go it alone, but Karpov was unwilling, so his break with Fide was deferred until Nigel Short became the challenger. Kasparov’s rival body, the Professional Chess Association, worked well only as long as it had backing from the technology giant Intel, and he later wrote that his split with Fide was a mistake. Coronavirus spooks China’s world title candidates Six weeks to go before the opening round of the eight-man world championship candidates at Ekaterinburg, and the coronavirus epidemic is causing serious problems for China’s Wang Hao and Ding Liren, who will be competing against rivals from Russia, the US, Azerbaijan, and the Netherlands. Wang Hao, who took second prize at the Gibraltar Masters last week, had a training camp in Beijing arranged for himself and his aides this month, but that event has now been cancelled. Instead, the 30-year-old will stay in Tokyo for a month before travelling to Russia. This was one of Wang’s best games in Gibraltar. Taking the initiative as Black in a 3 Nd2 c5 French, his rook and pawn systematically outmanoeuvre White’s pair of bishops. The situation is worse for Ding Liren, the world No3 and second favourite in Ekaterinburg after Caruana. Ding lives with his parents in his coastal home city Wenzhou, which has nine million inhabitants and 300 hospitalised virus cases. He had intended to meet his aides for training sessions, but now everything has to be done via Skype. Movement in Wenzhou is restricted, and even if Ding just wants to go out into the street he has to inform the manager of the building and have his temperature taken. Nearer the tournament, which starts on 15 March, there could yet be visa problems for both Ding and Wang, while their inward flights from China are only permitted to arrive at Moscow’s Sheremetyevo airport, 900 miles west of Ekaterinburg in the Urals. China’s No3, Wei Yi, has also been affected and has just withdrawn from the Prague Masters starting in 12 February where he was the No2 seed. He is not ill, but “the sudden coronavirus happened in China, and as the situation became worse and worse, it was impossible to make this journey”. Alireza Firouzja will replace him. 3657 (a first prize winner by Fritz Giegold,1957) 1 Bd4 g3 2 Bb6! axb6 3 Kc1! Kxc3 4 Ne2 mate