In today’s Absurd Football News, Barcelona have been given permission to sign a replacement for Ousmane Dembélé, a man so knacked by hamstring-twang that Barça players even took to the pitch at the weekend in funereal fashion, every single member of the squad donning specially-prepared Dembélé shirts. He’s pulled his hamstring, lads! The upshot of Dembélé’s injury is that Barcelona are a little short in attack. This, of course, is entirely their own fault. Dembélé picked up the problem well before the end of the January transfer window, yet despite their almost limitless financial resources, Barcelona chose not to loan or buy a replacement. Rather, they actually let one of their potential replacements, Carles Pérez, leave on transfer deadline day, joining Roma on loan. Bring out the violins! Listen close, and you can hear the Rumour Mill’s heart smashing into a million pieces. Any normal club would be now be in a tricky spot. But Barcelona have arguably the most famous production line of talent in the world in their academy, La Masia. Maybe Ansu Fati could get a run of starts, or Riqui Puig could be added to the first-team squad? Perhaps there is another star of tomorrow that could be called upon to play the final 15 minutes of another routine La Liga win? Nope, instead Barcelona are going shopping after being given 15 days to sign a player who is already playing in La Liga or is a free agent. Naturally, they have turned to former Middlesbrough flop Martin Braithwaite, who managed nine goals in two years for the Championship club but is currently playing at relegation-threatened Leganés. The Danish forward would cost €20m, and could well be the difference between them going up and down. Leganés, by the way, will not be permitted to sign a replacement of their own, another bitter blow for a club in a league that is already massively financially skewed in favour of the bigger clubs. Braithwaite will likely play a handful of minutes and not make any meaningful contribution. His Mr 15%, Ali Dursun (who also looks after Frenkie de Jong) will get another payday. Leganés, second from bottom and two points from safety, could well go down. That’s football, folks! The Paul Pogba machine has just clicked into gear, again. You can read about that here, if you have the stomach. Donny van de Beek heads a list of names that are being invited on to Ajax’s gilded merchant ship, Do Een, as the Dutch club look to cash in on the stars that guided them to the Champions League semi-final last season. Goalkeeper André Onana, left back Nicolas Tagliafico and winger David Neres are the others being touted for big-money moves, with Real Madrid linked with Van de Beek. He said last month: “Nothing is official [with Madrid]. There is no contract. That is the situation. That has not changed throughout the season. I don’t want to choose. Both are great clubs, but as I said before, Ajax is also a great club.” Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/02/17-58536-gnl.fw.20200217.jf.jarsofurine.mp3 Yaya Touré is back, baby! The big Ivorian could well pop up at Brazilian club Botafogo, who also signed Keisuke Honda in January, if personal terms can be agreed. Touré has most recently been playing in China with Qingdao Huanghai. Finally, Tottenham and Everton are reportedly keen on Chris Smalling, who has recently earned the nickname ‘Smalldini’ for his form at Roma. Manchester United have a contract with the defender until June 2022, with the option to extend for a further year, and so could still command a hefty fee for the 30-year-old.