Such is the devotion inspired by Jeremy Corbyn in some Labour members that cynics have called his supporters a cult. But cults are notoriously hard to leave, while Labour is easily abandoned, as millions of the party’s once loyal voters demonstrated at the last election. That defeat tested the faith of dedicated Corbyn supporters, which is why Rebecca Long-Bailey is not leading the pack in Labour’s leadership contest despite enjoying the incumbent’s blessing. Enough members recognise that their party took a wrong turn to be wary of the candidate who revs her engine for another ride down the same road. But Corbyn’s charismatic legacy is still powerful enough to forbid his denigration by any would-be successor. It is permissible to admit that Labour lost the election under his leadership, but not to attribute that defeat to his character, actions or beliefs. The central question for post-Corbyn Labour – whether it is (or should be) an anti-capitalist party – has gone unanswered Keir Starmer is the frontrunner because he embodies the awkward impulse to move on from a mistake without naming it. He comes pre-loaded with the aura of professional capability that Corbyn never mastered. But he also promises not to “oversteer” away from the 2019 manifesto that he dares to criticise only for being “overloaded” with policy, implying that the pitch was fine, just the volume needed adjustment. If there is so little for the party to regret, blame for the absence of Labour government must land on the shoulders of benighted voters led astray by a wicked media. I doubt Starmer thinks that way but he is smart enough not to confront those in the party who do. He pleads for unity, setting up his camp on the sprawling ideological terrain that has its rightmost boundary just short of anything liable to be called Blairism and no leftmost boundary at all. It makes sense to seek votes there, where the vast majority of Labour members dwell, but it is too broad a space for one candidate to cover without feats of intellectual dishonesty. Thus, Starmer denounces the “free-market model” while advocating a post-Brexit relationship of intimate alignment with the European single market. The combination requires not believing that competition drives prosperity, unless that competition involves submission to rules drafted in Brussels for a bloc of which the UK is no longer a member. So free markets are palatable only when served abroad with continental garnish? The incoherence does have a political rationale. Labour members like the EU more than they like capitalism. If Starmer understands the relationship between the two, he isn’t going to spell it out before all the ballots are counted. It has become standard in Labour circles to use markets as a byword for greed, and capitalism as a synonym for exploitation, without saying whether they should be reformed or abolished and, if the latter, what should be the replacement. The lazy answer is “socialism”, which can mean everything from Sure Start centres to a command economy. Self-certified socialists are an ideologically diverse bunch, featuring people who wear the hammer-and-sickle in earnest as an emblem of class struggle, people who treat it as a radical fashion accessory, and people who abhor it as the insignia of a mass-murderous totalitarian regime. All three types are well represented in Labour’s membership and leadership candidates try not to offend any of them. As a result, the central question for post-Corbyn Labour – whether it is (or should be) an anti-capitalist party – goes unanswered. As shadow chancellor, John McDonnell cultivated ambiguity on this point, hinting at Marxist upheaval for hardline audiences while reassuring squeamish fellow travellers that he planned nothing more drastic than a spot of Scandinavian-style redistribution. Now the choices are submerged in moralising banalities about the kind of economy Britain should have: equal; regionally balanced; democratic; run for people, not profit. Leadership candidates agree that nationalisation is a virtue applied to some sectors but not all, yet the criteria have never been spelled out. Private companies would not be allowed near railways, but whether they can safely offer broadband or clean hospitals is uncertain. There is some moral threshold in public life that businesses must not cross, but no one can say where it is. The bill for taking things into public ownership, plus subsequent running costs, would be sent to the rich, also ill-defined. None of the leadership candidates has the courage to say that Labour’s ambitions to grow the state would involve casting the tax net wider, although plenty of voters inferred as much. This week marks the 120th anniversary of Labour’s foundation; the leadership contest feels almost as long. Yet it is without serious analysis of the past or substantial account of Britain’s future. It is just shovelling meaningless words into an interminable present. At least Lisa Nandy has noticed the void, even if she cannot fill it. “The challenges we face are so big and yet the debate we are having is so small,” she said in one hustings. The exasperation rang truer than her rivals’ efforts at inspiration. Perhaps it is unfair to expect an exchange of hard truths in front of an audience that craves the soft focus. The party is traumatised by defeat, weary from factional warfare, eager for unity, which is something everyone can agree on as long as no one tries to spell out what it is they are uniting around. But unity without clarity is no route out of opposition. It is a trap. Perpetual opposition becomes a necessary condition for maintaining that vague kind of unity. The lines can only stay comfortably blurred when there is no responsibility to govern. Whatever the candidates might promise about leading the party back to power, the contest suggests the winner will come away with only a mandate to march on the spot, arms swinging, feet rising, fearful of choosing a real destination, while pretending there is movement and declaring the direction to be true left. • Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnist