Scotland have been fired up for their Six Nations clash with England by a fighting team talk from the world light-welterweight boxing champion, Josh Taylor. The Tartan Tornado visited the Scotland squad on Friday and delivered a few words of inspiration as Gregor Townsend’s side look to continue their hold of the Calcutta Cup. Stuart Hogg captains his side against England for the first time with Scotland looking to extend their unbeaten run against their old rivals, having won this fixture in 2018 and mounted a thrilling comeback in the 38-38 draw at Twickenham last year. Nonetheless England go into Saturday’s match as favourites despite beginning their campaign with a disappointing defeat by France but Hogg revealed Taylor’s words of encouragement had helped instil belief. “He’s looking forward to coming here and supporting us,” said Hogg, who missed last year’s fixture through injury. “He has excelled in his sport and I loved hearing from him. He touched on the fact nobody believed in his ability to become world champion. And he made people change their thought process on him. I’m excited to learn from him – and no doubt he will get us riled up.” Scotland are braced for an onslaught from England after Eddie Jones announced sweeping changes to his side on Thursday and named six forwards on the replacements bench. The weather is also likely to be a factor with Storm Ciara set to hit Edinburgh on Saturday evening with gusts of up to 50mph forecast. The Six Nations organisers have said they are “monitoring the situation” and are in dialogue with the unions but Hogg believes wet and windy weather will suit the home side better. “It’s classic Scottish weather,” added Hogg. “We’re used to it. We’ve got a couple of tricks up our sleeve. Hopefully if the weather comes in we can adapt because it will be the team that does that the quickest that will have the best outcome. “It will be a tough physical challenge up front with them having a six-two split on the bench. But our boys are fully aware of that and to get a foothold in the game they’re going to have to stand up and go toe-to-toe and better them. It’s an exciting one for our forward pack.” Hogg has the benefit of now plying his trade at Exeter to give his teammates valuable insight into England’s players, having made a fast start to life at Sandy Park. Despite confrontational comments coming out of both camps this week, Hogg insists he has nothing but respect for the opponents. “I’ve been fortunate enough to play for a few of their boys on Lions tours and they’re world-class,” said Hogg. “We want an opportunity to turn them over. I fully believe in our team, that we can do that and we’ll do everything in our power. But they’re a world-class team with world-class individuals we’re going to have to shut down.” Scotland began this year’s campaign with defeat in Ireland but had their chances in Dublin and the result might have been different had Hogg not made a shocking error in dropping the ball with the try-line beckoning. “Last week we were bitterly disappointed with the final outcome,” he added. “There were some good aspects to our game. We really took it to Ireland in attack and fronted up in defence. We’re gutted with the fact that we could have potentially won that game, so things to work on this week and go one better.”