In the Rose Garden She’s in the rose garden again, staring at her right arm, its pale soft underside that never gets the sun, never gets tanned. It’s very strange, she thinks, because the veins at her wrist are greenish-blue: but the blood that’s blossoming, overblown already, dropping fat petals on her dress, her shoes, the path with its edging of sharp pointed tiles (weathered is the word she’ll later hear and not understand) – the blood is brilliant startling red, much redder than the clouds of dark pink roses tangled above her – red, and at its heart a splinter, a glimpse of white, bright as the spiny shells that mark the drop from the patio, where her parents and the others are talking, moving their mouths and making gestures, though the sound doesn’t reach her – the drop from the patio down to the lawn, and all the way beyond  to where she is, in the rose garden, staring at her right arm, its strange new blossoming. Narratives describing strange, sometimes dreamlike, episodes from a female protagonist’s childhood dominate the second section of Helen Tookey’s four-part collection of poems and prose poems, City of Departures. Some of the subjects are literary heroines or versions of them: here, the pronoun “she” leaves identification open. Her experience is both individual and representative. The experience the poem describes – self-harm or suicide attempt – is dispassionately presented by the third-person narrator. The protagonist is dispassionate, too, curious about the effects of her own action, but observing them from a distance. There’s a fine level of formal and tonal control in the poem, reflecting this stance – a stance we might call “writerly” in its discipline. The first tercet simply presents the child or young woman noticing the pallor of her right arm’s “underside”. And then the narrative’s rich visual detail emerges: veins, blood that is “blossoming already” into “fat drops”, the rose garden itself and its larger setting where, like magnified thorns, there are “sharp-pointed tiles” edging the path and “spiny shells that mark / the drop from the patio”. A single sentence gathers energy as it unrolls across the six ensuing stanzas, and its length necessitates a little well-judged repetition. While setting the poem back on its narrative course after some important descriptive digressions, the reappearance of two grammatical subjects, “the blood” and “the drop from the patio”, suggest the unstoppable flow of blood and sentence. Central to the flow of meaning is that “splinter” of white brightness, located in the blood itself, or, rather, the redness of the blood. We might think of Blake’s sick rose, revised so that there’s insight rather than corruption at its heart. The narrative is clear and secretive at the same time: it prompts questions. I wanted to know whether the first line implied that the protagonist’s self-harming was frequent (“she’s in the rose garden again”) or whether previous excursions to the rose garden would have had a different emphasis. The latter seems more likely, because the blood’s blossoming is described, later on, as “new”. The rose garden as symbolism offers various interpretative possibilities. Then there’s the interplay of the different kinds of drop, the blood, dropping like overblown rose-petals, and the “drop” between the raised patio, where the parents and “the others” are talking, and the garden. Are these adults quarrelling, discussing their problem child, or simply enjoying a glass of wine? We don’t need to know, of course. It’s enough that we’re shown the child’s wilting isolation when we’re told that she can see the adults’ gestures, and their mouths moving, but not hear what they’re saying. The physical setting, aesthetic, expensive and sharp-edged, skilfully embodies the difficult family story. In the Rose Garden might be partly about puberty, a terminus for a reluctant departure from childhood into womanhood. It’s an interpretation that would fit the collection’s larger context of loss and dislocation. The title prose poem is here and perhaps makes an interesting comparative text. While not wanting to shoehorn a delicate and elegant poem into the Brexit boot, I couldn’t help finding a certain aptness to the UK’s current historical moment. Perhaps In the Rose Garden might also be read as a parable about declarations of independence, and their price? 