After a brief moment of vulnerability, Altior asserted himself to be a comfortable winner of the Game Spirit Chase here and reassure his supporters on his way to next month’s Cheltenham Festival. Nico de Boinville had to push him along between the final two fences but the veteran chaser, returned to two miles, responded well on the run-in to score by three lengths over Sceau Royal. There was an early scare when Bun Doran, setting the pace, fell at the water jump. Altior had inches to spare but was not obstructed by the faller, who rose to his feet apparently unharmed, and the pace was set thereafter by Dynamite Dollars, seen as the main pre-race danger. Briefly, Altior traded at almost even money on Betfair when it seemed as though he might be in trouble late in the race but that proved to be nothing more than his usual ‘flat spot’. He was returned as the 1-3 favourite and was shortened by several firms for next month’s Champion Chase, with only bits of 11-4 still available. While Altior ran to a very high standard when chasing home Cyrname at Ascot in November, that first defeat over obstacles was bound to shake the confidence of his followers and perhaps even those closest to him. Though there was little doubt that he retained all his ability, this was his first success since Sandown’s Celebration Chase 10 months ago, as he was prevented from running over Christmas by an abscess. “I think we’ve still got more improvement to come,” De Boinville told ITV Racing moments after this win. “His turn of foot from the last to the line was devastating. I think he’s still slightly feeling the effects of that abscess from Christmas but it’s more a confidence issue than anything else. “His jumping will get slicker, so there’s plenty more to come. We’re back where we belong and it’s all systems go for Cheltenham.” “We’ve had a few hiccups on the way but we’re getting there and hopefully at the right time,” said Altior’s trainer, Nicky Henderson, who acknowledged that the horse “took a blow” before the third-last, before finding his second wind. “He quickened up very well.”