We are in peak dal season: it’s all I want to eat at the moment right now. My version of Gujarati dal bhat is bright with lime juice and balanced by a little sweetness that could come from the jaggery, but – let’s be honest – will probably come from some brown sugar, as that’s what most of us have. It sits halfway between a soup and a stew, and its delight comes from the balance of sweet (brown sugar), sour (lime juice) and the temper. This quickly fried spice blend is a deal breaker: it’s what makes this dal. The curry leaves and spices crisp up, adding texture pops as well as bags of multilayered flavour. Temper, temper. A traditional dal bhat is made with toor dal (split pigeon peas), but I have used split red lentils, as they are easier to find. If you want to make this with toor dal, soak them overnight in cold water then cook for about 40 minutes, adding more water if needed. Curry leaves can be found in Indian shops and a lot of supermarkets; buy a bunch, keep them in the freezer and use as needed. Prep 15 minCook 40 minServes 4 For the dal2 large tomatoes, roughly chopped200g red lentils, rinsed1 large pinch sea salt1 tsp red chilli powder (I use kashmiri: it’s milder so you can use 2 tsp)1 tsp ground turmericJuice of 3 limes1 thumb-sized piece ginger, peeled and finely chopped2 tbsp jaggery or caster sugar 5 tbsp ghee or vegetable oil8 curry leaves3 small, fresh red chillies, seeds and pith removed, then thinly sliced1 tbsp yellow mustard seeds½ tsp fenugreek seeds2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely sliced Bring the tomatoes, lentils, salt and 900ml of water to a boil in a medium saucepan, skimming and discarding any white foam that rises to the surface. Reduce the heat and simmer for 20-25 minutes, until the lentils are very soft but still hold their shape. Meanwhile, blitz the chilli powder, turmeric, lime juice, ginger and sugar in a food processor until smooth, or chop together on a board. Once the lentils are cooked, stir in the seasoning mix and simmer for another five minutes, so the lentils absorb all the flavours. Take off the heat and blend with a stick blender to a thin, soup-type dal about the consistency of double cream. Just before serving, heat the ghee in a small, heavy-based frying pan over a medium-high heat. Once the fat is hot, add the curry leaves, chillies, mustard seeds, fenugreek and garlic, one at a time, pausing for a second between each addition and swirling the pan. Cook for about 30 seconds, until the spices are toasted, the curry leaves sizzle and pop, and the garlic begins to brown at the edges. Spoon the spices over the dal and serve immediately with basmati rice and the green chutney (see opposite). I picked this up from my friend’s Gujarati mum. It keeps for a few weeks in the fridge and gets used as a chutney, dip, sandwich topping and everything in between. Prep 15 minServes 4 15g freshly grated coconut or desiccated coconut1 large bunch coriander, stalks and leaves3 green chillies, deseeded and roughly chopped25g salted peanuts1 thumb-sized piece ginger, peeled and roughly chopped1 pinch sea salt1 unwaxed lemon, juiced and zested 1 tsp coconut or groundnut oil Put the desiccated coconut, if using, in a bowl with double the amount of water and leave to soak for five minutes, then rinse and drain. Put the coconut in a food processor with all the other ingredients and blitz until evenly chopped, but not completely smooth. Tip into a bowl and serve with the dal.