England are back in Six Nations title contention after a convincing victory over a below-par and overly generous Ireland. In their first home fixture of the tournament the hosts successfully capitalised on a 17-0 first-half lead and now sit second in the table, four points behind unbeaten France with two rounds left to play. The outcome was crucially shaped by Ireland’s failure to deal with two clever George Ford kicks into their in-goal area which yielded tries for Ford and Elliot Daly respectively inside the opening 25 minutes. With Ireland also under frequent forward pressure and glaringly short of inspiration at half-back a sizeable home win was never in doubt, although England missed out on a potential try bonus point. If Ireland thought their heavy World Cup warm-up defeat in the same stadium last August was painful this one will sting even more. Having won their opening two Six Nations games they had arrived hoping for a triple crown as a springboard to a potential title surge. Instead everything that could possibly have gone wrong did so in an entirely one-sided first half. On a blustery but dry afternoon England were ahead inside eight minutes. Ford rolled a well-judged grubber into the Irish 22 and, with Jordan Larmour caught fractionally out of position, Johnny Sexton came scrambling back to help out his full-back. To the visiting captain’s horror the ball bounced horribly up and away from him and fell into the path of Ford who duly touched it down. When Sexton also pulled a straightforward penalty effort wide, it completed a horror start for the Irish fly-half on the ground where his side clinched a famous grand slam on their last Six Nations appearance in 2018. As with Scotland’s skipper Stuart Hogg, caught out by a similarly awkward low, bobbling Ford kick at Murrayfield, it did nothing for his side’s morale. The next hammer blow was not long in arriving. Again a Ford chip found space in the Irish in-goal area, again the defence failed utterly to defuse the danger. This time it was Jacob Stockdale who hesitated momentarily, allowing Daly just enough time to nip past him and touch the ball down just inside the dead-ball line. Farrell’s conversion made it 14-0 and Ireland’s day went from bad to worse when the vastly experienced Cian Healy had to limp out of the fray prematurely. Sexton temporarily lost his right boot and, sockless, was struggling simply to stay upright. With England cranking up the pressure on almost every front, his team were looking similarly unsteady and a Farrell penalty awarded for offside in the shadow of the Irish posts widened the gap even further. With the wind slightly more in their favour after the interval Ireland could only cling to the memory of England’s second-half collapse from 31-7 up against Scotland last March. Sexton has also been involved in some fine comebacks as a Leinster player, not least against Northampton in the 2011 Heineken Cup final when the Irish province recovered to win from 22-6 down. There was a brief flicker when Robbie Henshaw drove between Tom Curry and Farrell to put Ireland on the scoreboard after 50 minutes but Sexton again scuffed the conversion attempt and the arrival of Luke Cowan-Dickie gave England fresh energy. The Exeter hooker, an increasingly prolific try poacher at all levels, drove over for his side’s third try after 62 minutes but instead of a potentially valuable bonus point there was only a late consolation try for Irish replacement Andrew Porter.