Restoration Britain may have been outrageous and dirty (in every sense) but it was not boring. Even the lecherous diarist Samuel Pepys was perturbed by the sexual scandals of Charles II’s court. Theatres reopened in 1660 after being banned for decades, and women acted in them for the first time. This hedonist age would soon be put to the test by bubonic plague and the Great Fire of London. Tate Britain’s survey of this pungent age is more a sniff of disdain than a blockbuster. It sucks out every last drop of drama, character and energy, let alone narrative clarity. It misdefines its subject and seems to have no sympathy for the people of the era or their art. What exactly is British baroque? A wall text explains the baroque in a nutshell: “It was an age when art was used to support and advertise the authority of the monarchy.” This is a comically inadequate view of a rich and complex aesthetic. It certainly doesn’t describe the art. In the second room we meet paintings of Charles II’s mistresses and illegitimate kids. Here is Peter Lely’s portrait of the king’s lover Louise de Kérouaille, dressed as a stylish shepherdess flaunting her cleavage in the countryside. Wait a minute. How does this open celebration of adultery in high places help to promote the stern rhetoric of power we’re told typifies British baroque? Nor does Jacob Huysmans’ distinctly Caravaggesque portrait of the king’s illegitimate son James, Duke of Monmouth, posing bare-legged and bare-breasted as John the Baptist, do any propaganda favours for a monarchy fighting off accusations of both sleaze and covert Catholicism. This art shows distinct signs of life and sensuality that defy the show’s determination to deaden it. For the baroque is not just an art of propaganda. It is a style that rejoices in movement, passion and abundance – the energy of which is perfectly summed up in the over-the-top wood carvings of Grinling Gibbons with their masses of fruit and cheeky cherubs. This style could celebrate power, but it could also express desire and feeling. One reason the show goes adrift is by getting its dates inexplicably wrong. It “covers” (as a wall text alluringly has it) the period from Charles II’s restoration in 1660 to Queen Anne’s death in 1714. But the baroque in Britain started with the masques of Inigo Jones and Ben Jonson in the early 1600s. It went electric in the reign of Charles I when a host of baroque artists came to Britain, including Artemisia Gentileschi, Anthony van Dyck and the defining genius of the style, Peter Paul Rubens. Seriously – how can you have an exhibition called British Baroque that doesn’t include Rubens? But the baroque wasn’t just about painting. The worst mistake this show makes is to pile up room on room of portraits and still lifes when the fascination of this art movement was its creation of dynamic spaces. Painting, sculpture and architecture all come together in baroque spaces to create immersive emotions. In other words, it resembles 21st-century installation art. This show fails to capture that. It all collapses into a weary sigh, with the reign of Queen Anne getting a perfunctory, portrait-heavy survey The architecture of Wren and Hawksmoor is reduced to a few framed designs and one model, then the explosion of extravagant palatial houses in late Stuart Britain is made to seem dreary. The crowds who visit Blenheim Palace, Chatsworth, Castle Howard and other gobsmacking masterpieces of British baroque know these are extraordinary cultural achievements. They are evoked here only wanly and conventionally. The biggest effort to convey an actual interior is a big wall photo of the Painted Hall in Greenwich – but it’s too cold and doesn’t capture the optical fun of James Thornhill’s paintings. Then it all collapses into a weary sigh. The reign of Queen Anne gets a perfunctory, portrait-heavy survey even though it saw dramatic entanglements of aesthetics and emotion. Anne’s favourite Sarah Churchill got an incredible prize when Blenheim was built to honour her warrior husband, but fell out with its architect Vanbrugh. If you enjoyed Olivia Colman in The Favourite … you probably won’t enjoy this charmless exhibition. Go and see Blenheim instead, or marvel at the enduring beauty of Wren’s baroque masterpiece St Paul’s. It survived the Blitz. It can survive this. British Baroque: Power and Illusion is at Tate Britain, London, 4 February to 19 April.