When Cherrelle Skeete read The High Table, she was shocked by her visceral reaction. “I just bawled my eyes out,” the actor remembers, “but with joy and jubilation. I was like, ‘Oh, I feel seen.’” Written by Temi Wilkey, the play spans continents and even spiritual planes to tell the story of Omotara, a queer Nigerian British woman who, says Skeete, “crosses the intersections that I cross, being queer, being of the African diaspora and being a free spirit. Feeling as though you’ve got your foot in all of these communities, and feeling you’re not able to express your full self in all of them.” In the play, Omotara is about to marry her girlfriend. But Omotara’s parents don’t approve, explains Wilkey, sitting alongside Skeete during a break in rehearsals at the Bush theatre in London. “They say that they’re not coming to the wedding, and there’s a chorus of ancestors who are trying to help her.” As an actor, Wilkey trained with the National Youth Theatre’s rep company, has performed at the Royal Shakespeare Company and the Royal Exchange, and was a co-founder of the drag king collective Pecs. The High Table is her playwriting debut and has been given a full run at the Bush. Using a large cast to talk about queerness and homophobia in the black community, as well as traditional Nigerian spirituality, would be a daunting prospect for any writer – let alone a first-time playwright. “I was looking at ancient Yoruba traditions and cultures, and queerness within those cultures,” says Wilkey. “Wole Soyinka is so spiritual in his writing. Something in his version of The Bacchae made me interested in the gods and spirituality.” The High Table, she says, was a story that she had to tell but she never believed it would be staged. “My plan was to just get it out of me, then come back to it one day when I was a better writer. I think also what gave me permission was watching Lena Waithe’s episode of [Netflix series] Master of None.” Skeete cuts in: “That episode changed my life!” Wilkey nods: “I watched it, like, ‘Oh, I can do this. I’m allowed.’” Written by and starring Waithe, the Emmy-winning episode entitled Thanksgiving from Aziz Ansari’s series was lauded for its portrayal of Waithe’s character, Denise, an African American lesbian woman, and her relationship with her family. “For many of us across the diaspora, we’re treading on so many different cultures and lines and intersections that we haven’t even fully realised ourselves,” says Skeete. “That’s why the play is so rich. Omotara is so proud of her Nigerian culture. What would happen if she didn’t get the blessing [from her parents]?” Skeete continues: “I think for her, it’s an acceptance of self. Every single person, queer or not, whether you’re the majority or the minority, has to come out to themselves in terms of the many identities that one represents. So there’s the coming out of your queerness, but then for me it was like, coming to London and understanding being from Birmingham is actually really important to me. So how does that affect the way that I speak? Well, I’ve been here for over 10 years and I’ve still got my Birmingham accent. Do you know what I mean? Part of [Omotara’s] journey is about her even gaining more of a respect for her culture, while understanding that yeah, she could live her queer best life.” The politics of portrayal are nuanced. Both Wilkey and Skeete admit to excitement that a play looking at the lives of young, queer, black women will be staged at a major London theatre, but also understand what this will mean for an audience unused to seeing themselves on stage. The burden of representation can be heavy, and many prospective audience members – queer and black or not – will have their own particular expectations. When I ask Skeete why people should see The High Table she becomes tearful. “I feel like it’s now part of black British theatre. I want to see it in the same anthology as debbie tucker green, Winsome Pinnock and Roy Williams. It fits in that canon. A black British person, who is proud of their culture, may see themselves for the very, very first time, and I think that’s huge … We all know what it feels like, in some way, to feel like you’re on the fringes.” She grins. “You know, when I’m an old dear, I can’t wait to be sitting on one of these audition panels at drama schools and seeing a queer black girl saying a speech from this play.” She turns to Wilkey. “You have created possibilities; it’s really, really special. Thank you.” At the Bush theatre, London, until 21 March. Then at Birmingham Rep, 25 March-9 April.