One of the highlights of the final furlong of awards season is the Hollywood Reporter’s Brutally Honest Oscar Ballot series, in which Scott Feinberg talks outrageous truths out of an anonymous voter (whose identity Twitter then scurries to guess). The first one this year was quite the corrective for all those who thought 1917 was a lock-in for best picture – unless Parasite were to dazzlingly pip it. Turns out, both of those movies are just too goddamn foreign. Sam Mendes’s 1917 might be fine for the Baftas but the Oscars are an American bash and a Yank has got to win in order to make Hollywood great again. It’s a reminder that Quentin Tarantino’s ninth film really does tick a lot of Oscar boxes. It’s about Hollywood, obviously; no film since The Artist has lavished so much airtime on the mechanics of the movie biz, nor riffed so lovingly on its folklore. It stars men – and a woman – that the industry adores. It flatters its audience with the assumption of enough cultural knowledge to indulge its spoof inserts and that final act rug-pull. Aside from some fairly uncontroversial scepticism about Charles Manson, it studiously avoids politics. And it offers voters an opportunity to fete Tarantino, one of their own, slightly-unsung prodigal sons – a tamed yet still spunky enfant terrible who’s just about to become a dad. To be honest, I have long harboured a loathing for Tarantino – the man maybe more than his movies, though I’ve never gone nuts for those either. Pulp Fiction is overcooked; Kill Bill tension free; Inglorious Basterds flat-out awful. But the problems I had with his back catalogue – especially the fetish-level self-indulgence and sniggering revisionism – evaporated here. I think that’s mostly on account of pace: Once Upon a Time in Hollywood is so relaxed as to be barely a film at all, while also being the most obviously cinematic contender. It is both an episodic meander and a formally stringent genre fairytale. It is all about the feeling: of being a hot and charming washed-up stuntman with the warm breeze flowing through your gorgeous hair as you fix an aerial on a Beverley Hills mansion. Of being a hot and charming 26-year-old starlet, married to Roman Polanski, feeling the warm breeze flow through your gorgeous hair as you zip through traffic-free freeways in an open-top motor, off to the hottest party in town. And if its actual narrative is all over the shop, it functions just fine as a delivery vehicle for scenes that stay with you for days: the humbling of Leonardo DiCaprio by a child star; Pitt scoping out a derelict movie ranch; Margot Robbie gleeful at seeing her own character up on the big screen (hat-tip to Tarantino for leaving Sharon Tate in the movie, rather than artfully substituting his own star). In its extreme auteurish extravagance, Once Upon a Time in Hollywood is absolutely uncompromising. It is also a manifesto: baked into the movie is the line Tarantino has been trotting since its release – that he, like Scorsese, is a celluloid defender, a crusader against the dark forces of the franchise. That might ring a little hollow. But it will still be music to many voters’ ears. Mine too, for once. Few, it seems, can carry a tune quite like Tarantino.