Ryanair may have to push back its long-term target of flying 200 million passengers a year by as much as two years due to delays in the delivery of Boeing’s 737 Max jet, the airline has said. Ryanair, one of the biggest customers of the grounded jet, with 210 on order, hopes to have its first 55 jets flying by summer 2021, a year later than originally planned, with 50 more planes a year in place for the following three summers. But the chief executive, Michael O’Leary, suggested Boeing’s delivery schedule could ultimately be up to two years late – meaning it may hit its 200 million passenger target by March 2026 rather than March 2024. “What is likely is they will push out that delivery profile with Boeing by at least 12 months,” O’Leary said in a pre-recorded video presentation. “At best that means we will have to roll forward our plans to fly 200 million passengers per year ... by at least 12 months, possibly 24.” The chief financial officer, Neil Sorahan, when asked if there was any risk to its plans to take delivery of 55 planes by next summer, said: “I don’t believe so, but we have been disappointed before.” The executives were speaking after Ryanair reported profit after tax of €88m (£74m) for the three months to the end of December, the third quarter of its financial year, with average fares up 9% and revenue for optional extras such as prebooked seating up 21%. In January Boeing said it did not expect the 737 Max, which was grounded after two fatal crashes, to return to service until mid-2020. Ryanair, which does not take deliveries during its summer peak of June-August, said last week it did not expect to receive the first Max jets until September or October 2020. It will take a maximum of eight planes a month, or about 50 deliveries a year, O’Leary said. The 737 Max, Boeing’s fastest-selling aircraft, was grounded in March after 346 people died in two crashes attributed to the plane’s anti-stall software. Ryanair’s third-quarter results came weeks after the group raised its profit forecast to between €950m and €1.05bn for its financial year to the end of March, compared with the €800m to €900m it forecast in November, citing a better-than-expected performance over Christmas and the new year. Analysts said the delay of 737 Max deliveries had reduced capacity in Europe, pushing up fares. “The performance was even stronger than we had forecast,” a Liberum analyst, Gerald Khoo, said.