Ian Watson admitted Salford’s tight victory over Toronto was a must-win game despite being only their second Super League match of the season. The Red Devils were thrashed 48-8 by the defending champions St Helens last weekend but they bounced back to deny Toronto a maiden Super League win, owing to tries from Niall Evalds and Dan Sarginson in the final seven minutes. “We needed to win,” the Salford coach said. “I know it’s only game two but it was a must-win game for us. We’re a new group and we’re trying to figure what we’re about and how we play together. You only truly know once you start playing games. “We feel when we stick with our processes and systems we’re a good team but once we start to fatigue we fall off. At the moment we’re struggling with those areas, so we need to keep working to be better.” The Wolfpack, for whom Sonny Bill Williams made his debut, opened the scoring in the 17th minute through Gary Wheeler. Salford responded with three tries from Kevin Brown, Tui Lolohea and Rhys Williams to control the match. However, Toronto tied the game at 16-16 in the 70th minute after Wheeler crossed and Brad Singleton scored but Salford snatched the spoils thanks to Sarginson and Evalds. “It got a bit nervy towards the end,” Watson said. “The last 10 minutes we came away with it. I thought it was a really good win for us. Toronto are obviously playing with confidence off the back of last season. They are a team who are reasonably settled, they all know each other, they know the system and how they play. “They throw the ball around and they challenge you. They’ve obviously tried to test our middles before throwing the ball around. They’re a team who are confident on the back of last year. They’ll cause a few teams problems.” Toronto went down 28-10 to Castleford on their league debut and after this second defeat, the Wolfpack coach, Brian McDermott, left the AJ Bell Stadium without speaking to the media. Salford Evalds; Welham, Sarginson, Lolohea, Brown; Mossop, Dudson; McCarthy, Burke, Greenwood, Williams, Sio, Jones. Interchange Lussick, Pauli, Ikahihifo, Yates. Tries Brown, Lolohea, Williams, Sarginson, Evalds. Goals Lolohea 2. Toronto Russell; Leutele, Kay, Mellor, McCrone; Wilkin, Springer; Olbison, Wallace, Singleton, Cunningham, Williams, Miloudi. Interchange Sidlow, Mullally, Thompson, Wheeler. Tries Wheeler 2, Singleton. Goals Wallace 2.