In the beginning, there was the green pepper and the red tomato. Contestants had a mere £5 to fill a carrier bag with ingredients, then 30 minutes to turn them into sumptuous dishes under the watchful gaze of Fern Britton or Ainsley Harriott. The resulting concoctions included the likes of ready salted crisp cookies, banana syllabub, and rice, with everything. This was Ready Steady Cook, the cooking show staple which ran from 1994 to 2010 and which is set for a comeback later this year. But the world it returns to is lightyears away from the one that it left. In the intervening decade, food TV has gone from the quaintly homespun to reaching an apex of ridiculousness. Where once there was a fresh-faced, pukka-era Jamie Oliver extolling the virtues of mixing salad with your hands and making this thing called “ravioli”, or a wine-soaked Keith Floyd slow-cooking beef in red wine, chicken in white wine (or just drinking wine), now cooking shows have been edged out of the home kitchen and into the Michelin-starred world of molecular gastronomy. Recipes have stopped being practical and delicious and, instead, food is either an opportunity to shame – like Oliver’s classist comments on “eating well” being only a preserve of the middle classes – or an unattainable food porn fantasy streamed in Ultra HD on shows such as Chef’s Table. Take the nation’s favourite treat: The Great British Bake Off. Initially a charming display of amateur talent where the most challenging prospect would be constructing a tower of macaroons, 10 seasons in, the technical challenges have become a litany of Joycean names (care for a dampfnudel? Or aebleskiver? Maybe a simple spanische windtorte?) Running out of variations on sponge, the producers appear to be rooting around in obscure, dusty recipe books in their quest for difficulty over entertainment. The 2019 series caused mass outcry from viewers as challenges such as the “maids of honour” were deemed “impossible” and double eliminations left early favourites inexplicably booted out and emotionally deflated. Watching the finalist Steph burst into tears over and over again, it was clear that Bake Off was no longer the gentle hit that had captured the nation’s hearts, and stomachs. The trend for impossible foodie TV was perhaps kickstarted by the self-appointed king of micro gastronomy, Heston Blumenthal. Forever dressed in chef’s whites and wielding his powerful glasses like a technician’s microscope, Blumenthal made his TV name in the early 2000s with fiendishly complex cooking shows that applied his Michelin-starred mentality to everyday recipes such as roast chicken and porridge. For Blumenthal, food is escapism – an all-encompassing experience that should explode all the senses and be a Promethean task to complete. Tasty and functional it is not. His latest offering, Crazy Delicious, takes this to a laughable new low. Looking like Willy Wonka’s factory on acid, the culinary gameshow takes place on an edible set where three contestants “forage” ingredients to cook for their “food gods” Blumenthal, US chef Carla Hall and restaurateur Niklas Ekstedt. The idea is for the amateur cooks to transform everyday ingredients into new “culinary experiences”. Discoveries so far have included strawberry cheesecake hot wings, hotdog profiteroles and banana tacos. It is certainly a (somewhat sickening) spectacle, but the Crazy Delicious recipes are so far removed from real life, they seem to serve no other purpose than to make us gawp aimlessly, not even salivating. And that’s without factoring in the surely gargantuan amount of food waste a programme with an edible set must produce. Instead, shows such as Crazy Delicious help to cultivate the snobbish attitudes that lead to a backlash against practical, easy food we may actually wish to make and eat. Food like that of former Bake Off winner Nadiya Hussain, who used canned spaghetti, tinned potatoes and instant noodles in her show Time to Eat, or Jack Monroe’s books for meals on a budget. Both Hussain and Monroe’s recipes have been borne from necessity – the effects of austerity – and Hussain has even urged viewers to be “less pretentious”, defending her use of cheaper alternatives. Even former queen of the Bake Off tent Mary Berry has recently said she has never eaten a takeaway, while Jamie Oliver – whose next show will teach takeaway fans to cook their favourite dishes from scratch – is on such a health crusade that he seems to have forgotten the value of no-frills thriftiness that first made him so popular as the Naked Chef. It is a fine line to tread; with rates of obesity, and especially childhood obesity, on the rise in Britain there is a vital need to promote healthy food options on our screens. Yet, with austerity also increasingly impacting families’ abilities to buy healthy ingredients, the answer cannot be to just shame people through patronising programming or promote a wasteful escapism that turns food into something totally abstract. Let’s hope, then, that the return of Ready Steady Cook is also a return to the simple, feasible and fun reality of food TV. No more atomised velouté or Icelandic laufabrauð. All we need is a bag with £5 worth of fresh ingredients, a nervous guest cooking live on air, and a winning team – red tomatoes or green peppers.