Sonny Bill Williams’s first game of rugby league for 1,956 days was, in many ways, symptomatic of his new side Toronto Wolfpack’s overall performance as their Super League debut ended in disappointment. It could be captured in the words “rusty, room for improvement, cautious optimism”. Yet the whole occasion was perhaps best summed up by the man himself: “The magic will come,” he said. This will surely be a tough, backs-to-the-wall season for Williams and Toronto, despite their considerable riches and geographical advantages across the Atlantic. That was illustrated here, as Castleford put any hopes of a Wolfpack victory to bed before half-time, when they led 22-4. Williams’s only real involvement up to that point had been fairly sombre. But when the hype is stripped away, the profile Williams brings back to league with him and all the razzmatazz, that was to be expected. This is a man, no matter how talented at rugby league, who has not played the game since September 2014. He has been built up as a superhero by the Wolfpack and it was almost possible to believe he might step back in as if he had never been away. Notwithstanding his time away with the All Blacks, his very first touch was a knock-on, which produced pantomime cheers from most of those in attendance. Williams was far from the villain, though; he was swamped by supporters both before and after the game and, when he stepped on to the field in place of Tom Olbison after 26 minutes, he was given an equally loud ovation. A hint as to what Williams can produce this year was the fact that, despite being pencilled in for a quarter of the game, the Kiwi played the final 54 minutes without coming off. He also grew into the game without being too spectacular. “The coach only wanted me to play 20 or 30 minutes but I was getting the feel of it again while I was out there,” he said. His coach agreed. “He got a second wind and he got through some tackles and carries,” Brian McDermott said of Williams. There was certainly not much sparkle from him but then his teammates were lacking in that area, too. Castleford were much the stronger side, with the England half‑back Jake Trueman the star of the show instead of Williams. He had a hand in most things Castleford did well as the Tigers won 28-10. In truth the job had been done by half-time, when Daryl Powell’s side were not only leading by a street but looking far too strong for a team that appeared shellshocked by the step up to Super League from the Championship. Williams and Toronto have promised they will all grow into their debut season in Super League together as the year wears on. “It’s a long season,” Williams said. “The magic will come. The foundations have been laid now and I’ve got to build on that.” Toronto may have preferred to ease Williams into his first season back but, with a squad of only 23 that is already being stretched, they may have no choice but to throw him in at the deep end. Super League’s first opening-weekend double-header was a unique experience, not least because, as the hosts for the day kicked off their game, the assembled media and dozens of spectators were chasing Williams round the outskirts of Headingley for soundbites, autographs and photos. Naturally he obliged before being whisked away to prepare for Salford on Saturday. That game ended in fairly one-sided fashion, too, as Leeds were well beaten by an impressive Hull FC team. Two tries for the wing Ratu Naulago were enough to help Lee Radford’s side to a convincing victory against a Rhinos side that were well off the pace. But peculiarly the second game of the day felt anything but a main event given everything that had preceded it. No matter what the Wolfpack’s critics say, many neutrals had come to see what Williams was capable of. On this showing they will have to wait a while to see him truly shine but it was a spectacle well worth savouring as one of world sport’s true stars made his long‑awaited return to the game that gave him his big break.