All 10 teams currently in Formula One look set to remain on the grid for 2021 with senior team members confident a new deal will be struck. The Concorde agreement between F1, the FIA and the teams concludes at the end of this year. Negotiations on a new deal are ongoing but the McLaren chief executive officer, Zak Brown, considers that one of the most contested issues – the fairer distribution of revenue – has been addressed to broad agreement. The Concorde agreement is the contract between the commercial rights holder, now Liberty Media, the sports governing body, the FIA, and the competitors. Included within the new deal, as well as technical and sporting regulations, governance and a budget cap, is the distribution of just over $1bn (£772m) in revenue to the teams and engine manufacturers. Wide variances in payments based on the last Concorde agreement have long been a bone of contention. Brown, who will oversee the launch of this season’s McLaren the MCL35 on Thursday, believes the new Concorde agreement and its new revenue deal would be accepted. “I think it will go through, I would be surprised if all 10 teams on the grid this year are not on the grid next year,” he said. Currently the revenue is distributed among teams via a range of payments. Each receives approximately $35m (£27m) for taking part, then a secondary sum based on their championship position in the previous season. Beyond this, however, there is a series of supplementary payments. Ferrari receive a longstanding team fee of what is understood to be around $73m. Four teams – Ferrari, Mercedes, Red Bull and McLaren – also receive a constructors’ championship bonus of between $30m and $40m. Further additional payments are also made to Red Bull, Mercedes ($35m each) and Williams ($10m). The revenue differential between the top teams, and the midfield can be of almost a factor of four. Liberty’s new structure is believed to address these inequities in an attempt to ensure that every team is financially viable and better able to compete with far greater weighting geared to performance. “I believe everyone is going to accept the revenue distribution as proposed,” said Brown. “It is a much more balanced. Special payments, other than Ferrari’s which is reduced, are gone and the gap between the best paid and least paid has closed up.” Ferrari, the only team to have been in the championship since its inception in 1950, will receive a historical payment but it is understood it must be taken in the form of profit rather than toward funding their F1 activities. Equally teams will still be recognised for longevity but must continue to perform to maintain a greater share of the pot. Brown suggests it will represent almost a financial form of relegation or promotion. “They have come up with a clever way to address historical performance,” he said. “It doesn’t feel quite right that a new team should be on the same financial playing field as McLaren or Red Bull, but the way they have done this is that new teams have the chance to earn into that and existing teams have to continue to earn into it or they can fall out of it.” Under the new system Mercedes, Red Bull and Ferrari will experience the biggest fall in income, with Brown believing McLaren would remain approximately at the same level. However with a budget cap of $175m set to be imposed in the new agreement the flatter distribution rate will not impact as heavily on the big teams but will bring the rest of the grid much closer to them in funding and thence, it is hoped, ability to compete.