The government is considering scrapping the census of every household in England and Wales – held once every 10 years – and replacing it with more regular updates, using cheaper methods to assess demographic trends. Sir Ian Diamond, the newly appointed national statistician, said he was looking carefully at whether next year’s census should be the last in a series that dates back to 1801 and was “hopeful” a better alternative could be found. The census has been part of British life since the government decided in 1801 that it needed to know how many men were available to fight in the Napoleonic wars. Interest in demography was also running high at the time due to the publication three years earlier of Thomas Malthus’s “an essay on the principle of population”, which predicted hunger and starvation because the number of people was increasing faster than the ability to feed them. Diamond said he wanted to explore whether he could get the data currently recorded in the census from a range of other sources, such as GP registrations, council tax records and driving licences. This would be supplemented by information gathered through surveys. “I will only make a recommendation to change the way we do things if we can replicate the richness of the census data,” Diamond said. “It would have to be equally rich but more timely, cheaper and more effective. We will only change if we can do something better. We are looking at the things we only get from the census and whether it is possible to get them from other sources.” Ministers have previously expressed support for the idea of using alternative data sources, considering the census to be outdated and expensive. The then Cabinet minister, Francis Maude, said in 2014 when giving the go-ahead to the 2021 census that it might be the last. Diamond said the cost of next year’s census would be close to £1bn – almost double the price tag of the 2011 census – even though most people would be expected to fill in their forms online. Although households are obliged by law to fill in a census form, the coverage tends to be about 94%, falling to 80% in some areas. Young men living in inner-city areas tend to be the most under-recorded group. Demographers consider the census to be the “gold standard” of population records, since it provides a once-a-decade snapshot of age, class, gender, housing tenure and educational attainment. The first few censuses were rudimentary affairs and it was not until 1841 that they became recognisable in their current form. Over the years, the census has reflected changes to the economy and society. Self-employment was first recorded in 1901, while the advent of the consumer society meant a question on household amenities was included in 1951. After the arrival of the Windrush generation, households were asked about migration for the first time in 1961. The first time a question about religion was put on a census form was in 2001, when almost 400,000 fans of the Star Wars films identified as Jedis. However, 10 years later the number of Luke Skywalker devotees had more than halved. From 1801 to 2011, the population of England and Wales increased from 8.9 million to 56.1 million. The Scottish census has been the responsibility of the Registrar General for Scotland since 1861, and its population rose from 1.6 million to 5.3 million between 1801 and 2011. Businesses, family historians and demographers all raised objections to Maude’s 2014 plan to scrap the census, fearing the loss of a rich seam of data. But Diamond said there was a need for much more regular assessments of demographic trends to enable better planning of services, particularly at a local level. He said he would look at the evidence and give a view by 2023. Ultimately, he said, it would be for ministers to decide whether the 2031 census should go ahead.