Who needs the Russians when the Democratic party of Iowa is perfectly capable of screwing up the democratic process all by itself? The political world waited on Monday night with bated breath to see which of the Democratic candidates would emerge from the arcane “caucus” process in the state. But when the polls closed, no results were available. There were, the party, stated, “inconsistencies” in the reported figures coming through from the precincts. No results would be issued until the results had been properly and accurately collated. The information was to have come from a recently developed smartphone app, with a back-up option that would enable precinct captains to phone in their results. Neither channel worked. CNN reported that one official who was trying to report his results was on hold for an hour and had apparently just got through to party headquarters when the party hung up on him – on live television. It was, to use a technical term, a shambles. To put it into context, we should note that the Iowa caucus system is Byzantine-lite. Voters come to an assigned venue – a church or an elementary school in their neighbourhood, say – and stand under a sign or in a corner associated with their favourite candidate. For half an hour, people hustle between groups, trying to coax supporters of other candidates to join their team. Then organisers count each candidate’s supporters, and there is a realignment period, during which people can switch allegiances. Members of any candidate group that doesn’t get at least 15% of caucus-goers must move to a new candidate. Once this part is done, delegates are assigned to the remaining contenders using a mathematical formula, and reported to the state party. This year, there were some additional refinements which seem to have made it even more complicated, but you get the idea. This may be why some genius in the state’s party HQ had the idea that the whole reporting process could be done with an app. So the party commissioned a private firm called Shadow Inc (whose mission is “to build political power for the progressive movement by developing affordable and easy-to-use tools for teams and budgets of any size”) to develop one, but gave them only two months and $60,000 in which to do it. You don't develop a mission-critical smartphone app without stress-testing it to oblivion From the outset, there seem to have been concerns about the app – concerns which were amply vindicated on the night. When they were expressed, though, the party leadership seems to have pooh-poohed them. At any rate, Troy Price, Iowa Democratic party chairman, said at a press briefing that the app was just one part of how the state’s vote was tracked, along with paper backups, a phone hotline and other, unspecified safeguards. “If there is a challenge,” he burbled, “we’ll be ready with a backup and a backup to that backup and a backup to the backup to the backup.” No one who knows anything about the technology will have been surprised by what happened. You don’t develop a high-profile, mission-critical smartphone app that will be used by hundreds of technically illiterate citizens who have downloaded it on to dozens of different kinds of smartphones without stress-testing it to oblivion. And that takes more than two months. And if you have a backup call centre you make sure it has the capacity to handle every call at peak time. It’s not rocket science, just common sense. Otherwise, it’s like issuing delicate clocks to monkeys. Screw-ups like this cost votes – and maybe elections. In October 2013, when Obama’s biggest political initiative launched Healthcare.gov – the website to help people find coverage under the Affordable Care Act – it failed so badly that it took a team of people from Silicon Valley working seven-day weeks for months to fix it. The damage to Obamacare was incalculable. In that context, the chaos in Iowa has been a gift to the Trump crowd. The moment party officials started talking about “inconsistencies” in the results, provocateurs were online with conspiracy theories about how it was all a swindle to make sure Bernie Sanders didn’t emerge as the winner, thereby ensuring that his zealous supporters would be suitably outraged. (Those with long memories will recall that something similar happened at the 2016 Democratic National Convention when hacked DNC emails were used to suggest that the party hierarchy was trying to stop Bernie.) Meanwhile, two interesting observations are prompted by the fiasco. The first is that the Nevada Democrats have decided not to use the fateful app for their caucuses on 22 February. (Smart move.) The second is that it may be significant that Michael Bloomberg didn’t bother entering the hustings in Iowa. Of all the people seeking the Democratic nomination, he understands best that technology is now political. After all, he’s made a fortune from it. Handy travel tips Surprise, surprise! There are lots of scammers on Airbnb. A recent investigation by Vice lists the most common scams. Filloux on Facebook Four reasons for believing that Facebook will ensure a Trump victory: read Frédéric Filloux’s sobering assessment on the Monday Note site. It’s getting hot in here… Climate models are running hot – and nobody knows why. An intriguing Bloomberg News report asks: is it something in the computer models – or something about the planet?