Secret sources who had supplied information to the US government “disappeared” after they were put at risk of death or torture by WikiLeaks’s release of classified documents, the first day of Julian Assange’s extradition hearing has been told. James Lewis QC opened the US case for the extradition of the WikiLeaks founder from the UK at Woolwich crown court. Lewis referred to a range of sources in states including Iraq, Afghanistan and China. “The US is aware of sources, whose unredacted names and other identifying information was contained in classified documents published by WikiLeaks, who subsequently disappeared, although the US can’t prove at this point that their disappearance was the result of being outed by WikiLeaks,” he told the court in south-east London. By disseminating material in an unredacted form, Lewis said Assange knowingly put human rights activists, dissidents, journalists and their families at risk of serious harm in states run by oppressive regimes. Assange, 48, is wanted in the US to face 18 charges of attempted hacking and breaches of the Espionage Act. They relate to the publication a decade ago of hundreds of thousands of diplomatic cables and files covering areas including US activities in Afghanistan and Iraq. The Australian, who could face a 175-year prison sentence if found guilty, is accused of working with the former US army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning to leak classified documents. Sitting at the back of the court and dressed in a grey blazer, grey sweater and white shirt with reading glasses perched on his head, Assange listened impassively as the US case was laid out. The sound of chants from hundreds of his supporters outside could be clearly heard throughout the first morning of evidence. But he stood up shortly before the lunchtime break to thank those protesting outside in support of him, adding that it was making it hard for him to concentrate. “I am having difficulty concentrating and this noise is not helpful. I understand and am very appreciative of the public support. I do understand they must be disgusted by these proceedings,” he told Judge Vanessa Baraitser. She stopped him from speaking, instead asking his lawyer Edward Fitzgerald QC to address her. “What Mr Assange is saying is he can’t hear and can’t concentrate because of the noise outside,” he said. Earlier, Lewis said that journalism was not an excuse for breaking laws. “The defence seek to suggest that the risk to these individuals who, by having the individuals revealed as informants, is somehow overstated. I would remind the court that these were individuals who were passing on information on regimes such as Iran and organisations such as al-Qaida.” He took the court through a number of details about documents relating to sources which the US alleges were put at risk. They included one who had supplied information about an improvised explosive device (IED) attack in Iraq and who had been mentioned in a report classified as “secret”. Another was named in a 2008 US state department cable discussing issues relating to ethnic conflict in China. Earlier, Lewis said he wanted to emphasise that the indictment essentially referred to two areas of Assange’s conduct: theft and computer hacking of the information published and identifying informants in Iraq and Afghanistan knowing that they would be at risk of harm. “He is not charged with disclosure of embarrassing or awkward information that the government would rather not have have disclosed,” he added. “The disclosures charges are solely where there was a risk of risk.” Lewis said he wanted to address what he described as the defence “hyperbole” that the WikiLeaks founder could be sentenced to up to 175 years in prison in the US “Sentencing is a function of the trial court not the function of the charging authority. Indeed, the equivalent offence in the UK would carry the equivalent sentence,” he added. Earlier, Lewis referred to a report in the Guardian from September 2011, which reported that WikiLeaks had published its full archive of 251,000 secret US diplomatic cables, without redactions, potentially exposing thousands of individuals named in the documents to detention, harm or putting their lives in danger. He went on to describe how the move had been strongly condemned by WikiLeaks’ five previous media partners – the Guardian, the New York Times, El País, Der Spiegel and Le Monde – who have worked with the site publishing carefully selected and redacted documents. “We deplore the decision of WikiLeaks to publish the unredacted state department cables, which may put sources at risk,” the organisations said in a joint statement, which Lewis read out. Assange’s case has drawn widespread support , including from the Council of Europe’s commissioner for human rights, who said last week that he should not be extradited because of the potential impact on press freedom and concerns about “the real risk of torture or inhuman or degrading treatment”. Assange’s father, John Shipton has said his son would face what was effectively a “death sentence” if sent to the US. The first week of the extradition case is expected to focus on legal argument before adjournment until 18 May. Assange’s lawyers will open his case on Tuesday. It is expected to expand on claims that emerged last week that Donald Trump had offered Assange a pardon if he would say Russia was not involved in WikiLeaks’s publication of US Democratic party emails that had an impact on Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign. Assange’s lawyers will outline a number of “abuse of power” arguments and are expected to argue that his extradition should not take place on the the basis of a clause in the 2003 UK-US extradition treaty, which prohibits extraditions for political offences. Hearings at the end of this week will focus on whether a number of witnesses can be allowed to give evidence anonymously. Assange has been held on remand in Belmarsh prison since last September after serving a jail sentence for breaching bail conditions. He was jailed for 50 weeks in May 2019. Assange had sought refuge in Ecuador’s London embassy to avoid extradition to Sweden where he was accused of sexual offences. However, Swedish prosecutors said last November they were discontinuing an investigation into a rape allegation, explaining that although the complainant’s evidence was deemed credible and reliable, witnesses’ memories had faded over the decade since the allegations were first made. Assange has always denied the allegations. He was removed from the embassy last April and was arrested for failing to surrender to the court.