Ask commuters in the north of England what improvements they would like to see on the railways and their wishlist is usually fairly modest: regular, reliable services with adequate carriages, non-leaking roofs and toilets that don’t empty straight out on to the track. Forget USB ports or wifi. Justthe basics – and some dignity. Few would put at the top of their list a £100bn-plus railway that will get them to London an hour quicker. A recent YouGov poll found that 35% of respondents in the north were in support of HS2, while 41% opposed the scheme. Potential emissions Construction: • Huge quantities of steel and concrete including concrete slab-track • Moving construction materials to site • Tunnelling (more carbon-intensive than open-air construction) • Construction machines • Removing soil by truck • Manufacture of rolling stock • Journey to work of HS2 employees Operation: • Power source not guaranteed to be renewable. Speed of HS2 requires more power • Ongoing maintenance • Increased car journeys to HS2 stations • HS2’s better airport connections could increase flying • Domestic flights reduced by HS2 could lead to increase in international routes Potential savings • Increased rail capacity shifts freight from road to rail • Increased capacity leads to more local/regional rail journeys • Modal shift with travellers choosing rail over more carbon-emitting road • Travellers also switching from flying to high-speed rail • Carbon sequestration from tree-planting • HS2 could be powered by all-renewable energy • HS2 prevents other carbon-intensive infrastructure projects Sources: HS2 Limited, 2019, High Speed Two phase 2a, Informationa Paper, E27: carbon Friends of the Earth, Opportunity Costs of HS2, 2019 Lord Berkeley’s Dissenting Report, 2020 [Size of emissions not included because different scenarios give different estimates; figures have not been modelled for all these factors] For people like David Whittle, 77, a retired coach driver from Leigh, Greater Manchester, it’s hard to comprehend what the benefits to the average person would be. “What am I going to be using HS2 for? It’s for business people. We’re packed in like sardines on the local buses and trains we take every day,” he said. The town fell to the Tories last December, and its newly appointed representative James Grundy is one of 21 Conservative MPs who have formed an HS2 review group calling for the project to be shelved in favour of local investment. Although Leigh constituents will be able to bus to the nearest stop, in Wigan, within 35 minutes, Grundy argues the money would be better spent on improving inadequate local links. Since its train station closed in 1969, Leigh has not even had the luxury of bemoaning poor rail services, something that Grundy – like his pro-HS2 predecessor Andy Burnham, who was the town’s MP until 2017 – wants to be reinstated. It takes a little over half an hour by car to get from Leigh into Manchester city centre, where many residents work. But the journey time is almost double by bus, despite the instatement of a swanky new guided bus service. As Grundy put it in a YouTube video posted by the HS2 review group: “We don’t need HS2 in our constituency, but we will all be paying for it.” The perceived disadvantages of the project for the north go beyond the lack of investment in local transport. Some, like Andy Carter, the Conservative MP for Warrington South, believe that if the government really did want to “level up” the economy, it should prioritise a project to link up the region itself. In a recent interview with the BBC, Carter noted that northerners were more likely to benefit from improved trains across the north than to London, because most people used them more frequently. “When I travel on the train, and I get on at Warrington Bank Quay and I see maybe 50 or 100 people getting on the train to go to London, then I go to Warrington Central and see the maybe 200 or 300 who can’t get on the trains because they’re full, that’s where we need to put our focus,” he said. The current design of the proposed £69bn Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR) – which would make travel within the region itself easier – integrates 50% of HS2 lines. High Speed Two Ltd is set up by the Labour government to examine possibilities for increasing high-speed rail capacity in the UK. The project is split into two phases - London to Birmingham forms phase one, with phase two extending the route to Manchester and Leeds. The transport secretary, Conservative Justine Greening, announces the decision to build HS2. A judicial review is called into the HS2 decision. Lord Justice Ouseley upholds one of the 10 grounds for complaint about HS2 in the judicial review – the claim that the government had acted unfairly and unlawfully when consulting on compensation for homeowners affected by the route. The Conservative prime minister, David Cameron, describes the project as "absolutely vital" as MPs approve funding. The high-speed rail (London-West Midlands) bill is formally introduced in parliament. After freedom of information requests, a 2012 Department for Transport viability report into HS2 is released, revealing the department considered it unaffordable. Allan Cook replaces Sir Terry Morgan as chair of HS2, after the latter fails to deliver the opening of the Crossrail project in London on schedule. A report from the New Economics Foundation suggests HS2 will deliver the most benefit to London, and exacerbate regional inequality. A fresh government review into HS2 into whether the scheme should be approved, amended or scrapped entirely. The Conservative transport secretary, Grant Shapps, announces that full HS2 services between London and Birmingham will be delayed by up to five years to 2031, and that the final completion of the northern section of the high-speed rail network would likely be delayed by seven years until 2040. He also confirmed the budget had escalated from the official £56bn at 2015 prices to up to £88bn at today’s prices. The proposed date for the start of the service. While it is unanimously accepted that better connectivity within the north is a matter of urgency, leaders including Burnham, Liverpool’s mayor, Steve Rotheram, and Leeds city council’s leader, Judith Blake, accept the certainty that NPR could not be delivered without HS2. But outside of the cities, leaders including Rotherham’s Labour council leader, Chris Read, hold the belief that while the costs would go up for NPR if HS2 was scrapped, the supposed co-dependence of the projects is a convenient scapegoat. “It doesn’t make sense to me. The first thing people would need and want is better train connections in and out of the cities of the north and the ability to be able to move between them more easily,” said Read. Read, who also dismisses Network Rail’s argument that the new high-speed rail line would free up capacity on existing lines in the north, is instead concerned it would only increase the burden on South Yorkshire stations such as Rotherham. After Sheffield city council lobbied against a proposal for a new HS2 station at the Meadowhall shopping centre in favour of it stopping in the city centre, planners opted for a cheaper option of a “spur” line that will use the existing station. A lack of capacity at Sheffield, said Read, could have a knock-on effect on Rotherham’s already poor services which, he added, were vital to the town’s commuters. “It’s absolutely critical for places like Rotherham that you do have easy connectivity into those hubs,” said Read. “Rotherham I suspect is quite classic of a northern town. People’s lives now involve them moving around more.” He added: “The world doesn’t stop halfway down the Sheffield parkway, we expect people to move around. We need the public transport infrastructure to enable people to do that.”