The numbers keep on racking up for Liverpool. Twenty-five points clear at the top of the table, 76 points from a possible 78 this season and an unbeaten streak that runs for 43 matches, back to January 2019. Here, a 17th straight league victory was decided by Sadio Mané’s 100th goal in English football. That 19th league title just keeps getting closer. While the big picture can sometimes seem boggling, the smaller details remain more readily comprehensible. This was another match in which the champions-elect had to graft, bide their time and enjoy some luck before earning a deserved victory. Norwich played their football, as they always do, and had chances which they squandered, as they often do too. They were also disciplined and resolute in their defending and, as the contest reached the final stages, a draw looked a realistic possibility. But then Liverpool found a way. It came from a long ball, sent forward by Jordan Henderson in the 78th minute. Mané was standing between two Norwich players on the edge of their box and one of them, Christoph Zimmermann, got up early to meet the ball. The German missed it, however, perhaps aided in part by a push from the Liverpool forward. But before anyone had a chance to even cry foul play Mané had taken the ball under control, spun and shot low, left-footed inside Tim Krul’s right-hand post. “I have many compliments for my lads for this performance,” said the Norwich manager, Daniel Farke. “For the performance, the workload and the tactical discipline. But then because of this one moment of magic from Mané I have to accept this loss. I don’t complain [about the push] because I have learned from this season that VAR never works in our favour. There is a push and if the referee had given a free-kick it would not have been overturned. But he allowed the goal and it’s not a clear and obvious mistake. “It’s also down to the unbelievable quality of Mané, he knows exactly which moment he has to be there with the little hit against the centre-back. Then there was a top-class first touch and a world class finish.” Mané had begun the match on the bench after his return from a hamstring injury and Liverpool missed his poise and penetration. The first half was a keenly contested but ultimately dry stalemate, with Norwich creating the only chance of note in the 35th minute. Again it was a long ball over the top, a frequent tactic from both sides when the force of Storm Dennis was behind them, and it sent the midfielder Lukas Rupp clear on goal. One on one with Alisson, Rupp did brilliantly to round the Brazilian. But in the decisive moment he saw Teemu Pukki advancing on his left and, instead of shooting, tried to play the Finnish striker in instead. It was a decent enough pass but not sharp enough to elude Alisson, who was down on the floor and clawing the ball away before Pukki could get a touch. In the second half things opened up, even before Mané’s arrival. Norwich carried a threat on the counterattack, especially through Todd Cantwell and Max Aarons, the two Norwich youngsters who have substantially enhanced their reputations this season. But Liverpool were now creating chances too. In the 59th minute Krul made an incredible double save, denying Mo Salah and Naby Keïta. Kenny McLean had lost possession for Norwich just outside the area and, after a short exchange of passes, Salah was into the box and had created space fora shot. It was low and to Krul’s right but the Dutchman got down and blocked it with a strong arm. The rebound went only as far as Keïta, six yards out from goal, but his shot was blocked by Krul again with an incredible right-hand reaction. It was a moment that will surely have impressed the Netherlands manager, Ronald Koeman, watching in the Carrow Road stands. Mané came on a minute later and his arrival only accentuated the direction of the game. But before his goal Norwich had another opportunity with Alex Tettey seeing a fierce drive come back off the post. After it they had chances too. In the closing moments the hosts had their best chance of all, the substitute Emi Buendía sending Pukki clear of Virgil van Dijk only for him to hit a tame shot into Alisson’s arms.