The drop in the number of listeners to BBC Radio 2’s breakfast show since Chris Evans left has come as a personal blow to its host Zoe Ball, she admits on Desert Island Discs. Ball tells Lauren Laverne on BBC Radio 4: “You kind of pretend it is not, but then the listening figures come in and your face is ‘on the tin’, so I do take it completely to heart.” Figures released last week show that her audience has improved slightly over the last quarter to 8.2 million weekly listeners, following a long slide down from the 9.1 million who tuned in to hear Evans in the weeks before his final show on Christmas Eve 2018. Support has come, she says, not just from her listeners but from the veteran DJs Ken Bruce and Steve Wright. “Steve said the figures will go up and down. Just keep doing what you are doing and don’t forget the time checks,” says Ball. “We have been there a year and we are still learning. I am loving it. Hopefully the figures will go up with time, but it takes a little bit of time to bed in.” The 49-year-old DJ also talks frankly to Laverne about her struggles with addiction. “I was lucky enough to go to rehab,” says Ball, who adds that she winces whenever she hears the word “ladette”. The term was coined in the 1990s to describe her hell-for-leather attitude to socialising and clubbing. “It is weird because you do this job and you are talking and you are gregarious and all these things, but I am actually quite shy,” she says. “If you had had a drink you could be in a room full of musicians, or you could be in a room full of people who were some of your heroes, and you could feel like you could hold your own if you had some sort of prop or something that made you feel a bit more at ease. But you just start leaning on those things a little too much.” In June 2018 Ball announced she had been sober for two years. “It is kind of a strange thing when you face things in your life, you know like addictions, that often you will find that you will deal with it a little bit but then you will slip back into old ways,” she says. “I’d sort of deal with one thing and then another thing would sort of affect me and it took me a couple of attempts to sort that out.” After she separated from her husband of 18 years, the musician Norman Cook, also known as Fatboy Slim, in September 2016, she had to face further trauma when her partner Billy Yates, who suffered with depression, killed himself in 2017. “Losing him was the hardest thing I had to deal with in my life,” Ball says. She now works to promote mental good health and believes sufferers need to be convinced they can be helped. “To listen to them is sometimes the best thing. Sometimes they won’t want to talk, but you have to check in.” Desert Island Discs is broadcast on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on Sunday at 11.15am. • The Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 in the UK. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. In the US, the suicide prevention lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org