During the arduous run-up to the UK leaving the EU, I thought about the Angel Lane Chippie in Penrith often. “British food is rubbish” was a phrase I heard incessantly, and in our imminent splendid isolation, we were told, all we’d be left with was bloody fish and chips. In fact, this was the only part of Project Fear that didn’t make me fearful. Because there are few things nicer than ambling hungry into a sweet, vinegar-scented chip shop to find the fryer bubbling, chips being methodically shovelled on to paper and a glass-fronted warmer cabinet rammed with mystery items decked out in batter. That shape, for example, could be a burger, while that one might be a black pudding. And that’s definitely a fish. But who cares? It’s all hot right now, ready to be smothered in vinegar, pelted with salt and served with a generous stack of chips. Some people swear by chips straight from the fryer, but I think chip-shop chips benefit from being carried, still wrapped, for two or three streets, allowing the surface area of each chip to soften slightly, the malt vinegar to permeate and your mind mentally to begin eating them at least six times. Then, the moment the paper’s unwrapped, one should begin involuntary grazing immediately, so that by the time you eventually sit on a bench to eat, you’re virtually full already. Dan Harding’s Angel Lane Chippie crossed my mind as a shining example of British brilliance, and not merely because there has been a chippie of some sort registered at this address since 1928, nor because the place has won 30 national awards over the past 10 years and is widely considered to be one of the north-west’s best. It’s all the tiny things: the white-on-black peg letterboard that’s there in an entirely non-ironic, non-retro fashion; it’s simply never not been. The jars of pale pickled eggs, the excellent, stodgy mushy peas, the flat cartons of slightly fruity “chip shop curry” (which, in case you’re wondering, people of genteel Britain, should be roughly the shade of Farrow & Ball Dutch Orange) and the fact that sausage comes in the four timeworn genres: “small”, “jumbo”, “cumberland” and “smokey”. Where else can you ask for anything in “jumbo” without blushing? Each time I visit Angel Lane, its stone floor, stainless-steel cabinets and spam fritters whisk me straight back to British chippies in the 1970s, when I struggled on tiptoes to see into the cabinet. It gives me a Brownie uniform, nit nurse and BAGA badges-era sort of Proustian rush back to a time when my biggest concern was finding bric-a-brac for the Blue Peter bring-and-buy. Perhaps everything was better in the olden days, I think each time I size up Angel Lane’s cod, which is always curly, firm-fleshed and clogged with extra globs of thick batter. Or the wodges of homemade cheese-and-onion pie, or sometimes steak, with cartons of “Angels [sic] own gravy”. I mean, yes, back then, of course, we ate cod without giving a flying fig for the oceans, carried our chips home in a cheap plastic bag that we hurled in the bin and flooded the planet with toxic chemicals, and ate them in front of Jim Davidson’s Too Risky on VHS. The good old days do not hold up well to scrutiny, so I’ll stick to discussing the chips. Thankfully, Angel Lane is nostalgic, but it’s also forward-reaching: they’re committed to using haddock and cod that’s sustainably sourced from Iceland and Norway. (In hindsight, we should really have been less rude to Norway about its last Christmas tree gift.) Back in December, incidentally, Angel Lane was flinging battered pigs in blankets into the fryer and serving them with a cranberry dipping sauce. If this taste sensation becomes a supermarket Christmas 2020 novelty item, robbed by every big business food development kitchen, I want you to know that Harding’s team were the trailblazers. On my most recent visit, I went posh and sat in the upstairs restaurant, which is essentially a no-frills seating area, like Nora Batty’s caff in Last of the Summer Wine. They’ll bring you a stainless-steel pot of tea and your fish and chips on a plate with a wedge of lemon, as if you’re Queen Noor of Jordan or something. They’ll do this after a fashion, because they’re also trying to serve the busy shop downstairs. Please don’t go and then moan on TripAdvisor that it isn’t at all shiny and bright and equipped for every need like a Harry Ramsden. Angel Lane is wonky, ancient and doesn’t need changing. We live in bizarre times for our teas right now, and they’re about to get even more fishy. • Angel Lane Chippie 17 Angel Lane, Penrith, Cumbria, 01768 866762. Open all week 11.30am-8.30pm (9pm Thurs-Sat, noon-8pm Sun). About £10 a head, plus drinks and service. Food 8/10 Atmosphere 9/10 Service 7/10