Ludicrous to think that it has been 10 years since The Trip first aired, a movie-in-the-shape-of-a-TV-show where Rob Brydon annoyed Steve Coogan around the Pennines, for no reason, while they slowly ate food. There is no way of describing The Trip without it sounding featherlight and pointless – “Two men approach their 50s by aggressively impersonating Michael Caine ” – but to love The Trip, as I unashamedly do, is to watch it first-hand, to consume it, to let it wash over you like a wave. Yes: a vast percentage of the show’s four episodic series is just Rob Brydon licking his lips and shouting: “WHATTYA GOT?” at a succession of politely smiling waitresses. But somehow within that there is art. The Trip to Greece (Tuesday, 10pm, Sky One) is just every other series of The Trip, then, though this time in Greece. Brydon again plays an amped-up version of himself, clanging on the verge of annoying, seemingly missing two or three of humanity’s core social nodes, always singing that same song, a Ronnie Corbett impression that goes on too long; while Coogan does the same, playing himself-but-not-himself, the chip-shouldered, fractious actor who takes driving very seriously and always seems on the verge of a full-blown temper tantrum. Over exquisite Michelin-starred meals in blue-skied idylls, they jab, tuck and bob their way at each other, a love language of impersonations and “competitively remembering things”. Coogan will always sleep with the same photographer and not quite know how to love his son. Brydon will always reveal himself, tender and human, on the phone to his wife. Someone will always, without fail, wear an unflattering hat. Although this trip is supposedly that of Odysseus, tracing his epic journey home, it more often feels Sisyphean: the same rock, pushed up the same mountain, the same slow trundle back down again, the same roving drone shot of a Range Rover, the same moody stare off the side of a ferry. That is not to say The Trip to Greece is not still very good. It absolutely is. But, as a viewer, there is a strange note to watching the fourth series: you almost want something new to happen, even though that’s the exact inverse of the point of this. To watch The Trip is to watch the two most entertaining people you know absolutely dominate a dinner party conversation while you just sit silently and watch: it is not about giving you some robust story to chew on. The Trip doesn’t need a pregnancy-scare storyline, or a character having a sudden identity crisis. Good, then, I suppose, that this series gives us none of them. There are always those big, lightly painted themes to The Trip – life, death, legacy, the fading of man – and always some quiet threat of dread, a phone call or email taken on a cliff that threatens to upend the world. And that’s it. Then, as surely as the sun sizzles into the sea, Rob Brydon points a flat palm at a plate of risotto, looks around an empty restaurant soundtracked by cicadas, licks his little Welsh lips, and whispers: “Whattya got?”