Police have spoken to the 16-year-old boy who was bombarded with social media messages from Scotland’s former finance secretary Derek Mackay. Police Scotland said that while it had not “received any complaint of criminality” regarding the Scottish National party politician’s behaviour, it was “assessing available information”. It has emerged that Mackay – who resigned from his government role after the scandal broke and just hours before he was due to present the budget – has deleted, or restricted access to, his social media accounts. He resigned after the Scottish Sun reported he had sent 270 messages to a schoolboy he befriended on Facebook and Instagram. The teenager told the paper: “I was happy to speak to the police and will tell them everything that happened. “I didn’t think what he was doing was a crime but I knew it was wrong and should be highlighted.” A Police Scotland spokeswoman said: “We would encourage anyone with information to please come forward. Police Scotland will always listen to anyone who wishes to seek advice or formally report a matter to us.” Mackay, who has been suspended from the SNP pending an investigation, is reported to have called the boy “cute” as well as offering to take him to a rugby game and out to dinner. Opposition politicians have condemned what they described as predatory behaviour, saying the messages amounted to grooming by Mackay, who had been tipped as a future successor to the SNP leader and first minister, Nicola Sturgeon. Mackay has not been seen in public since the story broke on Wednesday night. The father-of-two disclosed he was gay after his marriage ended in 2013. After the Scottish Sun report, it emerged that the Renfrewshire North and West MSP had also sent dozens of unwanted messages to an SNP activist over a period of four years. Shaun Cameron, 25, told the Daily Record on Friday that Mackay contacted him on Facebook after meeting him at an SNP event when he was 21. He said some of the messages were “quite suggestive” and alleged the then finance secretary had asked him in September 2017: “Got any naughty pics?” Sturgeon confirmed to MSPs at Holyrood on Thursday that she had accepted Mackay’s resignation from government, and that his behaviour had fallen “seriously below the standard required of a minister”. In his resignation statement, Mackay said he took full responsibility for his actions and apologised unreservedly to the boy and his family. “I have behaved foolishly and I am truly sorry.” He remains an MSP but is facing mounting calls to quit.