Eastbourne is a quaint and quiet seaside town. The smell of fish and chips wafts through the cobbled streets as locals nonchalantly potter about, occasionally strolling down to the pier to admire the coastal scenery. Daily life is peaceful. That is, until you discover the local football club. Eastbourne Town play in the ninth tier of English football. On the face of it, their home is just another run-of-the-mill, non-league ground. However, every other weekend, it is brought to life through an array of flares, banners and chants. The fans responsible for all this commotion are known as the Pier Pressure Ultras: a group of local supporters who take inspiration from Italy’s rowdy fan culture. The group was set up in 2017 when a few locals who were disillusioned with the modern professional game took it upon themselves to get behind the club on their doorstep. “At the very start it was a group of local boys who all had tickets at other teams who had become annoyed at the lengths it took to get to games and how expensive it was,” says founder Leon Jarvis. “It’s grown from people being disgruntled with Premier League and Championship football and the cost of going to games. It was £150 to go to a football match, whereas here you can come for £6. Once people realised that, it just grew.” The ultras do not just create a boisterous atmosphere. They raise money for various local charities and food banks, as well as championing diversity and inclusivity. They are also very hands-on when it comes to helping out the club. Over the years they have helped to design the matchday programme, maintain the website and run the club’s social media accounts – all on a voluntary basis. The group have also had an impact politically. “Typically, Eastbourne is a conservative place,” explains Eastbourne Town’s club secretary David Jenkins. “Obviously Pier Pressure aren’t that and they come with a noise, vigour and youth.” In the 2017 election, some supporters successfully campaigned to oust Caroline Ansell, the local Conservative MP. Eastbourne regularly have the highest attendance in the league and manager John Lambert recognises just how important the fans are. “When the chips are down and we need something, they are a godsend,” he says. “Towards the end of a game, they’re right there with us, chanting and singing. Last-minute goals, 97th-minute winners, it just all kicks off. The players run straight to them – into them – and they’re all jumping. It’s a sight to see.” • Follow Copa90 on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram• Follow writer Charlie Carmichael on Twitter