Donald Trump has not, as he claimed this week, been “fully vindicated and exonerated” of impeachment by the US Senate. Vindicated instead are the 63 million voters who backed him in 2016 and who have, in effect, terrorised their senators into keeping him in office. The issue is not whether Trump was innocent as charged, any more than was Bill Clinton in 1999. The Senate dismissed Trump’s case without even hearing the evidence. The acquittal was political, not judicial. I love America. I love it above all because I admire the raw vitality of its constitution. That constitution – bequeathed by British and French liberals – was intended to create a melting pot for global migrants as they colonised their way across America. Hardly changed since the 18th century, it remains archaic, ramshackle and flawed. But it works. It keeps the melting pot stirred, and above all it sustains an internally stable nation. Compare it with Britain’s de facto constitution, which is so overcentralised it may soon lose its entire Celtic fringe. The US Democrats’ attempt to unseat Trump has clearly backfired. Few of my American acquaintances regard him as fit to be president, though that may indicate the limits of my circle. Trump’s popularity has risen: now twice that of Richard Nixon when facing impeachment over Watergate in 1974. In six months Trump has taken his party’s Gallup approval rating from 43% to 51%. Support for his handling of the economy is higher than for any president in 20 years. That this is partly due to $1.9tn (£1.5tn) of debt seems of no account. Trump’s success has been famously based on his identity as a folk hero to the underprivileged, the “dispossessed”. Tossed on waves of vanity and paranoia, he has made mendacity an agent of power. Advisers have come and gone in despair. The sinews of national cohesion are strained close to breaking. But for those Americans – not just poor ones – who have long felt isolated from the power centres of Washington and New York, his artless ineptitude is mere evidence of authenticity. When the BBC interviewed a Southern Baptist woman on his many moral failings, she smiled and said: “We are all sinners.” If Trump is a crook, he is their kind of crook. Much political commentary predicts the doom of western democracy from an assault by reactionary populism. A torrent of books on this theme attributes the rise of demagoguery to decades of contemptuous neglect by democracy’s liberal elites. In Europe as in America, “ordinary people” have risen up, marched on capital cities and surged through the corridors of power. Their demands are not from left or right, labels that have lost all meaning. Voters simply feel inchoate and unheard. They want a new authenticity, a new tone of voice from those who order their lives. His disruptive term of office will be a warning to all hubristic governments. Otherwise, he will probably be a mere blip in the history of America The question now is whether western constitutions can handle this upsurge – and how far it is real. I studied American politics at the feet of their master historian, Arthur Schlesinger. He was fascinated by the capacity of the constitution constantly to “take America to the brink” yet pull back at the last minute. He referenced the eras of Nixon and George W Bush. But he feared a “disuniting of America” by embittered ethnic groups, polarising and fragmenting politics. He wondered if the longstanding balance of power between federal government and states’ rights could embrace such divisiveness. Schlesinger died in 2007, and goodness knows what he would have made of Trump. Yet I am sure he would have reverted to the constitution. In 2016 Hillary Clinton actually won 3 million more votes than Trump. The latter’s victory was a constitutional fluke, based on the anti-urban bias in the electoral college. It was a bias in the Senate towards smaller states – intended to prevent small states being overwhelmed by bigger ones – that secured Trump’s acquittal. Trump was thus the beneficiary not of a democratic decay, but rather of a 200-year-old constitution designed to do what he has done, give a voice to the “out-of-town and out-of-power”. Trump will be ousted by a perfectly healthy democracy in 2020 or 2024. In either case, there is no bar to the Democratic party finding a plausible candidate to succeed him, and repair whatever damage he is perceived as causing. His disruptive term of office will be a warning to all hubristic governments. Otherwise, he will probably be a mere blip in the history of America. When he goes, I imagine there will be a flurry of books on democracy’s glorious rebirth. One danger remains. In his Impeachment: A Handbook, the American academic Philip Bobbitt relates how the founding fathers saw impeachment as a curb on presidential power. They wanted no homegrown George III. But the federalist Alexander Hamilton realised the danger in putting a judicial sanction in the hands of the Senate, rather than the supreme court. It risked politicising impeachment. The risk was, says Bobbitt, that “if impeachment is weaponised by the losing party ... people will lose confidence in the peaceful transfer of power that accompanies a national election”. If impeachment allows partisan politics to negate the people’s vote, “the value of election as well as impeachment plummets”. This risk was averted this week. Yet Trump’s presidency is mortal. The ballot beckons. American democracy is alive and kicking. Democrats simply have to learn how to do the kicking. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist