Manchester United’s vice-chairman Ed Woodward has backed Ole Gunnar Solskjær to attract “high-quality acquisitions” in the summer and transform the club’s fortunes. Woodward, who has become a target of hatred from a section of disgruntled United supporters who regularly sing about his death, recently had his home attacked as tensions continued to rise. However, rather than turning to the now-available former Tottenham manager Mauricio Pochettino, Woodward says United have a “clear plan”, with Solskjær staying at the wheel. United languish in eighth place in the Premier League, with fewer than half the points of table-topping Liverpool, and Solskjær’s side face a battle even to qualify for the Champions League. The January acquisition of Bruno Fernandes for an initial £46.5m outlay has provided a welcome injection of quality at Old Trafford but Woodward admits there is still much to do. “The signing of Bruno Fernandes and return of key players from injury will be a boost to Ole and the squad as we head into the second half of the season,” Woodward said as part of introductory remarks read out at a recent fans’ forum. “We remain in contention in the Europa League and the FA Cup, as well as for Champions League qualification, so there is still lots to play for. However, as a club and a board, we do recognise that we are not yet where we want to be. “It is the overwhelming priority of everyone at the club to get us back to regularly challenging for Premier League and Champions League titles.” United have been linked with Pochettino since his departure from Spurs in November but Woodward says he wants big changes in the summer, with Solskjær key to the recruitment drive. United have been linked with a big-money move for Jack Grealish while Paul Pogba is likely to be moved out of Old Trafford. “The recruitment department is working to a clear plan and philosophy, along with Ole and his coaching staff,” added Woodward. “Our focus is on bringing in a combination of experience and the best young players with potential to develop further, fusing graduates from our academy with high-quality acquisitions. “Our recruitment process focuses on analysis and selection of players over the course of a season, with a view to the following summer transfer window. As part of the rebuild we see this coming summer as an important opportunity. “There has been no shortage of investment in players over the past few years, with over £200m spent since Ole became manager. Our aim is to ensure that we continue to achieve consistency in quality of recruitment. “Off the pitch it is important to note that the commercial elements of the club are geared to ensuring we have a self-sustaining model which supports investment in the playing side.”