A British passenger who was evacuated to the UK from Wuhan on Sunday was taken ill on the plane and escorted directly to hospital on landing. The passenger started to feel “slightly unwell” during the second flight to evacuate Britons from the Chinese city at the centre of the coronavirus outbreak, according to UK health officials. The person, who was wearing a face mask, “self-isolated immediately” and on landing at RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire was taken to hospital for tests while the other 10 passengers went on to staff quarters at Arrowe Park hospital in Wirral, Merseyside, where 83 others from the first flight back to the UK are also being quarantined. It is understood that Public Health England conducted a risk assessment before the plane door was opened. No ground personnel came into contact with the passenger apart from ambulance crew in full protective kit. It is a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals, or possibly seafood. New and troubling viruses usually originate in animal hosts. Ebola and flu are examples. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars) and Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (Mers) are both caused by coronaviruses that came from animals. The virus causes pneumonia. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. In severe cases there can be organ failure. As this is viral pneumonia, antibiotics are of no use. The antiviral drugs we have against flu will not work. If people are admitted to hospital, they may get support for their lungs and other organs as well as fluids. Recovery will depend on the strength of their immune system. Many of those who have died are known to have been already in poor health. Human to human transmission has been confirmed by China’s national health commission. As of 3 February, 361 people have died in China, and one in the Philippines. Confirmed infections in China are 17,238, and the official Chinese figures include Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau. Outside of China, infections stand at more than 150. Two members of one family have been confirmed to have the virus in the UK, after more than 160 were tested and found negative. The actual number to have contracted the virus could be far higher as people with mild symptoms may not have been detected. Modelling by World Health Organization (WHO) experts at Imperial College London suggests there could be as many as 100,000 cases, with uncertainty putting the margins between 30,000 and 200,000. There were fears that the coronavirus might spread more widely during the week-long lunar new year holidays, which start on 24 January, when millions of Chinese travel home to celebrate, but the festivities have largely been cancelled and Wuhan and other Chinese cities are in lockdown. Unless you have recently travelled to China or been in contact with someone infected with the virus, then you should treat any cough or cold symptoms as normal. The NHS advises that there is generally no need to visit a doctor for a cough unless it is persistent or you are having other symptoms such as chest pain, difficulty breathing or you feel very unwell. No. The spread of the virus outside China is worrying but not an unexpected development. It increases the likelihood that the World Health Organization will declare the outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern on Thursday evening. The key concerns are how transmissible this new coronavirus is between people and what proportion become severely ill and end up in hospital. Sarah Boseley Health editor and Hannah Devlin The other 10 passengers have not shown any symptoms but have been quarantined in a separate area of the facility from the first group, according to an email from Janelle Holmes, the chief executive of the Wirral University teaching hospital NHS foundation trust. A note describing the development was circulated to patients by staff from Public Health England on Monday. First reported by the Liverpool Echo and seen by the Guardian, it said: “During the flight, one of the passengers started to feel slightly unwell, and self-isolated immediately. Upon landing, that passenger remains isolated, and was taken to another NHS hospital for tests. We expect test results in the coming days and will keep you updated. “None of the other new arrivals have shown any symptoms, but as a precautionary measure they were allocated rooms in a separate area of the facility, isolated from those already here.” An English teacher who has been in quarantine at Arrowe Park hospital since Friday told the Guardian he was not worried, but hoped that whoever had fallen ill recovered quickly. “It doesn’t really bother me because I trust [health professionals] to have done what they say they did, which is [to have] dealt with it as best they could and isolated everyone else,” said the 32-year-old, who wishes to remain anonymous. If the person had fallen ill after arriving at the facility, anyone who had come into contact with them would have their quarantine time “reset” to 14 days. “Because they’ve isolated them, there’s no chance of that happening.” All those who have returned from Hubei province in China are being quarantined in staff accommodation blocks at Arrowe Park. A spokesperson for the Department of Health and Social Care confirmed that the passenger had developed “mild, cold-like symptoms”, adding: “Our robust processes continue to ensure there is no risk to the wider public from those in quarantine or those undergoing further treatment.” Separately, UK officials said there were no plans to introduce a US-style travel ban on foreign nationals who had recently been in China entering the country. Sources told PA Media that the UK would continue to follow the advice of the World Health Organization, which does not advocate such bans. The Chinese government has accused the US of causing “panic” in its response instead of helping. More than 17,000 people in China have been confirmed to have the virus and 361 have died there. In other countries there are more than 150 confirmed cases and one person has died in the Philippines. The UK health secretary, Matt Hancock, is due to update MPs later on Monday when he makes a statement to the Commons. Meanwhile, a University of York student and one of their relatives are continuing to be treated for coronavirus in a specialist infectious diseases unit at the Royal Victoria Infirmary in Newcastle. Earlier on Monday, Hancock announced £20m of UK government funding for the development of a coronavirus vaccine.