It may be that my poor old eyes are failing me (I’ve not quite reached marmalade-making age yet), but it seems to me that the photo of a supposedly exuberant Mr Johnson (Boris Johnson, the ultimate purveyor of fake news, Media, 24 February) shows two bottles of a certain cheap, tasteless and foreign beer on the table. Okay, they may belong to his partner – in front of whom they appear – but surely this can’t be right. The man who knows the price of a bottle of champagne being caught in the presence of Budweiser; as the brand’s own adverts used to say: “Wassup?”Jack SlaterScarborough, North Yorkshire • I’m unable to fulfil her request for Auntie Wink’s grapefruit and cherry recipe, but Dr Bufton (Letters, 24 February) may be interested to know that my copy of Midge Thomas’s Jams, Pickles & Chutneys: Best-Kept Secrets of the Women’s Institute contains directions for a pink grapefruit and cranberry variety. While clearly no facsimile, maybe it could serve as a suitable homage?Dr Annabel OvensMunich, Germany • Martin Rowson’s cartoon featuring a manic Priti Patel and the lyrics of the Sex Pistols’ Pretty Vacant was genius (Journal, 22 February). John Lydon, aka Johnny Rotten, would undoubtedly approve. Now, how do I stop bursting into song and driving my wife bonkers every time Ms Patel appears on screen?Michael HarberBury St Edmunds, Suffolk • Why is the need for plasters in diverse skin tones news in 2020 (‘Plasters to better reflect diversity of skin tones go on sale at Tesco, 24 February)? When I became a (white) childminder looking after two black children in 1974, I assumed it was good practice to include transparent plasters in my first aid box.Janet MearnsLondon • When we lived in the north, we used to enjoy regular visits to Beamish. In those days, it was in County Durham. Now, it seems, it has miraculously moved to Northumberland, according to your Wordsearch (G2, 25 February). Or are you just levelling up all the northern counties into one?Bob WightmanHarpenden, Hertfordshire • School satsumas (Letters, 22 February) is an improvement. Our son had school “insect” days.Rowan VuglarLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 