Mikel Arteta knew he would have limited wriggle room in his first transfer window as manager so was happy enough to add the defensive cover Arsenal desperately needed. A number of options were explored, ultimately bringing relatively risk-free loan deals for the centre-back Pablo Marí and right-back Cédric Soares. A month ago Arteta was concerned about the prospect of high-profile departures but Granit Xhaka’s situation was smoothed over and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang is going nowhere for now. Nick Ames Ins Pablo Marí (Flamengo, loan), Cédric Soares (Southampton, loan) Outs Emile Smith Rowe (Huddersfield, loan), Konstantinos Mavropanos (FC Nürnberg, loan), James Olayinka (Northampton, loan), Deyan Iliev (Jagiellonia Bialystok, loan), Tyreece John-Jules (Lincoln, loan), Ben Sheaf (Doncaster, loan extended) Injuries forced Villa to get busy in January and they will need their reinforcements to make rapid impacts if they are to stay up this season. Goalkeeper Pepe Reina has made an impressive start as a replacement for Tom Heaton, and Danny Drinkwater has looked rusty but vaguely promising in midfield. The big question is whether Mbwana Samatta and Borja Bastón can provide the sharpness up front that Villa have lacked. Paul Doyle Ins Mbwana Samatta (Genk, £8.5m), Louie Barry (Barcelona, £885,000), Borja Bastón (Swansea City, free), Pepe Reina (Milan, loan), Danny Drinkwater (Chelsea, loan) Outs Jonathan Kodjia (Al Gharafa, £2.5m), Lovre Kalinic (Toulouse, loan), Andre Green (Charlton, loan), Scott Hogan (Birmingham City, loan), Easah Suliman (Vitória SC, undisclosed), Jacob Ramsey (Doncaster, loan) Eddie Howe will have breathed a sigh of relief when Manchester United informed Bournemouth they had cooled their interest in Joshua King hours before the deadline, having had a bid north of £20m rejected on Thursday night. Bournemouth made inquiries themselves and were interested in loan moves for Danny Rose, Bertrand Traoré and Jacob Bruun Larsen but finished up with what they started, having retained King, Nathan Aké and Ryan Fraser, with the latter being able to leave on a free this summer. Ben Fisher Outs Asmir Begovic (Milan, loan), Jermain Defoe (Rangers, pre-contract agreement), Emerson Hyndman (Atlanta United, undisclosed), Mikael Ndjoli (Motherwell, loan), Brad Smith (Cardiff City, loan), Matt Butcher (St Johnstone, loan); Frank Vincent (Torquay, loan) Graham Potter added another exciting youngster to his Sussex stable in Tariq Lamptey, who made his Chelsea debut under Frank Lampard this season and, having sown the seeds, they activated a permanent move for Aaron Mooy after the Australia midfielder impressed. Meanwhile Argentina international Alexis Mac Allister returned from a loan spell at Boca Juniors and Glenn Murray stayed put, despite firm Championship interest, most notably from promotion-chasing Nottingham Forest. BF Ins Tariq Lamptey (Chelsea, £3m), Aaron Mooy (Huddersfield, £5m), Alexis Mac Allister (Boca Juniors, loan ended) Outs Gaëtan Bong (Nottingham Forest, undisclosed), Anders Dreyer (FC Midtjylland, undisclosed), James Tilley (Grimsby Town, undisclosed), Tudor Baluta (ADO Den Haag, loan), Tom McGill (Crawley, loan), Billy Arce (LDU Quito, loan), Kacper Lopata (Zaglebie Sosnowiec, loan), Bojan Radulovic (Alaves B, loan) Sean Dyche promised a quiet January transfer window and Burnley’s business was typically unspectacular, with just one signing from the Championship in Josh Brownhill and another departure in Nahki Wells, the latter leaving after never making a Premier League start and spending most of his time out on loan. Ben Gibson and Matej Vydra stayed at Turf Moor, despite being unhappy with their lack of game time. Paul WilsonIns Josh Brownhill (Bristol City, £8m), Henri Ogunby (Manchester City, undisclosed) Out Nahki Wells (Bristol City, £5m), Adam Phillips (Morecambe, loan), Ryan Cooney (Morecambe, loan), Scott Wilson (Blyth Spartans, loan), Will Harris (Warrington Town, loan), Tunde Bayode (Curzon Ashton, loan), Anthony Glennon (Grimsby Town, loan), Josh Benson (Grimsby Town, loan), Rob Harker (Hartlepool United, loan) The transfer ban was lifted but business was slow. Frank Lampard’s search for extra firepower ended in frustration – late moves for Edinson Cavani and Dries Mertens went nowhere – and the failure to bring in cover for Tammy Abraham meant Olivier Giroud, who wanted to join Inter, stayed put. Expect a bigger push in the summer, when Chelsea will look to sign Jadon Sancho and Timo Werner. Jacob Steinberg Outs Tariq Lamptey (Brighton, £3m), Danny Drinkwater (Aston Villa, loan), Victor Moses (Inter, loan), Marc Guehi (Swansea, loan), Conor Gallagher (Swansea, loan), Jamal Blackman (Bristol Rovers, loan), Josh Grant (Plymouth, loan), George McEachran (SC Cambuur, loan), Charlie Brown (Royale Union Saint-Gilloise, loan), Clinton Mola (Stuttgart, loan) Roy Hodgson’s priority was to sign a striker and a right-back in this window: the first came off in the form of Everton’s Cenk Tosun on loan, but Nathan Ferguson’s failed move from West Brom meant that Palace could not find a belated replacement for Aaron Wan-Bissaka. Missing out on Ferguson, as well as Hull’s Jarrod Bowen, will not have helped the manager’s mood. Ed Aarons Ins Cenk Tosun (Everton, loan), Scott Banks (Dundee United, undisclosed) Outs Víctor Camarasa (Real Betis, loan ended), Sam Woods (Hamilton, loan), Jason Lokilo (Doncaster Rovers, loan), Connor Wickham (Sheffield Wednesday, loan) Carlo Ancelotti’s first window as manager passed quietly which, with the new man still assessing his squad and Everton announcing record losses of almost £112m for the year to June 2019, was no great surprise. The club maintain no formal offer was received for Richarlison from Barcelona, although that may change in the summer, and were unable to shift deadwood such as Oumar Niasse and Cuco Martina. Andy HunterIn Jarrad Branthwaite (Carlisle United, undisclosed) Outs Kieran Dowell (Wigan, loan); Callum Connolly (Fleetwood, loan); Cenk Tosun (Crystal Palace, loan); Antony Evans (Paderborn, undisclosed); Lewis Gibson (Fleetwood, loan); Morgan Feeney (Tranmere Rovers, loan), Jonas Lössl (Huddersfield, loan) A pleasingly quiet window for Leicester, who were never likely to sell any of their key players halfway through a season that could end with a top-four finish. The only significant arrival was Ryan Bennett, who is a useful enough reserve centre-back who is hardly expected to become a regular starter. A high-end winger would have been a welcome addition but was not needed urgently, with Harvey Barnes improving and Ayoze Pérez doing a fair job on the right. PD In Ryan Bennett (Wolves, loan) Outs George Thomas (ADO Den Haag, loan), Andy King (Huddersfield, loan), Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall (Blackpool, loan), Lukas Husek (Sparta Prague, undisclosed), Admiral Muskwe (Swindon, loan), Mitchell Clark (Port Vale, loan) Jürgen Klopp usually avoids January recruits but the opportunity to sign Japan international Takumi Minamino for a bargain release fee of £7.3m was one he could not resist. Understandably, given the Salzburg playmaker’s impressive displays against the runaway Premier League leaders in the Champions League this season. Otherwise it was a case of finding Rhian Brewster and Natt Phillips valuable game-time on loan. AH Ins Takumi Minamino (RB Salzburg, £7.3m); Joe Hardy (Brentford, undisclosed) Outs Herbie Kane (Hull City, loan); Rhian Brewster (Swansea City, loan); Isaac Christie-Davies (Cercle Brugge, loan); Allan Rodrigues de Souza (Atletico Mineiro, undisclosed); Nathaniel Phillips (Stuttgart, loan); Daniel Atherton (Marine, loan) Pep Guardiola could probably have done with a fresh frontline centre-back despite Aymeric Laporte’s recovery from injury as he only has two others: the equally inconsistent John Stones and Nicolás Otamendi. Yet despite having the option of recalling Tosin Adarabioyo from Blackburn, Guardiola was content to retain the status quo. In the summer, then, expect him to strengthen the position and possibly add a creative midfielder to replace the departing David Silva. Jamie Jackson Outs Angeliño (RB Leipzig, loan), Patrick Roberts (Middlesbrough, loan), Lukas Nmecha (Middlesbrough, loan), Ian Poveda (Leeds United, £1m), Daniel Grimshaw (Hemel Hempstead, loan), Henri Ogunby (Burnley, undisclosed), Matt Smith (Charlton Athletic, loan) Bruno Fernandes’s arrival for £46.5m is a desperately needed boost for Ole Gunnar Solskjær, the Portugal international adding leadership and experience in midfield. The transfer deadline day scramble for a No 9 was less credible: Romelu Lukaku’s departure last summer should have presaged a replacement then instead of United’s rather last-minute move with ended with Odion Ighalo joining on loan for the rest of the season. JJ In Bruno Fernandes (Sporting, £46.5m), Odion Ighalo (Shanghai Shenhua, loan), Nathan Bishop (Southend United, undisclosed) Outs Ashley Young (Inter, £1.3m), Marcos Rojo (Estudiantes, loan), Cameron Borthwick-Jackson (Oldham, loan), Ethan Hamilton (Bolton, loan), George Tanner (Salford, loan) Steve Bruce has added quality at left-back in the shape of Danny Rose, while Valentino Lazaro brings creativity on the wing and Nabil Bentaleb central midfield stability. Yet, with a bid for Olivier Giroud having proved forlorn, does Newcastle’s worryingly coy forward line contain sufficient goals? And might Rose and Bentaleb turn into the troublemakers some at their parent clubs, Tottenham and Schalke, predict? Louise Taylor Ins Nabil Bentaleb (Schalke, loan), Valentino Lazaro (Inter, loan), Danny Rose (Tottenham, loan) Outs Kelland Watts (Mansfield, loan), Ki Sung-yueng (released), Rolando Aarons (Motherwell, loan) There was more than a hint of “preparing for life in the Championship” about Norwich’s January window. Lukas Rupp arrived from Hoffenheim after an unheralded career in the Bundesliga. Two younger talents – Melvin Sitti and Sam McCallum – were brought in and loaned back to their parent clubs immediately. Only one addition, attacking midfielder Ondrej Duda, looks to have been signed for immediate impact; valued by Daniel Farke at £25m, he came in on loan. Paul MacInnes Ins Sam McCallum (Coventry, £3.5m), Ondrej Duda (Hertha Berlin, loan), Lukas Rapp (Hoffenheim, undisclosed), Melvin Sitti (Sochaux, undisclosed) Outs Anthony Spyrou (released), Philip Heise (FC Nürnberg, loan), Rocky Bushiri (Sint-Truiden, loan), Dennis Srbeny (Paderborn, £850,000), Akin Famewo (St Mirren, loan), Carlton Morris (MK Dons, loan), Billy Johnson (Braintree Town, loan), Louis Thompson (MK Dons, loan), James Husband (Blackpool, undisclosed), Melvin Sitti (Sochaux, loan), Sam McCallum (Coventry, loan), Louis Lomas (Tampa Bay Rowdies, loan), Timi Odusina (Hartlepool, loan), Caleb Richards (Yeovil Town, loan), Isak Thorvaldsson (Fleetwood Town, loan) If it ain’t broke why fix it? Propelled by a combination of expert coaching and rare collective spirit Chris Wilder’s side have defied all expectations. But treading water can also be perilous and Wilder looks to have added real quality in the shape of the Norway midfielder and record signing Sander Berge. Meanwhile the pacy Dutch striker Richairo Zivkovic can only intensify competition for attacking places after arriving on loan from China’s Changchun Yatai, while a loan move for Greece international defender Panos Retsos strengthens options at the back. LT Ins Sander Berge (Genk, £22m), Panos Retsos (Bayer Leverkusen, loan), Jack Rodwell (free transfer), Richairo Zivkovic (Changchun Yatai, loan), Jack Robinson (Nottingham Forest, £1m) Outs Richard Stearman (Huddersfield, free), Tyler Smith (Rochdale, loan), Ben Heneghan (Blackpool, loan extended), David Parkhouse (Stevenage, loan), Callum Robinson (West Brom, loan), Kean Bryan (Bolton, loan), Marcus Dewhurst (Carlisle, loan), Mark Duffy (ADO Den Haag, loan), Jake Wright (released), Ravel Morrison (Middlesbrough, loan) A satisfying window for Ralph Hasenhüttl, who beat off competition from Premier League rivals to land Kyle Walker-Peters on loan from Tottenham. The full-back will likely slot in at right-back to fill the void left by Cédric Soares, who has joined Arsenal, and provide competition for the fit-again Yan Valery, but can also play at left-back. Leicester enquired about Denmark defender Jannik Vestergaard but balked at his asking price, with Southampton determined to recoup the £18m they paid for the defender. BF In Kyle Walker-Peters (Tottenham Hotspur, loan) Outs Cédric Soares (Arsenal, loan); Maya Yoshida (Sampdoria, loan), Harry Hamblin (Macclesfield, free); Kayne Ramsay (Shrewsbury, loan); Callum Slattery (De Graafschap, loan), Christoph Klarer (St Pölten, loan), Josh Sims (New York Red Bulls, loan) José Mourinho wanted a striker to cover for the injured Harry Kane and he did not get one, meaning he has at least a further two-and-a-half months without a recognised senior No9. He lost the experience of Christian Eriksen and Danny Rose but gained the youthful promise of Steven Bergwijn and Gedson Fernandes. David Hytner Ins Michel Vorm (free agent), Gedson Fernandes (Benfica, loan), Giovani Lo Celso (Real Betis, £30m), Steven Bergwijn (PSV Eindhoven, £25m). Outs Jack Clarke (QPR, loan), Christian Eriksen (Inter, £16.9m), Kyle Walker-Peters (Southampton, loan), Cameron Carter-Vickers (Luton, loan), Danny Rose (Newcastle, loan), Anthony Georgiou (Bolton, loan), Kazaiah Sterling (Leyton Orient, loan), Paris Maghoma (Brentford, undisclosed), Armando Shashoua (Atletico Baleares, loan), Brandon Austin (Viborg, loan), TJ Eyoma (Lincoln City, loan), Shilow Tracey (Macclesfield Town, loan), Tashan Oakley-Boothe (Stoke City, undisclosed) Nigel Pearson always said that Watford were unlikely to do significant business in this window, and so it proved – the club, 19th in the league, perhaps finding that any player talented and ambitious enough for them to be interested was also too talented and ambitious to join them, while also being frustrated in several attempts to get rid of players, on loan or otherwise. The Brazilian forward João Pedro has arrived, with more fanfare than impact so far, but he has youth on his side. Simon Burnton Ins João Pedro (Fluminense, £3.6m), Ignacio Pussetto (Udinese, £6.8m), Myles Roberts (Reading, undisclosed) Outs Filip Stuparevic (FK Pribham, loan), Dimitri Foulquier (Granada, loan), Marvin Zeegelaar (Udinese, undisclosed), Sebastian Prödl (released), Alex Jakubiak (St Mirren, loan), Pontus Dahlberg (FC Emmen, loan) Relegation fears led to a frantic dash in the final week of the window. West Ham strengthened their midfield after signing Tomas Soucek on loan with an option to buy for €20.5m and concerns about the attack saw David Moyes pip Crystal Palace and Newcastle to the £22.5m signing of Hull’s Jarrod Bowen. Moyes also sorted out the goalkeeping situation, signing Darren Randolph as cover for Lukasz Fabianski and shipping Roberto off to Alavés on loan. JS Ins Jarrod Bowen (Hull City, £22.5m), Darren Randolph (Middlesbrough, £4m), Tomas Soucek (Slavia Prague, loan) Outs Aji Alese (Accrington, loan), Nathan Holland (Oxford, loan), Conor Coventry (Lincoln, loan), Joe Powell (Burton, undisclosed), Martin Samuelsen (Hull, £1m), Roberto (Alavés, loan), Dan Kemp (Stevenage, loan) Nuno Espírito Santo openly pleaded for new signings to help his team continue to challenge for Champions League qualification while advancing in the Europa League, but Wolves only made one purchase. Daniel Podence, a forward most at home on the wing, became the third most expensive recruit in the club’s history when he joined for £17m from Olympiakos. That welcome addition still leaves Wolves very reliant on their one senior specialist striker, Raúl Jiménez, especially after the departure of Patrick Cutrone. Central midfield could also do with more depth. PD Ins Daniel Podence (Olympiacos, £17m), Leonardo Campana (Barcelona in Ecuador, undisclosed), Enzo Loiodice (Dijon, loan), Luke Matheson (Rochdale, undisclosed) Outs Ivan Cavaleiro (Fulham, £15m), Patrick Cutrone (Fiorentina, loan), Elliot Watt (Carlisle, loan), Sadou Diallo (Accrington, loan extended), Rafa Mir (SD Huesca, loan), Connor Ronan (Blackpool, loan), Jesús Vallejo (Granada, loan), Harry Burgoyne (Shrewsbury, undisclosed), Jordan Graham (Gillingham, loan), Ryan Bennett (Leicester, loan), Luke Matheson (Rochdale, loan), Benny Ashley-Seal (Accrington, loan), Sylvain Deslandes (Arges Pitesti, undisclosed), Ryan Giles (Coventry City, loan)