Andrea Levy was thinking big as she jotted down notes for what would have been her sixth novel: it would be a love story entwined with colonial history and a richness that was Heat and Dust, Behind the Scenes at the Museum and even a touch of The Da Vinci Code. “It would have been so much better than the Da Vinci Code, I’m sure,” said British Library curator Zoë Wilcox, reading one of the hundreds of notebooks that Levy stored in her cellar and are now in her care. The notebooks, as well as research material, correspondence, emails and audio recordings, are all part of a Levy’s literary archive, newly acquired by the British Library. Levy, the supreme chronicler of the Windrush generation best known for her novels Small Island and The Long Song, died 12 months ago aged 62. Before her death, Levy was in discussions with the British Library about her archive although she took some convincing, said Wilcox, the curator of the contemporary performance and creative archives at the library. “When I first spoke to her about it she couldn’t really believe that all the boxes of paper she had in the cellar really were an archive, she thought that was something much too posh for her.” Wilcox went to visit Levy at her north London home. “I wasn’t allowed in the cellar. Andrea was so modest about her work that she was quite scared about people seeing her drafts, her crossings out and her notes.” The truth though, said Wilcox, is an incredibly rich and important archive which shines light on the thought processes and working practices of “an extraordinary writer whose literary significance will be celebrated for years to come”. There are piles of notebooks with drafts and outlines of her novels and short stories. Often in red pen is a note chivvying herself along. One reads: “Could you try plotting out the book a bit… It shouldn’t be that hard, should it?’ Another is motivational: “I have to remember that only I can do it this way. I have to remember that I will have no idea what I will produce and that there is no reason on earth why it should not be good.” The archive stretches from the creative writing classes Levy took in her 30s at City Lit, an adult education college in central London, to just before her death. One jotter has Levy’s ideas for her next novel, Number Six, which will have at its centre a newly married couple, the woman black, the man white. He inherits something which takes him on a journey into his past, and to Jamaica. She writes that the story should be rich, think Heat and Dust, Behind the Scenes at the Museum, and The Da Vinci Code. Levy tells herself: “Be playful and broad with the stories. It is a book about the British Empire and its impact on the lives of people – both white and black … both top of tree and those oppressed by it. How that British Empire and that relationship shaped modern Britain.” Levy’s best-known novel remains Small Island which in 2004 won the Whitbread novel prize, the Orange Prize and the following year the ‘Orange of Oranges’. Her notes reveal an idea for its structure came to her in a dream on ‘30-7-97’. She has drawn a diagram which suggests a main story line and lots of tributary stories. The main story “could be a love story or something quite tangible and engaging to the reader”. Other papers touch on collaborations with the Lenny Henry, Baroness Lola Young and the Guardian’s Gary Younge. There is also an as yet unproduced screenplay of the life of Mary Seacole. Cox said Levy’s voice was vividly present throughout the papers. Whether she was motivating herself or writing about role models such as James Baldwin or Julie Andrews, her “modesty, humour and commitment to confronting the truth” shines through. The library has purchased the archive for £140,000 and items from it will go on display in the Treasures Gallery from late-February. It joins contemporary literary archives at the Library which include the papers of Hanif Kureishi, Margaret Forster, Will Self and Ruth Prawer Jhabvala. Levy’s husband Bill Mayblin said it had come as a surprise to her that her carefully saved boxes could be considered an archive. Once convinced, there was only one place she wanted it to go. “Not only had the Library greatly helped her research as a writer, but because much of her work examined British colonial history – a history full of omission and injustice – it seemed fitting, and somehow just, that her archive should finally find a home in a truly national institution. “She would be very pleased that through the British Library her work and her story is now owned, and valued, by we British.”