A vaguely panicked spot here for Paramount’s troubled big screen adaptation of Sonic the Hedgehog, neatly missing the video game’s peak of popularity by a solid 20 years or more. The words Sonic and trailer haven’t had the smoothest of relationships, with the first footage revealing a horrifyingly humanoid hedgehog who had fans screaming for it to be burned. Instead, he was re-tooled but the latest spot, showing a range of athletes heaping praise on Sonic’s speed, is the sign of a marketing team unsure just what the hell they’re doing. During one scene, the tortured star James Marsden asks “What am I doing?” and it genuinely feels like an outtake. The full-length version of the Super Bowl spot has a lot for us to take in. Vin Diesel has a brother! That brother is John Cena! Charlize Theron is back! And she’s in a perspex cage! There’s a magnet plane or something! Whatever that is! How did we get to the ninth Fast & Furious film? Does that make any rational sense? Do we all still want to see this when it comes out in the summer? Yes! The film that’s almost kind of just about maybe almost been happening for decades now is finally coming out this summer. A sequel to a hit that didn’t seem like it needed a sequel – but here we are, months away from the release of Top Gun: Maverick. It’s the first previously unreleased film ad tonight and it offers what we might expect and little else … but here’s hoping it proves its existence by the time June comes. Continuing the Pacinossance that began with the one-two punch of Once Upon a Time in Hollywood and The Irishman, Amazon’s fact-based thriller series Hunters looks set to give us a lot of Al – maybe, just maybe, too much? After years of thankless paycheque roles that pushed the actor further and further into the realm of parody, this new look at the Jordan Peele-produced show focused on Nazi killers has him screaming in a German accent, which I’m hoping isn’t indicative of the overall noise level of his performance. A thunderously loud trailer here for A Quiet Place Part II that starts with a couple of shocks: first that John Krasinski, back as director, is also returning as a star and second that his appearance is closely followed by a seat-ejecting arrival from one of those noise-loathing aliens. It’s a ferociously impressive tease for a sequel that many of us thought felt unnecessary, hinting that many of us might be very wrong. A necessary insertion here from Disney, continuing the cartoon-to-live-action machine with Mulan, arguably its riskiest bet so far. It’s a genre switch-up of sorts, with the film set to be more of a historical action adventure, a far cry from the more kid-friendly magic of Disney’s previous efforts. The latest tease promises again to bring us some rousing sequences, though, and serves as a vital reminder that not all Disney heroines are waiting for a man to save them. One of the most anticipated ads of the game gives us a closer look at Marvel’s belated solo adventure for Scarlett Johansson’s Black Widow. It’s not a great deal different to the trailer that already launched but it does reintroduce that wonderful “warped guitar” noise as well as remind us that the Oscar nominee Florence Pugh is starring in a big old blockbuster, so it’s hard not to love it. This year, the record-breaking $5.6m price-tag for a 30-second spot has left some studios choosing to sit this one out while others, such as Paramount, have used their time to poke fun at the sky-high entry fee. The SpongeBob movies have always felt akin to a fever dream, a manic rush of images, ideas and one-liners, and this brief tease suggests that the next shall be more of the same, with added cameos from Snoop Dogg and Keanu Reeves, because sure. A semi-surprise reveal here for a solid tease of the 25th James Bond film, which appears to be more plot-heavy than most, following on from the underwhelming Spectre and bringing back characters other than 007 himself. Apart from the teases of secrets and backstory, there’s the requisite mix of one-liners and action one would expect. The Universe is expanding. Marvel Studios’ The Falcon and The Winter Soldier, WandaVision and Loki are coming soon to #DisneyPlus. pic.twitter.com/Kmk6p8S4hV Another surprise reveal here, this time for the Disney+ Marvel shows offering a tease of Loki, WandaVision and The Falcon and the Winter Soldier. It’s a limited look but a reminder that unlike the Netflix Marvel shows, these ones will be attached to more substantial budgets and characters from the films themselves. It’s going to take a lot more than this, though, to convince many of us that a Marvel sitcom is gonna work ...