I understand the strength of feeling around the Seven Sisters Latin Village market – it is important to our community and it is important to Haringey council (The battle over a street market that will define a party’s future, Journal, 6 February). Since day one of this administration, the council has been committed to the long-term future of the market and its traders. It has been claimed that the council could simply pull out of this scheme. But the fact is that Grainger would expect to recoup at least £19m it has already spent, and we would still not own the land. These are vital funds that would be taken away from non-statutory services that play such a key role for residents in Haringey. We have done everything in our power to address the concerns that have been listed in the traders’ community plan. Affordable future rents and guaranteed equivalent space have all been agreed, and the council will do anything else it can to support the traders and the wider community. We cannot, however, do anything about the future ownership of the Wards Corner building in which the market now operates. That is why we established an independent policy advisory group to identify a viable future management approach for the market. The group has engaged with all parties and creates an agreed pathway for the traders to have a voice on the board and the management of the market. The market is not simply being demolished, and there will always be a Latin Village market in Seven Sisters during the rebuilding. The council is not seeking to compulsorily purchase the market because TfL has a contractual agreement to sell it to Grainger. We will remain committed to the long-term future of the market. Wards Corner is the gateway to Tottenham. Nobody can look at what is there and believe that this should be the future for the next 20 years. The council must deliver better for residents, better for businesses and better for traders – an energetic town centre, new homes, new jobs and opportunities and a Latin Village market renowned across Europe.Cllr Joseph EjioforLeader of Haringey council • The proposals for the Latin Village in Tottenham are just one example of Grainger and TfL seeking to steamroller development against community interest. They are also proposing to redevelop many London underground terminal car parks, replacing them with private housing. The commuters who use these stations to get the tube into London will try to find space on already over-parked neighbouring streets, or drive further into London. Congestion will increase and many will give up on public transport altogether. That can’t be in London’s interest.Lawrence GreenbergSouthgate, London • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition