Tiger Woods has been approached by the organisers of a proposed Premier Golf League, but admits he is still trying to “figure it all out”. Under the proposals outlined in January by the World Golf Group, 48 players would compete in an 18-event season offering a total prize fund of $240m. The tournaments would be 54 holes rather than the traditional 72 and there would be an individual and team league format, with the weekly individual winner claiming $2m of the $10m purse. The PGA commissioner, Jay Monahan, has informed players that they would have to choose between the new series or the PGA Tour, with European Tour chief executive Keith Pelley following suit. Woods was asked about the proposed league during the run up to this week’s Genesis Invitational in California. “Have I been personally approached? Yes, and my team’s been aware of it and have delved into the details of it and trying to figure it all out just like everyone else,” said Woods. “We’ve been down this road before with World Golf Championships and other events being started or other Tours wanting to evolve. “There’s a lot of information that we’re still looking at and whether it’s a reality or not – just like everybody else we’re looking into it. Just like all events you’re trying to get the top players to play more collectively. It’s one of the reasons why we instituted the World Golf Championships because we were only getting together about five times a year – the four majors and the Players [Championship[ – and we wanted to showcase the top players on more than just those occasions. “This is a natural evolution, whether things like this are going to happen...but ideas like this are going to happen going forward, whether it’s now or any other time in the future.” The 44-year-old was also asked about an announcement last week by golf’s governing bodies that they intend to break the “ever-increasing cycle of hitting distance”. The USGA and R&A will assess the potential of a “local rule” which would allow tournament committees to “specify use of clubs and/or balls intended to result in shorter hitting distances” for players. “The game has evolved and changed and we’re running out of property trying to design courses that are 7,800 to 8,000 yards,” said Woods. “It’s difficult but on top of that we want to keep the game so enjoyable. We’re trying to get more participation and having the larger heads, more forgiving clubs, it adds to the enjoyment of the game so there’s a very delicate balancing act.”