England questioned Australia’s ability to cope with the pressure of hosting the women’s Twenty20 World Cup – and then backed it up with a super over victory on Saturday. England earned first bragging rights over Australia this summer after skipper Heather Knight blasted them to victory in the second match of the tri-series, also involving India, at Manuka Oval. Bushfire smoke lingered in the distance as water bombers passed overhead throughout the game, battling blazes threatening Canberra’s southern edge. The temperature sat above 40 degrees all match and it was Knight who conquered the blistering conditions, smashing 78 runs off 45 balls. Australia mounted a stunning comeback, hitting 22 runs off the final two overs to force the Super Over but England chased the eight runs in four balls. Australia bowled after winning the toss and dominated early, allowing just 29 runs off the power play - the first six overs - but Knight and Fran Wilson (39 not out) responded with a 115-run partnership. Ellyse Perry (1-9) snared the first wicket when Beth Mooney took a screamer at point to dismiss Danni Wyatt (17) in the fifth over. Amy Jones (10 off 24) struggled to get going and under pressure was run out after a direct hit from Jess Jonassen fielding at mid-off. Australia teenage debutant Annabel Sutherland dropped a tough catch off Georgia Wareham (1-15) to keep Knight out there in the ninth over. Perry atoned the mistake later that over after running 20 metres from long-on and taking a sliding catch in the deep to dispatch Natalie Sciver (4). Wilson was dropped in the 18th over and Knight received another reprieve in the 19th as Australia struggled in the field. Knight, who made 67 a day earlier against India, was caught in the final over by Rachael Haynes off Megan Schutt (1-40) as England tallied 156-4. Australia opener Beth Mooney (65 off 45 balls) was sublime before a middle-order collapse put England in control thanks to Sarah Glenn (3-28). But Sutherland (22) led the fightback alongside Delissa Kimmince (15) and both finished unbeaten to steer Australia to 156-8. Left-arm off-spinner Sophie Ecclestone bowled a superb super over, keeping Alyssa Healy and Ashleigh Gardner to just eight runs. Perry bowled for Australia but Knight and Wyatt got there easily. England lost the series opener on Friday to India, who Australia face on Sunday.