As Dominic Raab told MPs on Tuesday that British nationals should leave China, Britons stuck in the region showed mixed reactions as they grappled with what this means for them in practical terms. Kieran*, a UK national, who has been working as a teacher in China for the past three years, has spent the last 11 days living in self-imposed quarantine in the city of Nanjing, a few hundred kilometres east of Wuhan, the centre of the Coronavirus outbreak. It is a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals, or possibly seafood. New and troubling viruses usually originate in animal hosts. Ebola and flu are examples. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars) and Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (Mers) are both caused by coronaviruses that came from animals. The virus causes pneumonia. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. In severe cases there can be organ failure. As this is viral pneumonia, antibiotics are of no use. The antiviral drugs we have against flu will not work. If people are admitted to hospital, they may get support for their lungs and other organs as well as fluids. Recovery will depend on the strength of their immune system. Many of those who have died are known to have been already in poor health. Human to human transmission has been confirmed by China’s national health commission. As of 3 February, 361 people have died in China, and one in the Philippines. Confirmed infections in China are 17,238, and the official Chinese figures include Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau. Outside of China, infections stand at more than 150. Two members of one family have been confirmed to have the virus in the UK, after more than 160 were tested and found negative. The actual number to have contracted the virus could be far higher as people with mild symptoms may not have been detected. Modelling by World Health Organization (WHO) experts at Imperial College London suggests there could be as many as 100,000 cases, with uncertainty putting the margins between 30,000 and 200,000. There were fears that the coronavirus might spread more widely during the week-long lunar new year holidays, which start on 24 January, when millions of Chinese travel home to celebrate, but the festivities have largely been cancelled and Wuhan and other Chinese cities are in lockdown. Unless you have recently travelled to China or been in contact with someone infected with the virus, then you should treat any cough or cold symptoms as normal. The NHS advises that there is generally no need to visit a doctor for a cough unless it is persistent or you are having other symptoms such as chest pain, difficulty breathing or you feel very unwell. No. The spread of the virus outside China is worrying but not an unexpected development. It increases the likelihood that the World Health Organization will declare the outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern on Thursday evening. The key concerns are how transmissible this new coronavirus is between people and what proportion become severely ill and end up in hospital. Sarah Boseley Health editor and Hannah Devlin He was not concerned about the Coronavirus when he first heard of the outbreak but has now decided to leave China. “I think what Dominic Raab has said is a logical solution to the current issue. It only makes sense to leave. I feel like I am a burden being here now. I have a choice to leave and the longer I stay, the more resources I am using up that the Chinese population may need,” he said. “A Chinese friend of mine said I was a coward for leaving, but in any situation like this, even in a war, isn’t the best option to get out of the situation? So, after talking to family and friends, I plan to leave as soon as I can,” Kieran added. Anna*, a British woman living in China, has managed to return to her home in Beijing after she was temporarily stuck in a remote village in northern Sichuan she had travelled to for a holiday at the beginning of the outbreak. Because all public transport between provinces had been cancelled, she said she paid a small fortune to get a private driver to take herself and her partner back to Chengdu, an 800km journey. Locals in the village she visited were “absolutely terrified”, she says, with kids reporting the news to their parents since many adults are illiterate. “Since there is no running water or plumbing in that area, they do not wash their hands more than once a day. I am worried that they will get sick and be unable to treat the virus. “We left at 2am to avoid checks and roadblocks as much as possible. Once we arrived in Chengdu, everything was smooth. All trains were booked up or cancelled but we booked a flight,” she says. “We are in home quarantine for the mandated 14 days now. My office is closed and locked up for the week at least and we are reporting our location and health status every day to the office HR.” Anna feels relatively unfazed by Raab’s warning. “I took that advice to mean British nationals who don’t live in China but are visiting. For us, Beijing is our home. Going back to the UK would mean travelling, which is expensive and stressful, and possibly a risk of catching or transferring the virus, and having to do another two weeks of home quarantine when I did finally get back to Beijing before going back to the office. So I think the decision to come back to Beijing was the right one and we remain safest in our home.” Software engineer Julia*, who is a British-Canadian citizen who works in Shenzhen, a tier-one city bordering Hong Kong and home to more than 12 million people, is likely to stay. She said movement in the city had been heavily restricted. As of Sunday, there were 207 confirmed cases of the virus in the city. “My temperature is checked every time I walk into my apartment lobby,” she said. “When I go outside I have to wear a mask but I’ve not been able to buy one because they’re all sold out. Thankfully I was given one by the concierge but I’ve been using the same one ever since.” Most of her colleagues are able to work from home but some of them are still in their home provinces on lockdown. “The general feeling is that nobody really knows what is going to happen next. For now, the Foreign Office’s advice doesn’t change my current opinion. I will speak to my employer and take a few days to think about it, but my life is here,” Julia added. Jack Cochrane, 21, from Middlesbrough, has been working as an English teacher in Shenzhen for the past six months. He just returned from a holiday in Manila six days ago. All but one border to neighbouring Hong Kong have now been shut, and much like other big cities in China, the city is largely deserted. “My girlfriend is Chinese so we had to come back,” he says. While the streets of Shenzhen are mostly empty, fast-food chains such as McDonald’s, KFC and Pizza Hut are all still open and, in the past 48 hours, Jack has seen a slightly increased flow of cars on the streets of his new home. “There are reports of people who got infected going into remission on social media and the local news,” he says. “I’ve got another six months on my contract, and I will definitely stay in China until that ends,” he says. Jack said he was not sure what to make of the Foreign Office’s advice for all UK citizens to leave China. “Flights are very expensive to return, and until I’ve heard from my company there’s not a lot I can do.” As a huge Middlesbrough FC fan, Jack spent a long time on Saturday wandering the empty streets, trying to find an open bar to watch the Blackburn game, to no avail. “You hear jiayou, a Cantonese phrase translating into ‘don’t give up’ or ‘hang on in there’ frequently on the streets right now. A lot of people here still remember the devastating Sars outbreak, although they don’t really want to talk about it. People don’t want to admit that this outbreak is potentially worse.” *Some names have been changed.