In a celebratory speech at the White House after his acquittal on impeachment charges this week, Donald Trump struck a note of complaint about having been put through “a phoney rotten deal by some very evil and sick people”. But the president was smiling, the assembled crowd of fawning Republicans was laughing, and the mood was buoyant. An understanding was passing between Trump and his closest supporters on Capitol Hill that three years into his presidency, he had just enjoyed a very good week – and more good news might be ahead. On Monday, Democrats failed to declare a winner in the Iowa caucuses, meant to be the first step on the road to picking someone to beat Trump in November. On Tuesday, Trump delivered a thunderous State of the Union address whose applause echoed for days in the conservative pundit-sphere. And on Wednesday, Trump watched as one Republican senator after another stood on the Senate floor and uttered the words “not guilty” in response to charges that Trump had abused his power and obstructed Congress – charges that theoretically could have removed Trump from office. In the end, it was not even close. Every Republican senator but one, Mitt Romney of Utah, voted in Trump’s favor, with many of them making speeches that piled on praise for Trump while raging at Democrats for attacking the man. It is by no means clear what the impeachment and acquittal will mean for Trump’s re-election effort, and, given the pace of Trump’s surprises and scandals, the defining issue of the day on 3 November might not yet be on the horizon. But for the moment, in the context of his storm-tossed presidency, Trump is riding high, political strategists agreed. “This is where we are today: Donald Trump is on a victory lap that could last until November, while the Democrats can’t find their backside with both hands,” said Michael Caputo, a Republican strategist and former Trump communications adviser. “I think this is going to be a very difficult election. But I think he’s destined to win.” Peel back the top layer of good news for Trump last week, and underneath was … more good news. In a crucial metric for presidents seeking re-election, a historic number of Americans feel good about the economy, with 74% telling Gallup they believe they will be better off next year than they are now – the highest percentage since 1977. Friday morning brought another good jobs report. Trump’s juggernaut effort to overhaul the judiciary by appointing an unprecedented number of conservative judges was also proceeding apace, with four additional confirmations last week for a grand total of 191 Trump federal judges – doubling Barack Obama’s pace. About a quarter of the active judges by now have been appointed by Trump. That accomplishment was among those Trump touted in his State of the Union address before a packed House chamber on Tuesday night, in a speech that also highlighted jobs growth and a pair of newly minted international trade agreements with China and with Mexico and Canada. “Three years ago, we launched the great American comeback,” Trump told the audience. “Tonight, I stand before you to share the incredible results.” Bob Dole, a former Senate majority leader and Republican presidential nominee, said Trump “really hit a home run” with the speech. “In my 36+ years serving in Congress,” Dole wrote on Twitter, “I heard quite a few #SOTU [State of the Union] addresses. This was one of the best.” There was more. On Monday, the reputed pollster Gallup released a survey that showed approval of Trump at an all-time high-water mark of 49%. The Democrats have fumbled the ball, he picked it up and they may not ever get it back The failure of the Iowa Democratic party to declare a winner days after the caucuses denied any candidate a significant early boost in the primary race. But the candidate Trump seems to fear most, former vice-president Joe Biden, appears to have come in a disastrous fourth. And one candidate who performed well was Bernie Sanders, the democratic socialist senator from Vermont – which some Republican officials also saw as good news for Trump. “Between the State of the Union, impeachment acquittal and Iowa caucus debacle, America got to see what a socialist train wreck the Democrat Party has become and with Bernie Sanders’ pending nomination, it’s only going to get worse!” said Michael McAdams, national press secretary at National Republican Congressional Committee, in a direct message. Whoever Trump runs against – with the possible exception of billionaire Michael Bloomberg – his campaign is likely to enjoy a fat fundraising advantage. The Trump campaign made a record $46m cash haul in three months at the end of last year, compared with $34.5m for Sanders. The national Republican party has seven times the amount of cash on hand as Democrats. “Since the president’s campaign only got bigger and stronger as a result of this nonsense, this impeachment hoax will go down as the worst miscalculation in American political history,” said Brad Parscale, Trump’s campaign manager, in a statement after the acquittal vote. Though he may feel that way, Trump is by no means invincible. For years he has proven incapable of expanding on a narrow base of support. The State of the Union address had poor viewership, with an audience that had shrunk 20% from the previous year, according to Nielsen. And it’s a long way to November. But instead of taking steps toward coalescing around a candidate with a clear winning message, Democrats find themselves in the uncomfortable position, nine months out, divided by uncertainty and hoping for a Trump stumble. “I’ve known the president since 1988 and worked with him for years,” said Caputo. “This is classic rebound Trump. He’ll beat them and he’ll beat them, until he can’t beat them any more. “The Democrats have fumbled the ball, he picked it up and they may not ever get it back.”