Paris St Germain were held to a pulsating 4-4 Ligue 1 draw at struggling Amiens after erasing a three-goal deficit only to concede a stoppage-time equaliser on Saturday. The result leaves leaders PSG 13 points clear of second-placed Marseille after manager Thomas Tuchel rested several regular starters ahead of Tuesday’s first leg of their Champions League last-16 tie with Borussia Dortmund. The makeshift lineup, with midfielder Ander Herrera playing in an unfamiliar right-back role, looked all at sea in the opening half as goals from Serhou Guirassy, Gaël Kakuta and Fousseni Diabaté gave 19th-placed Amiens a 3-0 lead. Guirassy fired Amiens ahead with a crisp fifth-minute finish and Kakuta made it 2-0 with a rasping shot which gave visiting goalkeeper Keylor Navas no chance. A huge shock seemed to be on the cards when Diabaté capped a jinking run through the middle with a low shot which went in off the post, but Herrera pulled one back on the stroke of half-time when he steered in a Julian Draxler corner. The Spaniard’s goal turned the match on its head as a pair of headers by centre-back Tanguy Kouassi levelled the score inside the opening 20 minutes of the second half. Amiens were again undone by set pieces, as Draxler swung in another corner for Kouassi to rise above his marker and head it home. Five minutes later, he met Ángel Di María’s cross at the far post to silence the home fans. With Amiens on the back foot, it was no surprise that PSG grabbed a 4-3 lead in the 74th minute as Mauro Icardi popped up at the far post and tapped in a fine low cross by Juan Bernat. But the visitors then missed several gilt-edged chances with Edinson Cavani, who was looking for his 200th goal for PSG in all competitions, particularly guilty of poor finishing. His astonishing miss in the dying minutes was punished moments later at the other end as Guirassy levelled with a fine finish from inside the penalty area after he was put through by substitute Quentin Cornette. RB Leipzig eased past struggling Werder Bremen 3-0 to reclaim top spot in the Bundesliga, two points ahead of Bayern Munich. Having failed to win in their previous four games in all competitions, Leipzig were desperate to bounce back and Lukas Klostermann’s 18th-minute goal quickly put them in the driving seat. Patrik Schick, who had set up Klostermann, then grabbed one himself, heading in his sixth league goal in the 39th minute before Nordi Mukiele latched on to a deep through ball to fire in their third goal a minute after the restart. Leipzig moved up to 45 points, with Bayern, in action against Cologne on Sunday, on 43. Borussia Dortmund, winners 4-0 over Eintracht Frankfurt on Friday, are in third place on 42. Former champions Werder, who have now lost eight of their past nine league games, are stuck in 17th place, a point above last-placed Paderborn. Bayer Leverkusen moved into fourth place and into Champions League contention when Karim Bellarabi struck in stoppage time to secure a hard-fought 3-2 victory at Union Berlin. The game was repeatedly interrupted after fans lit flares and smoke bombs in the stands. Hertha Berlin made a winning start to life after Jürgen Klinsmann, beating Paderborn 2-1 with a goal from Dedryck Boyata and an own goal from Jamilu Collins, in their first game since their former coach’s surprise departure this week. Dutchman Wout Weghorst scored a hat-trick in VfL Wolfsburg’s 3-2 victory over Hoffenheim. Meanwhile, in Serie A, Atalanta midfielder Mario Pasalic got the winner within seconds of coming off the bench as they took a huge step towards Champions League qualification by beating Roma 2-1. Edin Dzeko fired the fifth-placed visitors in front at the end of the first half, but Atalanta, who are fourth, found a deserved equaliser through José Palomino early in the second. Pasalic then stole the show in the 59th minute by curling a sensational strike into the top corner 19 seconds after coming on as a substitute. Earlier, 18th-placed Genoa recorded their first away win of the season with a 3-0 victory at Bologna that moved them within a point of the safety zone , despite finishing with nine men after Jerdy Schouten and Stefano Denswil were sent off. Lecce also enhanced their chances of survival by moving above Sampdoria into 16th place with their third consecutive league victory, beating Spal 2-1 at Stadio Via del Mare on Luigi Di Biagio’s debut as coach of Serie A’s bottom side.