LeBron James is considering a return to the Olympics. James a two-time gold medalist and three-time Olympian is among 44 players, including Stephen Curry and teammate Anthony Davis, announced by USA Basketball on Monday as finalists for the team that will play in the Tokyo Games this summer. James played in 2004, 2008 and 2012, helping the US win gold in his most recent two appearances. The pool includes 19 players who have won a total of 31 gold medals in either Olympic or World Cup competition for the Americans including nine players who captured the Olympic title for USA Basketball in Rio de Janeiro four years ago. We Have Something To Prove 44 athletes, including 16 Olympians, are #USABMNT finalists for the @Tokyo2020 Olympic Games »» https://t.co/fB5Z7pYQ4p pic.twitter.com/RJB1k0Mt83 “I’ve always maintained that equity is important,” said USA Basketball managing director Jerry Colangelo. “And you earn equity by participating. So, we think they’ve earned the right to be named to the overall roster for USA Basketball. It’s pretty elite. It’s a tremendous pot and the good news is they’ve all said they want to play.” James has played in 68 games for the US national team and has said several times over the past year that he is thinking about another Olympics after sitting out the Rio Games. Part of the interest in participating this summer is to have the chance to play for coach Gregg Popovich, with whom he has a close relationship. “It’s a possibility,” James said in December. There will be no tryouts. Instead USA Basketball will pare the list down to a 12-person Olympic team by early June, the decisions will be made by a selection committee and be based in part on player availability and health. Training camp will start in early July, potentially as little as two weeks after the end of the NBA finals. The Olympics start on 24 July. Colangelo said he believes all the players on the list want to play at the Olympics. “I feel very good about the response,” Colangelo said. Also included in the pool are 15 of the 16 players from the US who are scheduled to play in Sunday’s NBA All-Star Game. Stephen Curry, who is currently injured, has never represented the US at the Olympics but won two golds with his country at the 2010 and 2014 World Cups. If James joins the team, he will become the second four-time men’s basketball Olympian for the US, along with Carmelo Anthony. “I’m looking forward to coaching the US Olympic Team, and I’m excited about the potential and possibilities this team has,” Popovich said. The Olympics could be a return to the court for players like Kevin Durant and Klay Thompson, who have missed the entirety of this NBA season with injuries. Durant has resumed light training, and Thompson has said he would like to play if his surgically repaired knee is up to the challenge. Curry is due to return from a hand injury later this season.