Since the UK government first apologised for the Windrush scandal in April 2018, 8,000 people have been granted new documents that prove they live in the UK legally. Yet in the 10 months since it was set up, only 36 people have received any money from a scheme set up to compensate them for harm caused by their having been wrongly classified as illegal immigrants. The discrepancy is troubling. Delays can only serve to prolong the sense of injustice felt by Windrush’s victims, many of whom are pensioners who arrived in the UK from the Caribbean as young children. Practical problems such as debt or housing issues should be resolved sooner rather than later, if they are to be freed to get on with the rest of their lives. Even after all that has happened, it appears that the Windrush generation is not a government priority. Already, some of those who expected to be compensated have died before receiving a penny. That doesn’t mean there are no good reasons why just £62,198 has so far been paid out, out of a total expected to be between £200m and £570m. Applications must be processed carefully, and not rushed. But with 1,100 claims so far submitted, and thousands more expected, ministers cannot simply stand by and wait for the system to right itself. Instead, they should be proactive in taking steps to improve it. The announcement of a two-year extension, giving people until 2023 to send in their claims, was a step in the right direction. But there has so far been no movement in response to calls from victims, MPs and campaigners to improve the provision of advice. The claim form has 18 pages, plus 44 of guidance. Filling it in is technically demanding, particularly when it comes to assembling the evidence – doctors’ notes, official letters, bills – that is expected to back it up. And there are psychological challenges, too, in a process that demands people comb through their past and quantify what they suffered as a result of the Home Office’s mistakes. This ranged from the loss of jobs and homes, to difficulties with the NHS and relationship problems caused or exacerbated by separation, financial hardship and stress. In cases where a relative died after being deported or declared illegal, a traumatic loss may have to be revisited. Yet the government has not only rejected calls to restore legal aid in immigration cases, but also refused to provide a package of funding similar to that offered, via charities, to help vulnerable EU citizens apply for settled status after Brexit. As concerns mount about the small amount of compensation paid out so far, such obduracy appears increasingly wrongheaded. In the House of Commons on Monday the Home Office minister Kevin Foster accused David Lammy MP of having “lost the plot” when he made a connection between a deportation flight to Jamaica that is expected to take place on Tuesday and the Windrush generation. But while it is essential to distinguish between people deported because they have been convicted of serious crimes and those targeted wrongly on grounds of their immigration status, Mr Lammy is right to be alarmed. The government has yet to publish its review into the lessons of Windrush, but the recommendation that no one who has been in the UK since before the age of 13 should be deported was leaked, along with criticisms of officials’ ignorance of history and recklessness. The Jamaican high commissioner, Seth George Ramocan, said last year that deportation flights should cease until the report’s findings have been digested. He was right. Policies surrounding the use of deportation demand further scrutiny.