The Championship leaders West Brom cruised to a comprehensive win at play-off hopefuls Bristol City despite a late red card for Romaine Sawyers. Slaven Bilic’s team took the lead in the 32nd minute when Callum Robinson was left unmarked in the City’s box and, although the advancing Daniel Bentley saved his initial shot, the ball rebounded off his face to beat the goalkeeper. Four minutes later Bentley was at fault when he spilled a shot from Jake Livermore that he should have held and Hal Robson-Kanu was on hand to prod home from close range. The game erupted after 75 minutes when Sawyers reacted angrily to being fouled by Jamie Paterson and appeared to grab the City substitute by the throat. After consulting an assistant, referee Darren England issued a straight red card. Bilic remonstrated angrily but seconds later saw a weak header from Ashley Williams towards Bentley pounced upon by Robson-Kanu, who volleyed in his second to spark wild celebrations in the Albion dugout. Bilic blamed the reaction of Lee Johnson and his staff for the dismissal but played down any bad feeling at the final whistle. “There was no problem and I shook hands with Lee,” he said. “If you ask me if I liked his reaction to the incident involving Romaine, I would say no, but maybe in his position I would have done the same. “I’m told he and Paterson have known each other for years. When he grabbed him it was just to say, ‘What are you doing?’ because he had been fouled several times from behind. If that was a red card, we are going to have so many. It was the reaction of their bench that brought about the sending-off, but we are not Dalai Lamas in football so I understand it.” Johnson did not attend his press conference until an hour and a half after the game had finished. Then he responded: “Slaven is wrong if he attributes the sending-off to our reaction. If someone put his hands around one of my player’s throats, of course I am going to be angry. It was a clear red card. All I did was to draw the fourth official’s attention to what had happened.” The visitors were well worth their interval lead, but City were left to rue costly errors for both goals. Markus Henriksen gave the ball away in a dangerous position to leave his defence in trouble for the first and Famara Diédhiou was caught in possession trying to dribble out of defence for the second. City barely threatened until the 44th minute when a Nahki Wells cross just eluded Callum O’Dowda as it flashed across goal. The second half began with Albion again in the ascendancy, with Robson-Kanu volleying narrowly wide from 20 yards and Filip Krovinovic firing over after a powerful run. City were being outmuscled in all areas of the pitch and Johnson responded by sending on Andreas Weimann and Paterson for wingers O’Dowda and Niclas Eliasson. Weimann volleyed over from a Jay Dasilva cross for the hosts before Sawyers was dismissed for his reaction to Paterson’s challenge. However, the numerical disadvantage did not matter as Robson-Kanu capitalised on Williams’ slack header to wrap up a deserved victory. “My only complaints are with my own team,” said Johnson. “For 15 minutes it was a game and then we made so many errors against a good side that we couldn’t expect to win.”