Current explanations of suicide, such as Thomas Joiner’s, suggest that a sense of not belonging and feeling a burden are important triggers for suicide attempts, so it’s no surprise that stopping benefits, or handling them badly with people already prone to such feelings due to mental health problems, has led to an increase in deaths (Dozens of suicides linked to handling of benefit claims, 8 February). When worth is increasingly defined by ability to be economically productive, and mental health issues are discounted as a reason to not be in the workforce, the underlying message is that you are a burden and that you don’t belong. Indeed, this link of a society that increasingly defines worth via ability to work may also be contributing to rising suicide rates for men aged 20-24 when they try to join the workforce and develop careers, men and women aged 45-49 when they can be facing a plateau in their careers and redundancy, and older men who can be more prone to defining value via work role. A compassionate society would care for people experiencing difficulty, recognise that contributions can be made outside work, and facilitate this, rather than communicate a sense that if you cannot work you may as well be on the scrapheap, or even not here at all.Dr Chris AllenConsultant clinical psychologist, Berkshire NHS Foundation Trust • For years, heroic researchers like Mo Stewart and China Mills have identified avoidable deaths among the most vulnerable people claiming benefits. On Saturday you reported that the Department for Work and Pensions “admitted it had no idea whether lessons from the reviews were ever learned”. No wonder Disability Rights UK declared that “the welfare system is unfit for purpose”. At a time when suicide prevention should be paramount, the DWP can only look backwards to improve its “responses” to benefit-related deaths. The government sees the whole benefits system only as a cost without value. However, Steven Senior of the Faculty of Public Health taught me that, given the close links between poverty, debt and mental illness, the welfare system should be an asset for policymakers, to improve population mental health. If the WHO principle of “health in all policies” was more than an empty slogan, we would see that a welfare system fit for purpose would actually protect vulnerable people.Prof Woody CaanEditor, Journal of Public Mental Health • I would be surprised if the 69 suicides linked to the government’s treatment of benefit claimants will create much of a ripple beyond the Guardian. Ministers will not be rushing through emergency legislation, as after the Streatham terrorist atrocity. A year ago the DWP admitted 21,000 claimants died while waiting for benefits over a five-year period. That’s 12 people a day dying while waiting for a decision on their claims. Unnecessary institutional deaths on this scale should get as much attention as murders by extremists. Yet it continues without comment from most of the media and the government. Thanks to unemployment, mental health and relationship breakdown, any competent risk assessment would show that most of us are vulnerable to the callousness of the benefits system. The chances of being knifed or shot by a terrorist are much lower.Philip KerridgeBodmin, Cornwall • As someone involved in a voluntary capacity in trying to assist claimants who have been moved on to universal credit, I’d suggest there is one action that could be taken immediately without waiting for any more “investigations”. That would be to stop the horrific cruelty of making people moving on to universal credit having to wait for five weeks or more on no benefits. The stress caused to those who can’t pay their rent or council tax and are advised to “take out a loan” to cover the gap until their new benefit arrives seems to be considered an insignificant problem by the architects of universal credit, but is in fact a real life-threatening disaster to those on the receiving end. There is already plenty of evidence to show that claimants need to have recourse to food banks when this happens. We must stop beating about the bush and call this policy what it is: an act of callous and conscious cruelty against the weakest in our society.Name and address supplied • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org