Jürgen Klopp hailed Liverpool’s record-breaking campaign as “special” and “incredible” after the unbeaten Premier League leaders took another step towards the title with a 3-2 comeback victory over West Ham. Liverpool restored their lead at the summit to a remarkable 22 points courtesy of Sadio Mané’s late winner and despite trailing to Pablo Fornals’ second-half goal for David Moyes’ struggling side. It was a 21st consecutive home league win for Liverpool –equalling the all-time English record set by their predecessors in 1972 and setting a new Premier League record – and an 18th successive league win that equalled the top-flight record set by Manchester City. Klopp’s team have now won as many points – 79 – as Manchester United’s treble-winning team did in 1998-99 and as many league games – 26 – as Arsenal’s “Invincibles” in 2003-04. A proud Liverpool manager said: “A couple of years ago I said we wanted to write our own stories and create our own history and obviously the boys took what I said really seriously. “It is so special. The numbers are incredible. We all know that it is very special, but at this moment we just want to recover and prepare for the next opponent because they are really waiting and want to fight us. “The whole stadium at Watford will go for us and we have to be 100% ready. As long as we are really ready to fight no one should worry. But there is a lot of work to do. Could I have wished for a better position going into these last 11 games? No. I would never have thought it possible but each one is really difficult. We don’t expect one easy game.” West Ham remain in the relegation zone after seven league games without a win under David Moyes, although their new manager was rightly encouraged by his team’s display at Anfield. Moyes said: “I felt we had grown into the game and started to earn the right to play. We thought there were points there for us. There is a lot I want to improve. I thought in the main we did well but this wasn’t a big game for us. Neither was Man City. These were warm-ups. The big games start now. The players have been told that in the dressing room. We have to do something in these upcoming games.”