South Yorkshire police have said they will hold a “full and open” investigation after a 16-year-old boy sustained a head injury after apparently being struck by a police officer after a football match. A video appearing to show a police officer hitting the boy with a baton was shared on social media after Sheffield Wednesday’s match against Barnsley on Saturday. The footage shows the boy bleeding from his head. South Yorkshire police said a 16-year-old boy was taken to hospital in an ambulance after “sustaining a head injury from an officer’s baton”. They said an officer received injuries to his stomach and head for which he attended hospital. Ch Supt Sarah Poolman, the match commander, said: “On Saturday 8 February, following the Barnsley v Sheffield Wednesday match, our officers responded to disorder outside the transport interchange [in Barnsley]. “A full, open investigation, including extended video footage, will take place to ascertain the circumstances surrounding the incident, including the actions which led to a 16-year-old boy sustaining a head injury from an officer’s baton, and an officer being assaulted, sustaining injuries to his stomach and head. “The 16-year-old boy was taken to hospital by ambulance. The police officer also attended hospital. Both of their injuries are not life-threatening.” The incident has been referred by the police to the watchdog, the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC). South Yorkshire’s assistant chief constable Lauren Poultney said: “We understand the public will have concerns about the content of a video circulating on social media, with a 16-year-old suffering injuries to his head. South Yorkshire police has referred this matter to the IOPC and we are waiting for their decision as to how this is progressed. “As part of the investigation into the wider disorder following the football match on Saturday 8 February, a full review of all available footage will be undertaken. The clip circulating on social media shows only a very brief period of time, and in order to understand the full context of the situation we would ask anyone who was a witness or has further footage of what took place to contact us. Until a decision is received from the IOPC, we will not be making any further comment.” The force said a 47-year-old man was arrested on suspicion of assaulting an emergency services worker and was released under investigation. It asked witnesses with any video footage of the incident to get in contact.