Mikel Arteta is entitled to be pleased with three wins in eight days, but must also reflect on the sloppiness which gifted Everton two goals. Though Arteta said that in the first 65 minutes they played exactly as he wants them to, the reality is that Arsenal flowed for perhaps half that time, hanging on to the points not because of any great discipline and organisation; their opponents just finished poorly and Bernd Leno had a good second half. And Leno’s response, when asked about his mistake which led to Everton’s equaliser, was telling: Richarlison, its scorer, was “lucky”; he, its unwitting victim, was “unlucky”; and it didn’t matter in the end, because Arsenal won. This is not how winners think, and this is the mentality Arteta must change, but if he is as delighted with his team’s performance as he intimated, he would do well to re-evaluate his own too. Daniel Harris • Match report: Arsenal 3-2 Everton Matej Vydra is currently only playing because Ashley Barnes and Chris Wood are injured, but with two goals in two games the Czech striker is going to be hard for Sean Dyche to leave out, particularly as he plays so well alongside Jay Rodriguez. Burnley actually have four effective strikers at the moment, and that does not include Dwight McNeil who is becoming noticeably better at playing through the middle, but Dyche maintains whoever plays up front must have an understanding with his partner. “If you are going to play two up front they cannot operate as individuals, they have to connect,” the Burnley manager said. “I’m really pleased that Matej has come in and done well, because he’s been waiting and waiting for his chance. He’s stretched the pitch and connected well with the others. He puts in a lot of work and his finishing is sublime.” Paul Wilson • Match report: Burnley 3-0 Bournemouth It has not been easy for Olivier Giroud to accept his diminished role at Chelsea this season. The striker has not even made the bench at times and it was difficult to understand why Giroud ended up staying at Stamford Bridge last month. Against Tottenham, however, the Frenchman showed he is a better deputy for Tammy Abraham than Michy Batshuayi. It was only Giroud’s third league start under Frank Lampard, and his first since he struggled in the defeat to West Ham in November, and he was outstanding in a crucial Chelsea victory. He bullied the Spurs defence, scored a cracking goal and combined with Ross Barkley and Mason Mount for Marcos Alonso’s decisive strike. Now Lampard has a tough call to make: does Giroud keep his place when Chelsea side host Bayern Munich in the last 16 of the Champions League on Tuesday or should Abraham return after shaking off an ankle injury? Jacob Steinberg • Match report: Chelsea 2-1 Tottenham Steve Bruce’s admission that he may have to consider a change of approach following the abject defeat to Crystal Palace could be good news for Newcastle’s forgotten man Dwight Gayle. The former Palace striker made his first appearance for six weeks at Selhurst Park having recovered from a hamstring injury and Bruce is now hoping he can finally get the opportunity to show his ability after being sent on loan to West Brom last season by Rafael Benítez. “I don’t know how many times I’ve said in the last few months – I’ve gone on record to say I tried to buy him three times,” said the Newcastle manager. “Unfortunately, since the day I walked into the club he had a calf injury which never got any better. Then he did his hamstring. Dwight is a very good player and a natural goalscorer. It would be a welcome boost for us if he was available to us for the rest of the season.” Ed Aarons • Match report: Crystal Palace 1-0 Newcastle After a week of endless public arguments about every facet of the club aside from the actual football, Manchester City took things back to basics on Saturday by executing two of their defining features to near perfection: they missed a penalty and they suffocated a top rival with their possession. City grew into the game and they created numerous opportunities in the second half until Gabriel Jesus finished a lovely move created by Riyad Mahrez, wrapping up a sufficiently positive performance before a meeting with Real Madrid that carries even greater importance after the Champions League ban. “Do you still doubt about what they’ve done?” asked Guardiola after questions about the team’s attitude. Cutting through all the noise to focus on winning is part of the job description of professional players, but to see it in motion is impressive all the same. Tumaini Carayol • Match report: Leicester 0-1 Manchester City Mason Greenwood’s rocket of a finish was his 11th goal of the season in all competitions and fifth in the Premier League – making the 18-year-old one of Europe’s most prolific teenagers. As Ole Gunnar Solskjær said after the game the boy from Bradford is only going to improve. “He is the best finisher we have and one of the best I have seen, right foot, left foot, doesn’t matter,” the United manager said. “He knows how to score. He is just so sharp in and around the goal. What pleased me more is his link-up play, his switches of play he found Daniel James from right to left. The whole season he has had says a lot for him. He is just going to be better and better. He is only 18 and is not fully grown. Not like Wayne Rooney was at 18. In a couple of years’ time he will be more or less the complete No 9 or forward.” Jamie Jackson • Match report: Manchester United 3-0 Watford Compromise is sometimes seen as a dirty word in football but Graham Potter is far too shrewd, and sensible, to fall into that particular trap. Potter’s Brighton have played some aesthetically very enjoyable stuff this season but results have not always matched performances and relegation fears are rising. On Saturday he recognised the need to dust down his, much more pragmatic, predecessor Chris Hughton’s old playbook and grind out a precious point against dynamically dangerous opponents chasing an unexpected European dream. Aided by the use of three different formations– all based on a back three – during the 90 minutes, plus some untypically direct passing and in depth defending, Brighton duly achieved their aim courtesy of Neil Maupay’s equaliser at the end of a classic route one move. There were spells when Sheffield United had them on the ropes but the resilience of Potter’s players suggests survival should be secured. Louise Taylor • Match report: Sheffield United 1-1 Brighton Arguably the biggest boon from Southampton’s win over Aston Villa was the performance of Will Smallbone on his league debut. The midfielder, who turned 20 on Friday, was assured, unfazed and quietly knitted things together for a dominant Southampton side, delicately shifting possession and almost opening the scoring when he hit a post. James Ward-Prowse was excellent at full-back, Michael Obafemi arrived off the bench and Matt Targett lined up against his former club at St Mary’s, but Smallbone, who joined Southampton as an eight-year-old, was the academy graduate on the lips of supporters at the final whistle. “I knew before this season that he would play a few Premier League games, that was clear,” said his manager, Ralph Hasenhüttl. “It’s good for him and for every young player at the club. If they are good enough we won’t be scared to let them play. This must be our way for the future.” Ben Fisher • Match report: Southampton 2-0 Aston Villa It would be fascinating to sit in on a recruitment meeting at Wolves. Not one that discussed individual targets, rather the strategy that has brought the club such success. The sort of meeting that Jorge Mendes might dial into. When hiring from Portugal, as Wolves have been inclined to, what marks out a player who could make the transition from there to here? A Ronaldo and not a Renato Sanches? Diogo Jota is an intriguing case in point. The 23-year-old is now in his third year in England and with five goals in three days he is Wolves’ man in form. Against Norwich he ran the regarded Ben Godfrey ragged with his pace and close control, while his first strike was superbly executed. But as with his strike partner Raúl Jiménez it is often his strength and determination in the challenge that makes the difference. Finding that sweet spot between technical gifts and physical graft is one of the secrets of Wolves’ success. Paul MacInnes • Match report: Wolves 3-0 Norwich Things could have been very different in the career of Kasper Schmeichel after he left Manchester City back in 2009 to recently-monied Notts County in League Two, as City looked away from homegrown stars to more expensive acquisitions. In Nottingham, Schmeichel got games under his belt, even if the club went nowhere. It was easy to see such a level was way below the Dane’s talents ever since he has been a beacon of quality and consistency for whichever team he played for, proving it once more with a stunning performance against his first club on Saturday, including a fine penalty save. Not only is he one of the league’s best goalkeeper’s but also the most inspiring of leaders and he would not be out of place as Manchester City’s No 1 over a decade after leaving but he looks very content with his lot. Will Unwin • Pep Guardiola wary of Madrid test with Manchester City’s season on line