As Douglas Oakervee diplomatically puts it, in the opening of his much-anticipated inquiry into HS2, he was “invited to lead a quick review” of “short duration” with “limited time available”, which was “a major challenge to deep examination”. But it has, he says, “provided views”. It certainly has. Spun out in various directions prior to publication, the drips of leaked counter-argument furnished hopes for opponents of HS2; but this review was overwhelmingly a recommendation to proceed. No formal policy statement has been issued alongside it, but it appears that Boris Johnson has taken most recommendations on board for now – but jettisoned one or two immediately. In the detail, Oakervee recommended scrapping a junction at Handsacre, in Staffordshire, to save an unspecified amount. But that might have cut off Stoke from one or two potential train services and so will stay, according to Johnson’s response to local MPs. Meanwhile, Oakervee suggested HS2 Ltd’s governance be overhauled, and its involvement in Euston be scaled back. Kicking the firm appointed to deliver the project provides a useful way for Johnson to draw a line in the sand. The costs and benefits Oakervee identifies, however imperfectly, might well galvanise opponents rather than supporters: without including “wider economic benefits” the report says that phase one of the HS2 project – from London to Birmingham – would generate less than a pound back for each pound invested under the Treasury rulebook. But cancelling HS2 would cost a net £9bn-£10bn for no result, and phase 1 and 2 together do stack up. The widely quoted figure of £106bn eventual total cost, Oakervee makes clear, is a top-end estimate that he does not endorse. Indeed, he argues that the line could still be built far more cheaply if the government does not insist that engineering firms carry all the risk, which inflates the price of the contracts. But he concludes unequivocally that the “original rationale for HS2 still holds”: more capacity and greater reliability on the railway; and with any comparable alternatives yet to be identified, yet alone designed and developed. Upgrading existing lines would mean years of closures. And scrapping HS2 now would spook the whole supply chain and have serious consequences for a fragile construction industry. So Johnson has ended up with cover for a decision that only he forced himself to make, on the party leadership campaign trail last year, in front of HS2-sceptical Conservative audiences. The review, a hundred or so pages of well-spaced large type, struggles to bear the weight of expectation put upon it; but the approach Oakervee recommends chimes well with where the government finds itself now. The line should be built in full, he says, but the second phase should be reviewed to make sure it ties in most effectively with construction of Northern Powerhouse, and the lesser-known Midlands Engine, rail networks. However, what looks like a commitment to proceed might yet perturb northern supporters, who will worry about the missing detail and timetable. Phase 2a to Crewe is now set to be built alongside phase 1 – arriving just three to five years behind the original schedule, at the latest estimates. Joining up the line from Crewe to Manchester should remain a relatively simple task. But when the dust settles from this “go-or-no-go” decision, a high-speed line is right now only definitely being built from London to Birmingham – as it was last year. Yet to be confirmed, for all the promises, are the bits to Manchester, or particularly to Leeds via the east Midlands. The PM may not be a details person; but those will certainly matter along the new route, and drawing that up in new combinations is likely to take some time. Not that long ago, HS2 was aiming to have legislation in parliament for the northern sections of the route by 2017; but Johnson overtly refused to commit to getting the laws passed by 2025. Rebranding the second phase as an integrated, “high speed north” mega-project may make sense – but some will wonder if it will take even longer to get on track.