Shamima Begum has said her “whole world fell apart” when she discovered that she had been stripped of her British citizenship, in her first interview since losing her appeal against the decision. Pictured in a tent where she now lives in a refugee camp in northeast Syria, the 20 year old said that the decision made by former home secretary Sajid Javid was not wholly unexpected but she had hoped for more lenient treatment. “I kind of saw it coming because I did do my research just before I came out. I thought I would be a bit different because I had not done anything wrong before I came to Isis,” Begum said in an interview with US broadcaster ABC News. “When my citizenship got rejected, I felt like my whole world fell apart right in front of me. You know, especially the way I was told. I wasn’t even told by a government official. I had to be told by journalists”. Earlier this month, Begum lost an appeal in a British court against having her British citizenship revoked last year by then home secretary Sajid Javid. Although Begum had only ever lived in the UK before fleeing to Syria, the court held that she was eligible to apply for Bangladeshi citizenship, the birth country of her parents. The broadcaster found Begum at al-Roj camp in Kurdish run north east Syria, where she was living in a relatively spacious heated tent with Kimberly Polman, a US-Canadian in her 40s who is waiting on a decision as to whether she will be allowed to return to either country. Begum came back to prominence a year ago, after she was discovered at another refugee camp by a journalist from the Times, four years after she had originally fled. At the time she was heavily pregnant with her third child, but the infant, Jarrah, shortly after he was born. The interviewing journalist said that seemed almost unrepentant in that and some of her other early interviews. At the time, she said “I don’t regret coming here.” But Begum – who had come to the camp from the final Isis redoubt in Baghuz – said that she felt threatened at the al-Hawl camp when she first arrived a year ago. “I had just come into the camp. I had just given birth. I was hearing all these stories about women threatening other women, you know, folk uncovering their faces or speaking to men or doing interviews or anything like that. I just was afraid for my life,” she told ABC. Control of the vast 65,000-plus al-Hawl camp has been described as being in the hands of “radical women” – the last supporters of Isis. Since then Begum was moved to the smaller al-Roj, partly for her own safety. Begum is one of around 4,000 foreign women from over 50 countries living in refugee camps in north east Syria. The Syrian Kurdish authorities have said they will start putting on trial some of the 1,000 male foreign fighters held separately in prisons, but it is unclear what will happen to the women. British security sources have argued that Begum represents a security risk, and they have said she was a member of al-Hisba, Isis’s morality police, during which time she carried a Kalashnikov and had a reputation for strictness. Begum also allegedly “stitched suicide bombers into explosive vests”.