Quarantine is being imposed on those people who have been exposed to the greatest risk of coronavirus because they have returned from the centre of the epidemic, in Wuhan. They are in an NHS facility – nursing accommodation in Wirral – where they will not mix with anybody else. Their meals will be supplied and if anyone feels ill, they can be taken care of immediately. They will stay there for 14 days, which is considered to be the maximum incubation period of the virus, so if they are infected, any symptoms will develop while they are there. Self-isolation is a sort of voluntary quarantine, where people have to make their own arrangements. They are expected to stay at home, and certainly not go to work or college. It has been described by public health officials as taking the same measures you would if you had a heavy cold – although perhaps the better comparison would be the flu. The key thing is not to go near other people, to avoid spreading the virus, which is transmitted via droplets from coughs and sneezes. It is thought you need to be relatively close to inhale those droplets – maybe within a metre or so. But the droplets can also land on surfaces and transfer to people’s hands – hence the advice to wash them frequently. A lot of the advice put out is being thought up on the hoof because this is such a novel situation. At first, officials suggested it would do no harm to go to the shops, assuming people keep their distance from others. But more recently they have been advising people to arrange food deliveries to their homes. The virus is most likely to be transmitted at close quarters, to family members. Those people will be at risk in any circumstances if one of the family is infected. People coming back from China may well have their family with them, in which case everybody will be self-isolating. If they are returning to family in the UK, the others may want to keep their distance as much as they can – or self-isolate as well. They should not go to the GP surgery, where they risk infecting other people, some of whom may be very vulnerable because they have health problems. They should stay home and call 111 for advice. People returning from China are likely to be very happy to self-isolate in order to protect family, friends and colleagues. But these are voluntary measures and they cannot be compelled. However, the chances that any of those who have not been in the major affected cities have coronavirus infection are low.