Anthony Bouthier Solid when taking balls and an exceptional 90‑metre spiral kick. Looked at home at this level. 8 Teddy Thomas Looked good on his return to this level but would like to have been in the game more. 7 Virimi Vakatawa Some early flashes but struggled to get in the game. 6 Gaël Fickou Little chance to play with ball but thrived in his new role as defensive captain 7 Vincent Rattez Scored a try and was a thorn in England’s defensive side all game. 8 Romain Ntamack A composed performance mixed with some genuine invention. Worth sticking with. 7 Antoine Dupont Controlled and was at heart of everything. Even with his timing howler, this was a masterclass. 10 Cyrille Baille A tough afternoon against a dominant England front row. 5 Julien Marchand Part of the retreating scrum and missed too many lineouts. 4 Mohamed Haouas Some solid work at ruck time but was on losing end against Marler. 5 Bernard Le Roux Energy in the loose, but shares some blame for the malfunctioning lineout. 6 Paul Willhemse Like his boilerhouse colleague, a strong defensive effort with 12 tackles. 6 François Cros Junkyard dog in Edwards’s new defence, making all of his 14 tackles. 7 Charles Ollivon Sixty‑seven metres run, 14 tackles and two tries in a titanic display as captain. 9 Gregory Alldritt Got team out of their troublesome scrum with carrying from the base. 8 Replacements Peato Mauvaka 6; Jefferson Poirot 7; Demba Bamba 5; Boris Palu 5; Cameron Woki 6; Mathieu Jalibert 6; Arthur Vincent 6. George Furbank Comfortable under the high ball but poor in attack. Dropped a couple of passes. 5 Jonny May Two magical tries gave England a sniff on a tough day. A one‑man cavalry. 7 Manu Tuilagi Two strong early carries suggested he was up for the fight, before the early injury. 6 Owen Farrell Spilled passes and very little in the way of attacking direction. One to forget. 4 Elliot Daly Moved from full‑back and offered little in his usual club position. 4 George Ford Some flashes in attack but kicking too often overcooked or directionless. 5 Ben Youngs Missed a tackle for Rattez’s try, terrible kicking game and ponderous in the loose. 3 Joe Marler Cornerstone of the scrum, the one thing that worked well for England all game. 8 Jamie George A mixed bag. Typically busy and steadied the lineout after some early struggles. 6 Kyle Sinckler Positive part of the scrum, but less conspicuous in the loose than usual. 6 Maro Itoje Discipline was poor and not his usual powerful presence. Looked low in mood throughout. 5 Charlie Ewels One lineout steal aside, struggled to replicate Bath form in an unimposing display. 5 Courtney Lawes Carried a lot of ball in Billy Vunipola’s absence and didn’t do it nearly as well. 6 Sam Underhill Worked very hard and was busy around the ruck, but it was his first middling game. 6 Tom Curry Clumsy at the base of scrum, offered little carrying. Not an international No 8. 5 Replacements Luke Cowan-Dickie 6; Will Stuart 6; Ellis Genge 7; George Kruis 6; Lewis Ludlam 6; Willi Heinz 6; Ollie Devoto 6; Jonathan Joseph 6.