Any conclusion taken from this game depends on where one stops the clock. Watford began the match looking like the perfect combination of strength and poise but ultimately were brushed aside and remain stubbornly in the relegation zone. Everton started a disjointed mess, clambered their way back and ended the match hungrily, Theo Walcott’s last-minute goal meaning that for the first time since December 2017 they had come from behind to win. “I said to the players that we plan to play a game in a certain style but sometimes it is not possible,” said Carlo Ancelotti, the Everton manager, after a period of post-match reflection. “Sometimes against teams with different qualities you have to fight. You have to be ready because, if you are not able to compete, you can lose. That is normal in football. So in the second half we were more in the game in that aspect and, once we [matched] it, we could show our quality; because this team has quality both technically and tactically.” The opening 45 minutes were dominated by Watford before Everton bossed first-half added time. In a classic case of football each period turned out to be of equal value. Adam Masina opened the scoring in the 10th minute, his first goal for Watford coming on the end of a flowing move. Étienne Capoue seized possession in the middle of the park and switched the play to Gerard Deulofeu. The Spaniard was having one of his good days and took the arching ball down with instant control and laid it off to the advancing Masina. The full-back finished calmly inside Jordan Pickford’s left post. Three minutes before half-time Watford doubled their lead and looked good value for it. Roberto Pereyra started and finished the move, intercepting an Everton clearance with a flicked backheel and firing home after Troy Deeney showed awareness with the lay-off. An announcement of two minutes’ added time was about to come over the Tannoy when Everton clawed a goal back. A Lucas Digne corner was poked in by Yerry Mina after his initial header was forced towards goal by Mason Holgate. It was ugly and it was improbable but one soon became two. Another corner, this time by Gylfi Sigurdsson, found the same target, with Mina off the back post but advancing beyond Craig Cathcart and bouncing a header into Ben Foster’s net. The half-time whistle went seconds afterwards. “Maybe it was down to a lack of concentration,” said Nigel Pearson, the Watford manager. “Today we have to reflect very honestly on the fact we haven’t worked hard enough to preserve the lead we fought so hard to get. It’s a disappointment but this game is now gone, over. We’ve got to take responsibility; we tried to win it, but ended up losing.” Everton went down to 10 men with 19 minutes remaining after the dismissal of Fabian Delph. Ancelotti pointed out this helped his team focus on staying competitive physically and left them waiting for the moment to counterattack. It duly came in the 90th minute when Masina was robbed of possession by Richarlison. The Brazilian held off Watford’s attentions for some 40 yards before laying the ball off to Moise Kean. His woefully scuffed shot became a decent pass to Walcott, who drove a shot back across goal to send everyone in blue ballistic, including staff who ran down the touchline to celebrate with the players. Ancelotti was not tempted to join them. “I was not able to run. If I run I’m dead,” he said.