Saturday afternoon’s meeting at Newbury has been abandoned due to a waterlogged track. An impromptu 8.30am inspection was called just after 6.30am as 12mm of rain had fallen on already soft ground. However, by 8.15am the decision had already been taken to call the meeting off with no sign of the rain abating and to compound matters strong winds are forecast later in the afternoon. A tweet from the Newbury Racecourse twitter account read: “RACING ABANDONED. The inspection has been brought forward and the racing has been abandoned. The ground is waterlogged following significant rain overnight, and we are expecting more rain and strong winds throughout the day.” The highlight of the card was the William Hill Supporting Greatwood Gold Cup Handicap Chase. Doncaster’s 888Sport Grimthorpe Chase meeting will go ahead as scheduled, however, last year’s winner Chidswell and one of the favourites, Boldmere, are non-runners due to the heavy going. 1.50 Doncaster This weather is ideal for Blackjack Kentucky, who “can’t have it soft enough”, according to Nicholls. He’s been given a fair mark for this handicap debut, despite an authoritative performance at Chepstow last month. 2.25 Doncaster On what could be a great card for Nicholls, Dolos can follow up on his recent Sandown success, when he was giving 22lb to the runner-up, First Flow. That one has upheld the form with two wide-margin victories in the past fortnight. Gino Trail is interesting on his debut for Fergal O’Brien but is 13 now. 2.45 Kelso Calva D’Auge deserves his place after a couple of battling wins but ratings suggest he has nothing in hand on these terms with Clondaw Caitlin, who has been really impressive in a couple of mares’ hurdles. The mudlover can make her sex allowance tell. 3.00 Doncaster Clear of her rivals by 8lb on official ratings, Cill Anna is a worthy odds-on shot. Her Wincanton success last time was easily a career best, so she is going the right way. 3.35 Doncaster The fitting of blinkers has done plenty for Worthy Farm, who has won his last two races in them. It looked as though he could be a fair way ahead of his mark at Wincanton last month and a half-stone rise is reasonable. He has his quirks but may be worth chancing. Chris Cook Newbury Racing abandoned Kelso 1.37 Stratagem 2.12 Albert’s Back 2.45 Clondaw Caitlin 3.22 Saint Xavier 3.57 Black Pirate 4.32 Dunly 5.07 Monbeg River (nb) Doncaster 1.50 Blackjack Kentucky (nap) 2.25 Dolos 3.00 Cill Anna 3.35 Worthy Farm 4.10 Firak 4.45 Stonific 5.20 Nells Son  Lingfield 1.25 Superseded 2.00 Top Breeze 2.35 Spirit Warning 3.10 The Perfect Crown 3.45 Karibana 4.20 Pentimento 4.55 Blazon Southwell 5.30 Mister Music 6.00 Hatcher 6.30 Harbour Front 7.00 Ubla 7.30 War Empress 8.00 The Eagle’s Nest Supporters of Epatante, who was displaced as favourite for the -Champion Hurdle on Thursday following a report that she had been intermittently coughing, received a more encouraging update from Nicky Henderson on Friday night when the trainer confirmed that his mare remains “on course” for hurdling’s championship race. “I can tell you Epatante didn’t cough today,” Henderson said after saddling Monte Cristo to win a juvenile hurdle at Newbury. That is the official line today. We are forced to say these things before somebody gets it out, and then it’s headline news. Unfortunately, we have to say it before it leaks out and it is drifting [in the betting]. You virtually have to let everyone know before she has even coughed. “But that is what they are making you do. She has not coughed this morning and we are all on course.” Epatante had been the clear favourite for the Champion Hurdle for two months following her impressive success in the Christmas Hurdle at Kempton Park on Boxing Day, but she is currently second-favourite with all major layers at a top-price of 9-2. Willie Mullins’s Benie Des Dieux, who has an alternative option at the Festival in the Mares’ Hurdle the same afternoon, heads the market at 3-1, while Pentland Hills, a stable companion of Epatante, is next in the betting at 5-1. No inspections are currently planned for Saturday’s three meetings over jumps in Britain ahead of the arrival of the latest storm from the Atlantic, but the meeting at Navan in Ireland, which was due to include the Grade Three Flyingbolt Novice Chase, has been postponed with details on a rearranged date to follow. Monday’s card at Chepstow has also succumbed to waterlogging, after 25mm fell at the Welsh track up to 3pm on Friday. Greg Wood