The chaotic delay in declaring a winner in the Iowa caucuses is being blamed, in part, on a smartphone app introduced just weeks before the election to report results. Many are asking what went so wrong with the new platform – and as a result, whether Iowa will be entrusted with its first-in-the-nation vote in the future. Here is what we know so far. For the first time ever, precinct chairs in the Iowa caucuses were asked to use a product called IowaReporterApp to report data instead of phoning in results, reportedly to streamline the process and get results more quickly. The app was developed by a company called Shadow. Shadow is based in Denver, Colorado, and describes itself as “an independent, for-profit technology company” that contracted with the Iowa Democratic party to build a caucus reporting mobile app. The company has also been contracted by a number of Democratic candidates, including Pete Buttigieg, Joe Biden and Kirsten Gillibrand for texting software during 2020 campaigns, according to Federal Election Commission data. The company said on Twitter it “regret[s] the delay in the reporting of the results” of the caucuses. We will apply the lessons learned in the future, and have already corrected the underlying technology issue. We take these issues very seriously, and are committed to improving and evolving to support the Democratic Party’s goal of modernizing its election processes. The app was reportedly built in the last two months on a budget of about $60,000, according to Iowa FEC data. Experts say this is a relatively low budget and recklessly fast timeline for an app set to be used in a high-stakes scenario like an election. “The sequence of events that led to the failure of this technology is nothing new – it happens in every rollout,” said Meredith Broussard, a professor at NYU and computer scientist. “This was a totally predictable disaster.” What’s more, the app was not tested at scale and not vetted by any third party agencies, according to reports. The Department of Homeland Security released a statement on Tuesday saying it was not asked to audit the Shadow app. It was also sent to volunteers without any training on how to use it. One precinct reporter told Vice’s Motherboard he first received an invitation to test the app on 18 January, just weeks before the caucus. Reporters were expected to use their personal devices and began experiencing errors in the app, which introduced additional risk into the process, Broussard said. “People have wildly different phones and comfort levels with technology,” she said. “It would have been a much more effective strategy to give everyone a device with the app pre-loaded – you have to plan for disaster in this kind of high-stakes situation”. And disaster, indeed, is what occurred. A “coding issue” caused only partial data to be reported out by the 1,700 caucus sites throughout Iowa. What’s more, many caucuses take place in rural areas of Iowa where cellphone coverage is less reliable, compounding issues, said Doug Schmidt, a professor of computer science at Vanderbilt. “These things were clearly not taken to account when building the app and the app was clearly not tested in more chaotic environments,” he said. “This should serve as a cautionary warning that there are some reasons we have done elections on paper for hundreds of years.” Because the Democratic party had relied almost entirely on the app to report data, its backup method of phone-in reporting was not well-staffed, and thus some precinct chairs reported wait times of hours just to call in results. After glitches were reported in the app, the Democratic party said it would recount votes from the paper backups initially used to record results, causing a nearly 24-hour delay. This was not a hack, said Schmidt, intensifying concerns about the viability of the underlying technology. “This occurred without anyone even trying to disrupt the election – it was simply self-inflicted wounds,” he said. “This is a good wakeup call that you have to be willing to pay for technology and invest in it to get it to work.” In light of the Iowa debacle, managers in the upcoming Nevada caucus appear to be considering alternatives to app-based reporting. “This should serve as a cautionary note warning that there are some reasons why we have done elections a certain way for hundreds of years with paper and cross checks,” Schmidt said.