“When in a hole, stop digging” is an iron law of politics, but not one that Boris Johnson recognises. He made his name by flouting conventional wisdom and gives the impression there’s no reason to stop. In the case of High Speed 2 – a railway where costs have doubled to around £100bn – he joked to schoolchildren last week that with a hole this big “the only thing to do is keep digging”. Yet Mr Johnson knows the arguments are finely balanced: between those who claim the scheme will be an economic boost for a country far too reliant on the south-east and highly polluting forms of travel, against those who say it is not the most cost-effective or the greenest solution to the problems it is intended to solve. Mr Johnson has yet to make a convincing case for proceeding with the project – which his chief adviser calls a “disaster zone”. Instead the prime minister has hidden behind a review that he launched last August and leaks suggesting that Douglas Oakervee, the former HS2 chairman reporting to Mr Johnson, strongly “advised against cancelling the project”. There’s no doubt HS2 has been mismanaged and is well behind schedule and over budget. More than £7bn has been sunk into the project. The first trains were supposed to run by 2026 but won’t pull out of stations before 2028. The project’s objectives are pretty clear: to increase capacity on the railway to meet long-term demand; to rebalance the economy by stimulating growth in the north of England; and to do both of these things in the most environmentally sustainable way possible. But is HS2 the answer to the questions raised? Or would a better reply be to scrap it and start with something else? Mr Oakervee’s review, it has been reported, says that even with the extra costs there will be a benefit to the wider economy, though this has fallen from £2.30 for every £1 spent in 2017 to between £1.30 and £1.50 for every £1 spent this year. Given how badly the project has been run, there is every reason to be sceptical about these figures, but this should not blur into outright cynicism. That HS2 benefits the north ought not to be a difficult argument to win. Yet it has not been made in a convincing manner. The mistake is to see HS2 solely as a high-speed service to and from London. In fact the new railway’s hidden worth is that it frees up capacity on lines that are almost full and run into cities like Birmingham, Manchester and Leeds. By segregating the high-speed operator on to its own railway, more services can run on lines that currently have to deal with a complex – and inevitably sluggish – mixture of slow and fast trains. That is why city leaders back HS2 even though its first phase does not reach them. The concern is that pulling the plug on HS2 would not lead to alternative local rail improvements in the north of England. Transport traditionally comes off a poor second to the NHS and schools. Under the Tories it has been roads that have received the cash. With that in mind, consider that though HS2 will destroy swathes of ancient woodland, it will only do roughly as much damage as one 15-mile stretch of motorway. All that can be done to mitigate its impact should be done. Transport is the UK’s biggest source of greenhouse gas emissions, which have been flat since 2008. HS2’s conservative estimate is that over 120 years it will not cut carbon emissions. Yet without a ready alternative to free up space on the rail network there will be no way of tempting people out of cars, trucks and planes. So far there’s no strategic plan from ministers that meshes the railway fix that HS2 provides with money and links to ambitious schemes for local buses, trams, cycling and walking. Government can’t just endorse HS2 without giving a green light to the National Infrastructure Commission’s recommendations for significant investment in public transport. Ministers ought to also block the third runway at Heathrow. The Treasury has said public spending on infrastructure should be around 1% of GDP a year – about £25bn – for the next 30 years. There is no fiscal reason not to proceed with HS2 as long as it can be part of the answer to the climate emergency. On balance HS2 ought to go ahead in an integrated transport plan designed to cut carbon and maximise the transfer from road and air to rail.