It is nearly impossible to take on West Side Story, a musical adapted into an Oscar-winning film, countless community and high school theatre attempts and multiple Broadway reboots, without baggage. Any revision to it, especially one that cuts a song and decks the Jets and Sharks in gang tattoos, is going to require boldness. Thus it’s perhaps fitting that the latest take on West Side Story, the first to revamp its much-lauded choreography on Broadway since the musical’s debut in 1957, is helmed by Amsterdam-based auteur Ivo van Hove, who has taken multimedia, collar-grabbing theater from the European avant-garde to New York over the past 20 years (he won a best director Tony for his revitalization of Arthur Miller’s A View From The Bridge). Still, in pre-show interviews, Van Hove and choreographer Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker, both originally from Belgium, have seemed almost intimidated by the project of reviving West Side Story. If you’re going to take on an American classic, you better do it boldly, and well. And if you’re going to swing at it on America’s pre-eminent stage, you better swing big. So Van Hove’s West Side Story, produced by Scott Rudin, makes a lot of gambles in moving the show from mid-century Upper West Side to somewhere in 2020 New York (still the same area, according to the program, though its minimalist style and backdrop of empty, graffitied streets suggest elsewhere). The characters have Soundcloud rapper-esque face tattoos and iPhones; mini-dresses and body-con streetwear replace full skirts, while fluid Latinx-influenced dances sub for the original’s ballet-based choreography. The production keeps the original book by Arthur Laurents with music and lyrics by Leonard Bernstein and Stephen Sondheim, though cuts I Feel Pretty and the intermission, thus running a brisk, bracing hour and 45 minutes straight. The original production was a smash in part because of its frank engagement with the incendiary issues of its time: civil rights (glowing reviews of its premiere coincided with national coverage of the forced desegregation of Little Rock Central high school in Arkansas), immigration and mixed-race relationships, lack of economic opportunity, police targeting. The challenge facing Van Hove was to translate and resharpen West Side Story’s message and resonance from beneath the dated flourishes of last century. The most striking, and overall effective, strategy in this effort for a grittier West Side Story is also Van Hove’s signature trick: the use of livestreaming cameras to project, widen and expand the story onto a massive on-stage screen. The minimalist set, designed by Van Hove’s longtime creative and life partner, Jan Versweyveld, is stripped and elusive – a stark brick background with two sliding doors concealing Doc’s pharmacy shop (Jets territory) and the bridal shop where Maria and Anita work. Action that takes place out of the audience’s direct view – behind the wall in the pharmacy, for example, or a former third-floor dressing room now styled as Maria’s bedroom – is filmed and streamed to the main-stage screen. The movie-theatre hybrid is, for the most part, immersive, and evokes the current screen-soaked, hyperkinetic and distracted era. It’s less effective, however, when broadcasting slow motion pre-filmed pieces, such the Jets mugging in slow motion through what appears to be Brooklyn as if filming an entropy-based music video or Tony running through the streets soaked in blood, that seem more hammy than intended, and distracting. Van Hove also pointedly connects the production’s material to larger themes outside the stage. Gee, Officer Krupke! has always been sly social commentary masked as gleeful camp, but Van Hove’s production – characters taping Krupke on mobile phones, dancing beneath pre-taped video of mistreatment, unwarranted searches and handcuffing men of color – sears off the comedy into a eerily moving, unsettling invocation of police brutality in the age of viral videos. Anita’s harassment by the Jets, pitched in the movie as mostly slurs and insults, becomes a much darker, more graphic depiction of barely thwarted sexual assault increasingly public in the era of #MeToo. While the original movie and production cast leaned heavily on bronzer, Van Hove’s production casts a roster of young, diverse talent. The Jets, originally a gang of white eastern Europeans, now includes men and women of all colors, though Tony, (a luminous Isaac Cole Powell) remains a Polish American. The Sharks, a Puerto Rican gang, are cast of largely Latinx actors. Thirty-three of the show’s 50 performers are making their Broadway debut. The decision to bet on younger talent proves to be a wise one; the show is at its strongest in its group numbers (Dance at the Gym, Rumble), when the actors on stage reflect the diverse reality of America: bodies crossing, colliding, harmonizing across the stage in unison, a genuinely show-stopping feat of choreography that is the show’s major highlight. Less wise was the casting of Amar Ramasar as Bernardo, a performer plagued with controversy after he disseminated sexual images of fellow female dancers during his time with the New York City Ballet. The casting decision has surely caused a headache for the production and ethical reckoning for some viewers which seems, given the performance, not worth it; Ramasar’s Bernardo fades to the background, upstaged by a magnetic Yesenia Ayala as Anita, Shereen Pimentel as Maria and a smoldering ensemble of Sharks. It’s as if the production strapped the distraction of his casting to the character’s back and willed both to disappear. Van Hove has said he wanted to make the violence more tangible, and mock-fight scenes plus a liberal use of fake blood ensure this is the case, the show ultimately hews closer to its gloomy, doomed love. The end arrives abruptly, with no time to linger or rationalize the tragedy; something has been lost, and it didn’t need to be this way. It’s a fitting close for a show that throws down a bunch of gambles, most of which pay off – though of course, the biggest gamble was already set: a revamp of a beloved classic on Broadway, with big-name producers, is sure to lure ticket buyers, grit and controversy or not. After breaking box office records while still in previews, it looks like it has already paid off.