The third Dublin Racing Festival over the last two days at Leopardstown was, by some margin, the best so far, thanks in no small part to the efforts of the track’s groundstaff and the decision to keep watering the track on Sunday morning despite 5mm of rain overnight. A repeat of 2019, when the final day saw 22 non-runners as a result of drying ground, was avoided, and Delta Work, whose connections were 50-50 at best about his chance of running on Saturday afternoon, was able to give Gordon Elliott his first win in the Irish Gold Cup and advance his claims for the Cheltenham Gold Cup next month. The core at least of Ireland’s team for next month’s Festival is now complete, and the non-handicaps look nicely balanced with exactly half of the 18 favourites trained in Ireland and the other nine in Britain. A little surprisingly, though, only two of the the eight Grade One winners at Leopardstown this weekend are now the clear favourite for a race at Cheltenham next month, and one of those – Notebook, in the Arkle Trophy – was already at the head of the market before winning the Irish equivalent on Saturday. The other one is the extraordinary Faugheen, whose could run in either the Marsh Novice Chase (formerly the JLT) or the RSA Chase at Cheltenham or, conceivably, neither, if his connections decide that winning a Grade One novice event at the age of 12 is as much as they can ask of the former Champion Hurdle winner. If Faugheen does run at the Festival, and it will be a surprise if he does not, it promises to be one of the all-time Cheltenham moments should he win. Even at around 6-1, though, his price for the Marsh Chase does not make a huge amount of appeal, as his jumping – so far at least – has not been as fluent and assured as you would expect of a dual Grade One winner over fences. His engine and incredible will to win got him over the line at both Limerick’s Christmas meeting and at Leopardstown on Sunday. A 12th Grade One win for Faugheen to match his age would be something to savour whether you have backed him or not, and there are better bets to be had for next month’s meeting now that the Leopardstown action is done and dusted. Honeysuckle and Delta Work are priced as you might expect for the Champion Hurdle and Gold Cup respectively, having won the feature events on Saturday and Sunday respectively, while it is impossible to know what to make of Aspire Tower, who fell at the last in the Spring Novice Hurdle just as he was settling down to battle it out with Cerberus. Some observer felt that he was getting the worst of it at the time. Others, this one included, would not be so sure, but Aspire Tower was in a real fight with a horse who was soundly beaten by Allmankind at Christmas and makes little appeal for the Triumph at 8-1. Appreciate It, who bolted up in the bumper at the end of day one, seems sure to start favourite for the Champion Bumper, and a worthy one too, though he will not be a great deal shorter on the day, while Paul Nolan’s novice Latest Exhibition is a definite talent but seems equally likely to end up in either the Ballymore or the Albert Bartlett. There is more certainty about the destinations for both Asterion Forlonge and, in particular, Chacun Pour Soi, and these may be the two horses to back now. Asterion Forlonge is quoted for the Supreme as well as at 8-1 for the Ballymore Novice Hurdle, but his owner has Shishkin at the top of the Supreme betting and Willie Mullins seemed content to point towards the Ballymore with the rapidly improving six-year-old. He did not jump a hurdle in public until 5 January and will be a stern opponent for all next month, including the current ante-post favourite, Envoi Allen. Chacun Pour Soi, meanwhile, is a 3-1 shot for the Champion Chase behind Defi Du Seuil but could easily start favourite on the day. Mullins could not have been more clear after his win in the Dublin Chase that he sees the eight-year-old as a very rare talent and the visual impression of Saturday’s win was backed up by a timefigure that was almost off the scale. Faugheen was the hero of the weekend but Chacun Pour Soi could well be the Dublin Racing Festival winner who emerges as the biggest star at Cheltenham. It is a thin afternoon for punters on Monday following the abandonment of the card at Fontwell, but Carlisle has a couple of competitive events and Mymilan (2.20), who has made a bright start to his chasing career, could be worth backing at around 3-1 to add a second win to his record from three outings over fences. Winds Of Fire (4.30) is also fairly priced in a competitive handicap hurdle, while Comeatchoo (6.30) and Via Serendipity (7.00) both have fair claims on the evening card at Wolverhampton. Carlisle 1.50 Goobinator 2.20 Mymilan (nap)  2.55 Penny Mallow 3.25 Dorking Cock  4.00 Haul Us In 4.30 Winds Of Fire (nb) Wolverhampton 5.00 Elusif 5.30 Pearl Spectre 6.00 Buy Me Back  6.30 Comeatchoo 7.00 Via Serendipity  7.30 Bond Angel 8.00 Sheriffmuir 8.30 Ember’s Glow Fontwell Meeting abandoned (waterlogging)