What’s going for it? Ilkley ticks all my fancy-pantsy, bobo, middle-class boxes, big time. A handsome Yorkshire spa town: yes, please. It’s like Harrogate in miniature, all smartly painted Victorian stone townhouses and sans serif typefaces in understated Farrow & Ball tones. Leafy promenades containing all the key accoutrements of bourgeois life (kitchen designers, bridal boutiques, JoJo Maman Bébé, cafes and the like) so I can pass myself off as the Baudelaire of the Yorkshire Dales. Mais oui. A Bettys! Well, I’m a sucker for a fat rascal – that goes without saying. A beautifully kept lido with views to die for. A fierce community of wild swimmers, if you fancy a change of scene to accompany your butterfly stroke. A damn good butcher for the non‑vegans. A branch of Booths. I mean, who doesn’t like Booths? (And why can’t we have them down south?) Alan Bennett making regular appearances at its literature festival. An independent cinema. Stop it, stop it! Honestly, Ilkley is so la-di-da it’s a wonder they don’t just rename the infamous moor Le Jardin de Wharfedale and be done with it. The case against Not cheap, obvs. Not cheap at all. And probably not for class warriors. Well connected? Trains: it’s at the end of the line that goes to Bradford and Leeds (half‑hourly, 30 mins). Driving: 15 mins to Skipton, 45 the other way to Leeds and a little less to Bradford. Schools Primaries: Ben Rhydding is “good”, according to Ofsted, and All Saints’ CofE, Sacred Heart Catholic and Ashlands are all “outstanding”. Secondaries: Ilkley grammar is also “outstanding”. Hang out at… The Box Tree has been wowing taste buds since the 1960s. You certainly won’t want for tea and cake, or, if you must, a flat white and a brownie. There are plenty of cafes, which range from the trad, like Bettys, to the mod, like the lovely Commute cycle cafe or, next door, Toast House. Where to buy Focus on the handsome centre for Victorian stone terraces and townhouses. Poshest, though, is north across the River Wharfe in the village of Middleton, which has south-facing views across the valley and lots of fancy 20th-century suburbans. Or try south-west, around Grove Road, Parish Ghyll Drive and all about. There are some nice period houses south-east, on and off the delightfully named Cowpasture Road. Large detacheds and townhouses: £600,000-£1.75m and upwards. Detacheds and smaller townhouses: £400,000-£600,000. Semis: £250,000-£450,000. Terraces and cottages:£200,000-£400,000. Flats: £125,000-£600,000. Rentals: a one-bedroom flat is around £575-£675pcm; a three-bedroom house is £850-£1,200pcm. Bargain of the week One-bedroom postwar flat close to the centre and the station, £125,000, with daleeddison.co.uk. Jill Garforth “Near enough to the Dales for lunch and a walk.” Jane Kilsby “Try the Bar T’at for a pint of Landlord.” Simon Myers “There’s so much in walking distance and such good train links that we don’t own a car.” • Live in Ilkley? Join the debate below. Do you live in Eltham, south-east London? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by Tuesday 11 February.