I wonder if Will Hutton has thought of moving the broadcasting tax (aka the TV licence fee) on to the council tax (“The BBC is a pillar of civilisation”, Comment)? This is what they do in France. It would be simpler and cheaper to collect and we would no longer criminalise those who cannot afford it. Poorer older people, who now get the free licence, would not suffer, as council tax is reduced for them. Only the aged rich would suffer slightly. The BBC would still get its money but be similar to the police, fire service and so on as being a public good; it would keep its independence and continue to remain free of government interference.Martin TuckerHartley Wintney, Hants Will Hutton rightly predicts substantial cuts once the BBC assumes responsibility for funding free licences for the over-75s. But the possession of a licence is an obligation on households, not on individuals. Why then have I seen no mention of an obvious amelioration, to grant the concession not to households containing any over-75s but to those comprising only over-75s?Charles BailyBedford For John Humphrys to say that equal pay at the BBC would mean less cash for programmes verges on the absurd (“Humphrys sparks row after attack on women’s equal pay claims at BBC”, News). That broadcasters doing virtually identical jobs for the same number of hours per series ought to be paid on the same scale brooks no argument. What Humphrys had in mind was bringing the pay of women up to parity with that of men. Another option would be to reduce the money received by male broadcasters down to the level of their female counterparts. Both of those would create a furore. A better idea would be to add together the annual salary of the male and female broadcasters, then halve that sum and pay the resulting amount to both parties. That would not add to the financial burden of the BBC nor would it leave any member of staff on the breadline.Denis BruceBishopbriggs, East Dunbartonshire Catherine Bennett is right to highlight the “prodigiously late-onset” belief of some that Labour’s next leader should be female (“Why should Keir Starmer step aside? His rivals have few feminist credentials”, Comment). However, it is puerile to cast Lisa Nandy’s early-onset acceptance of the referendum result (now Keir Starmer’s too-late-onset position) as somehow anti-feminist. Nandy has spoken and written articulately about gender equality, and grassroots engagement with women-centred policymaking. There may be other reasons to prefer another candidate, but a lack of feminist credentials isn’t one of them.Peter McKennaLiverpool The delays in accessing help for people with mental health problems are worse than you present (“Mental health care postcode lottery is ‘putting lives at risk’”, News). Provisional data from the Office for National Statistics for 2019 shows that suicides among men over 45 are now at their highest levels in 10 years. Also there is a rising trend in suicides among under 25-year-olds and a staggering 70% increase in self harm among teenage girls. Twenty years ago when I was in child and adolescent mental health services, we were experiencing huge increases in referrals beyond our capacity to cope. We had to prioritise suicide attempts, chronic eating disorders, early-onset psychosis and serious self-harm. We knew then that the young people suffering emerging depressive illnesses and anxiety problems would become adults with entrenched mental illness. Reports and data elsewhere reveal a service in crisis, with very long waiting times for assessment and treatment. Young people denied support and help will appear in the criminal justice system, engage in antisocial behaviour, develop drug and alcohol dependency, end up in the care system and cause disruption in school. An authoritarian government that sees troubled young people as problems to be punished is at risk of repeating the mistakes of the past, when, for relatively small sums of money, future chaos and misery could be avoided.Steven WalkerWalton-on-the-Naze, Essex Prof Gill Wyness is quoted as saying that “disadvantaged kids will still go to a lower-quality university… the rich kids will go to the Russell Group, they’ll go to UCL, and the poorer kids will go to South Bank” (“Top universities ‘not being chosen by low-income students’”, News). I’m glad to see the professor recognises our important work in widening access to higher education. I would be interested to know however, how she defines “quality”. Perhaps students, disadvantaged or otherwise, choose a technical university like LSBU because we offer courses such as nursing and degree apprenticeships, which many Russell Group institutions don’t. Or perhaps it’s because of our relationships with 1,000-plus employers, the fact we are fourth in the UK for graduate outcomes and 16th for starting salaries. Prof David Phoenix, vice-chancellor, London South Bank UniversityLondon SE1 Spot on, Kenan Malik (“No history, no languages… the end of humanities only deepens divides”, Comment). How is it possible for Sunderland University to retain its university status when it is clear it is now little more than a training college?Nick PritchardSouthampton Local authorities should be congratulated for banning vehicles from city centres (“Is this the end of the road for cars in Britain’s cities?”, Focus). Diesel vehicles are a particular problem as they generate ultra-fine particles, which are the most dangerous biologically. It had been assumed that diesel emissions would become less of a problem with the introduction of stricter emission standards, but recent testing has shown that diesel filters emit a huge number of ultra-fine particles when the filter is automatically decoked every 300 miles. Pressure from car manufacturers has ensured that these emissions are not included in EU vehicle emission tests. Evidence as to the health impact of air pollution is also accumulating. A recent study showed that academic performance improved after air filters were fitted to schools in Los Angeles, providing key evidence of a causal link. After Brexit we will no longer be protected by EU air quality standards, and the government’s forthcoming environment bill is a poor substitute for EU law. We urgently need a new clean air act, and a national clean air agency to enforce it.Dr Robin Russell-Jones, scientific adviser, all-party parliamentary groupsGeraint Davies MP, chair, all-party parliamentary group on air pollutionHouse of Commons, London W1A Regarding your article “Bathroom brands need to come clean on recycling, says Which?” (News): is it not time that blame for failure is properly acknowledged by replacing phrases such as “This film/tray/plastic not currently recycled” with “Our company is not yet using recyclable material for this product”? Like cigarette packet warnings, this should be made compulsory where there are no specific recycling instructions.Malcolm ShifrinLeatherhead, Surrey