In June 2018, the dead body of Errol Graham was found lying emaciated in his flat with just a few five-year-old tins of fish in his cupboard. Eight months earlier, his unemployment and housing benefit had been stopped after he failed to attend a work capability test. Suffering from serious mental health difficulties, he had warned of being unable to cope with “unexpected changes”. His death is another shocking example of the complete disregard for the lives of poor and vulnerable people shown by the social security system. Graham’s tragic case only came to light because his family had been treated with contempt by the Department for Work and Pensions, which seems to operate according to the Victorian morality encapsulated in a quote often attributed to the Oxford scholar Benjamin Jowett: “Never apologise, never explain. Get it over with and let them howl.” The Conservative party led the charge with its 2012 Welfare Reform Act. This reduced the generosity of benefits by tens of billions of pounds while attempting a wholesale redesign of the system. This was accompanied by broader shifts in the use of impoverishing sanctions and health assessments. A discussion of welfare is an essential part of, but not the same as, a discussion of how to end poverty. Yet successive Tory ministers have had more of an eye on reducing outlays, making systems look simpler or changing people’s behaviour, than on supporting vulnerable people. Perhaps the biggest hole blown in our national safety net for the needy has come with universal credit, which brings together six different means-tested benefits into a single payment. It has been, so far, one of the most effective ways of spreading penury and fear, with even Tory cabinet ministers admitting it drives food-bank use. But no one has stopped the expansion of the system’s glacial bureaucracy, which sustains the long waits for payments and its capricious punishments. Once fully rolled out, more than 6 million families will receive it at any given time and it will pay out over £60bn each year. Labour had promised a root-and-branch overhaul of what it called a “cruel and inhuman” system but then lost December’s election. Tory ministers ought not to get complacent. Universal credit remains, in the words of the Resolution Foundation thinktank, a “negative symbol” of a decade of welfare changes. The cuts it has allowed and its controversial minimum five-week wait for an initial payment are intensely disliked by claimants. About 3 million people will be worse off by 2024 than if they had stuck with the old benefits system. The Tories won power by winning “red wall” seats from Labour. These areas – with low rents and high numbers of disabled, unemployed or single-parent claimants – will lose out in terms of spending power as welfare pounds disappear. The obvious answer is for the Tories to reverse their cuts. Poor women, and their children, are the main casualties of the rightward shift of welfare policy. Such women have little political clout, particularly as many of them do not vote. Few politicians see reason to take up their cause. With Brexit, overlaid on to these discussions is the media depiction of immigrants or minorities as gaming the system. This can be channelled into a belief that poor people are undeserving of assistance. This calculated manipulation by rightwing politicians is why we are in the mess we are in. Some voters back politicians who are determined to cut the support that those same voters rely upon. To stop the scandal of deaths like Errol Graham’s we need welfare policy to be determined by evidence and humanitarian concerns, not just the balance of political power.