Many thanks to Ian McEwan for expressing so succinctly my own feelings about Brexit (Brexit, the most pointless, masochistic ambition in our country’s history, is done, 1 February). He has managed to encapsulate the bewilderment, hurt, sadness and anger felt by me and millions of others. The sense of outrage at the lies, deviousness and hypocrisy is difficult to express without sounding bitter and curmudgeonly. McEwan’s article is neither. As a musician and piano teacher, my whole life has been immersed, surrounded and expressive of European culture, not to the exclusion or appreciation of other cultures, but as something that is a part of my inner being, to be treasured and nurtured and passed on through my teaching to the next generation. I am a European, who happens to be British.David DearLiverpool • Ian McEwan comprehensively lists the devices used by the Brexiters to spread their “magic dust”. But why did the dust fall on fallow soil? Why were so many people unaware of the benefits of EU membership? Because not much has ever been done officially to blow the dust away. Apart from the Thatcher government’s campaign of the 1980s to alert business to the opportunities provided by the single market, there has been precious little in the way of official information to counter the continued sniping at the EU. Indeed, when in 1996 the European commission mounted a long overdue multimedia effort to inform people across the continent about their EU rights under the banner of “Citizens First”, the UK government chose to opt out of it on the grounds of pre-election sensitivities. The incoming Labour government in 1997 only permitted a low-key campaign. All of the (then) other 14 member states fully supported Citizens First. Since then there has been no major drive in the UK to encourage a wider understanding of the rights and responsibilities of EU citizenship. No wonder the dust settled.Richard UpsonHampton, Middlesex • To Ian McEwan’s list I can add more for which the UK, not the EU, is culpable. It is undemocratic. European institutions mirror those of democratic nations: an elected parliament and unelected bureaucracy. Westminster has a chamber of unelected parliamentarians. Even the elected chamber uses an archaic and unrepresentative system, allowing a government that lost the popular vote to “get Brexit done”. It favours Scotland over England. No European ruling opposed an English parliament or set out the Barnett formula. It is Westminster that left the English behind. It trashed local government. The first tranche of changes, though a year after Britain joined Europe, actually made us less like continental nations. Some reform was needed, but even from 1974 to 1994 there were too few districts and too many empty town halls. Things have got worse since. It failed to electrify. Electrified rail flourishes on the continent – and under Scotland’s devolved government. Westminster has left Oxford, Bristol, Leicester and Nottingham without electrified lines and Sheffield with only its tramways. Even Crossrail has been repeatedly delayed. So if the left-behind think Brexit has solved anything, they will soon find otherwise.Charles GilmanMitcham, Surrey • I want to thank Ian McEwan for expressing how I feel, both for myself and my children. I really do feel like a outsider, a “left-behind” and fear for my children’s future. I live in a coastal, typically deprived area as a single parent. Always a remainer who believes in sharing values and inclusion. What is left for us when all around us are people are celebrating a future I see as a huge mistake?Deborah Mackay Morecombe, Lancashire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition