Is Larry Elliott the only economist apart from Patrick Minford who believes we are better off outside the EU (Why there are many reasons to be cheerful, 1 February)? His attempt to defend such a calamitous and damaging act flies in the face of virtually all respected expert analysis. Being part of the EU has civilised this country in a way that would have been otherwise unthinkable. Workers’ rights, environmental protection, social and regional development immediately come to mind. Does he truly believe a government led by Boris Johnson is going to unleash allegedly hidden potential and end the north-south divide by loosening state aid rules and taking other measures? More likely we’ll end up as the 51st US state or worse. In any case, Europe is about much more than trade deals and economic performance – it has been the most successful peace project in history, bringing countries and peoples together in a way that was inconceivable in the immediate aftermath of the second world war. Of course, the EU is not perfect but it is far better to be on the inside, making it work better.Emeritus professor David HunterRichmond, North Yorkshire • Larry Elliott writes that “the UK is one of the world leaders in artificial intelligence and could seize a competitive advantage once it can set its own regulations”. The old illusions are starting to come back. Since the 1950s how many wonderful examples of Britain leading the world have crashed because there was no economic machinery behind them? The world leadership in jet transport is all gone. The first computer was built in Manchester, but where is our computer industry? The first nuclear power station was at Calder Hall. Now the French and Chinese are building our next one. It will be the same for all the wonderous advantages of artificial intelligence. We may be at the point of progress at this moment, but without an economic clout behind it we will see the field taken over by the Americans, the Chinese and probably the Europeans. As members of the EU we could have led the way with 28 modern economies and a 500 million-population market behind us. With us as members the EU could have “seized the competitive advantage and set its own regulations”. But alone we can’t. John DoddsGraulhet, France • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition