It was 28C in Cape Town just as Stuart Hogg kicked off proceedings in Edinburgh with the rain all but horizontal. The possibility of South Africa joining the Six Nations is an idea that clearly polarises opinion but it can be said with certainty it presents an altogether different proposition to this. “Classic Scottish weather,” said Hogg on the eve of the match. “We’ll have a few tricks up our sleeve.” For the second week running, he and his coach, Gregor Townsend, will lament an inability to make one of them count. Perhaps that is a little unfair given the foul weather ensured chances were at a considerable premium but that only served to highlight their importance. England were able to take theirs in the second half, Scotland were not and again it is hard not to wonder whether Finn Russell might have been able to produce the necessary moment of magic. Add in the fact that once more Scotland’s lineout went to pieces and these are testing times for Townsend. Their scrum was worse and their handling nowhere near as accurate as England’s. On the whole it was one of Hogg’s better performances but again it was he who made a costly mistake. He was hoping the ball would bounce over his tryline but in doing so almost fluffed his lines completely to allow Owen Farrell a try. As it was, Hogg was adjudged to have just about grounded the ball but soon after the resulting England scrum Ellis Genge was over for the decisive try. It was not as shocking as his failure to ground the ball against Ireland but the full-back was equally as hard on himself. “Devastating … I take it on my shoulders, take it on the chin,” he said. “I’m not going to shy away from it. I did make a mistake.” Townsend was far more philosophical over the incident, suggesting it was almost an excellent decision but for the bounce of the ball and chose to laud his captain’s performance. Two years ago Scotland bossed the battle of the breakdown and Eddie Jones responded by effectively picking three opensides. Tom Curry, Sam Underhill and Lewis Ludlam all made their presence felt in that regard – Jamie Ritchie, Hamish Watson and the returning Magnus Bradbury were far less conspicuous than Townsend will have wanted. That was about the sum total of conclusions to be drawn from a first half utterly devoid of any rhythm and the second was just as shapeless. Scotland kicked off with the wind at their backs and seemed a little too eager to make the most of it. Certainly the hosts were up for it. Flower of Scotland before the Calcutta Cup at Murrayfield will always stir the senses and Sam Johnson was intent on backing his words that no one likes England, thumping into Jonny May following Hogg’s kick-off. If there were any subsequent pattern to the match it was that England were all too happy to kick the ball, often hanging it up in the air, while Scotland seemed a touch unsure whether to run it back or play to the conditions. That was a conflict they struggled to resolve all match. Ali Price was his usual busy self, always looking to snipe, to create half openings for his willing forwards or to chip over the top. He was busy at the start of the second half too, charged down by May but doing well to collect a swirling high kick from George Ford. From there, Adam Hastings launched his own kick into the skies and Ford could not gather. Scotland would have been happy enough with the scrum but Rory Sutherland had other ideas, bullocking up the middle of the pitch. It led to a Scotland penalty, another kick to the corner and 14 phases with the hosts battering away. Eventually it also led to a penalty from Hastings, bringing the scores level at 3-3 but on those 14 phases you could not help but feel the match had swung. Had the England dam burst it would have been hard to see a way back for Jones’s side. The conditions then made sure that after Genge’s try there was no way back for the home side. It may have been classic Scottish weather but for all their endeavour, you still sense they are a team more suited to the South African sun.