Cities are expert in sluicing away the sins of the night before. By 6.30am on the first day of Britain’s new future, all traces of the beery patriotism that had fuelled Nigel Farage’s Brexit party had been swilled from the centre of the capital. From their plinths, Churchill, Lloyd George and Millicent Fawcett looked down on a muddy, empty, silent Parliament Square, unmoved. There was not a trampled EU flag or a discarded “Got Brexit Done” banner to be seen. On Wordsworth’s Westminster Bridge, the sun seemed reluctant to come up, perhaps just to annoy Mark Francois, reportedly waiting with champagne glass in hand. I had wandered down here early for evidence of that fabled new dawn that I’d seen advertised on the front of several newspapers (as well as on a souvenir tea towel, free with the Daily Mail). On the walk down through Soho, blinking itself awake, there was nothing to see apart from the extraordinary process of daily reinvention: floors being mopped, windows being cleaned, pavements swept, rubbish being hoisted onto wagons, warm bread being delivered. Questions about Brexit were met with shrugs and resignation in several languages. In Soho’s Bar Italia, above which John Logie Baird invented television, my mention of new dawns was greeted with a brisk “No, too much Brexit! Too busy!” We all know the feeling. One positive Brexit result: people might finally be vox-popped out. Anyway, down here they do new dawns every day. I’d had a pint in the Wetherspoon’s on Whitehall the night before. The pub had hosted the most raucous of “Ingerlund” crowds, getting tanked up before swaying down past the cenotaph to hear the nation’s landlord, Tim Martin, offer his back-of-a-fag-packet take on global geopolitics. At 8am, “freedom breakfasts” were being served, alongside medicinal pints of John Smith’s, to those for whom last night’s militant camaraderie had given way to this morning’s hung-over solitude. A few doors down, the prime minister perhaps recognised the feeling. Downing Street gave the impression of being more locked down than ever. Boris Johnson had only offered a recorded Facebook message to the nation at 10pm the night before. In place of a convincing vision of Britain’s “global future”, there had been a desperate-sounding hope that we should just all try to forgive and forget the recent past. Churchill, you were reminded, had taken to his bunker before victory in Europe, not afterwards. As the London morning wore on, that collective hangover from the harangues of the past three years seemed to be expressed in a curious silence. College Green had emptied of TV crews; there was not a protest vigil or a megaphone shouter in sight. What was left in its place felt like a nation waking up from last night’s skinful to wonder: “Was I the worst?” And of course, the sweaty flashbacks kept coming. In this sense, the previous evening had offered a car-crash, fast-forward history, not of the last four years but of the last 40. I had spent the early part of it among the Thatcherite undead, listening to John Redwood, “the right honourable bastard” as he was introduced, speak on behalf of the “Maastricht rebels” to an invited crowd of dinner guests convened by the rightwing thinktank the Bow Group. Old battle stories were rolled out. Greater love hath no man, it appeared, than to have defied the Tory whips over the euro. The group’s “field marshal”, Bill Cash MP, doing a valorous tour of TV studios, was remembered in dispatches. A toast was raised in the memory of former patron Roger Scruton, the Conservative philosopher who died last month and who had provided the ideological ballast for Brexit: the belief that it is “only when people define their loyalty in territorial and national terms that difference in religion and class can be put aside”. After Redwood sat down, I walked across Westminster Bridge to see how that philosophy was expressing itself in practice. I was met first by a big bloke in a union jack T-shirt amplifying God Save the Queen through a bullhorn and challenging me to prove myself a patriot by joining in. A damp crowd of nostalgists of all ages watched clips of the 1966 World Cup winners being played on a big screen outside parliament, along with – let’s get this party started! – ancient footage of Teddy Taylor MP and James Goldsmith in leather club chairs arguing against Brussels elitism. News reporters from dozens of countries lined the square, trying to make sense of it. After 47 years and 30 days it is all over. As the clock strikes 11pm on Friday, the UK is officially divorced from the EU and will begin trying to carve out a new global role as a sovereign nation. It was a union that got off to a tricky start and continued to be marked by the UK’s sometimes conflicted relationship with its neighbours. Here’s a run-through the beginning, the middle and the end. The French president, Charles de Gaulle, vetoes Britain’s entry to EEC, accusing the UK of a “deep-seated hostility” towards the European project. Sir Edward Heath signs the accession treaty giving entry to the EEC in an official ceremony that was accompanied by a torch-lit rally, dickie-bowed officials and a procession of political leaders including former prime ministers Harold Macmillan and Alec Douglas-Home.Lisa O'Carroll The UK decides to stay in the common market after 67% voted "yes". Margaret Thatcher, later to be leader of the Conservative party, campaigned to remain. Margaret Thatcher negotiated what became known as the UK rebate with other EU members after the "iron lady" marched into the former French royal palace at Fontainebleau to demand “our own money back” claiming for every £2 contributed we get only £1 back” despite being one of the “three poorer” members of the community. It was a move that sowed the seeds of Tory Euroscepticism that was to later cause the Brexit schism in the party. Thatcher served notice on the EU community in a defining moment in EU politics in which she questioned the expansionist plans of Jacques Delors, who had remarked that 80% of all decisions on economic and social policy would be made by the European Community within 10 years with a European government in “embryo”. That was a bridge too far for Thatcher. Collapse of Berlin wall and fall of communism in eastern Europe, which would later lead to expansion of EU. Divisions between the UK and the EU deepened with Thatcher telling the Commons in an infamous speech it was ‘no, no, no’ to what she saw as Delors’ continued power grab. Rupert Murdoch’s Sun newspaper ratchets up its opposition to Europe with a two-fingered “Up yours Delors” front page. A collapse in the pound forced prime minister John Major and the then chancellor Norman Lamont to pull the UK out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism. On 1 January, customs checks and duties were removed across the bloc. Thatcher hailed the vision of “a single market without barriers – visible or invisible – giving you direct and unhindered access to the purchasing power of over 300 million of the world’s wealthiest and most prosperous people". Tory rebels vote against the treaty that paved the way for the creation of the European Union. John Major won the vote the following day in a pyrrhic victory. Tony Blair patches up the relationship. Signs up to social charter and workers' rights. Nigel Farage elected an MEP and immediately goes on the offensive in Brussels. “Our interests are best served by not being a member of this club,” he said in his maiden speech. “The level playing field is about as level as the decks of the Titanic after it hit an iceberg.” Chancellor Gordon Brown decides the UK will not join the euro. EU enlarges to to include eight countries of the former eastern bloc including Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic. EU expands again, allowing Romania and Bulgaria into the club. Anti-immigration hysteria seems to take hold with references to “cockroches” by Katie Hopkins in the Sun and tabloid headlines such as “How many more can we take?” and “Calais crisis: send in the dogs”. David Cameron returns with reform package.   The emphasis, on this “happy Brexit day”, appeared to lie on keeping any extremes of anger contained; there were no fireworks, no cans of alcohol, and the crowd was reminded that swearing was a public order offence. Speakers appeared on stage to call for an end to the divides in society. And then, there you were, listening to Anne Widdecombe offering, as a national battle cry: “There will be no level playing field!” Brexit doesn’t really have a playlist beyond We Are the Champions, so instead, in the spirit of togetherness, the music-hall act Dominic Frisby got the audience to sing along with his composition The Maybe Song “maybe Donald Trump is not all bad” and made crowd-pleasing nudge-nudge jokes about Anna Soubry being a Nazi. It was fitting that the final act of this national fever dream was given to Farage, who took to the stage in his Arthur Daley coat and union jack tie, trying to flog spontaneous euphoria to a crowd that had been more used to stockpiling disgruntlement. As Farage conducted a countdown to the witching hour, he ventured some wild “we happy few” Shakespearean claims about the significance of the moment in our island history. In the crowd, I found myself Googling that fictional antihero Harry Flashman, George MacDonald Fraser’s “scoundrel”. Flashman, you will recall, inadvertently triggered the charge of the Light Brigade with a stentorian fart, blaming “Russian champagne” for “the most crashing discharge of wind, like the report of a mortar”, thereby sending his trusting regiment into uncertainty and worse. It would be tempting to believe that Farage and those footsoldiers – who variously embraced at 11pm or yelled “Fuck the EU” – have been appeased by the victory and that a new, one-nation vision might emerge. If not, the morning after might go on for a very long time indeed: as we know, hangover cures are rarely all they are cracked up to be.