What were you hoping for?To laugh, learn something, eat something that would upset my rabbi and my mother, and meet someone memorable. First impressions?She had a friendly and approachable energy. Pleasing on the eye, too. What did you talk about?Why the staff at Disney have to ask a fallen child three times if they are OK; where we had been in the world; and what constitutes celebrating Christmas. Any awkward moments?Florence and the waiter wrestling over the water bottle. She thought he was criticising her technique. He thought she was doing him out of a job. Good table manners?Impeccable. Best thing about Florence?She can identify an Oaxacan cheese manufacturer from 100 paces. Would you introduce her to your friends?Absolutely. Describe Florence in three wordsCurious, bright, playful. What do you think she made of you?She asked lots of questions, so best-case scenario: this man is a talented raconteur with an interesting life. Worst case: man, this Jew talks about himself a lot. Did you go on somewhere?I suggested a pub, but work the next day loomed. And… did you kiss?Two friendly hugs and a phone number exchange. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?They wouldn’t have found an unexploded second world war bomb in Soho and we would have been able to go to Quo Vadis. Otherwise it was highly enjoyable. Marks out of 10?8.6. Would you meet again?I would be open to it. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?Timothée Chalamet. First impressions?He’s here before me – how is he not already elbow-deep in the guacamole and tortilla chips? What did you talk about?His Jewish childhood, Disney marathons, shakshuka. Any awkward moments?Not really. The waiting staff were super funny, which kept us entertained. Good table manners?Very. He was definitely more polite about diving into the tacos than I was. Best thing about Daniel?He has a really interesting background and didn’t seem to mind my nosy questions. Would you introduce him to your friends? Definitely my friend Laurence. He would have a crush on Daniel, for sure. Describe Daniel in three wordsFunny, articulate, intelligent. What do you think he made of you?“She wasn’t kidding about eating being her biggest hobby…” Did you go on somewhere?Not this time. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?One more frozen margarita. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?I don’t think so, but I did have a fun dinner with him. • Florence and Daniel ate at El Pastor, London SE1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like‑minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com