Name: Thunberging. Age: As old as gen Z. Appearance: Increasingly on dating apps. Surely Greta’s too young to be on dating apps? At 17 she is, and will have to wait another year before signing up. Will she still care about the environment then? Don’t be so cynical. She’ll have no trouble finding people who share her interests, at any rate. How so? New data analysis by the online dating platform OkCupid has found that online daters are increasingly connecting over the climate crisis. Bit heavy for a first date, isn’t it? Regardless, mentions of climate change and the environment on profiles have increased by 240% over the past two years, with millennials and gen Z the most concerned. Fair enough – they will live to see the worst of it. On the in-app questionnaire by which OkCupid measures users’ compatibility, 51% of respondents said climate crisis was the issue that mattered most to them – over world peace, the economy and eradicating disease. Well, shared values are important in a relationship. Don’t forget compromise – on issues such as “food security” and “air quality”. And I’ve been looking for someone to go halves with on an air purifier. Good news: 88% of OkCupid users in the UK are concerned about air pollution levels in the country. Finally – I believe in love again. And if you’re a man wanting to date women, your chances are even better: 90% of UK women are concerned about rising sea levels, compared with 83% of men. Personally, “concerned about rising sea levels” used to be top of my list of criteria. But as I’ve got older, I’ve learned to be relaxed about those. That’s where you and Thunberg might differ. I’m counting on her to do something about it! You, and everyone on OkCupid. Mentions of “Greta Thunberg” on profiles increased by 800% in the past year. It must be gaining on “must have good banter” and “looking for a partner in crime”, then. What are they saying about her? It’s not a sentiment analysis, so who knows, but OkCupid is calling the trend “Thunberging” ... “two daters bonding over their passion for the environment/climate change”. “Passion” is one word for it. What does this make Extinction Rebellion, then? Speed dating? No, still very much activism. And 91% of OkCupid users in the UK feel the government should be doing more on the climate crisis. In my day, we joined environmental groups for hooking up. Maybe it would have been better if you had focused a bit more on the carbon emissions? Do say: “My hopes for the future are to avoid the 2C scenario.” Don’t say: “Love to travel long distances by air.”