If you thought you knew how bad British prisons are, you haven’t read this book. Drugs, riots, suicides, squalor, overcrowding, understaffing, dangerous criminals let out early, minor offenders kept in too long or wrongly banged up in the first place; that’s only a fraction of the story. Chris Atkins’s journal of his time in HMP Wandsworth shows why conditions are so atrocious, with four Tory justice secretaries (Michael Gove, Liz Truss, David Lidington, David Gauke) coming and going during his stretch and none of them able to cope. It’s an inside story to make you weep at the incompetence, stupidity and viciousness of the current system. As an acclaimed documentary film-maker, Atkins was an unlikely candidate for a five-year prison sentence. He ended up there after being found guilty of tax fraud – a scam not to enrich himself but to fund his film projects. He was convicted in June 2016, the day after the EU referendum result (“I can’t help feeling that my incarceration and Brexit are somehow mystically interlinked”). Though his accountant was the chief culprit and they weren’t the only ones in the industry diddling HMRC, Atkins has no complaints: “If I’d been on the jury, I’d probably have come to the same decision.” The toughest part of it was being separated from his infant son Kit. Relieved not to get a harsher sentence and sharply focused on everything around him, he’s on an adrenaline high when first admitted to Wandsworth. Even the filthy 6ft by 12ft prison cell, with its graffiti, peeling paint, concrete floor, plastic mattress and seatless toilet, doesn’t altogether dismay him; at least the man he’s sharing it with, Ted, isn’t a psychopath or off his head on spice. After the trauma of his court case, Atkins even gets a good night’s sleep. Soon enough, though, the reality of his situation dawns on him: the meagre food (“if I fed it to Kit I’d be prosecuted for parental neglect”), the lack of exercise (staff shortages mean an almost constant lockdown, with prisoners confined to their cells for 23 hours a day), the sense of menace and incessant noise, and the denial of a visit from Kit, whose criminal history needs to be checked before he’s approved despite being only three years old. Within a fortnight, quickly grasping how the system works and embarking on a “brown-nosing crusade”, Atkins moves from E wing to the less chaotic A wing. And a week later, he’s in Trinity, allegedly the cushiest place in Wandsworth. But even Trinity has its hierarchy: to be given a decent cell, a prisoner’s IEP (incentives and earned privileges) level needs to be Enhanced, and Atkins, as a new arrival, is Standard. By signing up for a dry lining course, without knowing what dry lining is, he improves his prospects. Then a lucky break earns him a place on H wing, “the prison equivalent of Hampstead”, among white-collar professionals and ex-public schoolboys like himself. Entering (or re-entering) this “bubble of white privilege” makes him feel guilty: “In a strange mirror of wider society, the more educated and affluent prisoners carved out the best jobs and places to live,” while “the most vulnerable people on the outside often got the worst deal behind bars too.” Still, you can’t blame Atkins for trying to avoid the worst of Wandsworth. Ingratiation is the route to integration, and as “the screws’ bitch” he’s able to move more freely about the prison, delivering food or handing out slips and in return sneaking in a quick phone call or shower. Each month he discovers more about the place and the petty madness of its rules. And each chapter of his book begins with a list of things he has learned, whether “how to build a drugs empire” or how “rehabilitation programmes can actually increase crime”. As that suggests, Atkins’s liberalism has its limits. Prison reformers may be keen on cheerily titled rehab courses (“Getting it Right!”, “Be a Hero!”) but their effectiveness is doubtful. One prisoner confesses how by signing up for a victim awareness course, and using the right buzzwords, he’ll improve his chances of being released and resuming his life of crime. And while teetotal Muslims sign up for AA programmes as a break from being locked up, there’s precious little funding for mental health services. Healthcare is stuck in the Middle Ages – 'It wouldn’t have been out of place if they’d started dispensing leeches' Atkins is shocked by the amount of self-harm he sees and by the number of prisoners who are mentally disturbed rather than malevolent. He cites the example of an inmate called Dex, who is forever in trouble for cutting himself or trashing his cell: “He’s too disturbed to conform to the prison’s regime, but isn’t deemed mad enough to be committed to a psychiatric unit.” The longer he spends inside, the more catch-22s he encounters: the prisoner unable to present his report on the consequences of being locked in his cell all day because he’s locked in a cell all day; the men not given definite release dates whose behaviour deteriorates from the uncertainty and whose release dates are then further deferred; the fact that the prison wing where inmates are sent to get clean of drugs is also the easiest place to obtain drugs (heroin, coke, weed, speed, skunk and crack – everything but paracetamol). Soon Atkins is having one-to-one sessions with his fellow cons, having been enlisted as a “Listener”, lending an ear to any prisoner going through a crisis. The experience confirms that half of them are illiterate; that prison healthcare is stuck in the Middle Ages (“it wouldn’t have been out of place if they’d started dispensing leeches”); that the authorities waste their energy on fiddle-faddles (decreeing that inmates be called “men” rather than “prisoners” for example) rather than real reform. His biggest complaint is that Wandsworth is stuck in a time-warp, with a decaying building and little or no use of IT. Atkins admits that keeping his diary was personally helpful – a way of staying sane. It’s also, for all its knockabout humour, fantastically informative. Along with examples of prison slang – an electronic tag is a “chav nav” or “Peckham Rolex”; to “bank it” is to smuggle drugs into prison in your anus – there are boxes full of statistics he’s unearthed and insights he’s gleaned. It’s well known that the UK has the largest prison population in the EU, the highest reoffending rate, and that under Chris Grayling the number of prison officers was cut by a third. But I didn’t know how little confiscation there is of criminal proceeds (26p in every £100), or how many children in the UK have a parent behind bars (around 200,000), or that 58% of remand prisoners do not receive prison sentences, or that, though those remand prisoners make up only 13% of the prison population, they account for 46% of suicides. Nine months after entering Wandsworth, Atkins moved on, to serve the rest of his sentence in a couple of open prisons; the journal stops at that point. He feels little nostalgia for his time in jail, but thinks it has made him less judgmental and that we might all benefit from a spell inside. His epilogue lists the changes he’d introduce were he ever appointed justice secretary. They are humane, straightforward and make good sense. What are the chances of them being adopted by the current incumbent, Robert Buckland? As someone who once invested in a film partnership that HMRC investigated as a tax avoidance scheme, he and Atkins have some common ground. Let’s hope against hope they get together and that some of the reforms proposed here are implemented before conditions in our prisons get even worse. • A Bit of a Stretch is published by Atlantic (RRP £16). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.