New Chelsea recruit Sam Kerr is in the running to scoop another individual accolade after being named on a five-woman shortlist for the BBC’s prestigious women’s footballer of the year award. Australia’s captain, who was named the best player in the world in a Guardian poll last year, is joined on the list by England’s Lucy Bronze, Julie Ertz and Megan Rapinoe of the US, and Dutchwoman Vivianne Miedema. The shortlist was selected by a panel of experts, including coaches, players, administrators and journalists, who based their choices on performances in 2019. The winner will be decided by a public vote and announced on 24 March. Kerr, who completed a big-money move to WSL club Chelsea in November last year, has admitted to a tough start to life in London after a “rollercoaster” year that saw the Matildas go no further than the last 16 at the World Cup and her Chicago Red Stars lose the NWSL final. “It’s exciting,” said Kerr, who finished third in last year’s BBC poll, behind Ada Hegerberg and runner-up Pernille Harder. “Any time you’re nominated for an award it’s a huge honour.” Defender Bronze, who topped the BBC’s vote in 2018, came second to Kerr in the Guardian’s poll despite being crowned Uefa’s player of 2019. The 28-year-old, widely considered the finest right-back in the world, helped England to the World Cup semi-finals and won the Champions League with Lyon. “All the awards are quite different, this one is predominantly fans and that’s nice,” Bronze said. “It’s the people who support the women’s game and watch every single week, and when they vote for you it feels nice to have that support especially being a defender. “The whole image of the England team has changed in this last year. The attention, the support was unbelievable for the team and the recognition we’re now getting is really special.” Kerr and Bronze are in distinguished company, with World Cup and Ballon d’Or winner Rapinoe, her national teammate and Chicago Red Stars midfielder Ertz and Arsenal’s Miedema vying for the award. Rapinoe, in particular, enjoyed a standout 2019, and not solely for her on-field performances. “It’s really special,” said Rapinoe. “I feel like in so many ways I’m representing what the whole team is standing for, every team in the World Cup it felt like we were all on the same team fighting for something bigger. We were able to transcend sport in such an incredible way… so to be a mouthpiece and driving it forward is amazing.” Kerr became the first Australian, male of female, to score a World Cup hat-trick at the tournament in France, when she scored four against Jamaica, to finish fourth in the golden boot race with five goals, one behind Rapinoe, who shared the award with compatriot Alex Morgan and England’s Ellen White. The 26-year-old Australian has won five consecutive golden boots across the NWSL and W-League, is the all-time top scorer in both leagues with 69 and 70 goals respectively. She also holds the records for the most goals in a single season of both leagues, the most goals in a single NWSL match and quickest W-League hat-trick. The previous winners of the BBC honour, other than Bronze and Hegerberg, twice, are Scotland’s Kim Little and Nigerian Asisat Oshoala.