Police in rural south-west Wales have used DNA profiling to solve the mystery of a missing cow. Dyfed-Powys police say they are the first force in the UK to employ a technique more often used in serious crimes such as murder to reunite a heifer with its owner. The case – described locally as a “moo-dunnit” – centres on a £3,000 animal that went missing from a field in St Clears on the River Taf in Carmarthenshire. Police were called in and suspicion fell on a neighbouring farmer, David Aeron Owens. The complainant, who has not been named, pointed out to officers the cow he believed was his. PC Gareth Jones was handed what Owens claimed was the cow’s passport – its identification document. Unsatisfied, police oversaw the taking of blood samples from the disputed animal, which were compared against samples from cows on the complainant’s farm to prove a familial link. The cow in question was returned home and Owens, 51, pleaded guilty to theft at Swansea crown court this week. Jones said: “This has been a long and protracted inquiry, and it has taken a lot of work and patience to get to this point. Without the use of the heifer’s DNA we would not have been able to prove that it had been stolen by Mr Owens. “We are proud to be the first force in the UK to use a cow’s DNA in a criminal case, and will continue to use innovative methods to get justice for victims.” The cow was reported stolen in December 2017. During the criminal investigation, Owens launched proceedings against Dyfed-Powys police over the way blood samples were taken from the cow, as he had not been willing for this to happen. A judicial review found the force acted lawfully. Jones said: “I must thank the victim in this case for the determination shown in wanting to see justice being done. It has been a long investigation, but we hope he is satisfied with the outcome. “What this case shows us is that where the farming community works with the police, reporting crimes and providing us with vital information, we can be successful in taking out prosecutions.” He added: “I echo comments made by the judge, who said Mr Owens, as a farmer, would be well aware of the need for a level of trust in the rural community. In committing these offences, he has played a part in breaking down that trust, which will be difficult to build back up.” Owens was sentenced to pay a £4,000 fine and pay £400 costs.