World Rugby plans a comprehensive review of the sport’s policies relating to transgender players. Moves will begin at a forum next week which is bringing together independent experts and leaders in the fields of sports science, biology, medicine, ethics and law, as well as rugby administration, medical and playing representatives. The rugby union governing body, whose current policy follows that of the International Olympic Committee, is consulting with expert voices and the global women’s game before the London summit. However with latest research suggesting that a reduction of testosterone does not lead to a proportionate reduction in strength and power, World Rugby says it is important for contact sports such as rugby “to find an appropriate position for player welfare and risk”. World Rugby’s chairman Bill Beaumont said: “There is growing recognition of the importance of autonomy of gender identity in society, and all sports are currently evaluating their policies to ensure that they are fit for purpose in the modern sporting and societal landscape. Rugby is no different, and this forum makes it possible to explore the best available evidence and hear the relevant expert opinions.” The governing body will also ask elite players for their views through a questionnaire to gain a representative view from the game’s top levels. Beaumont added: “World Rugby’s vision is ‘a sport for all, true to its values’ and we are committed to exploring the evidence from experts in the field of biology and medicine, together with insights provided by leading legal, ethical and social minds, to determine whether the current guidelines are appropriate for all participants. “We are undertaking an extensive consultation process that includes obtaining the perspectives of players who will be directly affected by this policy in both elite and community rugby. This is important in achieving transparency and buy-in.” World Rugby’s chief medical officer Eanna Falvey said: “Sports organisations and the medical community alike appreciate that this is a complex area to negotiate. It is especially complex in a contact sport where size, strength and power can be influential. “By bringing together the world’s leading experts for the first time at our forum we will be able to consider all evidence, considerations and viewpoints as we move towards developing an updated policy that is proportional, appropriate and good for all.”