The controversial film director Roman Polanski has said he will not attend the French “Oscars” because he fears a “public lynching” by feminist activists. The veteran is at the centre of a storm of protest after his new film about the Dreyfus affair, An Officer and a Spy, topped the list of nominations for the César awards, which will be presented in Paris on Friday night. France’s equality minister and feminists were outraged at his 12 nominations, including for best film, given that Polanski is still wanted in the United States for the statutory rape of a 13-year-old girl in 1977. “We know how this evening will unfold already,” Polanski said in a statement to AFP. “Activists are already threatening me with a public lynching, with some saying they are going to protest outside,” the 87-year-old added. “What place can there be in such deplorable conditions for a film about the defence of truth, the fight for justice, blind hate and antisemitism?” Earlier this week, French star Adèle Haenel, who last year accused the director of her first film of sexually harassing her when she was 12, criticised the Césars for honouring Polanski. “Distinguishing Polanski is spitting in the face of all victims,” she said. “It means raping women isn’t that bad.” The entire board of the French film academy, which awards the Césars, was forced to resign this month after Polanski’s movie became the favourite to lift the top prizes. Academy head Alain Terzian had justified its choice by saying that the academy “should not take moral positions” about giving awards. Despite protests outside some cinemas, the movie – about Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish officer wrongly persecuted by the French army at the turn of the 20th century – has been a French box-office hit. However, the publicity campaign for the film was halted after French photographer Valentine Monnier claimed that she had also been raped by the director in 1975. Monnier, an 18-year-old model and actress at the time, said Polanski tried to give her a pill as he beat her “into submission” at his Swiss chalet. Polanski “absolutely denied” the allegations, pouring scorn on her story. The director told AFP that he had taken the decision not to attend the Césars ceremony to protect his team and “my family, my wife and my children, who have been subject to insults and affronts as part of a kind of collective responsibility that comes from another age”. “The activists brandish the figure of 12 women who I am supposed to have molested half a century ago,” he added. “These fantasies of sick minds are treated as established fact – a lie repeated 1,000 times becomes a truth.” Polanski said that he was not going to submit himself to a trial by media so “that the irrational triumphs yet again”. The director caused uproar at the Venice film festival last year – where his film won two prizes – by comparing his hounding by the media to the antisemitic persecution Dreyfus suffered. He later blamed the disgraced Hollywood mogul Harvey Weinstein for his woes. He said Weinstein had tried to brand him a “child rapist” to stop him winning an Oscar in 2003 for The Pianist.