‘I didn’t recognise my own democracy. The Spanish state was repressing a civic initiative. Regardless of what I think about Catalan independence, it was a real shock.” Joan Clevillé recalls the banned Catalonia independence referendum of 2017 and its ensuing violence as a “traumatic experience”. The choreographer, who comes from Barcelona and is now artistic director of Scottish Dance Theatre, decided that Greek myth would provide a powerful lens through which to view these events and other ideas of resistance and disobedience. His new work – Antigone, Interrupted – is a solo, made with and performed by Clevillé’s long-term collaborator Solène Weinachter. In looking at Sophocles’ directly political tragedy, with its characters driven to inescapable fates from the conflict between civic duty and family loyalty, Clevillé and Weinachter ask: what is that driving force today, and is it possible to regain control in our uncertain world? Examples from a global swell of protests in recent years fed into the process: Extinction Rebellion, pro-democracy groups in Hong Kong and the 2013 Gezi Park protests in Turkey with “unlikely alliances between queer groups and football hooligans”. In France, Weinachter’s home country, the demographics are changing. While protests had previously happened “on the outskirts of society”, the dancer says, participation has now become mainstream, involving people from all backgrounds. Furthermore, the violence against the gilets jaunes (yellow vests) “has really been shocking”. “I’m interested in interrupting our inherited ways of reading a story in order to make it relevant today,” says Clevillé. “We’re trying to interrupt this idea of Antigone as a martyr, a character whose actions lead her to death.” The notion to remake Antigone with one performer stemmed from his incredulity that Weinachter had not explored a solo format in the 10 years that they’d been working together (“11!” pipes in Weinachter). Performed in the round, there are no props behind which the body can hide: its strength and vulnerability is exposed. That Antigone is a woman defying Creon, King of Thebes, is crucial (in Sophocles’ play, Creon proclaims it better to be overthrown, if needs be, by a man). Clevillé and Weinachter drew from defiant women throughout history for inspiration, particularly Rosa Parks: “that split-second decision of a body taking a very simple action … as dance practitioners, it gives me goose bumps,” says Clevillé. Today we have Greta Thunberg who, like Antigone, is a young woman with an “incredible drive towards action”. Female dissent feels somehow fundamental, Clevillé adds: “at the root of all inequality comes patriarchy. In that sense, female dissent feels like it’s always been there, that need to challenge a set of fundamental rules that have been set up to the benefit of some and not others.” Extracts from the play are sewn together with new devised writing (playwright Ella Hickson is on board as dramaturg). Weinachter is the storyteller, alternating between playing Antigone and appearing as herself: she takes rests, jumps through space and between characters, and draws from her personal experience of seeing her sister, Audrey, play Antigone at her school when she was younger. In portraying all the characters, Creon becomes a “needed part of [her] reality” says Clevillé, rather than simply a villain: he’s doing what he thinks is right, too. As the play’s stakes escalate and Antigone is brought to her death, Weinachter herself appears and interrupts the narrative’s fatalistic trajectory: “What about leaving?” she asks. Can dissent be directed away from martyrdom and destruction, and towards something creative? “This story empowers us to know we are not governed by fate, there is still potential to interrupt it with our own agency, as Rosa Parks did,” says Clevillé. While the events in Barcelona shocked him, they showed how actively people are engaging with politics: you feel “the energy of conversations, assemblies, actions happening in every city, town and neighbourhood”. And it is urgent that we engage, they say. Antigone’s sense of urgency “had a strong impact on me,” says Weinachter. “I still feel it now. Urgency to act radically for our planet, our democracy and to bridge the gap between those who have privilege and those who don’t.” • Antigone, Interrupted is at Perth theatre, 14-15 February. Then touring.