Two of Super League’s biggest clubs have confirmed they have no objection to supporters bringing rainbow flags to their fixtures against Israel Folau’s Catalans Dragons: including the side who will be the opposition for his first Super League match in England. Folau’s Catalans debut saw him score a try in the Dragons’ 36-18 victory over Castleford, but the occasion was marred by claims from some away supporters that they were asked to remove flags backing the LGBTQ+ community after displaying them inside Stade Gilbert Brutus, where Folau made his first rugby league appearance for 10 years. Catalans subsequently insisted they do not have a policy of banning flags, while Super League have said they hope an investigation into the matter will be concluded on Monday. Hull FC, who host Catalans in their next game on 1 March, have said they will not eject fans with rainbow flags. A club spokesman said: “We have nothing against pride flags in general.” Folau’s first game in England would have been against the reigning Super League champions, St Helens, had next weekend’s fixture not been postponed due to the Saints’ World Club Challenge commitments. That game will now be rearranged for later in the year, but they told the Guardian that they too would not ban rainbow flags under any circumstances. The two sides met in an early-season Super League encounter on Sunday, with the Saints warming up for next Saturday’s meeting with the NRL champions, Sydney Roosters, with an impressive victory to end Hull’s unbeaten start to the new campaign. “We knew we had to play for 80 minutes against these – we only played for 40,” Hull’s coach, Lee Radford, said. His opposite number, Kristian Woolf, has had to endure problems in the opening weeks of his time in charge of the reigning champions, including injuries to a number of the players who helped the Saints win the Super League title last year. They were still without four of last year’s Grand Final-winning side here, but a dominant second-half display was enough to ensure a second win in three games. Trailing 6-2 at half-time, Saints had gone 135 minutes without scoring a try after failing to score for the first time in four years last week against Warrington. However, Matty Costello’s try six minutes after the restart opened the floodgates. Jake Connor kicked out on the full to hand Saints field position and by the time Hull touched the ball again, they were 18 points behind. Costello, Luke Thompson, Louie McCarthy-Scarsbrook and James Bentley all crossed in a 10-minute passage which saw the Saints forge a 24-6 lead, with all four tries being created at some stage by the outstanding Jonny Lomax, who put in a performance that will have caught the eye of the new England coach, Shaun Wane, who was in attendance. “He’s a class player and when we were on top, he was involved,” Woolf said. Hull had led at half-time thanks to a Carlos Tuimavave try. He crossed again in the final quarter along with Jamie Shaul, but by then the damage had been done thanks to a blistering passage of play from the champions. Hull: Shaul; Naulago, Tuimavave, Fonua, Swift; Connor, Sneyd; Taylor, Houghton, Sao, Jones, Griffin, Ellis. Interchange Johnstone, Matongo, Fash, Bowden. Tries Tuimavave 2, Shaul Goals Sneyd 3 St Helens: Welsby; Makinson, Naiqama, Costello, Grace; Lomax, Fages; Walmsley, Bentley, Thompson, Taia, Peyroux, Knowles Interchange McCarthy-Scarsbrook, Lees, Paulo, Smith Tries Costello, Thompson, McCarthy-Scarsbrook, Bentley, Smith Goals Makinson 6 Referee L Moore. Attendance 12,399.