A proliferation of “WANTED” posters featuring the beaming visage of Norwich defender Ben Godfrey around north London suggest there may be more than a grain of truth to speculation that both Tottenham Hotspur and Arsenal are interested in signing the 22-year-old this summer. Norwich rate him at £50m and may be forced into selling him should they fail to escape the drop. José Mourinho is also believed to be keen on Godfrey’s fellow Canary Max Aarons, which could lead to Spurs pulling off what in timeless transfer jargon is referred to as a “summer double-swoop”. Tottenham and Arsenal are also scouting RB Leipzig central defender Dayot Upamecano, but will have to fend off interest from Barcelona and Bayern Munich if they are to get him. In other news pertaining to Spurs, the club are reported to be growing impatient with the dithering of midfielder Eric Dier, who can’t decide whether or not to ink a new deal with the club. The Northern Echo reckon Steve Bruce is keen on offering Andy Carroll a new deal, despite the injury prone battering ram making just four starts for the club this season. The impressive form of on-loan goalkeeper Dean Henderson between the sticks for Sheffield United has got antennae twitching at PSG, although the French club would have to out-bid Chelsea, Tottenham and the Blades if they want to lure him away from Manchester United. Having failed to sign Moussa Dembélé from Lyon during the summer, choosing instead to bring in Odion Ighalo on loan until the end of the season, United may move for the French striker in the summer, but are believed to unsure if he is worth the £60m asking price. Having been given permission to leave Lyon this summer, Dembélé’s sale to United to or anyone else – Chelsea are also believed to be interested – will result in his former club Celtic trousering a substantial sell-on fee. And finally, PSG are ready to hose Kylian Mbappé down with an unlimited supply of high denomination bank-notes in a bid to stop him from encouraging advances from Real Madrid.