Adam Lallana has been in and around the Liverpool team for what seems like decades, though in recent times he’s been more “around” than “in”, which has encouraged Leicester to think he might be worth a punt. The attacking midfielder is in the final year of his contract at Anfield and the Leicester Mercury suggests an approach has been made to bring Lallana’s six-year spell at Liverpool to an end. They might face competition, however, from Lallana’s former employers Southampton, who fancy bringing him back to the club for whom he starred in their rise from League One to the top tier at the start of the last decade. Talking of Southampton – and why wouldn’t we be? – Saints are planning to take on Liverpool and RB Leipzig in the race to sign the highly regarded Werder Bremen midfielder Milot Rashica. The Kosovo international has scored seven times for the struggling Bundesliga side this season and is valued at around £22m. Two Chelsea players attracting interest from Italy are Emerson Palmieri, to whom Juventus and Internazionale have taken a fancy, and Marcos Alonso, also a target for Inter. Chelsea will want €30m for him though. It’s not all outgoings for Frank Lampard, however, with the Blues becoming the latest club to be linked with a move for the Amiens striker Serhou Guirassy. Tottenham also like the look of the £18m rated Frenchman though, while Celtic are toying with the idea of trying to lure him to Glasgow. Arsenal are sending their scouts on a jolly to watch Roma’s Italy midfielder Bryan Cristante his weekend. The 24-year-old, who signed from Atalanta at the start of this season after joining Roma on loan last term, is under contract until 2024, mind, so would command a reasonably hefty wedge. Real Madrid are scouring the continent for youthful talent, as per, and have alighted on the Rennes midfielder Eduardo Camavinga. Marca reckons the 17-year-old would provide ideal back-up in the long term for Casemiro. Down in the Championship, Matheus Pereira is set to make his move to West Brom permanent after the derby against Birmingham next month. The terms of his loan agreement with Sporting stipulate that the Baggies have to buy the Brazilian winger once he has made 30 Championship appearances of 45 minutes or more. Given how he has excelled at the Hawthorns in the Toughest League In EuropeTM, he’s likely to cross that threshold in March.