I’m all for an eye cream if needed, but I am not predisposed to eye gels – or to gels generally. I understand the allure of something light and refreshing on tired, bleary eyes (I’m keen on a pair of cold dessert spoons myself), but where others feel cool and watery, I often experience itchy, parched skin gasping under a tight, sticky film. However, the trend for gel-creams (products with the light texture of the former, the heft of the latter) made me roll again and put a selection through their paces. And, well, I’m converted – at least for spring and summer, when skin generally demands less. The main object of my affections is Biossance Squalane + Peptide Eye Gel (£46, 15ml). This, as its name makes clear, harnesses my beloved squalane (a fine, thin, fatty and intensively but ungreasily lubricating oil derived from olives) to moisturise way more than your average eye gel. Add in aloe to soothe, glycerin and hyaluronic acid to hydrate (essential if you’re to plump up crepe-paper skin), smoothing peptides and a host of antioxidants, such as grape, green tea, goji and niacinamide, and the overall effect is bouncier, more refreshed upper and lower lids, a perfect base for makeup (ideal if your concealer creases and crepes), and zero stinging or tearing. The opaque, airless pump keeps the product fresh too. It’s beautiful, and inevitably, costs more than a half tank of petrol. But before you dismiss the whole idea, I loved two others almost as much. The Body Shop’s Oils of Life Eye Cream Gel (£20, 20ml), is a silky, elegant gel that skin gulps in greedily. The oils make it as comforting as it is reviving, the visible effects (smoother skin) are instant, and skin remains slightly moist to the touch all day, as it should. My only gripe is the pot packaging and the tangible presence of silicone, which didn’t agree with every concealer I own. I prefer the hygiene and sensation of Origins Mega Mushroom Relief & Resilience Soothing Gel Cream for Eyes, (£40, 15ml). The specially shaped, permanently cold metal applicator simultaneously dispenses the antioxidant gel, massages away puffiness, pleasantly cools and awakens the eyes, while smoothing and soothing the surrounding skin, either under or over makeup – it revives cakey concealer a treat. All work on any age or skin type – and it’s so rare I can say that – though I’d still opt for cream at nighttime. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.