Prep 10 minCook 15 minServes 1 100g soba noodles (100% buckwheat are best for this)Ice cubes, for chilling the noodles⅓ cucumber, cut into ribbons with a vegetable peeler or into small cubes for a contrast with the soba2 spring onions, thinly sliced For the dressing1 tbsp toasted sesame oil1 tbsp mirin (or you can use white wine or cider vinegar)1 tsp red miso paste1 tsp soft light brown sugar or palm sugar½ tsp soy sauce or kombu To garnish (optional)Black and/or white sesame seedsWasabi pasteJapanese picklesSprouted greens (alfalfa, broccoli, cress or radish all work well)Shiso leaves, shreddedGrated fresh root ginger Cook the noodles according to the packet instructions until al dente (usually about five minutes), then immediately drain and chill in a sieve with a few ice cubes. Whisk the ingredients for the dressing together in a small bowl and taste. It should have quite a savoury-sour flavour. If necessary, add more vinegar, miso paste or sesame oil until it tastes the way you like it. Ditch the ice cubes and put the chilled noodles in a shallow bowl or plate along with the cucumber and spring onion. Add any of the garnishes that appeal to you and drizzle the dressing over the cold noodles. Quench your thirst with a tall glass of iced green or oolong tea alongside. Prep 15 minCook 15 minServes 1 1 tbsp vegetable or sunflower oil1 tsp soy sauce, plus extra to taste1 tsp rice vinegar (or white wine/cider vinegar), plus extra to taste1 tsp grated fresh root ginger2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely grated1 tsp honey or brown sugar120g chicken breast, cut into stripsHandful shiitake mushrooms, sliced4 Tenderstem broccoli stalks, chopped into 2.5cm pieces1 fresh red chilli, sliced1 spring onion, slicedToasted sesame oil, to tasteSesame seeds, to garnishEgg or rice noodles, cooked according to packet instructions, to serve Mix the oil, soy sauce, vinegar, ginger, garlic and honey or brown sugar in a bowl, then add the chicken strips. Leave to marinate for a few minutes so the chicken doesn’t dry out when you cook it. Put a wok over a high heat. You’ll know it’s hot enough and ready for stir-frying when you flick a little water into the pan and it immediately evaporates. Add the marinated chicken and cook for a few minutes, tossing and stirring constantly so none of it burns. Remove the chicken from the pan. Add a little more oil if the wok is dry, add the mushrooms and broccoli, and fry for a minute or two, tossing frequently, then add the chilli and spring onion. Stir a couple more times, then taste. Season the stir-fry with sesame oil, soy sauce and vinegar to bring out all the flavours of the dish, and serve hot, garnished with lots of sesame seeds, on top of noodles. Feel free to add other vegetables, such as chopped pepper, broccoli or bean sprouts (raw or cooked). I like to add edamame beans, broad beans and grated courgette, too. Prep 20 minCook 20 minServes 1 100g thick or thin rice noodlesVegetable or sunflower oil, for frying150g raw, shelled prawns (or defrosted frozen ones)1–2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped1 green chilli, finely chopped1 spring onion, thinly sliced1 small bunch mint and/or coriander, roughly chopped1 small carrot, coarsely grated or cut into ribbons with a vegetable peeler1 small handful salted peanuts, roughly crushedSea salt and freshly ground black pepperLime wedge, to serve (optional) For the sauceGrated zest and juice of 2 unwaxed limes1 tbsp fish sauce1 tbsp soft light brown sugar or palm sugar1 red chilli, finely diced1 garlic clove, peeled and finely grated Combine the ingredients for the sauce in a bowl. Cook the rice noodles according to the packet instructions until al dente, drain, toss them in the sauce and set aside. Meanwhile, heat a little oil in a skillet or frying pan over a medium heat, add the prawns and fry for a few minutes until golden-pink and opaque – remove them from the pan as soon as they’re done so they don’t become tough. Add the garlic, chilli and spring onion to the same pan once you’ve removed the prawns and fry gently for a couple of minutes, then remove the pan from the heat and return the prawns to the pan so all the flavours blend. Serve the noodles in a shallow bowl or on a dinner plate and scatter over the prawns, herbs, carrot and crushed peanuts. Season to taste and add a lime wedge, if you wish. You can add all manner of ingredients to these noodles. The following work particularly well: assorted pickles, citrus, herbs, mushrooms, kimchi, sriracha sauce, coconut milk or cream, peanut butter and Korean gochujang paste. Prep 10 minCook 15 minServes 1 150g packet miso ramen noodles (or plain noodles)1 handful frozen peas, or any vegetables you have lurking in the fridge (carrots, sugar snap peas, corn, bean sprouts, finely shredded cabbage, courgette, etc)1 egg1 tbsp red or brown miso paste (if using plain noodles)1 fresh green chilli, sliced1 spring onion, sliced and put in a bowl of iced water for a few minutes1 generous pinch black or white sesame seedsToasted sesame oil, to tasteJapanese dried nori seaweed, to serve (optional) Cook the ramen noodles according to the packet instructions, adding the frozen peas (or whichever vegetables you opt for) to the pan so they cook at the same time. Cook the egg by poaching it in the broth (whisk it in a bowl first then pour it into the broth or crack it in), boiling it whole in a separate pan, or giving it a quick fry. Add the miso paste to the noodle cooking liquid (if cooking plain noodles) and stir through. Remove from the heat and garnish with the chilli, drained spring onion, sesame seeds, sesame oil and any other toppings you like. The egg goes on last if you cooked it separately, along with the seaweed (if using). Recipes from Signe Johansen’s Solo: The Joy of Cooking for One (Bluebird, £16.99). To order a copy for £14.95, visit guardianbookshop.com