The Metropolitan police has referred itself to the police watchdog following the death of Caroline Flack. The Love Island presenter, 40, was found dead at her flat on Saturday after taking her own life as she awaited trial for allegedly assaulting her boyfriend, Lewis Burton, 27. Scotland Yard’s directorate of professional standards reviewed all previous contact with Flack before making the referral on Wednesday. It is standard practice for a referral to be made to the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) when a person who has had recent contact with police dies, the force said. A Met spokesman said no officers had been suspended, placed on restricted duties or served with investigation notices, and that no issues had been identified. An IOPC spokesman said: “We will make a decision on the level of our involvement after carefully assessing the information we have received. Receipt of a referral does not mean an investigation will necessarily follow.” Flack stepped down from the current series of the ITV2 dating show after she was arrested and charged with assault by beating. She pleaded not guilty to a charge of assault at a hearing at Highbury Corner magistrates court in December. The court heard that, in the aftermath of the alleged incident at her previous flat in Islington on 12 December, Flack told police, “I did it” and then warned that she would kill herself. Flack was released on bail but was ordered to avoid any contact with Burton, who did not support the prosecution, ahead of the trial next month. In an unpublished Instagram post, handed by Flack’s family on Wednesday to the Eastern Daily Press, which covers Norfolk, where the presenter grew up, she wrote of her arrest on 12 December: “Within 24 hours my whole world and future was swept from under my feet and all the walls that I had taken so long to build around me, collapsed. “I am suddenly on a different kind of stage and everyone is watching it happen. I have always taken responsibility for what happened that night. Even on the night. But the truth is … it was an accident.” Flack added that she had been having “some sort of emotional breakdown for a very long time” – “But I am NOT a domestic abuser. We had an argument and an accident happened. An accident.” She also apologised for the impact on those close to her, writing: “I’m so sorry to my family for what I have brought upon them and for what my friends have had to go through. “I’m not thinking about how I’m going to get my career back. I’m thinking about how I’m going to get mine and my family’s life back.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.