While globally there were more than 14,000 cases of coronavirus, and more than 300 deaths as of Sunday afternoon, there are still just 12 confirmed cases of the virus in Australia – four in New South Wales, four in Victoria, two in Queensland, and two in South Australia. Health minister Greg Hunt said three of those in NSW have been discharged from hospital having been cleared. See this explainer to find out how this coronavirus spreads and how to protect yourself. On Saturday evening, prime minister Scott Morrison announced that except for Australian citizens, permanent residents and their immediate family, legal guardians and spouses, anyone travelling from or through China to Australia will not be allowed to enter in a bid to contain coronavirus. The federal government cancelled the visas of 71 people who were attempting to fly out of China to Australia overnight, as the travel ban took effect. People on flights that were in transit when the policy change was announced were allowed to enter Australia. More than 700 people arrived in Melbourne and at least 70 in Brisbane, according to Australian Border Force commissioner Michael Outram. “They’ve been met on those flights by biosecurity officers, and they’ve been asked questions and they’ve been subject to health screening, including by state and territory health officials,” he said. “A small number of people, as I understand it, were then taken for further screening at a hospital, but that’s a handful – two or three.” Twelve flights out of China to Australia have been cancelled since the travel ban was put in place. Outram said any non-citizen or non-resident who arrives in Australia having travelled through China will have their visa cancelled and they will be put into detention for the quarantine period. Australia’s chief medical officer, Prof Brendan Murphy, said the extreme measure was taken in order to contain the spread of the virus. “We are doing everything we can to contain the spread of the virus in Australia. We don’t apologise, but we do understand that this could be a significant imposition on many people.” The government is still attempting to get about 600 Australian citizens or permanent residents in the Hubei province back to Australia. They will still be taken to Christmas Island for a 14-day quarantine period, once China has agreed to allow a flight in. An Australian medical assistance team and a mobile hospital has arrived on Christmas Island, and the flight to collect people from Wuhan is expected to leave in the next 24 hours. Hunt said it wasn’t expected any of these people would have coronavirus, but the medical team was prepared for that. The airline crew that will fly in to Wuhan will not be required to be quarantined, but will be wearing face masks and gloves during the flight, and will be subject to a health screening upon arrival in Australia. The government has backed down on plans to charge people up to $1,000 to be evacuated to Christmas Island, with treasurer Josh Frydenberg telling the ABC that the department of foreign affairs gave the government incorrect information about the charge. “We won’t be charging. Those people will be able to come to Australia with no cost incurred,” he said. This came despite home affairs minister Peter Dutton saying an hour earlier that people would still be charged. The government had said previous governments had charged for airlifts such as those run out of Lebanon in 2006, and Egypt in 2011. But that claim was contradicted by Julia Gillard, who was prime minister at the time, and Kevin Rudd, who was foreign minister. No. Australians have been told not to travel to China, but Dutton went one step further and suggested Australians about to leave for any overseas holiday should reconsider their travel. The chief medical officer said the medical advice around travel was currently limited to China. Prior to 1 February, students who had travelled from the Hubei province were told to stay home for a 14-day quarantine period. From 1 February, this now extends to any student who has travelled from mainland China on or since 1 February.