Late-night hosts discussed Donald Trump’s attack on Michael Bloomberg’s height and the decision by Republican senators to let him off the hook for his corrupt behaviour. Republican senators stopped witnesses from testifying at Trump’s impeachment trial, and not for the reason you might think. pic.twitter.com/toLV0FAiec On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah spoke about the Republicans who voted not to continue Trumps’s impeachment trial yet have also admitted that he made a mistake. He said they think of him as “bad but not kick-the-guy-out bad”. Before the Super Bowl, Fox had Sean Hannity, “Fox News host and guy who definitely names his guns”, interview Trump, who spent time spreading an unverified story that Michael Bloomberg asked for a box to stand on during the Democratic debates. “This is the genius of Donald Trump,” Noah said as the story then became a story after he mentioned it. “Maybe Bloomberg can convince the DNC to give the debates a 70s theme so he can show up in his platforms,” Noah joked. He continued: “God damn what a low blow although for Bloomberg, every blow is a low blow.” Bloomberg’s campaign hit back, saying that Trump lies about his obesity, spray tan and fake hair. “It’ll make history class a lot less boring down the road,” Noah said of the current political climate. Noah then said that “a story that Trump completely made up” dominated cable news for the next day as “all they really want to do is repeat his insults all day”. After the 2016 election, CNN’s Jeff Zucker admitted that amplifying everything Trump said all day was harmful but still, “they can’t resist that sweet Trump juice”. On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert spoke of the Super Bowl and that “the real winner was anyone watching the half-time show”. He also mentioned the Fox interview and how Trump believes that sport is a microcosm for life. “Everyone’s a large sweaty man, it’s sponsored by fast food and every other country in the world has no idea what the hell we’re doing,” he joked. Trump was asked for his opinion on Bernie Sanders who he called a communist before bringing up Sanders’ Russian honeymoon, stating that Moscow and marriage are not words one would associate. “Of course Trump doesn’t think of marriage when he thinks of Moscow,” he said. “For Trump, Moscow means a binding oath of loyalty that he cannot break until death.” He also said that Nancy Pelosi seemed confused and nervous. “To be fair, you’ve made us all confused and nervous,” Colbert said to Trump. Adam Schiff has spoken about the damaging implications of Trump getting away with it saying that Trump could move full-time to Mar-a-lago and let Jared Kushner run the country. “Wow, not even in Adam Schiff’s worst nightmare scenario, do Eric and Don Jr get any responsibility,” he said. He criticised the “lame excuses” given by Republicans who voted not to hear witnesses in the impeachment trial, quoting one who claimed that Congress has failed. “No it hasn’t, senate Republicans have failed and you’re one of them,” he said. On Late Night with Seth Meyers, the comic said: “Trump really can keep being dumb because there’s no cost from his base.” He played footage of Trump talking about stealth military jets. “He genuinely thinks stealth means invisible,” he said. “His brain is only capable of thinking in cartoons. He actually believes the military has developed the same technology as Wonder Woman.” Trump has also claimed that Ivanka has created 15m jobs. “I don’t even know what her job is!” Meyers responded. Of Trump, he said: “This is the deranged mind of an addled man who is incapable of wielding the tremendous power he holds.” The Republican response to Trump’s wrongdoing also came under fire. “They might as well come out and say remember all that confetti from the Super Bowl, those were documents from the White House that we shredded,” he said.