Willy Caballero 7 Veteran keeper twice blocked well from Lewandowski and was steady throughout. No chance to prevent goals. César Azpilicueta 6 Seemed to have Bayern’s front line under control until costly slip put door ajar for the opening goal. Andreas Christensen 5 Man in the mask had performed doggedly until rash missed tackle on Davies led to Bayern racing out of sight. Antonio Rüdiger 5 Like the rest of Chelsea’s back line, pulled apart after the break by opponents who were just too good. Reece James 6 Few chances to pick out Giroud or Abraham with his trademark deliveries; pinned back by threat of Bayern wingers. Jorginho 6 Mopped up tidily for the majority but his booking heightens Chelsea’s midfield issues for the second leg. Mateo Kovacic 7 Found some pockets of space beyond Bayern’s midfield but front line could not capitalise on some dangerous slide-rule passes. Marcos Alonso 5 Denied by Neuer before half-time in rare foray into Bayern box, but idiotic red card only makes a near-impossible job harder. Mason Mount 7 Intelligent performance from Chelsea’s likeliest source of a goal. Took aim several times and almost punished one poor Neuer clearance. Ross Barkley 5 Found it hard to contribute in possession on a night when off-the-ball discipline was paramount. Replaced after the hour. Olivier Giroud 6 Won headers and buffeted Bayern’s centre-backs, but largely in harmless positions, before departing for Abraham. Subs Willian (for Barkley 61) 7, Abraham (for Giroud 61) 6, Pedro (for Azpilicueta, 73) 6 Manuel Neuer 7 Save from Alonso’s angled shot in first half now looks crucial. Couple of miscues but far from his busiest night. Benjamin Pavard 7 Effective rather than spectacular, keeping possession well and always on hand to support the attacking players. Jérôme Boateng 7 Enjoyed robust contest with Giroud and then, faced with the trickier Abraham, preserved clean sheet with outstanding tackle late on. David Alaba 7 Would have been targeted as potential prey for Giroud but Chelsea were unable to expose his lack of height. Alphonso Davies 9 Scintillating left-back talent showed defensive awareness early on before cutting loose in second half to superbly assist Lewandowski. Thiago Alcântara 8 Took control of midfield as the game progressed. Showed class with shimmy and pass in buildup to opener. Joshua Kimmich 7 Sent flying by early Giroud challenge but settled down to show class; a perfect foil for Thiago. Kingsley Coman 6 Fired wide when well placed early on; relatively quiet thereafter before hobbling away from the scene. Thomas Müller 8 Strong, purposeful and incisive from No 10 position. Hit bar, created chance for Coman and shot a whisker wide. Serge Gnabry 9 Loves playing and scoring in London. Relatively quiet in first half but lethal second may have clinched the tie. Robert Lewandowski 9 Master goalscorer showed his generous side to twice set Gnabry up beautifully, before adding poacher’s strike of his own. Subs Coutinho (for Coman 66) 7, Tolisso (for Gnabry 85) 6, Goretzka (for Thiago 90) 6