It is welcome to see the government promise much-needed funding for local bus services – a mode of transport that is often a lifeline to those living in rural communities (Johnson clears way to approve HS2 with £5bn overhaul of bus services, 11 February). It’s greatly disappointing that only 4% of journeys made last year were by bus, despite it being an efficient and environmentally friendly option. In the last year alone, we’ve seen more than 240 bus routes closed or cut, thanks to a lack of funding. Where bus services do exist, they are often infrequent or unavailable outside of peak times. The situation is all the more dire in the shires and rural areas, where people are forced to rely on cars to access vital services like hospitals and shops. There simply aren’t the buses to take them from A to B. I look forward to the publication of the national bus strategy, but, as ever, the devil will be in the detail. It will be crucial that bus routes that have been slashed in recent years are restored. Years of inadequate rural policies and public sector austerity have been hugely damaging to our rural towns and villages. If these communities are to be sustainable for the future, working out how to revitalise our bus network must be a top priority. Graham BiggsChief executive of Rural Services Network • £5bn to boost bus services – it makes a good headline, but it’s not the answer for deeply rural areas. For most able-bodied car owners, rural bus services are like ambulances: you are keen to have them available, but hope not to use them too often. To tempt car users to the bus would require a frequency that is completely unaffordable. Short of that, more services will tend to dilute a fairly static demand. Dial-a-Ride services are often touted as the answer. They do offer convenience for those who get to use them. But in sparse areas, the cost per trip is much higher than most timetabled services. The default solution among current operations seems to be to ration demand by a first-come, first-served scramble when phone lines open a week or two ahead – which is hardly fair to the less sprightly, or useful for those who need to know what time they can accept a hospital appointment six weeks ahead. Subsidising a sparse timetabled service, especially where it can fit in between school runs, will often be the least-worst solution.John GeddesWinster, Derbyshire • It was Margaret Thatcher who removed the power of local authorities to own and run bus services – except in London, where she did not dare. The result is a startling difference between London’s excellent service, run by TFL, and the rest of the country. The private companies running services outside London, such as Stagecoach and Arriva, have cut short town centre services and concentrate on fewer services of longer distances. County councils are starved of funds and cannot support the bus services most people need. If Johnson really intends to improve bus travel, he should produce a new Transport Act which would bring back municipalisation of the buses.Richard SymondsBroadstairs, Kent • Hold on! As the PM has announced a funding boost for depleted bus services, the first task of the new chancellor of the exchequer is to ensure funding for the 81 bus between Stokesley and Guisborough town, which is up for closure, and so prevent Rishi Sunak’s constituents losing their through service to Guisborough and the seaside towns of Redcar and Marske.Barbara HawkinsGreat Ayton, North Yorkshire • Your article (Road to nowhere, G2, 11 February) missed out one important factor in the growing gridlock in London. As soon as the bus companies sacked all the conductors, the whole system slowed down considerably. This should now have been proved to be a false economy. Let’s bring them back and the difference will be noticeable. Pete BrownHastings, East Sussex • In Vulcan’s cryptic crossword (No 28,052, 10 February), 23 across suggests that conductors are “no longer seen on buses”. Vulcan may be surprised to learn that conductors still appear on some buses – the 73 service between Dundee and Arbroath, operated by Stagecoach, for one. Conductors make the operation much more efficient, and the passengers appreciate them. Other operators, please take note.Dr Richard A’BrookCarnoustie, Angus • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition