Tired and bickering Democratic candidates frantically crisscrossed New Hampshire on Wednesday morning as they tried to regain their footing after the breakdown of the Iowa caucuses voting process threw the 2020 US election into chaos earlier in the week. On the day that a buoyant Donald Trump went from a triumphalist State of the Union address to expecting acquittal in the final vote of his impeachment trial in Washington, Democrats scrambled to appear competitive both with Trump and with each other on a tense campaign trail. Joe Biden, speaking at a crowded church event on a crisp sunny day in New Hampshire on Wednesday morning, was noticeably down – but insisted he was far from out after a disappointing showing in the results that have trickled in from Iowa so far. “I’m not going to sugarcoat it. We took a gut punch in Iowa,” he told the crowd. “The whole process took a gut punch,” he added. Those comments reflect the view among Democrats that the Iowa caucuses left the Democratic primary field in disarray and that Biden lost significant ground against his chief rivals in the state after the vote collection process collapsed on Monday night. Biden said: “You know, 24 hours later we’re still trying to figure out what happened. At this rate New Hampshire might get the first vote after all.” The New Hampshire primary is next Tuesday. Biden has been placed a disappointing fourth so far in Iowa, behind the leading Pete Buttigieg, Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, despite being the frontrunner in national polls. “This isn’t the first time in my life I’ve gotten knocked down,” Biden said, adding: “I’m not going anywhere.” The former vice-president in Barack Obama’s administration is sticking with his overall viability, or electability, as his rationale for voters to pick him over other more adventurous choices. He told voters to ask themselves: “‘Can the person I’m voting for beat Donald Trump?’ I believe I can.” Meanwhile, Buttigieg was taking every opportunity on Tuesday and Wednesday to proclaim victory in Iowa and leverage his surge to try to win in New Hampshire, which holds the first primary vote in the nation next Tuesday, followed by contests in Nevada and South Carolina later this month. The official overall winner of the Iowa caucuses, held on Monday, still had not been declared on Wednesday morning, after the breakdown of a new data collection app threw the contest into utter chaos. Party organizers had to rely on an overwhelmed phone system and paper votes in the end, and with between 60% and 70% of voting precincts’ results made known by Wednesday, Buttigieg, the 38-year-old former mayor of South Bend, Indiana, remained slightly ahead of Vermont senator Sanders. Later on Wednesday morning, sitting US senators Sanders, Warren and Amy Klobuchar again had to interrupt their races to fly back to Washington for the final impeachment vote on Trump. The president was expected to be acquitted by a loyal Republican majority in the Senate later on Wednesday, not thrown out of office as Democrats strived to do by impeaching him on charges that he abused his office by pressuring the Ukrainian government to investigate Biden while holding back US military aid for leverage. Despite having been impeached, Trump has been gleeful about the mess in Iowa as he seeks to ride the strong economy and an enthusiastic conservative base to re-election. The Democratic candidates will rush back to the campaign trail shortly after the impeachment vote, with no time to lose and the New Hampshire primary taking on increased significance in the wake of the Iowa confusion. In the lead-up to the Iowa caucuses, polling had showed Sanders with a significant lead over his rivals and Biden also jostling near the top. The belated results proved disappointing for both. Warren, who has been struggling to recapture the traction she was building during a surge last year, held an event in New Hampshire at the same time as Biden on Wednesday morning before heading to Washington. With the three leading men on an attention-grabbing seesaw of good and bad news, Warren’s position of being solidly in the middle of the field coming out of Iowa brings the growing risk of invisibility. Accompanied to New Hampshire by his husband, Chasten, on Tuesday, Buttigieg was both emotional and ebullient as he acknowledged leading the field in Iowa. But he admitted his campaign’s weakness when asked how he would win over reluctant African American voters – a persistent question for his candidacy, saying he “had a lot of work to do” in states such as South Carolina. “And the process of proving that begins here in New Hampshire as we make our way on to states like Nevada, South Carolina and the Super Tuesday states as well. And we will earn that support,” he said. Sanders, with his wife, Jane, out on the campaign trail, too, has been making overt efforts to court the large number of Latino voters in Nevada. And with Biden overwhelmingly the favorite with the majority African American Democratic party electorate in South Carolina, Buttigieg could be in danger of peaking too soon. On Wednesday, Biden attacked both Sanders, a self-declared socialist, and the more moderate Buttigieg, an openly gay military veteran. “I have great respect for Mayor Pete and his service to this nation but I do believe it’s a risk, to be just straight up with you, for this party to nominate someone who’s never held office higher than mayor of a town of 100,000 people.” Biden warned that Democrats on all levels would face a tougher election in November if Sanders got the party nomination to fight for the White House. Alluding to Sanders’s longtime identification as a democratic socialist, Biden warned every Democrat “will have to carry the label he chose for himself”. Attendees at the Biden event were a mix of curious voters and hardcore committed Biden supporters. Jess Knowles, 25, came because he was curious about the former vice-president but also worried how he would fair against Trump in the general election. “If he stumbles over words or seems a little foggy, that won’t end well. So I’m here to see how he is on the stump,” Knowles said. Thomas Young, a firm Biden supporter, said the still-developing Iowa results didn’t sway him. “I don’t see that as indicative as everybody else does. I don’t see that as ‘OK, Pete Buttigieg is going to win’,” he said. Paul Turner, an undecided Democrat at the event, said: “I’m looking for Biden to rebound – I’m for looking for more excitement, more energy from him, to get more of the youthful vote. If you look at the numbers, my demographic in the 40s, Bernie’s edging him, I think. In this area in particular it’s very important for Biden to make a strong appeal and I don’t know what it’s going to take for that. I’m kind of waiting for him.”