When Dillon Lewis feels that rugby has become too much of a grind, the Wales prop will be able to fall back on the coffee-bean business he set up two years ago with his Cardiff Blues front-row colleague Brad Thyer. To the 24-year-old, reference to the black stuff means an Americano rather than a pint of stout, the tipple of preference of many of his tight-head predecessors of yesteryear at the Arms Park. “Coffee is the alternative to beer for a professional player,” says Lewis, one of a number of players who was capped by Warren Gatland before he had established himself at his region. “Rugby is a social sport and players get on with each other and if you cannot go to a pub, where do you go? We have a coffee club at the Blues but I have become a bit of a snob unfortunately. When I moved house, the first thing I bought was a great big coffee machine and I have up to seven cups a day, starting at 5.30 in the morning.” Lewis is one of the lesser-known players in Wales’ team but he will be winning his 25th cap on Saturday. He admits his entry into international rugby was a happy accident, but one he fully exploited. Injury had reduced him to one appearance for the Blues in 2016-17 and as he worked his way back at club level, he was summoned to train with Wales before their summer tour matches against Tonga and Samoa. “They pulled me in to training to make up the numbers,” he recalls. “Greg Bateman [the Leicester prop] was going to go on the tour, but in the end he could not prove his eligibility to play for Wales and I ended up on the plane. I was on the bench for Tonga and came on in the last couple of minutes, then Tomas Francis was called up by the Lions. I started against Samoa and returned home with two caps. It was complete chance, but you have to take opportunities when they come. “I do not know what Gats saw in me. His regime was tough and you did not have many days off but it worked and the last 18 months under him were unbelievable, a grand slam and a penalty decision away from a World Cup final. We are under new management now and you are judged in different ways. Italy showed the type of game we aspire to, but the mindset of hard graft has not changed. There is a different outlook on how we want to play, but you cannot be expansive without putting in the hard work first.” Lewis established himself last season, being used from the bench after the first round of Wales’ grand slam campaign and was involved in all his side’s seven matches in the World Cup, replacing the injured Francis 35 minutes into the semi-final against South Africa. He is the epitome of a modern prop, strong in the scrum – although Wales had problems in that area against Italy last weekend – powerful over the ball and comfortable handling, running, passing and tackling. “There may be fewer scrums in the game today, but you will not get picked as a prop if you cannot scrummage,” he says. “Equally, you will be left out if that is all you bring, but it is your primary role. I love getting my hands on the ball, but the first part of my game that I look at is the scrum. It is still a significant part of the game and England will have wondered how they did not win in Paris having dominated France in that area. We had some issues in the set piece last weekend, but the main problem was that we took too long to work out what the referee was looking for. We had a pretty good scrum in the World Cup and it is an area we always work hard on. “I started out as a No 8. I was called into the Blues’ Under-16s a year early and one of the coaches sat me down and said I was not fast enough to make it in that position and would be better off in the front row. “My love for the game stemmed from being constantly involved and I did not want to lose that as a prop. I was 17 when I made my debut for Pontypridd in the Welsh Premiership, chucked in the deep end because of injuries. I played six games in three weeks and learned a lot, finding out why they go on about the dark arts in the front row.” When Lewis feels weighed down by the demands of rugby, he stirs and smells the coffee. He set up Fat Dragon with Thyer and welcomes the distraction it provides. “Brad was out for 12 months with injury and came to me with the idea of starting a business,” he says. “We came up with coffee and sell beans. We get half of them roasted in England and the other half in a unit in Wales. We do everything online, supplying coffee shops and gyms. It is a switch-off button even though you are still working and it is a bit of a retirement plan, even if I hope that is a while away. “Tokyo was good for coffee shops and so is Dublin, but I doubt I will have the time to visit one this weekend. It is always hard at the Aviva Stadium and it is usually raining. We have focused on ourselves this week, tweaking what we did not get right against Italy, and there is no reason why we cannot win.”