The year is 1988: Margaret Thatcher has become the UK’s longest-serving 20th-century prime minister; Prince Charles has narrowly avoided death-by-avalanche while on a skiing holiday; and a leather-jacketed Bros are topping the charts. And, on 8 November, nearly 20 million people tune in to watch Scott and Charlene’s wedding on Neighbours. Originally broadcast the year before in Australia, the storyline marked a high point in the soap’s two-year history, the spectacle of Jason Donovan gazing lovingly upon his bride Kylie Minogue as the piano balladry of Angry Anderson’s Suddenly plays setting the nation’s hearts aflutter. It was an escapist idyll for a Britain still coming to terms with the grim industrial overhaul of the most recent miners’ strike and the spectre of continued structural inequality. Here was a world we could get lost in. Neighbours has always been a slightly strange prospect and that has been a part of its addictive charm. Take, for instance, Harold Bishop being washed out to sea in 1992 (emblematically leaving only his glasses behind), only to return four years later with amnesia. He would go on to be visited by the ghost of his wife Madge. Or 1991’s Bouncer’s Dream, an episode featuring a dog dreaming of marrying his canine girlfriend. A David Lynch dream sequence for animal lovers. Yet, with steadily declining ratings in the new millennium and a shift from BBC One to Channel 5 in 2008, things started to get a little too strange. There was the unceremonious swapping of actors playing the same character, such as Libby Kennedy being recast from Kym Valentine to Michala Banas and back again over one month in 2009. And the invincible Paul Robinson, who survived a multi-storey fall, airplane explosion and attempted shooting by his own son. Cut – over the cheery melody of the Neighbours theme – to 2020, and there seems to be little hope left in the once-utopian cul-de-sac of Ramsay Street. There was a hostage situation in the Lassiters complex, orchestrated like a PG-rated Scorsese by “local mobster” Raymond Renshaw, and the case of neighbourhood lawyer Toadie’s wife Dee who, like Harold, had returned from the dead. Spoiler alert: this “Dee” was in fact Andrea, Dee’s evil twin who was separated at birth by a meddling nun. And then there is Finn Kelly, an unconvincing yet supposedly charming high-school teacher who was driven out of town (and off a cliff) after he obsessively tried to win over Elly by posing as her sister’s paraplegic fiance. He now has amnesia, though, and is back in love with Elly while still dating her sister. Amnesia can’t forget everything, it turns out. On a positive note, there have at least been efforts at increasing diversity by including a gay wedding and a transgender teen character. But it cannot help seem too little, too late. All sense of sanity departed when the writers’ room first learned of the many dramatic applications of memory loss. Take us back to the mullets and fuzzy romances of the 80s, otherwise it might be time to move away once and for all.