Louise Godbold had recently come from a press conference at Harvey Weinstein’s criminal trial in New York and within 24 hours she’d be on a plane again going back there. But today Godbold, one of more than 90 women to come forward with claims against the disgraced movie mogul, is doing what she’s trained to: helping trauma survivors overcome the injuries that powerful abusive men like Weinstein so often leave in their wake. On a cloudy Tuesday morning in Los Angeles last month, in a classroom at the California Endowment building that opened on to a flowering courtyard, the 57-year-old Godbold is explaining why she prefers the word “activated” to “triggered”. “I’m always unsure whether to use that word ‘triggered’,” she told the 40-odd professionals gathered before her at clusters of white-clothed tables. “I’m trying to back away from it and use activated because triggered gives power to the trigger.” At the center of the tables are piles of mandala coloring pages alongside boxes of markers. Some attendees take notes on the projected images at the front of the classroom, others are coloring the pages in. Billed as an advanced exploration into different types of trauma and their effect on relationships, the body and the brain, Godbold’s daylong lesson – purchased online with a few clicks for $125 (scholarships are available) – delves into the body’s natural survival responses in the event of trauma. It also looks at emotional regulation strategies to help cope, including recent discoveries about harnessing brainwaves and eye movements in the healing process. In March, Godbold is organizing a survivor-focused conference where all of the speakers are what Time magazine has referred to as “Silence Breakers”, or leaders of the global conversation around #MeToo. But on this day she is conducting her general trauma and resilience training for members of the local community, a practice she has been doing for years in her capacity as executive director of Echo, a Los Angeles-based educational organization. Those in attendance include two women from Time’s Up, an initiative formed in the crucible of #MeToo and aimed at fighting sexual harassment in Hollywood – and past sessions have included other Weinstein accusers such as the actor Katherine Kendall, who’s involved in the ongoing civil suit against Weinstein. But most people are working professionals specializing in education, social work and a host of other disciplines. One attendee is taking the training to further inform his work leading men’s retreats for veterans and first responders. Another is a resident services coordinator in the Hollywood area who works with the previously homeless to help them retain their housing. Many found their paths to helping others after going through personal traumas of their own. Among them is Ali Jameson, whose work as a life coach centers around adult adoptees still coming to terms with their circumstances. Jameson herself had always known she was adopted – she had understood that she was chosen and loved by a supportive and stable family ever since she was old enough to speak. Still, the revelation proved more difficult than she’d initially acknowledged. “I didn’t realize until I was 26 or so that that was traumatic, that the actual separation from my birth mother was a trauma,” Jameson said after the workshop. “I kept telling myself I’m happy. I have a great life. But really I had so much hurt and so much shame and so much guilt.” Now she works with adoptees who are learning to accept and love themselves and is, among other things, host of the podcast Adopt Yourself. In an exercise testing selective attention, attendees were asked to watch a video of people passing a basketball and keep track of how many times players wearing white passed the ball. When it was over, Godbold asked how many passes people had counted. Most hands confidently went up. Then she asked how many people saw the gorilla walking through the middle of the screen. Fewer hands went up. The gorilla is a stand-in for the trauma-affected victim, she explained, and how easy it is to overlook a guiding principle of trauma recovery: restoring power and control to the survivor. If we’re not empowering the survivor than our trauma-informed practice counts for nothing “We get so fixated on doing it ‘right’ we slip out of the power with equation and slip into the power over equation,” Godbold said. “I really want you to understand if we’re not empowering the survivor than our trauma-informed practice counts for nothing.” That’s something she has been thinking about a lot lately, as someone who is often interviewed by media regarding her experiences with Weinstein, but is seldom asked about her relevant trauma expertise. “People just want to know which body parts Harvey groped. It’s really as reductionist as that,” she told a recent interviewer. “All of us are so fed up because there’s so much more to us, there’s so much more to our story.” Journalists are turning their attention more than ever to the stories of sexual assault survivors – and while that brings valuable attention to an underexplored subject, it can also retraumatize survivors in the process. That’s why in the Pacific Standard magazine over the summer, Godbold penned a “code of conduct” for media professionals working with trauma survivors, outlining how they can learn from their subjects and ask tough questions even as they “do no harm”. Doing no harm starts with understanding basic concepts about how trauma is processed in the body and brain, Godbold argued. In her training she discussed how any number of factors can cause a spike in cortisol, the stress hormone that controls the body’s fight-or-flight responses. The takeaway is simple, Godbold explained: accommodating a traumatized person’s preference around things like interview location, temperature and lighting, can minimize or even prevent the unnecessary activation of stress responses and help survivors cope better when they occur. For Kendall, such knowledge has been empowering. In an interview the actor recalled how once seeing Weinstein at a Miramax party had activated her body’s internal alarm system. “My knees went blip-blip and they turned to jelly and my hands started to shake,” Kendall said. “Do I walk straight up to him and punch him in the face? Do I run for the hills?” But the trauma workshops she took with Godbold left her better equipped to recognize and manage her body’s responses when such circumstances arose, she added. For years now, such insights have been at the forefront of public consciousness, as in the aftermath of the Brett Kavanaugh confirmation hearings when the National Sexual Assault Hotline was being flooded with calls from retraumatized Americans. And they’re only becoming more relevant. As the Weinstein trial kicked off, Godbold published a piece in Vox designed to help survivors of sexual trauma self-regulate even as national coverage of the trial would expose them to a churn of unwanted memories and feelings. Godbold has been doing the training for years, but none of it seems disconnected from sexual assault stories roiling headlines across the country – or, incidentally, the trial where she’s headed next. “The coverage of the Weinstein trial is so black-and-white,” Godbold said on her way out of the workshop, rolling a suitcase, on her way to New York. “There’s so much you miss when you don’t talk about trauma and resilience.”