Pete Buttigieg is taking every opportunity he can to proclaim victory in Iowa and leverage that to win in New Hampshire, before the next few state votes in the Democratic primary contest to choose the candidate to take on Donald Trump in November’s election. The winner of the Iowa caucuses on Monday still had not been called as of Tuesday evening, but with 62% of precincts reporting, the 38-year-old former mayor of South Bend, Indiana, had pulled slightly ahead of the Vermont senator Bernie Sanders. In the lead-up to the Iowa caucuses, polling showed Sanders with a significant lead over his rivals. Buttigieg, a relative unknown a year ago, made sure to lace that into his stump speeches and during the question-and-answer portions of his campaign stops throughout the day on Tuesday. When the former South Bend mayor was asked how he would win over reluctant African American voters – a persistent question for his candidacy – Buttigieg said his campaign “had a lot of work to do” in states such as South Carolina. “And the process of proving that begins here in New Hampshire as we make our way on to states like Nevada, South Carolina and the Super Tuesday states as well,” Buttigieg said of the forthcoming contests. “And we will earn that support.” At the beginning of his speech Buttigieg began by saying “I’m having a very good day” before adjusting that comment: “We are having a very good day.” At a stop at nearby Laconia earlier in the day, Buttigieg also pointed to the still-emerging caucus results. “Official verified caucus results are coming in from the state of Iowa,” Buttigieg said, adding “they’re not complete but results are in from a majority of precincts and they show our campaign in first place.” As of late Tuesday night, the tally was 28,319 votes for Sanders and 27,135 votes for Buttigieg. But Buttigieg enjoyed a slight lead in the delegate count with 26.9% to Sanders’ 25.1%. The Sanders campaign on Tuesday afternoon released a statement that didn’t quite concede Iowa but did not declare victory either. “We want to thank the people of Iowa,” Sanders’ senior adviser Jeff Weaver said in the statement. “We are gratified that in the partial data released so far it’s clear that in the first and second round more people voted for Bernie than any other candidate in the field.” Winning the midwest has been a key part of Buttigieg’s electoral path. From the earlier days of his candidacy he saw Iowa as fertile ground as a midwestern candidate who could draw parallels to Barack Obama. While Buttigieg has campaigned in all four early primary contest states, he had put a special emphasis on Iowa. Polling only recently had started to show Sanders in the lead in Iowa, less of a priority for the Vermont senator who had won New Hampshire in his 2016 campaign and whose home state is also in New England. But for Buttigieg, Iowa is key to his electoral chances. At a recent cattle call of top donors in Chicago, some of Buttigieg’s top strategists emphasized that for the young former mayor and openly gay military veteran to make it through the early primary states he would have to do well in Iowa and outperform his rival moderate Joe Biden there. On Monday, some of Buttigieg’s major donors were glued to their phones frantically texting each other as precinct results came in – a sign that some of his top supporters knew the stakes of Buttigieg placing competitively in Iowa. Buttigieg’s path forward is hardly assured, however. New Hampshire is much more favorable ground for Sanders and he has consistently polled ahead of the rest of the field there. And weeks after the New Hampshire primary is the South Carolina primary, the most difficult of the first four states for Buttigieg, who has struggled to rally support among the majority black electorate there. But before that Buttigieg is trying to leverage his lead in the incomplete Iowa results to another strong showing in New Hampshire, which holds its primary on Tuesday. “New Hampshire is famous for thinking for itself,” Buttigieg said at a campaign stop in Portsmouth. “I know how heavily and how serious people here in New Hampshire take that responsibility, that thumb on the scale, that comes with being a voter here.”