I went to a grammar school but I wasn’t really into the academic scene back then. As a teenager, I was more interested in tinkering with cars, to be honest. I couldn’t ever see myself in an office job, which is why I applied for an apprenticeship. I figured it would teach me something practical. I applied to various companies and eventually landed a position as a cable jointer with the North Eastern Electricity Board in York. I’ve got to say, I absolutely loved it. I was out digging holes and doing cable repairs for the first 10 years of my working life. Starting out at the coalface taught me how people think, what drives them. The older I get, the more I have become aware that everything ultimately comes down to people. In business, the better you are with people, the better your company will be. I am not against further education by any means. We have many outstanding university graduates at Northern Gas Networks, where I am now chief executive. But it’s difficult to appreciate what it’s like to work through the night in awful weather unless you’ve done it yourself. It gives you a real emotional connection with others. Apprenticeships are very different today compared with when I did mine back in the 1970s. We run a modular three-year course, which allows our apprentices to become craftspeople and then move into different areas of the business. I think as well that any stigma there might once have been around apprenticeships has disappeared completely now. In fact, my youngest daughter is just finishing college and she is thinking about applying for an apprenticeship, which I think is great. One of the first steps I took as CEO was to extend the age limit for our apprentices up to 30. We have employed a number of skilled ex-armed forces colleagues this way. Over the last few years, we have really modernised our workforce and many employees started with us as apprentices. Our age demographic has also changed dramatically, with more than half of our workforce now aged 40 or under. A significant proportion of our senior management is made up of former apprentices as well. As a chief executive, one of the most valuable lessons that I can draw on from my apprenticeship past is the ability to embrace change. Our industry is undergoing a major transformation as we prepare for a low-carbon future and progress the decarbonisation of heat to achieve net-zero carbon emissions by 2050. Having worked in many different roles over the years across a wide range of disciplines and levels has also taught me to look at the wider landscape. So one of the things I have been pushing hard for is hydrogen as an alternative fuel, for example – and this was a long while before the UK government’s net-zero target for 2050, I should add. It would be good to see more businesses getting on board. Companies without an apprenticeship programme are really missing out. You need people from all backgrounds to make a great team. Plus, there are plenty of people who don’t have a degree but have skills from other areas of their life that can be incredibly valuable to a successful, modern and dynamic business. Mark Horsley is chief executive of Northern Gas Networks. He undertook a four-year apprenticeship as a cable jointer at North Eastern Electricity Board from 1975-1979.