Serie A’s leading scorer Ciro Immobile grabbed his 27th league goal of the season as irrepressible Lazio won 3-2 at Genoa on Sunday to stay on the tail of leaders Juventus. Lazio, on 59 points from 25 games, stayed one point behind the Turin side as they equalled their points tally for the whole of last season, when they finished eighth, and extended their unbeaten run to 20 league games, including 16 wins. Third-placed Inter’s match at home to Sampdoria was one of four games postponed on Sunday because of the outbreak of coronavirus in the regions of Lombardy and Veneto. Lazio needed less than two minutes to go ahead when Adam Marusic exchanged passes with Felipe Caicedo and powered through the Genoa defence to score. Both teams had chances in an end-to-end match before Immobile, who has played in all of Lazio’s games, added the second from Caicedo’s flick in the 51st minute. Genoa are stuck in the relegation zone with 22 points, but they had not lost in their last four matches and pulled one back when Francesco Cassata scored from the edge of the area six minutes later. Lazio survived a couple of anxious moments before Danilo Cataldi floated a free-kick over the wall for what proved to be the winner in the 71st minute. Genoa grabbed another back with a stoppage-time penalty converted by Domenico Criscito after Manuel Lazzari was adjudged to have handled following a VAR review. “We scored three goals and we could have scored more,” said the Lazio coach Simone Inzaghi. “The regret is that we didn’t finish the game off because we risked complicating it towards the end. We have 13 games to go, we’re up with the leaders and our obligation is to stay in touch with Juventus and Inter. We’ve done something incredible, 16 wins and four draws in the last 20. In another league we’d probably be top.” In Germany, goals from Moussa Diaby and Nadiem Amiri gave Bayer Leverkusen a 2-0 victory over Augsburg and kept them in contention for a Champions League spot following their sixth win in seven league games. France youth international Diaby, who joined this season from Paris Saint-Germain, scored his fourth goal of the campaign after Kai Havertz threaded a superb pass through the Augsburg defence for the 20-year-old. Amiri made it 2-0 with a solo run after being given far too much space and Havertz hit the post with the hosts in complete control. Leverkusen are fifth on 43 points, level with Borussia Mönchengladbach who are fourth. The top four teams qualify for the Champions League. Bayern Munich lead the standings on 49 points, followed by RB Leipzig on 48. • Updates from the day’s other games around Europe will appear here later