Horse racing is to enter a new era of collaboration across the Irish Sea with the news that officials in Britain have signed a deal to provide integrity services to support their counterparts in Ireland. The contract, due to commence in the spring, amounts to a recognition that the British Horseracing Authority has some expertise in this area and headcount at its High Holborn office is to increase to fulfil its new obligations. Niall Cronin, communications manager at the Irish Horseracing Regulatory Board, explained: “The IHRB issued a tender for an external company to provide additional monitoring of betting trends on Irish racing to support our existing integrity functions and provide additional information to our stewards with regard to any issues or concerns that may arise. “Following the procurement process, the BHA were identified as the preferred supplier. The BHA will be supporting the IHRB in monitoring of betting on Irish racing and we will also be co-operating in other areas of intelligence.” The BHA has no history of taking on such contract work for other regulators but its spokesman, Robin Mounsey, said that the benefits of closer co-operation with Irish officials were too good to pass up. “The improved collaboration that this agreement will bring will benefit those who work in, bet on and follow racing on both sides of the Irish Sea,” he said. “Using a single intelligence management and monitoring system, as well as recruiting a dedicated resource to monitor the majority of Irish racing from a betting perspective will further protect the integrity of both British and Irish racing and allow the relationship that exists between the BHA and IHRB to grow closer still.” While the degree of proposed collaboration is new, the two regulators have had a good working relationship for years. IHRB vets have assisted the BHA in the build-up to major racing festivals by carrying out tests on some intended runners based in Ireland. Dr Lynn Hillyer, head of anti-doping and chief veterinary officer at the IHRB, joined straight from a nine-year stretch at the BHA. CC Nicky Henderson made it plain at Huntingdon yesterday that Shishkin is the leader of the pack among two-mile novice hurdlers at his yard, but he also pointed out that “there’s a host of them in the Ballymore” and Global Society (1.50), who makes his second start over hurdles at Kempton Park this afternoon, could yet prove to be good enough to line up at the Festival. Global Society started favourite for three bumpers in Ireland in his first season, when he was trained by Gordon Elliott, but got off the mark immediately after switching to the Henderson stable under a hand ride by Nico de Boinville. Today’s step up to two miles and five furlongs looks sure to suit, and should also provide a much better test of his Cheltenham credentials with Colin Tizzard’s useful Ofalltheginjoints among the horses taking him on. A big field lines up for the handicap hurdle at 2.55 on the same card, but quite a few are making up the numbers and the favourite Imperial Elysian (2.55) looking fairly priced at around 4-1 to follow up his recent win at Huntingdon. Nefyn Point (3.50) should go well at around 6-1 on the Bangor card, while Fantastic Flyer (7.15) is worth an interest at decent odds to return to form at Chelmsford City this evening. Dean Ivory’s mare is generally consistent and only 2lb higher than for her latest win over course and distance. Jorvik Prince (8.15), meanwhile, will take all the beating in the finale having returned to form in convincing fashion on his first start for Mick Appleby last time. GW Kempton 1.20 Notre Ami 1.50 Global Society 2.25 Celtic Joy 2.55 Imperial Elysian (nap) 3.30 Touch Kick 4.00 Lord Baddesley 4.30 Flinteur Sacre Bangor-On-Dee 1.40 If You Say Run 2.10 Big Difference 2.45 Bob And Co 3.15 The Cashel Man 3.50 Nefyn Point 4.20 Gaelik Coast 4.50 Faivoir Southwell 2.00 Sambucca Spirit 2.35 Stagiaire 3.05 Straitouttacompton 3.40 Sandridge Lad 4.10 Padleyourowncanoe 4.40 Letmestopyouthere Chelmsford City 4.35 Bold Decision 5.10 Elusif 5.45 Antonine Road 6.15 Roundabout Magic 6.45 Lady Shanawell 7.15 Fantastic Flyer 7.45 Spenny’s Lass 8.15 Jorvik Prince (nb)