If Aston Villa play like this against Manchester City at Wembley next time out, an occasion to celebrate threatens to be a chastening experience. Eventually, in second-half stoppage-time, Southampton put Villa out of their misery as Stuart Armstorng swept the ball into an empty goal to build on Shane Long’s early strike. Dean Smith’s side remain embroiled in a relegation fight while Southampton can finally feel better about themselves after moving 10 points clear of the bottom three. This represented Villa’s ninth defeat in their past 12 matches and they were fortunate the scoreline was not bigger. It took only eight minutes for Southampton to breach the worst defence in the division, with Moussa Djenepo beating Ezri Konsa to the byline before cleverly hooking a cross towards the front post with the outside of his right foot. Long was lurking and managed to steady himself to instinctively divert the ball beyond Pepe Reina with the top of his thigh. That was the start of things to come, with Southampton continuing to pepper a frail Villa defence throughout a stop-start first half, with prolonged stoppages owing to head injuries to Djenepo and Anwar El Ghazi, who was replaced by Trezeguet. Djenepo required a bandage but was soon back to his unpredictable self, able to hurt Villa down the right and twice he almost doubled Southampton’s advantage. But he fired over after Reina saved from Danny Ings before the Villa goalkeeper made another alert stop. Djenepo is an alluring player but the Mali winger has a tendency to flicker from the sublime to the ridiculous and sliced painfully wide in the second half as the hosts applied further heat. Villa’s tepidness left Smith seething on the touchline, and Douglas Luiz and Marvelous Nakamba were particularly overrun in midfield. At one point Long sped back into the Southampton half to wriggle through and nick the ball off a static Nakamba but Villa were outclassed in every department. James Ward-Prowse, who again impressed at right-back, made sure Jack Grealish had little joy. Villa struggled to assert any control, with Pierre-Emile Højbjerg and the Southampton academy graduate Will Smallbone, making his first Premier League start a day on from celebrating his 20th birthday, hoovering up possession and kickstarting waves of attack. Smallbone, who joined Southampton as an eight-year-old, was given a warm ovation, when withdrawn, after a tidy display on debut. Villa seemed to rally after Mbwana Samatta had an effort deflected over but Southampton did not relent, with Long causing problems after skipping on to a downfield ball. Long comfortably beat Tyrone Mings, who returned to the Villa defence following tonsillitis, in the foot race, prompting Reina to erratically charge out of goal to meet the ball. Reina misjudged the flight of the ball and ended up manhandling Long to the floor. That was Long’s last hurrah but his replacement, Che Adams, flashed narrowly wide with his first shot. Southampton should have put the game out of sight long before Armstrong did, with Adams denied by a brilliant Kortney Hause block. In the end Villa got off lightly.