Get Brexit done. Deliver on the result of the referendum. Strong and stable. Catchphrases have always been a predictable staple of political campaigning, but we’ve been treated to a particular abundance in recent years. They’re the sort of phrases that litter every news story or televised speech, that burrow into your brain to lay their horrible eggs, hatching periodically to bring the words “dither and delay” unbidden to the front of your mind while you’re eating breakfast. The latest political earworm is “level up”. This phrase, frequently heard from Boris Johnson’s mouth, is fast becoming one of those clanging catchphrases, the endless repetition of which makes you wish you could jettison yourself into space in order to die as far away from Westminster as possible. It’s the opposite of an instant classic: it’s tired and irritating, right from the first time you hear it. The phrase featured prominently in the 2019 Tory manifesto, along with the imperative to “unleash” things such as innovation and Britain’s potential, in the manner of, say, the hounds. The promise to “level up” Britain appears no fewer than 11 times in the unusually short manifesto, mostly in reference to spreading wealth to regions other than London, but also to improved education and healthcare outcomes. “Level up” is as close to meaningless as it’s possible for it to be without being written in Wingdings. The 2019 manifesto was intended as a thin document, difficult to analyse or find issue with, and “level up” did a lot of the semantic heavy lifting. It’s the verbal equivalent of Polyfilla: a neat way of breezing past details such as what exactly will be improved, how much it will be improved by, who will do the improving, and why those improvements are needed in the first place. Far easier to “level up” the north and Midlands than to confront the painful legacies of former Conservative policies such as deindustrialisation and austerity. It’s also a bizarre co-opting of gaming language. Intentionally or not, the phrase hits the ear like a patronising appeal to young people and their video games. You guys like Fortnite? Why not try the latest Tory Britain expansion pack? Level up to unlock achievements such as adequate school funding, sufficient public transport infrastructure and a slightly less crushing sense of disappointment with the state of modern Britain. Levelling up implies improvements for the needy without any redistribution of wealth. This, by definition, is impossible But, as with any new piece of political jargon, it’s not simply annoying – although it is unbelievably annoying – it’s also deeply suspect. The writer Jonathan Meades called jargon the “prissy net curtains of language”. Political jargon is primarily about artifice, about projecting a certain image of the party and of the politician speaking. In this case, Conservative politicians can sidestep the thorny issue of gaping economic inequalities. “Levelling up” implies improvements for the needy without any redistribution of wealth or opportunity from the wealthiest. This, by definition, is impossible. Already, just eight weeks after the election, it’s clear that the rhetoric of “levelling up” is at odds with the government’s true ambitions. A planned reallocation of council funding may redirect millions of pounds away from the north of England, rerouting it into traditional Conservative heartlands in the south and away from the regions with the highest incidence of poverty, including places such as Redcar, Wolverhampton and Middlesbrough – the same places that the government has promised to “level up”. Meanwhile, a value-for-money review of government departments could cut off funding for a swathe of projects launched under David Cameron and Theresa May. To use another insidiously passive piece of political jargon, “left behind” people will continue to be left behind by the Tories. “Level up” is a semantic move to disguise an enduring truth: that, really, levelling the playing field was never on the Conservative party’s agenda. • Imogen West-Knights is a writer and journalist