If I could go back in time and give the participants of 1990s home improvement shows one piece of advice, it would be this: never tell Carol Smillie about your hobbies. Give that woman the slightest inkling that you have a penchant for silent films and she’d turn your room into a monochromatic tribute to Charlie Chaplin. Mention you went on holiday once, and you’d find your house kitted out with deckchairs and beach balls. The 1990s were a wonderful and bizarre period for factual television. Shows such as Changing Rooms, Ground Force and DIY SOS had, at their peak, millions of viewers. While many of the makeovers now seem horrifying and tasteless, the home improvement format showed how you could change your living space on a small budget – without needing to buy lots of new stuff. YouTube videos are more useful than the makeover show: they offer specific advice needed to unclog your dishwasher Ofcom’s recently published five-year review of public service broadcasting is full of grim reading for traditional broadcasters. Young people seem to have given up on what the regulator classifies as “leisure interest” shows: home improvement, gardening, cooking and fashion. The number of viewers aged between 18 and 24 watching lifestyle programmes has plummeted by 46% over the past four years. In part this is because lifestyle tips have migrated to YouTube. The platform is well known for its stream of vloggers and videogamers, but just as popular are the millions of how-to videos giving step-by-step demonstrations on DIY and home improvement. These are often infinitely more useful than the hour-long home makeover show: they offer detailed, specific advice needed to unclog your dishwasher or assemble a flat-pack bed. TV lifestyle shows focused predominantly on homeowners. For millennials living in small rented accommodation whose landlords may not permit an entire redesign, advice on how to repot a plant or construct some bookshelves can be invaluable. YouTube how-to videos are now some of the most viewed on the platform, overtaking videos in the animals, science and education categories. Many of these videos are created by independent contractors and enthusiasts, but big homeware brands have also started making how-to content. Home Depot, Ikea and Homebase all have YouTube channels with entertaining home improvement formats, as well as more run-of-the-mill tutorials – all of them nudging the viewer towards buying more stuff. This is perhaps where YouTube’s DIY videos differ most from the Changing Rooms format of old. Lifestyle shows were an unlikely bulwark against consumer culture. Even if you didn’t follow their advice to the letter, they pulled back the curtain of consumer goods and showed how you could create things in your own home from a mixture of raw materials and ingenuity, be that an MDF shelving unit or a home-cooked curry. Because these shows were broadcast on the BBC, which needed to avoid mentioning brand names and appeal to a broad range of income brackets, there was a natural tendency towards recycling and mending. There are still lots of shows on daytime TV and digital channels about how to make your home look nicer. Kirstie Allsopp’s Fill Your House For Free (also distributed on YouTube) deserves a particular mention for its green credentials. But it’s a shame none of them are being watched by young people, many of whom will be living for the first time in their own home, which they need to furnish from scratch. Young people are an unfortunate contradiction when it comes to environmental issues: though a record number of those between 18 and 24 see the environment as a pressing political issue, they also spend more on takeaways than any other group, and are far more likely to chuck an item of clothing away after wearing it only once. Branded YouTube tutorials are trying desperately to disabuse young viewers of the notion that DIY is a good alternative to buying new stuff. Ikea’s YouTube channel includes a high-budget gameshow where flatmates decide which furniture to buy, while Homebase’s how-to videos link to Homebase-branded products. These are shameless ploys to make young people buy more things they don’t need. Carol Smillie would be having none of it. • Sam Wolfson is a freelance music writer