Q: My 12-year-old son dislikes most novels, saying that he hates description. He is happy reading the Diary of a Wimpy Kid series, but they last no length of time. The only book he has ever devoured is The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time. He hates everything else I suggest. Help! Mary, 47, strategic pricing manager, Manchester A: Jasbinder Bilan, author of Asha and the Spirit Bird (Chicken House), winner of the Costa children’s book award 2019, writes: I feel your pain Mary, having two boys of my own. Twelve is the make-or-break age for boys and reading, so I’m throwing everything your way in the hope that at least a few of these books light his fire. The fact that he loved Curious Incident tells me he likes a quirky, character-led real-world story, so here goes. Start him off with Frank Cottrell Boyce’s latest, Runaway Robot. With its eye-catching illustrations by Steven Lenton, it’s an easy way back to reading. It is a heart-warming story set in the near future where Alfie makes best friends with a robot called Eric. The bite-size nature of short stories is also perfect. Jason Reynolds’s Look Both Ways deftly treads the line between child and teen, and the American setting and nod to Wimpy Kid will quickly draw him in. Ross Welford’s The Kid Who Came From Space is a pacy, gripping adventure about a boy who has to rescue his kidnapped twin sister. The only problem is she’s been taken to outer space. Next up is a real classic: Holes by Louis Sachar. Although it was written a good while ago, my boys loved this. Imagine being sent away to juvenile detention camp in the Texas desert where you are asked to dig holes, five feet wide and five feet deep, every single day and you don’t know why. High Rise Mystery by Sharna Jackson will hook your boy right in with its short snappy sentences and urban London setting. There’s been a murder in the neighbourhood, and sisters Nik and Norva are on it. Finally, The Star Outside My Window by award-winning author Onjali Rauf. Although a little darker than the others on this list, the theme of domestic violence is seen through the innocent eyes of 10-year-old Aniyah. The book celebrates hope and resilience, and there’s a healthy dose of adventure as the children take things into their own hands. This would be a great one to read together. Submit your question for book clinic below or email bookclinic@observer.co.uk