Leeds slipped up at home to Wigan in the latest dramatic twist at the top of the table, by losing 1-0 despite utterly dominating their relegation-threatened opponents. Pablo Hernández’s own-goal proved decisive as Marcelo Bielsa’s team missed a host of chances, with Jack Harrison hitting the woodwork, and Patrick Bamford having two shots cleared off the line. That made it three defeats from four for Leeds, who now have Fulham within three points, having been 11 points clear of third place in mid-December. Losing to Wigan last season proved costly and may do so again in this season’s promotion race. West Brom were able to take advantage and climb back to the top of the table with their first league victory in 2020 and in eight games, beating Luton 2-0. Donervon Daniels’ own goal after a cross by newly arrived loanee Callum Robinson settled nerves for the Baggies and victory was completed by Semi Ajayi’s 70th-minute strike. Nottingham Forest are back in fourth after their first loss in seven matches. Scott Hogan, on his Birmingham debut, equalised at St Andrews after Tiago Silva had put Forest ahead. Hogan struck after Blues goalkeeper had saved a penalty from Lewis Grabban, before Kristian Pedersen bundled home the winner. Hull began life without Jarrod Bowen and Kamil Grosicki by being on the end of a thrashing from a rampant Brentford, for whom Said Benrahma scored a hat-trick. Reece Burke headed into his own net before Ollie Watkins’s headed goal completed the scoring for the Bees, whose goalkeeper David Raya may wish to forget letting a Ryan Tafazolli back-pass escape under his foot for Hull’s goal. Resurgent Bristol City complete the play-off quartet after a fourth win in succession came at QPR courtesy of Famara Diedhiou’s diving header. Preston and Swansea’s 1-1 draw slowed their challenge for the top six, with Rhian Brewster, on loan from Liverpool, cancelling out Scott Sinclair’s strike against his former employers. Sheffield Wednesday and Millwall played out a goalless draw that did either little good as their play-offs hopes dwindle. Luton remain bottom, but only on goal difference as Barnsley lost 2-1 at Charlton, who got only their second win in 18 league matches, with Andre Green grabbing the decisive goal. Middlesbrough are seven points clear of third-bottom Wigan but remain winless after Blackburn sub Hayden Coulson cancelled out Lewis Travis’s opener. Hull City 1-5 Brentford, Birmingham City 2-1 Nottingham Forest, Charlton Athletic 2-1 Barnsley, Fulham 3-2 Huddersfield Town, Leeds United 0-1 Wigan Athletic, Middlesbrough 1-1 Blackburn Rovers, Preston North End 1-1 Swansea City, Queens Park Rangers 0-1 Bristol City, Sheffield Wednesday 0-0 Millwall, West Bromwich Albion 2-0 Luton Town. Freddie Ladapo scored the winner for leaders Rotherham in their 3-2 defeat of Burton, to open up a three-point advantage on Wycombe, who lost 2-0 at MK Dons, after second-half goals from Rhys Healey and Ben Gladwin. The biggest game of the day and perhaps most significant result came in Peterborough sweeping aside Ipswich 4-1 to climb above them into third. James Norwood’s 79th-minute penalty was little consolation for Paul Lambert’s side as Posh had already scored twice through Sammie Szmodics, with Ivan Toney and Siriki Dembele getting the others. Tranmere’s hopes of avoiding relegation were dealt a bitter blow after a 2-0 loss at Bolton in a game too far for an away team playing its fourth game in nine days. Southend, meanwhile, gave themselves a glimmer of hope by grabbing a first home victory of the season after Elvis Bwomono’s last-minute goal secured a 2-1 defeat of Lincoln. Accrington Stanley 2-1 AFC Wimbledon, Bolton Wanderers 2-0 Tranmere Rovers, Bristol Rovers 1-2 Coventry City, Fleetwood Town 2-1 Doncaster Rovers, Ipswich Town 1-4 Peterborough United, Milton Keynes Dons 2-0 Wycombe Wanderers, Oxford United 2-1 Blackpool, Portsmouth 2-0 Sunderland, Rochdale 1-0 Shrewsbury Town, Rotherham United 3-2 Burton Albion, Southend United 2-1 Lincoln City. Eoin Doyle celebrated his return to Swindon on a permanent deal from Bradford by scoring the first goal of the leaders’ 2-1 defeat of Exeter. Crewe stayed four points behind after their win at Walsall, Daniel Powell and Oliver Finney’s goals coming after the early setback of Caolan Lavery’s opener. Plymouth were able to overtake Exeter in third place as Tyreeq Bakinson scored his first goal for the club in a 1-0 defeat of Newport. Stevenage stay rock-bottom after being beaten 3-0 at home by Leyton Orient, for whom Ruel Sotiriou scored twice. Morecambe are second bottom, four points above Stevenage, who lost at Cheltenham – their 2-1 win took them into the final play-off place. Cambridge United 2-1 Colchester United, Cheltenham Town 2-1 Morecambe, Crawley Town 3-1 Scunthorpe United, Grimsby Town 2-2 Forest Green Rovers, Macclesfield Town 0-1 Northampton Town, Mansfield Town 2-2 Carlisle United, Plymouth Argyle 1-0 Newport County, Port Vale 1-1 Salford City, Stevenage 0-3 Leyton Orient, Swindon Town 2-1 Exeter City, Walsall 1-2 Crewe Alexandra, Oldham Athletic 3-0 Bradford City.