At this point in the year, wearing acid-hued makeup seems inappropriate – shouldn’t we at least wait until Coachella? And then, of course, there’s the age restriction. Right? Well, actually, not so fast. This modern neon, as seen at the Jonathan Cohen SS20 show, has “beauty for all” – people and seasons – popping all over it. Unlike its festival iteration, it is understated, which is why it works. For glow, apply foundation and highlighter and an almost imperceptible touch of blusher. Dip a concealer brush into pigment and press into the corners of your eyes. And that’s how grown-ups can go neon right now. Too Faced Born This Way Highlighting Palette £34, toofaced.com The Gypsy Shrine Neon Pigment in Gaia £7.95, beautybay.co.uk Plastic Freedom Blending Brush £4.95, plasticfreedom.co.uk Origins Pretty in Bloom Foundation £23.80, johnlewis.com Chanel Rouge Allure Ink in Euphorie £31, chanel.com Everyone is obsessed with beauty being fragrance-free. It’s beyond boring. I understand the concern with fragrance being a skin irritant – it’s a real issue for many people and there are some products so artificially and highly scented, I would not recommend them to my worst enemy. Nevertheless, the idea that every skin or hair product with an iota of fragrance is out to destroy you and the planet is just nonsense. There’s a lot to be said for quality ingredients and formulations – many irritating products come down to bad formulations. And on a basic level there is something rather joyous about a product that not only does the job but also smells incredible. The glorious jasmine scent is one of the reasons I love this hair mask. We are crawling towards the finish line of winter, but it’s left its brutal marks on our hair and skin. Prior to using this product my hair looked and felt like a hay bale. This mask – a blend of ceramides and botanical oils – gives hair that much-needed boost of hydration, softness and shine without weighing it down, so even those with fine hair can use it. You basically leave it in post shampoo, for 15 minutes then rinse. For a more intense treatment, go for 30 minutes to an hour with your hair wrapped in clingfilm. It’s not glamorous but the scent, and softness of your hair afterwards, more than make up for it. Leonor Greyl Masque Fleurs de Jasmin Nourishing Mask, £39, cultbeauty.co.uk Mediterranean medley Dolce and Gabbana’s fruity fragrances, each with a singular note - orange, lemon or pineapple – will transport you to Sicily. Dolce and Gabbana Fruit Collection Eau de Toilette, £150, harrods.com Purple reign Lavender fans will have a field day with these colognes – blended with wisteria, coriander or silver birch. A glorious ode to the purple one. Jo Malone Lavenderland Colognes, £50, jomalone.com A thorny sibling Imagine rose had an edgy, rebellious twin? Well this fragrance – a rare Bulgarian rose, tonka and patchouli blend – is exactly that. Wear if you dare. Tom Ford Rose Prick Eau de Parfum, £218, tomford.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.