Foreign nationals who live in China or planned to visit say they have been left in limbo as a result of the coronavirus outbreak, with many unsure of when they can return to work or get a refund for their trip. Those who live and work in the country said travel restrictions had left them stranded and unable to return home, while people planning to visit the country could lose hundreds of pounds. The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the Wuhan coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine. The UN agency advises people to: Despite a surge in sales of face masks in the aftermath of the outbreak of the coronavirus outbreak, experts are divided over whether they can prevent transmission and infection. There is some evidence to suggest that masks can help prevent hand-to-mouth transmissions, given the large number of times people touch their faces. The consensus appears to be that wearing a mask can limit – but not eliminate – the risks, provided they are used correctly. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office has advised UK nationals to leave China where possible. It is also warning that travellers from Hong Kong, Japan, Macau, Malaysia, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand who develop symptoms of cough or fever or shortness of breath within 14 days of returning the UK should contact the NHS by phone. Justin McCurry This month the UK Foreign Office advised the 30,000 British nationals in China to leave if possible and warned against all but essential travel to the mainland. The British consulates general in Wuhan and Chongqing remain closed. British Airways, which has suspended flights to Beijing and Shanghai until 31 March, is one of nearly a dozen airlines to restrict travel to China. Peter Hughes, a British lecturer at a university in Henan province, which is near Wuhan, had flown to the UK to see his family and friends in early January. He said he had received no information from his university or any airlines about his prospects of returning home. Hughes, who realised he could not return home when he saw on Sky News that Virgin and BA had suspended flights to mainland China, said: “Nobody knows what is going on. I’m in total limbo because of a lack of any information.” His employers told him to not book a flight back but to instead enjoy an extended holiday. However, they have yet to provide any further information. “I am just one in 1,000. There are so many foreign teachers in China who are in the same position,” he said. Karel Frederik Bruwer, a teacher living and working in Shenzhen in the south-east, said he went on holiday to visit family and friends in Mpumalanga, in his home country of South Africa, on 22 January and was still there. He has not received any information on when he can return. His offices are shut until 1 March and he is insure what will happen next. Like many other companies and schools, he has been asked to register for online classes. “It’s a bit of a mess, as one would expect from something as terrifying as an unknown virus,” said Bruwer, 34. “I’m enjoying my time at home in South Africa with family and friends but do feel worried about my colleagues and students trapped in limbo in China. “At least I am able to enjoy the summer weather here – but they are currently holed up inside their homes, living a very surreal life.” Holidaymakers who booked trips to China from April have yet to receive a refund. Many have been told to wait to see if the travel advice changes. Laurent Dammé, a 30 year-old doctor who lives in Luxembourg, had booked a trip to take part in the Great Wall Marathon. However, the race was cancelled on Wednesday. Though he was reimbursed for the fees he paid to participate, he is yet to receive information on his British Airways flight. “I was disappointed when I heard the marathon was cancelled. As I was there to participate in the marathon, I’d want to be reimbursed for my flight as well, but right now British Airways don’t have any updates about their flights for April and May. I talked to them yesterday but I didn’t get any new information,” he said. “I will have to wait to see what happens.” Adam Wilkins, 50, is in a similar predicament. The service engineer from Gloucestershire had booked a trip to visit China in April with his wife. Wilkins, who was due to travel on 4 April, said: “We’re in limbo because we’ve booked time off work and we’d like to go but we can’t book anywhere else until we know we’re not going.” He paid the deposit for the trip last year and had to settle the outstanding balance two weeks ago, despite the Foreign Office advising British nationals not to go. “It was a choice between paying the balance or losing our deposit,” he said. Wilkins said while the issue could seem like “a first-world problem” – he was aware many people were in a worse situation – he had booked the holiday to give him and his wife something to look forward to after the death of her father last year.