The EU has given its formal backing to 32 major gas infrastructure projects in a move critics say will lock Europe into burning fossil fuels for generations. MEPs voted to support the European commission’s proposal by 443 votes to 169 on Wednesday, with 36 abstentions, provoking environmental groups to lament Brussels’ “hypocrisy” over the climate emergency. The total cost of the infrastructure is estimated to be €29bn. Under the EU’s funding programme up to 50% of the costs of each project could be covered by European taxpayers. The consulting firm Artelys has claimed in a report that the majority of the projects, stretching from Ireland to Croatia, are “unnecessary”. Environmental groups said gas firms were enjoying the fruits of heavy lobbying and the sector’s advantageous position within the commission’s decision-making institutions. An industry-led advisory body provides the European commission with forecasts on Europe’s future energy needs. Colin Roche, climate justice coordinator for Friends of the Earth Europe, said: “This climate hypocrisy has to end. Following unprecedented disasters like Australia’s wildfires, history will look unkindly on those who today backed building more fossil fuel pipelines and terminals. “A European green deal is not possible with more fossil fuels, and Europe needs to go fossil-free fast.” The European energy commissioner, Kadri Simson, from Estonia, had asked the parliament to back the proposal on the grounds that three-quarters of the 151 projects were electricity- rather than gas-based. The parliament had the option of accepting the entire list, the fourth proposed by the commission under its “connecting Europe” programme, or voting it down in its entirety. Simson said: “An objection to the 4th PCI [Projects of Common Interest] list would mean that the 3rd PCI list remains in force – a list with 40% more gas projects than the new list. “As a consequence, key electricity interconnectors and energy transition projects such as the North Sea Wind Power Hub, new smart grid projects and new CO2 network projects would not be eligible for funding under the Connecting Europe Facility.” Simson said she would ensure the next project list “reflects the European green deal priorities”, in reference to the EU’s goal of carbon emission neutrality by 2050. She insisted that being on the new list did not guarantee funding. Ciarán Cuffe, an Irish MEP from the Green party, who voted against the projects, said: “Given the severity of the climate emergency and the little time we have left to avert climate catastrophe, it is wrong to spend more public money on fossil fuel investments. “We are past the time to channel public money into expensive and unnecessary fossil fuel projects when Europe should be investing in energy efficiency and renewables.”