Stefan Collini’s trawl through Dominic Cummings’ writings (The long read, 6 February) is a helpful insight into the mind of a maverick. However, in giving credence to Cummings’ enthusiastic embrace of (natural) science, Collini, as a literary critic and historian, risks falling victim to his own critique of those who speak outside their disciplinary comfort zone. Cummings’ understanding of modern genetics, IQ, evolutionary psychology, child development and neuroscience, as evidenced by his blog and advice to Michael Gove when education minister, is a mishmash of half-understood, controversial, and sometimes just plain wrong assertions. As Cummings argues, politicians need advice from experts, but his deference to the physical and life sciences excludes evidence from the social sciences to its peril (as witness the free school debacle). Beware the autodidact bringing gifts; truly, a little knowledge can be a dangerous thing.Steven RoseEmeritus professor of neuroscience, Open University • I read Stefan Collini’s article with great interest. He describes the high value Cummings places on scientific literacy and his fascination for ideas, but this alleged intellectual powerhouse lost all credibility when I read of his dismissal of the social sciences. Insights and solutions to many of society’s ills have been offered by social scientists since the 1950s and earlier. The links between income and health, the roots of youth crime are all there in numerous reports, should this government need the evidence to address them. It is clear from this article that Cummings has a very selective interest in ideas. He is only interested in those that support him and not ones that look to achieve the greater good. This explains everything about this government.Hildegard DumperNailsea, Somerset • Stefan Collini describes Cummings as “undeniably clever” (though presumably not so clever that Collini can’t find numerous inconsistencies in his views). However, I must take issue with his observation that Cummings “quotes Nietzsche fairly often, but then who doesn’t?” This may be the case in Collini’s circle, and my friends and I speak of little else down Wetherspoon’s on a Tuesday evening, but I suspect Nietzsche (“There are no facts, only interpretations”) is a closed book to the general populace – if not to Cummings.Bill BradburyBolton • Stefan Collini must be thanked for his erudite and illuminating essay on the thinking of Dominic Cummings; those of us who have also tried reading Cummings’ writings, will be keenly aware of the labour and tedium his research involved. Cummings is a historian. He must know the extent to which affairs are affected by whim, caprice, accident: the founding fathers, for instance, would never have anticipated the state of their constitution under Trump. Cummings appears, however, to believe they can be directed according to mathematical patterns, scientific systems. These work wonderfully with physical phenomena, rather less well with people. His lack of any empathetic understanding of how humanity actually operates – which may explain his lack of interest in the arts – suggests at the very least that life under the government he runs under the nominal premiership of Johnson may potentially be very brutal indeed.Michael RosenthalUpper Brailes, Warwickshire • For some of those who have not read Cummings’ blogs as Collini has, it has long seemed obvious that Cummings was a highly articulate chancer and mercenary for neo-liberal US billionaires. Of course his solipsistic assurance and his effectiveness in managing the leave campaign will have impressed those of lesser intellectual competence, from the PM onwards, but look at the damage his apparent advice has done to the educational system. It does not even conform to what Collini quotes Cummings as having written about what education should do, though it reflects the contempt Cummings appears to hold for ordinary people who are, after all, also members of our society, even if not on his radar. We shall see what all his smokescreen chatter about science is worth when it comes to the US trade talks and their lax food standards to be imposed on us profit-generating consumers as against the EU standards, or any of the other socially responsible restrictions on market freedom necessitated by environmental concerns. It looks as if the blog is a deliberate distraction of the public readers away from what his real objectives are. Collini has done a useful job analysing the distractions, but they add weight to the cynical interpretation that if Cummings believed what he writes and advised his political masters accordingly, we would see more respect for law and human values in government policies.John Veit-WilsonNewcastle upon Tyne • Stefan Collini’s fascinating analysis didn’t touch on the curious fact that Cummings trained as a historian, while showing only limited signs of understanding modern history theory, nor on his adulation for Bismarck, whose views of politics and political processes seem to be at odds with his own. Cummings the technocrat appears not to have understood Bismark’s view that politics is not an exact science but an art, the art of the possible.Miles ParkerFowlmere, Cambridgeshire • Perhaps it’s time that “Classic Dom” became “Quel Dommage” .Ruth EversleyPaulton, Somerset • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition