A Turkish court has acquitted nine activists accused of terror charges over their alleged involvement in Istanbul’s Gezi park protests, a landmark ruling in a case that has given new hope to Turkey’s beleaguered civil society in a country where many fear the rule of law is being steadily eroded. Applause erupted in the courtroom and some people cried in disbelief when the decision was announced at a courthouse near the Silivri maximum security prison campus, on the outskirts of Istanbul, on Tuesday. A guilty verdict had widely been expected for the businessman and philanthropist Osman Kavala, who has been held in pre-trial detention for more than two years, along with two other defendants facing life sentences without parole for their role in the 2013 protests. The 16 civil society figures on trial – among them architects, journalists, lawyers and actors – were facing a total of 47,520 years in prison over allegations of trying to overthrow then prime minister and now president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s government by organising the demonstrations. The case of seven further defendants, who are abroad and were being tried in absentia, was separated but arrest warrants for them were lifted. One lawyer said they were also expected to be acquitted. The high-profile case had drawn strong criticism from Turkey’s western allies and human rights groups, including the European Court of Human Rights, which in December called for Kavala’s immediate release. The 2013 Gezi demonstrations were held over the future of Gezi park, a rare green space in central Istanbul, which was slated for redevelopment into a shopping mall. The discontent soon blossomed into nationwide protests against Erdoğan, which were met with a police crackdown in which 22 people died and about 5,000 more were arrested. The fallout from Gezi reignited political tensions between Turkey’s right and left and set the scene for the increasingly authoritarian direction the government has travelled in since. A verdict in the cases of 11 human rights defenders first arrested in 2017 on terrorism charges, including the leadership and several members of Turkey’s Amnesty International branch, is expected on Wednesday. The defendants could face up to 15 years in prison if found guilty. Also on Tuesday, Turkey issued 695 arrest warrants of new suspects across the country in connection with the network of the exiled cleric Fethullah Gülen, whom Ankara blames for the failed 2016 coup.