How do you prepare to face your biggest rivals in the Six Nations? Watch the Donald Trump impeachment trial? That’s how Vickii Cornborough and Shaunagh Brown prepared for last Sunday’s 19-13 win against France. “Everybody else went out to a restaurant, but me and Shaunagh thought we should just have a night in and cook our own food,” Cornborough says. “We watched the impeachment trial.” Brown says. “It was a great evening.” In the shadows of the Pyrenees in Pau, south-western France, Cornborough entered the field as a 48th-minute replacement to win her 50th England cap. The prop, named in the starting XV for Sunday’s meeting with Scotland, reflects on the milestone after a gruelling training session of almost two hours. “Going into France I geed myself up so much that it was just the same as every other game and I didn’t expect there to be much fuss over it,” she says. “But the support was overwhelming.” A proud day for the Cornborough family, but were they there to witness it? “No, my parents are retired and they spend half the year abroad so they were on holiday in Spain,” says Cornborough with a laugh. “But when I arrived home on Monday, the house was dark and as I opened the door all of my friends and family were there for a surprise party.” England became the first international women’s team to offer full-time professional contracts in January 2019, with 28 players signed up, which has had a significant impact on Cornborough and her teammates. “I thought it would forever be a pipe dream for rugby to be my full-time job,” she says. “I was always told rugby is for fun but go out and get another job. For me to live in that dream and see the next generation of kids coming through and how it can be your career is unbelievable, it gives me goose bumps. It’s provided stability so I can focus the majority of my time and effort in rugby.” Cornborough missed the autumn internationals because of injury but appreciates how the contract has helped her recovery. “For my mental health and sanity, it was such a good thing for me to be able to be around my teammates. I was working every day rehabbing and the resources I had access to – doctors, physios, a full-time strength and conditioning coach who guided every session. I wouldn’t have had that or been able to put that amount of effort in if I wasn’t full-time.” Cornborough and Brown reflect a jovial atmosphere within the squad, regularly joking together. All players share rooms, however Cornborough is a “nomad”, meaning she does not have a regular roommate, yet they are eager to avoid one teammate in particular. “Nobody wants to be with Rowena Burnfield,” says Cornborough with a laugh. “She’s a snorer and consequently has her own room sometimes,” says Brown. Apart from impeachment trials, players relax by playing the Nintendo Switch, but despite being a champion rugby player, Cornborough’s performances are substandard. “It’s like playing with your mum, she’s like an old lady,” says Brown. Cornborough retorts: “I’m always last but it was canoeing the other day and it’s knackering, you’re trying to canoe as fast as possible and then you’ve got to do it in time. It’s so stressful and I’m not very good at not being good at something.” Cornborough still works as an IT business development manager around her rugby schedule and sees similarities between the jobs. “From work into rugby I bring my organisational skills, determination and ability to lead,” she says. “From rugby into work it’s the ability to work in a team. It’s one thing I don’t think people naturally do well in if they’re not from a sporting background. Success on the pitch is scoring points and closing out games and for business it’s closing deals. This is the same thing, just different objectives.” Dates for the 2021 World Cup in New Zealand were announced this week and Cornborough is thrilled. “To prep for the World Cup full-time will be amazing. 2017’s tournament had some of my biggest highs and lows. I don’t think I will ever get over losing the final.” Before then Cornborough will marry her fiance, Will, who proposed in August. He plays for Havant as a flanker and the pair met when they joined the same team as youngsters. It then took another 10 years before encountering each other again in a bar. The wedding, which Cornborough jokes Brown is yet to RSVP to, includes guests from 10 rugby teams. “I had to ring up the England coaches to go: ‘Excuse me, I’d like to get married this summer can we have a look at the calendar, what day can I get married please?’” says Cornborough. “And then I called Will and went: ‘Right, I’ve got a date.’” Cornborough is clearly a well‑respected member of the squad and someone Brown admires. “She’s an inspiration,” says Brown. “It’s such an honour to play alongside her, everything she does is for the team. She is one of, if not the best, looseheads in the world.” Katy Daly-McLean, scorer of more than 500 England points, agrees: “To get 50 caps as a prop is sensational.” Cornborough is humble despite Scotland not beating England since 1998 and last year being on the receiving end of an 80-0 drubbing by the Red Roses. “There are loads of threats in Scotland’s team we must be mindful of and we need to play to our strengths to overcome those,” she says. “The level of all the teams is up. It’s going to be a difficult rest of the competition, so all bets are on. I’ve still got so many more things I want to achieve in an England shirt and I’m nowhere near done yet.” Scotland v England Scotstoun Stadium 12.10pm SS Action; BBC Alba