I was saddened to hear of the death of Terry Hands at the age of 79. I got to know him well during his 25 years as a director at the Royal Shakespeare Company from 1966 to 1991. Only three weeks ago Terry also turned up at a monthly theatre club I host at the Drama Studio in Ealing where his wife, Emma Lucia, is a director. That evening we were discussing a recent Almeida production of The Duchess of Malfi. Terry, who joined our informal group, was eloquent and forthright in his views. I didn’t altogether share his opinions but he spoke with such passion that the news of his hospitalisation a few days later came as a real shock. Terry was a director with a very distinctive style, visible in his work for the RSC, in his many international productions and in his period as artistic director of Theatr Clwyd from 1997 to 2015. You could always recognise a Hands production – especially if it was of Shakespeare – by certain trademark features. There was a bold and frontal style of acting, a stage devoid of clutter, and an extensive use of follow-spots: many lights, I once suggested, made Hands’ work. I always assumed his approach was based on a style made famous by the French director Jean Vilar with the Théâtre National Populaire. Years later Terry told me that he had absorbed the Vilar method without ever having actually seen it. After studying at Birmingham University and Rada, Terry and a group of friends founded a company at the Liverpool Everyman in 1964. The turning point in their fortunes came with a rave review in the Manchester Guardian of Murder in the Cathedral which found its way into the paper’s London edition. But it was when Terry joined the RSC in 1966, initially as director of a touring group called Theatregoround, that he came to prominence. His production of The Merry Wives of Windsor for the main company in 1968 also marked him out as a major force. A once-derided play became a detailed exploration of Elizabethan middle-class life and the character of the jealous husband, Ford – first played by Ian Richardson and later by Ben Kingsley – emerged as a figure of tragicomic intensity. If I had to pick out Terry’s great achievement with the RSC – where from 1978 he became joint artistic director with Trevor Nunn before assuming sole control in 1986 – it would be his production of the Histories with Alan Howard playing all the kings from Richard II to Richard III. Terry restored the Henry VI trilogy to its rightful place in the canon. In the 1960s the RSC had given us a severely edited version, The Wars of the Roses. But Terry presented the plays in their entirety. He had the advantage of a first-rate cast including Helen Mirren as Queen Margaret, Julian Glover as Warwick and Emrys James as York. But Hands brought out the different textures of the plays and showed that Part Two, played on a stretch of gradually despoiled green turf, offered a memorable image of England as a bloodstained Eden. Terry worked a lot in continental Europe and, after leaving the RSC, turned Theatr Clwyd into the most successful theatre in Wales, even managing to attract Nicol Williamson out of semi-retirement to play King Lear. What struck me most about Terry, however, was his passion for Shakespeare’s language, his ability to draw the best out of actors and his love of ritual: something that may have derived from the fact that his father was a regimental bandmaster in the Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry. In a long career, he had inevitable failures including a musical version of Stephen King’s Carrie which died a spectacular death on Broadway. But Terry Hands was a great director who left our theatre infinitely richer than he found it.