While contemplating the nature of the afterlife in the hit 2008 movie In Bruges, it occurred to Ray, the guilt-ridden Irish hitman, that hell might be “the entire rest of eternity” spent in the eponymous picture-perfect Flemish city in north-west Belgium. Despite his low opinion of his surroundings, the city remains such a magnet for curious, camera-toting visitors enjoying mini-breaks that the mayor felt compelled last year to crack down on tourist numbers to avoid his manor becoming “a complete Disneyland”. Now, however, the city is welcoming day-trippers of a different kind, the travelling supporters of Manchester United having converged on the city to see their team take on Club Brugge in Big Vase. On paper, it is hardly a fixture to get the heart racing, although the prospect of an afternoon spent swilling fine Belgian beers in one of the continent’s more picturesque squares should make for one of European football’s most pleasantly genteel experiences. In stark contrast, a cold, wet Thursday night in Wolverhampton might not be as appealing for the discerning tourist, but try telling that to supporters of Espanyol. Enjoying their first taste of European football for 13 years, they take on Wolves, for whom this season’s adventures on the continent are also a novelty to be savoured. “Yes, the fans are enjoying the trip with us and we want more of this atmosphere at Molineux,” said Nuno Espírito Santo, as a gaggle of excitable Spaniards wandered past on their way to explore the myriad delights of the Wulfrun Shopping Centre. Meanwhile in Glasgow, Nando’s on Sauciehall Street is currently a hive of activity, what with visiting Braga fans seeking out a taste of home before their last-32 first leg against the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers. With VAR being used for the first time in this season’s competition, $tevie Mbe has warned his players not to do anything stupid. “One thing’s for sure – we’re going to have to be careful, and make sure we behave,” he tooted, his perma-furrowed brow furrowing just that little bit more as he stared forlornly in the direction of Alfredo Morelos. In Denmark, Queen’s Celtic fans currently enjoying the many herbal stimulants available for purchase on Pusher Street in the laid-back, autonomous freetown of Christiana may need reminding that their game against FC Copenhagen is among the early kick-offs. “It’s going to be difficult and we’ll have to think our way through it,” said Neil Lennon, failing to specify if he was talking about his players or those who have travelled to support them. And finally, in other European mini-break news, it’s deja vu all over again for Gooners wandering around the Parthenon before Arsenal’s fifth trip to take on Olympiakos in 10 years. Like the famous temple, both clubs have seen better days, as all four of their previous European ties have been in Big Cup. Join Tumaini Carayol from 5.55pm GMT for hot MBM coverage of Club Brugge 2-1 Manchester United, while John Brewin and Daniel Harris will be clockwatching the rest of Big Vase. “This decision has cost our player the chance to play in a national cup final, not something that comes along every week, to the detriment of the player, his teammates, the club and our fans. We believe it also damages the credibility of our governing body and brings the game into disrepute The decision is plainly wrong and the dogs in the street know this. We have no right to appeal this final decision and it is painful to accept” – a fresh and funky Inverness Caley Thistle respond to James Keatings’ failed red card appeal, prompted by a ludicrous second yellow for diving that rules him out of the Bell’s Challenge Cup final. The latest Football Weekly Extra podcast is right here. Meanwhile, tickets are also on sale for the next live show in London. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/02/20-55871-gnl.fw.20200220.jf.brugge.mp3 “As STOP FOOTBALL enters its second decade of relentless campaigning, I was impressed that, for 85 minutes, you managed to lure Diego Simeone to the cause. On a related note, do you know if he and Humility Man™ subscribe to this?” – Simon Mazier. “Arsène Wenger’s ‘solution’ to the offside rule (yesterday’s News, Bits and Bobs) simply turns it back to front, creating exciting hair’s breadth rulings about the last body part that’s in line with the defender instead of first body part that’s in front. Surely he would be better off instructing referees (and VAR) to fall back on his old solution to anything. ‘I did not see.’ Case closed!” – Alex Frew McMillan. “Can I just point out to Tim Woods (yesterday’s Fiver letters) that while many off us disliked the thuggish antics of the Wimbledon 1980s era, we all laughed heartily in May 1988, so they still have lots of support. The first ever penalty saved in an FA Cup final. Oh how we laughed” – Graham Haslam. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Alex Frew McMillan. PSG Nasser al-Khelaifi has been charged by Swiss federal prosecutors in connection with a wider bribery investigation linked to World Cup TV rights. Abdullah bin Nasser al-Thani has been removed as Málaga president for six months on a series of charges including alleged illegal appropriation. José Mourinho isn’t writing off Tottenham’s Big Cup hopes despite their 1-0 defeat at home to RB Leipzig and a squad riddled with knack. “This is our situation, it’s like going to a fight with a gun without bullets,” he parped. Manchester City boss Pep Guardiola is confident in his club’s ability to defend its position over that Big Cup ban and hopes they will still be in Europe next season. “I trust 100% what my club have said and what they have done,” he cheered. Lionel Messi says he’s got no intention of leaving Barcelona, but warned that they need to act after a month in which there has been “one problem after another”. Meanwhile, in the latest triumph for Tony Pulis’ talent-handling, Martin Braithwaite has joined Barça from Leganés for €18m. And a West Ham fan, who wore an anti-board T-shirt while volunteering as a pitchside flag-waver before last month’s home defeat by Liverpool, has had his ban lifted by the club. So they’re doubling down on the punishment, then? Remember the name: Jude Bellingham. Ben Fisher runs the rule over the £145-a-week teenager turning heads around Europe. RB Leipzig may not have much history, but they’ve got fans, a well-drilled team and the perfect manager in Julian Nagelsmann, fizzes Jonathan Liew. Eni Aluko on Manchester City. Richard Jolly was at the Etihad to gauge the mood among City fans on a big night for home-made banners. Paul Wilson raises a finger, adjusts his earpiece and rules that Arsène Wenger’s plans for the offside rule won’t solve the VAR hot mess. Olympiakos skipper Omar Elabdellaoui talks Arsenal, Manchester City and Erling Braut Haaland with Will Unwin. Gabriel Jesus could be missing sitters for Juventus next season, backed by Mauro Icardi and Thiago Alcântara, according to The Mill. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!