It is the biggest awards-season upset since the La La Land/Moonlight best-picture mixup: Piers Morgan has been voted the top secret crush of magazine readers. In a poll conducted by Heat, the controversial broadcaster and Twitter loudmouth beat off stiff competition from Prince Harry, Alan Sugar and Ant and Dec (separately, of course). Morgan won by a landslide, reportedly receiving two-thirds of all the votes cast – and he was predictably thrilled, celebrating the result on social media. But who are your secret crushes? I don’t think you should ever be judgmental of people’s crushes. For me, it’s Kermit the Frog. He sums up all the important philosophies in very short, sharp sentences that you can absorb at the age of eight. I actually got the opportunity to interview him in 1996 during my brief-lived career as an MTV presenter. Kermit is the second sexiest creature on earth, after my girlfriend. I think a crush has to be holistic: it’s the whole thing. His voice is magnificent. His greenness is perfect. His legs are edible. He has aged extraordinarily well. I would love to know what face cream he’s using. Piers Morgan? I wouldn’t go there. A crush is only acceptable if they are a good person. If they are not, it’s not OK. I find Louis Theroux very mysterious, personally. I like how, when he does interviews, he won’t reveal anything about himself. I remember he did a documentary with some Nazis, and they were asking him if he was Jewish, and Theroux was refusing to say. I liked that. I haven’t told anyone about my Theroux crush – not even my best friend. Currently, it’s Scarlett Johansson. I think, with age, my crushes get more selective. She always plays strong roles. I like strong women! My wife knows about my crush. She laughs at me all the time about it. She looks a little like Scarlett, actually – she’s also blond. If, one day, things get reciprocal between me and Scarlett, things could get a little uncomfortable. Growing up, I had a huge crush on Richard Hammond from Top Gear. I would tell everyone about it. They’d say: “That weird guy from Top Gear? What are you watching Top Gear for?” It’s strange because I hate cars and all that hyper-masculine stuff. But there was something about Richard Hammond – I don’t know what it was. When he had his car crash, I thought, poor guy. He’s so brave.