It’s 1945 and zombie Hitler has raised an undead army to conquer the world. That’s pretty much all you need to know about Zombie Army 4’s paper-thin plot – which is fine because this isn’t the type of game you’ll be playing for its complex analysis of war and morality. Instead, your focus is on studiously gunning down each and every member of the zombie horde as they amble relentlessly towards you. Players are offered a generous array of warring dead, all of whom can be hacked, slashed, shot, stomped and dismembered in a variety of gruesome ways. Think Left 4 Dead meets Call of Duty: Zombies – and you are in the correct (and very well-trodden) battle zone. If you’re wondering what happened to the first three Zombie Army games, here’s a quick primer. The series began as a spin-off from the popular Sniper Elite games – the remnants of which remain in Zombie Army 4’s third-person sniper rifle mechanics and gory X-ray kill cams. It’s been all quiet on the western front since Zombie Army Trilogy was released in 2015, but five years later, Zombie Army 4 picks up where the franchise left off. Zombie Hitler has been vanquished but the undead Nazi army continues to roam the Earth (there is no rest for the wicked). That’s where you come in as one of several Resistance soldiers tasked with fending off the zombie masses and sending them straight back to hell. Every character in the game has unique skills, allowing for a bit of variation depending on which hero you choose to play. Weapons are customisable, too, while unlockable perks allow you to add explosive or electrical effects and item enhancements change the way your equipment works. There is no (great) escape from the fact that Zombie Army 4 boils down to one simple action: gunning down as many zombies as possible. But this is a wonderfully absurd game, filled with schlock and gore, where Nazi suicide cults and eerie lab experiments are set to an 80s B-movie backdrop of John Carpenter synthwave and pulp comic hyperbole. Even the loading screens glimpse at upcoming levels with the game’s own take on some classic horror movie posters. There’s a huge grindhouse vibe throughout that makes for some very retro cinematic moments, including more than one encounter with zombie sharks. The game’s arcade-like action is perfect to dive into for an hour or two, especially if you’re playing co-op. Here, you don’t even have to pick up where you left off – co-op mode drops you straight into the action across the entire campaign, letting you and up to three others fill your boots with all the zombie-stomping mayhem you can handle. It’s here where Zombie Army 4 really shines – this game was absolutely made to be played with friends. There’s nothing quite as thrilling as fighting back-to-back with your pals as you’re surrounded by undead Nazis keen to eat your entrails. If you’re a fan of zombie survival horror, exploitation war movies or just shooting a lot of things in a lot of different ways, Zombie Army 4 is a no-brainer in every sense of the phrase. 