Set pieces are diminishing in number but not in significance, the lineout especially. It provided the platform for Wales’s opening two tries – and their fourth – against Italy and the only try in Ireland’s victory over Scotland in Dublin also came after a penalty was kicked to touch. Italy and Scotland both conceded 10 or more penalties and with teams reluctant to kick to touch and concede a lineout, indiscipline costs. Italy have little to salvage from their heavy defeat in Cardiff, but they had the dominant scrum with the 23-year old tighthead Giosuè Zilocchi, making his first appearance in the Six Nations, giving Wyn Jones an uncomfortable afternoon. Scotland came into the Six Nations on the back of an early exit from the World Cup and without their playmaker Finn Russell, who was sent home after returning late to camp following a drinking session. They were not expected to get close to Ireland in Dublin but they fronted up at forward, created the better opportunities and might have secured a draw but for Stuart Hogg dropping the ball in the act of touching it down. They gained strength through unity, leaving their head coach, Gregor Townsend, with a decision to make. Scotland coped without Russell but also missed him. When France were muddling in mediocrity in the 2010s, they had a craze for playing players out of position and not just deploying a scrum-half at 10. They went to Twickenham last year with a mixed up back three and gave England the freedom of the pitch. Italy played Carlo Canna, an outside-half, at 12 against Wales, with attack in mind but their defence suffered. Wales put a wing, George North, into the midfield to cover for the injured Jonathan Davies, although Nick Tompkins showed he was the more creative option, and England went to Paris with a makeshift back row, Courtney Lawes and Tom Curry playing out of position, and it showed. Specialists seem to count, especially away from home. England have had ample time to find cover for Billy Vunipola, given his run of injuries in the Eddie Jones era, but in his absence they continue to struggle for a gainline breaker. Nathan Hughes’s run in the position ended before the World Cup but he was a different type of No 8, preferring to stand out and attack in the wide channels whereas Vunipola operates round the fringes, strong enough to make ground from a standing start. England had no forward making metres in Paris – Sam Underhill’s 21 were the most and his strength likes elsewhere – nor a back after Manu Tuilagi went off injured in the opening quarter, three months after being beaten in the World Cup final by a team armed with carriers. Four sides started the campaign with new management teams. There was no change for Italy under Franco Smith, sagging limply to defeat in Cardiff against a Wales side that under Wayne Pivac is looking to change gear. Ireland looked tactically much the same as they were under Joe Schmidt against Scotland, if shifting slightly from set plays, but France were transformed. England’s pre-match talk about brutality amounted to no more than being brutally poor for the first hour. France’s set pieces were shaky but their defence, under the stern eye of Shaun Edwards, was magnificently organised and steadfast. No lead seemed secure enough for them last year but that is changing, even if they again let their supporters’ nerves fray, and they remain lethal in broken play. The wide boys flourished on the opening weekend. Jonny May dragged England back into contention against France with two tries out of nothing. Teddy Thomas did not get over the line but was a threat, along with Vincent Rattez, who opened the scoring. Josh Adams scored three tries for Wales and no player has scored more in Test rugby in the last 12 months. It was only two years ago that he looked out of place at Twickenham and exposed positionally, but now he is one of the game’s best finishers and roams the field in search of the ball. It is the difference confidence makes and, for all the changes France have made, their scrum-half, Antoine Dupont, remains the catalyst. He just has more licence, to the benefit of his wings.