Growing up together, Robyn and Wes had never considered the possibility of a romantic relationship. “He was a good friend of my older sister at school,” says Robyn. “And our families lived in the same village in north Devon.” The four-year age gap meant they didn’t see much of each other during their teens. “I do remember seeing Rob when she’d started university and she was really into politics. She was ranting about communism,” says Wes, laughing. It wasn’t until Christmas 2018 that their relationship began to change, when Wes paid a drunken visit to her family home. “Everyone had gone to bed at my house and I wanted to carry on the party,” he explains. Although he believes there was “some chemistry” that night, she wasn’t so sure. “I think he thought he was being charming and was trying to chat up my 82-year-old granny,” she recalls. “But he couldn’t even stand up. We had to put him to bed.” A week later the pair went to a New Year’s Eve party in Bristol, where they were living. “It was a coincidence that we had both chosen that city to move to,” says Robyn, “but it’s very popular with young people from our area.” It wasn’t long before they were chatting and laughing together. Their friends realised there was a spark there, but Robyn was oblivious. “I’d sworn off men after coming out of a bad relationship,” she says. “I’d gone out for a fun night with friends and it wasn’t on my radar at all.” Reading different signals, Wes leaned in for a kiss at midnight. “I told him it had better not be a pity kiss. I thought he felt sorry for me.” After they had ironed out that misunderstanding, they spent the rest of the evening together. “My sister was at the party and asked if I’d been kissing Wes,” says Robyn. “I denied it but I had lipstick marks all over my face, so I had to confess in the end. She found the idea of us together weird at first but came round to it.” In January the pair went on their first date, to a local pub. “I was panicking because I was late,” says Wes. “I saw a scooter rider get knocked off his bike on the way and I was first on scene to help.” The rider wasn’t seriously injured, but Wes admits he hammed up the story for Robyn. “I told her I’d saved someone’s life.” Even without that, they had plenty to talk about. “We had a lot of the same friends and it all felt very easy and natural,” says Robyn. It wasn’t long before they became an official couple. In September they made the decision to move in together, and now live Wes’s flat. “We’re like an old married couple,” Robyn says. Wes says he is “a really enthusiastic” cook. “I’m going to start Slimming World thanks to his cooking,” Robyn laughs. They also love exploring Bristol and travelling. “Last year we went to Milan and Croatia; we’re saving for a trip to New York.” Robyn works for a local water company, while Wes is an account manager for a coffee roastery. “When I met Rob she was drinking instant coffee with sweeteners,” says Wes. “Now I’ve turned her into a coffee snob.” Describing his girlfriend as “one of the funniest people” he knows, Wes says they always have fun together. “She loves me for who I am now, not for my potential, and that’s a really nice feeling.” For Robyn it’s her partner’s upbeat nature that made her fall for him. “I call him my sunshine man. I feel like I can be myself around him – which I’ve never found before.” The relationship came at the right time for her. “In 2016 I lost my best friend to suicide, which was really hard,” she explains. “I was getting myself back together but finding a new love has given me a new lease of life.” Though the couple think they will move back to Devon in future, Robyn says they want to enjoy city life first. “We’re enjoying our lives at the moment and making the most of being together.” • Want to share your story? Tell us a little about you, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.