Ralf Rangnick was not impressed. The day before RB Leipzig’s Bundesliga game against Eintracht Frankfurt on 25 January, the celebrity barber Sheldon Edwards, aka HD Cutz, had been flown in to the team hotel to cut nine of the players’ hair. Leipzig promptly lost 2-0. Rangnick, who is head of sport and development at Red Bull in New York these days and a former coach of RB Leipzig, was perplexed. “If someone had asked me on Sunday, which of the 12 teams who played on Saturday had flown in a barber I would have put quite a lot of money on it not being RB Leipzig,” he told Bild. “If I am honest I am pretty stunned by this, because from a barber in the team hotel to a gold steak, the step is not too far.” The comment about the gold steak was a reference to Franck Ribéry’s visit to Dubai in January 2019. But this was not a dig at the former Bayern player: the barb was directed completely at the Leipzig players. The team were top of the Bundesliga going into the game against Frankfurt but defeat meant Bayern Munich leapfrogged them. The two teams face each other in a mouthwatering game at the Allianz Arena on Sunday and the feeling is that Leipzig have to get something from this game or the Bayern machine will just do what it has done in the past seven seasons: go on to win the title. Leipzig’s current coach, Julian Nagelsmann, was not too hard on the players after the Frankfurt game but lamented a lack of intensity in training. “We are perhaps just beneath the summit at the moment,” he said. “And the question now is: do we want to reach the summit? Or do we stay where we are, have a bit of food, a bit of drink and then start our descent?” “I am not talking just about matches, because [against Frankfurt] they were totally engaged. But this is about training as well. We don’t have that much training time and I find that we sometimes are not, by any means, engaged enough. “On Wednesday, for example, the decision was: ‘This is quite good what we have done so far’. The decision was not: ‘I am going to go out there, burn [for the cause] and become German champions’.” Nagelsmann is a fascinating character. Still only 32, he demands absolutely everything from his players. They are not in great form going in to the game against Bayern, with the defeat in Frankfurt followed up by a point rescued in the 89th minute at home against Borussia Mönchengladbach last Saturday in the league, before a 3-1 defeat at Frankfurt in the German Cup on Tuesday. Bayern, on the other hand, are flying under Hansi Flick, who took over from Niko Kovac in November. The Bavarians have won eight of their past 10 games and go into Sunday’s showdown as clear favourites. The contest may well be decided by two prolific strikers: Bayern’s Robert Lewandowski and Leipzig’s Timo Werner. Both are in great form, Lewandowski edging Werner in the race for top scorer, the Pole having 22 goals in 20 games with the German two behind. In third place is Borussia Dortmund’s English winger Jadon Sancho, on 12 goals. The 23-year-old Werner has long been rumoured to be on his way to Bayern but Flick was reluctant to talk about the Leipzig forward. “A lot can happen in life,” he said. “He’s playing at Leipzig, I’m not thinking about him. He is a really good player but at the moment I can only think about Robert Lewandowski. He is the best striker for me. He is in top shape and we are very happy to have him in our squad. He leads our team from the front and has a quality in front of goal that I have rarely seen.” Whatever happens on Sunday, the game is unlikely to end goalless. The teams have scored 111 goals in their 40 league games this season. Bayern’s 58 is the joint-highest number of goals scored after 20 league games in Bundesliga history, a record shared with Werder Bremen’s 1985-86 title challengers. Those 111 goals are split among 26 different players, 13 from each club. Of the nine players who saw HD Cutz for a trim last season, four have been on the scoresheet in the league this campaign. As for the number of players who will see a celebrity barber on the eve of this game, Nagelsmann can only hope that is zero. From now on, it is all about the football.