Scotland omitted Finn Russell from their squad to face England as they look to maintain “cohesion” before their second Six Nations game. But the head coach, Gregor Townsend, remains in talks with the sidelined Racing 92 fly-half. Adam Hastings is set to continue in the No 10 jersey in Saturday’s Calcutta Cup game while Duncan Weir is also in the 37-man squad. Russell left the squad nine days before the opening-day defeat by Ireland after missing training following an alleged drinking session at the team hotel. “I think Gregor is in dialogue with Finn but I know through this period we have been after cohesion and as many players to do as many training sessions as we can,” said the defence coach, Steve Tandy. When asked whether Russell would feature later in the tournament, Tandy said: “I have no idea. That’s as much as I know and as defence coach I think I have enough to deal with. It’s more about getting our systems up and running. I will leave that to the boss.” The Welshman Tandy feels togetherness is crucial as he introduces new patterns of defence play to the squad. “The boys have been great,” he said. “The way the boys have bought into it and been asking questions, their appetite to learn and be stimulated in a slightly different way, they have been a pleasure to work with.” The former Ospreys head coach, who was appointed in late December, said: “I am new to international rugby and it’s been awesome to see the way the boys have really connected. “The majority of the group have trained nearly every session. It’s been hard for some of the exiles to miss two or three sessions but that’s part of international rugby. Having a large group together constantly has been a real benefit and having most do the full six or seven sessions has been of real importance. “Obviously we didn’t get the result in Ireland but a lot of the performance is down to having cohesion and being a tight group.” The Scotland lock Jonny Gray hopes to see his former Glasgow teammate Russell back in the squad. “I don’t know too much about the situation,” Gray said. “All I know is that everyone cares about Finn here and hopefully it sorts itself out.”