A month after Storm Gloria battered the east coast of Spain, the extent of the devastation to the Ebro Delta is only now becoming clear. Those whose livelihoods depend on the region are demanding solutions amid fears that rising seas will further threaten the fragile ecosystems of the Mediterranean’s most important wetland. Storm Gloria brought rain, snow and flooding to most of Spain, but it was the east coast that was hardest hit, with high winds whipping the normally placid Mediterranean with such ferocity that plastic containers of products that haven’t been on the market in decades washed up on Catalan beaches. The low-lying Ebro Delta suffered most, as the storm sent waves crashing nearly 30 metres inland, inundating rice fields and irrigation channels with saltwater as far as 3km (2 miles) from the shore. Mussel and oyster farms were badly damaged, while pumping stations essential for maintaining the balance between fresh and saltwater were destroyed. Houses in the town of Deltebre were flooded. “You can just imagine the impact of waves as high as nine metres and winds up to 100km per hour hitting a region that is at sea level,” says Gerardo Bonet, president of the Ebro Delta mussel farmers’ association, who estimates the association’s losses at around €1.6 million (£1.3 million). “No one has ever seen a storm like this here.” The delta produces 4,000 tonnes of mussels and 800 tonnes of oysters a year but 11 of the platforms used to grow the creatures have been destroyed and many others damaged. “We have to replace and reinforce the structures and also make them higher, because the sea level has risen as a result of climate change,” Bonet says. Around 15% of the 700,000 tonnes of rice grown in Spain comes from the delta and more than 7,000 acres of rice fields will have to be desalinated and flooded with freshwater before planting can begin in April. Even then, it’s estimated that around 20% of the crop will be lost. According to rice farmer Raül Arqués, the real danger is another storm coming before they can rebuild what Gloria washed away. “At the moment we have no defences, nothing to keep the sea out.” While Gloria represents the sharp end of the threat from the climate crisis, for decades the delta’s fragile ecology has suffered from a combination of political neglect and over-exploitation of the river. The Ebro, which gave Iberia its name, is the only major Spanish river that flows into the Mediterranean. Its waters are much in demand for irrigation and hydro-electricity and there are 181 dams along its 930km course from Cantabria to the sea. As Bonet puts it, “the delta is a balance between the river and the sea and for some time now the sea has been winning”. He says the river’s flow into the delta has fallen by half since the 1990s. One effect of all those dams is to drastically reduce the amount of sediment that reaches the delta. The sediment is an essential element of the local ecology and also protects the shoreline from erosion. In some areas the shoreline is receding by more than five metres a year. Not enough sediment or water is getting to the delta, says Joan Francesc Vidal, director of the Ebro Delta nature reserve, which is home to around 95 species of birds and a stopover for around 300 migrating species. Vidal believes the solution lies in forcing the companies that generate electricity to release more sediment, and redistributing the sand that storms shift northwards back to the southern beaches. “There are a range of views on how to solve the problem, from building underwater defences to simply letting nature take its course,” Vidal says. “Personally, I believe redistributing the sand is the least disruptive and cheapest.” Marta Subirà, the Catalan government environment minister, believes the political challenge is almost as great as the environmental one. “The European, Spanish and the Catalan governments haven’t always been on the same page in how to deal with this,” she says. Lluís Soler, the mayor of Deltebre, is more forthright. He accuses both regional and national governments of wilfully neglecting a vital part of Spain’s natural heritage. “The problem is there are only 80,000 people living in the delta, and that’s not many votes,” he says. “Neither the Catalan nor the Spanish government has committed itself to the measures needed to conserve the Ebro Delta. They do nothing, or at best carry out studies that result in nothing. They do the minimum to ensure there’s rice so they can have a paella at the weekend.”