UK Sport has begun an unprecedented comprehensive review into UK Athletics after admitting it had “major concerns” following a series of crises, scandals and poor decisions that have plunged the organisation into disarray. The independent review, which comes only five months before the Tokyo Olympics, will examine “the strategy, leadership, governance, operation, culture and connectivity of UK Athletics” to ensure it is “fit for the future”. UK Sport, which has funded UK Athletics to the tune of £27m since 2017 in its role overseeing all Olympic sports in Britain and Northern Ireland, has taken the step despite two independent reviews already having been recently commissioned to look at the actions of the organisation. In recent months UK Athletics lost its chief executive Zara Hyde Peters before she started in the role when she stepped down after failing to disclose to her local athletics club her husband’s “inappropriate relationship” with a 15-year-old girl. The governing body also faced intense criticism over its relationship with the coach Alberto Salazar, who is appealing against a four-year ban for doping offences. To make matters worse, UK Athletics has also lost its performance director and chair, failed to hit its medal target at the recent world championships, and has a £2m hole in its finances following the decision to stage the 2018 World Cup on the same weekend as the Wimbledon finals and football World Cup. The competence of UK Athletics was also questioned after it named a reserve shot putter into the line up of the men’s 4x400m team at the 2019 European Athletics Team Championships – leading to the team to be disqualified from the race. The sport’s governing body also suffered an embarrassing logistics failure ahead of last year’s world championships after hammer thrower Nick Miller had to relocate away from the team holding camp in Dubai because there were inadequate facilities. Announcing the review, UK Sport said UK Athletics had faced a series of significant challenges that had “had an adverse impact on both the sport and the reputation of the sport”. In an unusually strong statement the UK Sport chief executive, Sally Munday, said: “Issues raised in recent months regarding the sport are of major concern to both UK Sport and to the leadership team at UK Athletics. Both organisations are committed to delivering long-term improvement and ensuring the sustainability of the sport while acting in the best interests of its athletes, staff and the wider athletics family.” UK Sport said the initial review would be led by Dame Sue Street, a former permanent secretary at the department for digital, culture, media and sport, and would be completed by April. “Our aim in commissioning this first stage review is to ensure we have a full understanding of the priority issues and any next steps required to help the sport move forward,” Munday said. Last month UK Athletics’ first performance director, Malcolm Arnold, said the sport was in its worst state for 60 years having largely squandered the legacy of London 2012 and people needed to “wake up” to the scale of the problem. Arnold pointed out that while Britain has a handful of exceptional athletes such as Dina Asher-Smith, Katarina Johnson-Thompson and Laura Muir, the talent pool has shrunk significantly owing to the “dreadful neglect” of elite athlete and coaching development by UK Athletics and poor decisions. UK Athletics recently announced independent reviews into safeguarding in the sport as well as its controversial decision to allow Mo Farah to continue working with Salazar despite a BBC Panorama documentary in June 2015 raising questions about the coach’s practices at the Nike Oregon Project. At the time an internal UK Athletics investigation found there was “no reason to be concerned” about Salazar and cleared Farah, who denies any wrongdoing, to remain with him. In a statement UK Athletics said it welcomes the latest review. “We are pleased to have the support of UK Sport on a wide range of issues and the review will sit alongside and complement this work and is a further step in building a strong future for the sport.”