That faux lashes are no longer reserved for special occasions is not a terrible thing – but it is when they are dense odes to tarantulas, obliterating the wearer’s vision. By placing a lash strip only at the bottom (the experimental can draw them on as per Ralph & Russo SS20) and pencilling a line across your inner socket, you’ll keep things modern and a little edgy. Ultimately, your falsies should be an elevated version of your, perhaps, naturally sparse lashes. And you should be able to see where you are going. 1. KVD Vegan Beauty Everlasting Blush £22, debenhams.com 2. Jillian Dempsey Kohl Eyeliner in Jet Black £16.50, thisisbeautymart.com 3. Morphe Pop of Pastel Lipstick £20, uk.morphe.com4. Anastasia Beverly Hills Faux Lashes £14, anastasiabeverlyhills.co.uk 5. Fenty Full Frontal Mascara £21, boots.com When someone tells me that, despite using pigmentation-busting products, their skin issues – sunspots, acne scarring, uneven skin tone and the like – are reoccurring, I ask whether they use sunscreen. With products that treat dark spots, etc, you need sunscreen to protect the skin otherwise you’ll be going round in circles. The second question I ask is: what product are you using? You need something with a clever formula and this Dr Dennis Gross offering is one of the best – and fastest acting – products I have come across in a long while. It is formulated with i-ascorbic acid (essentially vitamin C in its pure form), lactic acid, kojic acid and liquorice extract, which are all very powerful for battling hyperpigmentation and uneven spots. This serum also brightens, reduces the look of fine lines and wrinkles, and softens. I noticed changes to my overall skin texture overnight and the more you use it, the better the results. (If your pigmentation issues are pronounced, I would recommend seeing a good aesthetician every couple of months in conjunction with using this product.) Now for some caveats. The texture is a little sticky, but it doesn’t stay that way. The scent, like any great vitamin C product, is reminiscent of hot dog water. It’s pricey but a worthy investment because it works. And quickly. Which is what counts. Dr Dennis Gross Dark Spot Serum, £99, spacenk.com Brighten up An exfoliator and remover of makeup, dirt and excess oil, this foaming gel cleanser – with 11.8% glycolic acid – is perfect for dull skin that needs brightening. SkinCeuticals Glycolic Renewal Cleanser, £30, skinceuticals.co.uk For the morning after It has pretty packaging, but is a serious cleanser. The blend of coconut water, lime peel, apple extract and hyaluronic acid hydrates while drawing out impurities. Hangover Wash The Day Away Cleanser, £20, toofaced.com Open sesame Sesame milk is known for its dead skin cell removing properties. Add that to a balm with over 40% botanical oils and you have a wonderfully gentle but efficacious cleanser. Erborian Milk and Peel Balm, £26, spacenk.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.