In the early hours of Thursday morning Australian time, Steve Smith and David Warner return to Newlands in Cape Town to take on South Africa in a cricket match. As benign as it seems, the event will mark nearly two years since the sandpaper imbroglio tore viciously at Australian cricket’s cultural seams, sparking a wave of invective, reflection and – it would appear – rehabilitation: public and private, institutional and individual. Although most Australians were asleep when it happened, in the pantheon of cricket crises the sandpaper affair landed in the “I remember where I was when I found out” realm. Given the sheer onslaught of content this century, such a phenomenon is worth pointing out. For this author, it was an antenatal class in north London, ducking to the bathroom four or five times to read dispatches while our midwife delivered subtly editorialised views on the dangers of NHS doctors “intervening” in the birth. But where our doctor successfully intervened, Australia’s spin doctors unfortunately did not. The press conference coverup added to the crime, and the issue metastasised. After texting an ex-pro about the incident at the time, the reply came: “It’s nowhere near the worst ball tampering I’ve seen, but it’s definitely the dumbest.” The reaction was seismic. To put it in context, around Melbourne locals with a dash of self-awareness remember the time when its major tabloid devoted more pages to the Wayne Carey affair in March 2002 than it did September 11 in 2001, so consumed was the city with its game. If it were possible, this was bigger and, unlike the vast majority of AFL tales, it was global. It led the news in the UK, which at the time was dealing with Brexit, Cambridge Analytica, and Russian spies using nerve agents. But for a few days, “Aussie Cheats” took top billing, and had outlets such as the BBC combing the country for Australian cricket pundits, most of whom were in South Africa. As a result, at one point a retired Australian district cricketer fronted shows to provide special comments, such was the hunger for a human piñata. The chief question was: “Why do Aussies so often cheat?” To believe the sandpaper scandal was an overstated moral panic in response to ball tampering – which many people still do – would be to misunderstand it. The event became less about the specific indiscretion than it was the straw that broke the camel’s back for a public weary of the ceaseless sneer and charmlessness of the men playing at the highest level of the country’s national sport. It was a lightning rod for the general behaviour of Australian cricketers which had sat simmering for decades, and then boiled over under Darren Lehmann – the arch-alpha who in the 24 months since Cape Town has coached with Australia’s national performance squad before taking a role with Brisbane Heat in March 2019. To simply fast forward two years would be to disregard the subsequent public bloodletting, which was followed by a painstaking process of wound-healing. Central to it has been an arm-wrestle and recalibration on each of Smith and Warner, who have re-entered the side undiminished as batsmen but diminished as leaders. Attitudes toward them both differ, as they always did. A Stuart Broad-dismantling aside, Warner has returned with energy and runs, but this time devoid of any overt brand, whether it be The Reverend or The Bull. There were rumours he may not have been welcome back in the national side, but for Justin Langer’s insistence. No doubt 21 Test centuries helped his case, to which he’s added another three – one of them a triple. If there has been any rebrand, it has been as a family man who appears unconcerned with pining for the affection of both public or teammates. He simply enjoys scoring siege-mentality runs, and is at peace with his natural abrasion and resting Bull face. Also, there remains an official version of events at Newlands to which everyone is happy to subscribe, for now. Welcoming Warner back might therefore have proven a smart move, given that any attempt to ostracise him might have invited a nuclear reaction. In contrast, the events of Cape Town have chiselled Smith from Australia’s generational chief – following Border, Waugh, Ponting and Clarke before him – to something more akin to a batting savant. In the intervening period, as skipper Tim Paine has demonstrated the soft power benefits of possessing a polished diplomatic touch, without compromising on the relentlessness and ruthlessness required to win Tests. It’s a contrast that puts a fine point on Smith’s blind spot when originally in the role, and it’s not unreasonable to question the wisdom of any Smith reappointment on this basis. Through the trial, turnover, and tears of sandpaper-gate, Australian cricket has endured its dip and is now clearly headed north, both on the field and off. Everybody associated with the farrago was clearly humbled by the experience, but its reverberations still endure. Having bustled themselves into a new era of pre-game handshakes, PG sledging and earthing, the most pressing cultural question now is: how real is this behaviour, and will it be observed should Australia ascend to the top of world cricket again?