The lawyer for Lt Col Alexander Vindman condemned Donald Trump on Saturday for making “obviously false statements” about the decorated military veteran, after the president defended sacking him through several critical tweets. Ambassador David Pressman, who represents Vindman, said: “The president this morning made a series of obviously false statements concerning Lieutenant Colonel Vindman; they conflict with the clear personnel record and the entirety of the impeachment record of which the president is well aware.” He went on: “While the most powerful man in the world continues his campaign of intimidation, while too many entrusted with political office continue to remain silent, Lt Col Vindman continues his service to our country as a decorated, active duty member of our military.” Pressman’s statement came several hours after Trump said that “Fake News CNN & MSDNC keep talking about ‘Lt Col’ Vindman as though I should think only how wonderful he was. “Actually, I don’t know him, never spoke to him, or met him (I don’t believe!) but, he was very insubordinate, reported contents of my ‘perfect’ calls incorrectly, &…” The next tweet from Trump said Vindman “was given a horrendous report by his superior, the man he reported to, who publicly stated that Vindman had problems with judgement, adhering to the chain of command and leaking information. In other words, ‘OUT’”. Vindman was a key witness in the impeachment inquiry, delivering damaging testimony despite Trump’s opposition to the proceedings. While Vindman, a Ukraine expert and Purple Heart recipient, was set to rotate out of his national security council post this summer, he was abruptly axed and escorted out of the White House on Friday. Vindman’s twin brother – who was not an impeachment witness – was also booted from his job on the national security council, reports said. Gordon Sondland, who also provided testimony in the inquiry, was sacked from his post as US ambassador to the European Union just hours after Vindman’s firing.