By anyone’s standards, Julian Cope has had a remarkable career. Plenty of artists went from the post-punk indie underground to the pages of Smash Hits and the stages of Top of the Pops, but only Cope attempted to do it while existing on a diet largely comprised of LSD – with inevitably chaotic results. Later in the 80s, he went from being dismissed as a hopeless acid casualty – his record company, he recalls tonight, baulked at the release of his 1985 single Sunspots, not least because the chorus largely consisted of Cope vocally impersonating the noise of a car driving past – to a brief period as a mainstream rock star. From there he dived into cult-dom of a particularly esoteric nature, where learned books on prehistoric archaeology and Krautrock rub shoulders with the kind of baffling discography you can only get away with if you release your own albums. Songs sit alongside spoken word, and then there’s the likes of 1999’s Odin, which, depending on your perspective, is either a meditational device designed to allow listeners to communicate with “the granite sub-basement of the underworld”, or 72 minutes of Julian Cope humming. It’s the stuff of which rabidly devoted followings are made – the venue is sold out – and the kind of serpentine path that’s almost impossible to make sense of in 90 minutes. Yet on stage Cope somehow manages it. Hidden behind a dense beard, sunglasses and what looks like a Luftwaffe cap, he’s nevertheless a warm and extremely funny performer. For all the weirdness, there’s a real depth to his work, informed by his eclectic passions. Between songs, the topics range from politics to the use of ephedra by ancient civilisations – “whenever cultures are achieving their pinnacle, it’s not the product of the smug and the cynical – it’s the ones on drugs,” offers the subsequent song – to the vacillations of Cope’s own career. Stripping the songs back to acoustic guitar, albeit an acoustic guitar that comes with a side order of distortion and wah effects, lays bare the melodies that occasionally get lost in the studio amid Cope’s penchant for lo-fi experimentation. He can hop neatly from the Teardrop Explodes’ punchy 1981 hit Passionate Friend, to the expansive Autogeddon Blues, to a consideration of social media in Your Facebook, My Laptop from his most recent album, Self Civil War. Indeed, you can occasionally see a clear musical link between what Cope did then and what he does now: he plays an as-yet unreleased song that harks back to what he calls the “ba-ba-ba” years – after the kind of vocals that regularly appeared on Teardrop Explodes songs – complete with pure pop tune, sparkling chorus and “ba-ba-ba” interjections. Alas, its commercial progress may be impeded by the fact that it’s called Cunts Can Fuck Off. “I’m making lists of all the people I love,” he sings, “and all the cunts who can fuck off”, a sentiment it’s very hard not to get behind in what the sleeve of Self Civil War calls “our troubled times”. In fact, 41 years on from the Teardrop Explodes’ debut single, it’s very hard not to get behind Julian Cope: uncompromising cult heroes come no more engaging. Touring until 8 March.