As recently chronicled in the Guardian, the mushroom is having a moment, and nowhere more so than in Antipodean-inspired brunch cafes, where meat is in retreat and avocados, eggs and sweetcorn fritters are in the ascendancy. Packed with beneficial nutrients and so sustainable you can grow them in spent coffee grounds (creating a virtuous breakfast circle), mushrooms are set to play an ever bigger part in our mornings. Like the bacon sandwich or boiled egg, mushrooms on toast is a dish of such seeming simplicity you may wonder how it warrants How to Eat’s attention. How will it support 1,500 words of painfully verbose, serio-comic riffing? But at How to Eat the deliciousness is in the detail. For instance, two plain, baked flat mushrooms on Warburton’s toastie loaf is, technically, mushrooms on toast. But is that the dish that celebrity fans such as Nigel Slater, Timothy Spall and Victoria Coren fell in love with? It is certainly not a plate you would happily pay £7 for in your local hipster café (after drone yoga, Weds 7.30am). Not without asking: “Oi, tattoos, where’s the rest of it?” So, without further ado, it is time for How to Eat (HTE) to put the fun in fungi and adjudicate on mushrooms on toast. Disclaimer: much as HTE loves the picture of Britain painted in this American article, of a nation of Siobhans habitually foraging their own mushrooms, please don’t. It will likely be a waste of time in built-up Bolton or Birmingham (pro tip: try the supermarket), or you may die. Eight years in, HTE cannot afford to lose any more readers. We are barely quorate here as it is. The meatier the mushrooms, the mightier the dish; that is, both meaty in texture and in their bosky woodland flavours. They have their uses elsewhere, but in this case avoid mushrooms that can take on a flabby, chewy consistency, such as oyster, hen of the woods, girolles and shimeji. Instead, use stocky, muscular varieties such as chestnut or shiitake, bulked out if necessary with field or cup, and, perhaps, given a given a bit of extra bottom-end weight in the bass cabinets (note: it is often useful to think of a dish as a dub reggae soundsystem), by adding a few dried, rehydrated wild porcini. Chop everything into broadly uniform bite-sized chunks. You do not want a jumble of mushrooms ranging from minuscule to XXL pieces you struggle to manoeuvre into your mouth. Cook with care so that, beyond their silky surfaces, those earthy mushrooms retain a toothsome bite. To be precise, this entry should be titled creamed mushrooms on toast. You can fry your mushrooms in A Fat of Your Choosing (it should be butter and plenty of it) and simply plonk them on toast, but why deny yourself the pleasure of also enrobing them in something creamy? Preferably, half-fat creme fraiche, as its lactic twang is useful as we build flavour into this dish. Adding cream of some sort also helps overcome a major issue: during frying, mushrooms disgorge so much water you will struggle to drive it off. Served naked, wet mushrooms will create an unedifying damp patch in the middle of your toast. The addition of creme fraiche, however, seems to hold the sauce atop the toast for longer, slowing the rate of absorbency, preventing the bread from turning into a rank wet mulch. How does that work, you ask? Let’s call it an emulsion-cum-viscosity-type-thing-maybe. If you came here for hard science, you are reading the wrong column. In terms of additional flavourings, garlic is key, shallots or onion less so. You can crush, smoosh and generally obliterate the former into a melting paste, but, no matter how finely chopped, onions bring an itty-bitty texture to the dish that detracts from its velvet smoothness (see also, bacon shrapnel, pine nuts, chopped chives etc). For extra umami impact and/or general interest, you should also vigorously reduce a splash of soy sauce, dry Marsala or other wine in your mushrooms. HTE’s preference is for soy early doors, then a squeeze of lemon just before serving to give it some top-line zip. You will see recipes advising you to garnish your mushrooms on toast with chives or flat-leaf parsley but will no one think of the food waste? Globally, 97.2% of fresh herb garnishes are removed and discarded after serving. They add nothing. Except a huge carbon footprint. Maybe. Probably. Either way, such decorative shrubbery is nonsense. Grated cheese is more tempting but similarly inessential. Deploy your soy efficiently and you will not need a sprinkling/avalanche of parmesan or cheddar to ramp up this dish’s umami levels. In fact, go too heavy on the cheese and your ’shrooms will turn into a greasy quagmire. Adding an egg creates a similar issue. Yolk running in creamy sauce is not the sublime diary duet it appears on paper. It turns your hillock of creamed mushrooms into an overly thickened mess, while the egg white turns this already rich dish into something that eats like a precursor to gout. You could add a green side salad to make yourself feel virtuous but it will taste disgusting. Is there anything more dispiriting in food than eating iron-packed, chlorophyll-stacked leaves that have wilted in a hot, creamy sauce? It is a truly jarring experience. Like Thom Yorke supporting Taylor Swift, a misplaced Manchester City pass, Paddy McGuinness fronting Newsnight. Adding anything more substantial or radical to mushrooms on toast (please click past suggestions such as goat’s cheese, crab meat, prosciutto or leeks), turns this into an irreconcilably different animal. The only thing worse would be dressing your plate with that Brian Blessed of condiments, truffle oil. No matter how little you use, it shouts down every other flavour. Less a finishing flourish, more aerial bombardment. Take two inch-thick slices from the middle of a circular off-white sourdough boule and after toasting them to a Mediterranean tan, arrange them in a crossed V-shape*, one on top of the other. That way, you can drape your mushrooms over the “joint” in that V and ensure that a section of the bottom piece of toast remains dry. This is the section, along with the indestructibly robust crusts, that you can then use to mop up any remnants of sauce or stray mushrooms. It is the best of both worlds: the generously buttered toast will be gently softened by the creamy sauce yet, elsewhere, will remain dry enough that you can taste its lightly sour, long-fermented complexity. You could try other breads. You could try ones that appear to make sense, such as ciabatta or English muffins (too woolly, too absorbent, ultimately). If you really hate yourself, you could also try those that don’t, too (dark rye, worthy wholemeal, supermarket white sliced that will drown and disintegrate beneath those mushrooms). But with the exception of Simon Hopkinson’s beloved fried bread – worth trying, but just too much, frankly – you will always come back to sourdough. * Please invert the V so its apex is facing away from you as you eat. Only a monster would eat food that is pointing aggressively at them. And why have you made your food so angry? Because you are eating it upside down. A flat plate with a low lip to retain the sauce, but nothing deeper or curved that exists in that growing grey zone where bowls meet plates. You need a proper flat surface to work on, one that in no way inhibits your movements with a knife and fork. Put the kitchen roll on the table, too. Let’s go all out. This is a saucy dish. It can get messy. Historically, mushrooms on toast was regularly described as the ultimate “light supper”, that middle-class meal eaten mid-evening (in lieu of a proper tea, the bohemian layabouts) that baffled working-class northerners who, by that hour, had already eaten their supper – cornflakes in front of Coronation Street. But now we all work and eat at increasingly irregular hours and that confusion no longer opens up the seam of comic gold it once did. The light supper is toast. Eating a main(ish) meal at 8pm (or 4pm or 10pm) has been normalised. That is good news for mushrooms on toast, because other than before 9am, when a deeply savoury version can be a bit over-facing, it works at any time. It is big enough to fill any hunger gap, but not so heavy it will leave you prone and groaning. Quite the opposite. It is a relatively easily digestible livener. As a fan of the savoury course, HTE also recommends it as dessert, albeit in a half-size version. I know this is Britain. I know this is How to Eat. But, hey guys, we don’t have to drink alcohol with every meal, right? Because in a very satisfying case of serendipity, vis-a-vis the Oz-style brunch cafe, the flat white is the perfect partner for mushrooms on toast. In a Venn diagram they would overlap in their creaminess, but then the coffee’s smoothly modulated bitterness clears the palate of any overbearing greasiness. It’s perfection. For 20 minutes. Then you can go for a pint. So, mushrooms on toast, how do you eat yours?