Tom Harrison, the chief executive of the England and Wales Cricket Board, said he is not a champion of four-day Test cricket and warned that any attempt to make the shortened format mandatory will be met with resistance. The International Cricket Council is to meet in Dubai at the end of March, when a proposal to make fixtures in the World Test Championship four-day affairs from 2023 will feature in the debate over the sport’s future. An ECB spokesperson last month described the governing body as “cautious” proponents of four-day Test cricket and that it could “provide a sustainable solution to the complex scheduling needs and player workloads we face as a global sport”. But while Colin Graves, the ECB chairman, has stated his personal support for the concept, Harrison has now stressed that English cricket is not in favour of such a sweeping change other than for fixtures against emerging Test nations. Quoted in the latest edition of the Cricketer magazine, which is published on Friday, Harrison said: “There are no plans over the next few years to introduce four-day Tests in England … certainly not in the World Test Championship … the Ashes. “I’ve been positioned as the champion of four-day Test cricket. I am not. It’s not a binary argument. We have just had the most successful summer of Test cricket we have ever had. We played one four-day Test [v Ireland], and five five-day [Ashes Tests]. They were all outrageously successful. “I’m cautiously supportive of four-day Tests, in certain geographies, in certain times of the year, against certain opposition. In a cluttered calendar, when we’re facing enormous pressure on schedules, four-day Test cricket does answer some questions, some of the time. It’s not the answer to all of our problems, and our own problems. That’s not to say we might not play another four-day Test at some stage … against Afghanistan and Ireland for instance.” Asked if the ICC could impose four-day Tests on its members without their unanimous consent, Harrison replied: “The ICC is us. Good luck with that one. There’s no support for that – India, Australia and us – and that’s quite a powerful lobby.” This bullish assertion comes at a time of tension between the wealthier member boards and the ICC over the latter’s desire to create new men’s and women’s T20 and ODI “Champions Cups” for the period 2023-31. The move would ensure at least one global tournament is staged per year and help regulate cash-flow for the so-called smaller nations who struggle to make bilateral cricket pay. But despite the ICC seeking expressions of interest over hosting these events, the schedule is yet to be agreed. There is resistance from India and England amid fears of swamping the global calendar and devaluing the existing ODI and T20 World Cups. An ECB spokesperson said: “We, along with other members of the ICC share the view that we must fully understand the impact on the schedule, and particularly, the impact on Test match and bilateral cricket before making a decision on the new proposals. We look forward to being a part of this work and making a fully-informed decision.”