Seven men and five women will be sent out of courtroom 99 at the New York supreme court on Tuesday carrying the fate of Harvey Weinstein and the #MeToo movement on their shoulders. The jury of 12 New Yorkers will begin a potentially testing deliberation on whether or not to find the disgraced movie mogul guilty of rape and sexual assault. Their collective decision could have monumental consequences. If they find the defendant guilty he could face a maximum sentence of life in prison. If they acquit, the failure to secure a conviction against a man who has been accused of alleged sexual misconduct by more than 100 women will send waves of shock and dismay throughout the fledgling #MeToo cause that was largely triggered by revelations involving Weinstein in 2017. The judge in the case, James Burke, will closely instruct the jury how to work through the five charges facing Weinstein, 67. First they must consider the evidence relating to the two main accusers. One is a woman who the Guardian is not naming because her wishes over identification are not known. She alleges she was raped by Weinstein in a New York hotel, for which he has been charged with rape in the first and third degrees which carry a maximum sentence of 25 years. The second main accuser is Miriam Haley, a former Project Runway production assistant who alleges the fallen Hollywood producer forced oral sex on her in his SoHo apartment in 2006. The count of criminal sex act also carries a top sentence of 25 years. If the jury finds Weinstein guilty of the charges relating to either or both of the main accusers it can then move on to consider the final two counts: predatory sexual assault. To convict on these charges the jurors must find the movie producer guilty of sexually assaulting more than one woman. For these counts, prosecutors have invited them to consider the evidence of the best-known of the six women who have gone into the witness stand, the Sopranos actor Annabella Sciorra. She gave harrowing testimony in which she described allegedly having her hands pinned above her head as she was held down on a bed and violently raped in her Gramercy Park apartment in the winter of 1993-94. Though the alleged incident is well beyond the statute of limitations, and thus cannot be prosecuted in its own right, it can speak to the accusation that Weinstein was a serial sex criminal contained in the sexual predatory assault charges. Those are the most serious counts of all, carrying a possible maximum sentence of life imprisonment. In the US, Rainn offers support at 800-656-4673 or by chat at Rainn.org. In the UK, the rape crisis national freephone helpline is at 0808-802-9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800-737-7328) or 1800respect.org.au. Other international helplines can be found at Ibiblio.org.