It was 1992. I was a five-year-old girl with a head of Barbra Streisand-esque Jewish curls and an embarrassing early 90s outfit, sitting on the stairs with my dad, when he told me he was gay. Not as dramatic as Phillip Schofield on national television, sure, but just as powerful. It was a big year. John Major had won the election. IRA bombs were a worry in London. And I was hooked on Polly Pockets, My Little Pony and Meccano. So my dad’s sexuality was not that high on my five-year old agenda. But from that moment on the stairs, it came to define who I was. As a kid, having a gay dad felt like a superpower. I was proud of my dad, I wanted my friends to meet him and I loved being around him. I always felt grateful that he told me when I was young. It meant I had the joy of truly seeing him for who he was. And it gave me a very early lesson in injustice, power and privilege that I continue to carry with me. I credit my dad for the ease and confidence I felt about him being gay. He made space for questions (“Can two men make babies?”, “What’s drag?”, “Your friend died of Aids – what does that mean?”), gave age-appropriate answers and made sure that I always knew how much I was loved. I can’t imagine a better way to come out to your children. Or a better way to show them how to have difficult conversations with kindness and curiosity. But coming out isn’t just that one dramatic conversation. It’s a continuous process. Throughout my childhood, he surrounded me with examples of positive gay relationships. I spent so much time in Soho that I could navigate it blindfolded. London and Brighton Pride became staples of my year. I was a regular at Stonewall meetings. And I consumed every single piece of gay-friendly media – several times, since there wasn’t much of it at this point. I saw myself in Jenny Lives with Eric and Martin, a book that scandalised Margaret Thatcher so much that she banned “the promotion of homosexuality” in schools and libraries. And to this day my favourite film is Beautiful Thing – which gave me positive role models for the type of relationship I was being told by the government was disgusting and shameful. My dad had the foresight to surround me with anything that normalised queer life to make me feel like I belonged, in a world that was still intent on telling me the opposite. This is what homophobes often call “pushing the gay agenda on children” – something I’ve heard from protesters in Birmingham recently. And quite frankly, I’m all for it. I’m a walking example of what happens when teaching LGBTQ+ relationships is done right. These books, films and experiences gave me the strength to hold my own through secondary school – when things got tougher and “your dad’s a poofter, that’s butters” became a weekly insult. Because of the gay world in which my dad had nurtured me, I was empathetic, confident and unashamed at a time when lots of my friends were tearing themselves apart around sexuality. But there was a downside. The mainstream gay community was, and still is, struggling with its own misogyny, transphobia, biphobia and racism. So ironically, growing up part of gay culture made it harder for me to come to terms with my own queer identity and with my Jewishness – something that wasn’t that welcome in gay spaces. I remember the sense of confusion and anxiety I felt as a 12-year-old when I realised that I fancied Usher as well as Mariah Carey. Since I was told that bisexuals didn’t really exist, I didn’t know where that left me. And despite my dad’s incredible openness, it took me until my 20s to have that conversation with him. So what is there to learn about coming out to your kids? Be open, honest and low-drama. It gives kids the permission to ask the right questions and to confidently field hostility when they encounter it in the outside world. Don’t shy away from immersing kids in queer culture and politics. Community is important, as is connecting the struggle for gay rights to other intersections of oppression, such as racism and transphobia. And lastly, there’s no right way to come out. And, in fact, no obligation to come out at all – there are lots of situations where our societal obsession with coming out can be dangerous. Instead of being an individual responsibility, it’s an institutional one. It’s on our politicians to create policies that support all queer people rather than leaving so many marginalised, on our media to properly reflect the true diversity of queer relationships on screen and in print, and on all of us to create a society where queerness is celebrated. PS: Thanks Dad. • Rachel Diamond Hunter is the head of campaigns at 38 Degrees • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.