Ten minutes into my date with Taylor and I’ve spilled the champagne, smashed four glasses and slapped his cheek with uncooked lobster. The table is a blazing inferno (my attempt to light our votive candle was suboptimal). While I fumble with the fire extinguisher, Taylor stares at his phone, arms folded, and purses his lips. Moments like these transform Table Manners from a physics-based dating simulator into something approaching hilarious Mr Bean fan fiction. Table Manners borrows the idea Bossa popularised with Surgeon Simulator by challenging players to complete a series of dexterous tasks via purposefully janky controls. Each level entails a visit to a series of increasingly whacky restaurants that play host to various romantic dates. Your partner makes demands – “Order us burgers … Refill my glass … Cook fondue” – and you have a limited time to realise their whims lest they slam down their fist and declare the date over. It’s a fun premise, made sharper by a puckish commitment to a conceit that pokes fun at modern dating conventions. To embark on a date you must first take out your mobile phone, boot up an an app called Blundr then wipe your gammon-finger across the face of a prospective suitor. But under all the beards, piercings and makeup, every date (whether male or female) has the same base character model – and this standardisation is jarring. Similarly, you can flirt with your date through the app, but everyone has identical pre-generated chat options. In any other game this could seem lazy, but in Table Manners the superficiality is satirical. There’s always another near-identical suitor to take your date’s place at the table. In Table Manners you repeat the same dates with different people – steak, sushi, burgers – while in real life many of us bookmark classy-but-not-too-pricey haunts to revisit with other “first dates”. But there are frustrations. While Table Manners’ slapstick controls are part of what makes the chaos fun, sometimes they swing from deliberately awkward to accidentally broken. Unscripted bugs cause mayhem: a bucket of chips attached itself to my hand and smashed into anything I tried to delicately grasp; the blow torch refused to detect the food I was trying to toast; a glass got stuck halfway inside a table mat and prevented burgers being served; I had to restart the game twice after the pointer couldn’t detect “home” on the menu after completing levels. Meanwhile, as the table settings grew more complex the challenges became unfairly obscure. In an ice bar Taylor insisted, “my glass is empty!” but when I filled the glass on his placemat, the task remained incomplete. As it turned out, a metal cup balanced on the opposite edge of the table should have been filled instead. Upon returning home from the unsuccessful date, I logged in to chat with some other matches on Blundr. The pre-generated chat served the same joke twice within 10 seconds to one suitor, but whereas she hated it the first time round, the second made her laugh. There’s a fine line between playfully obtuse instructions and infuriatingly vague game design. Being unable to complete a task because it’s challenging is one thing, but not knowing exactly what the task is (and being blocked from doing it by bugs) is another. Table Manners has a brilliant premise and provides incisively funny commentary on modern romance but, just like when a Tinder date doesn’t match their profile and then proceeds to behave inexplicably, sometimes you just want to make your excuses and leave.