Finn Russell has once again been ignored by Scotland’s head coach, Gregor Townsend, who has made three changes to his starting XV for the Six Nations trip to Italy on Saturday. Russell has not played in the Six Nations after being disciplined following an alleged drinking session a fortnight before Scotland’s opening defeat by Ireland. The fly-half has since said he will not return to play for Scotland unless changes are made. The Edinburgh forwards Stuart McInally and Ben Toolis and the Gloucester centre Chris Harris have been promoted from the bench for their first start of the 2020 campaign in Rome. The hooker McInally swaps places with Glasgow’s Fraser Brown, who moves to the bench, while the second-row Toolis comes in for the injured Jonny Gray. Harris has been selected ahead of Huw Jones, who drops out of the 23-man squad. The Sale wing Byron McGuigan takes Harris’s place on the bench. Townsend, who said he had had no recent contact with Russell, said: “We believe Chris and Stuart deserve this opportunity. They were very close to the starting 15 when we entered this campaign. We think this is the right time for them to come in. Chris has been excellent for Gloucester this season and has continued to make improvements since the summer. He works very hard on both sides of the ball, which will be important this week. “Stuart has shown over the past few weeks he’s back to full fitness and is raring to go and Ben gets an opportunity to start following Jonny’s injury against England. Second-row is a position [where] we have a lot of competition with a number of very good players available for selection. We’re looking forward to seeing how he combines again with Scott [Cummings] after a successful outing together against Russia in the World Cup.” Scotland and Italy have both yet to win a match in the Six Nations this season, Scotland defeated by Ireland and England , and Italy enduring away defeats by Wales and France. “Italy are always a very tough opponent, especially in Rome, where we know they’ll look to play with a huge amount of energy,” Townsend said. “It’s a different Italy team to the one we’ve played in the past. In their opening two games of the Championship they have played with real ambition and width. Team to face Italy Stuart Hogg (capt), Sean Maitland, Chris Harris, Sam Johnson, Blair Kinghorn, Adam Hastings, Ali Price, Rory Sutherland, Stuart McInally, Zander Fagerson, Ben Toolis, Scott Cummings, Jamie Ritchie, Hamish Watson, Magnus Bradbury. Replacements Fraser Brown, Allan Dell, Willem Nel, Grant Gilchrist, Matt Fagerson, George Horne, Rory Hutchinson, Byron McGuigan. Hogg; Maitland, Harris, Johnson, Kinghorn; Hastings, Price; Sutherland, McInally, Fagerson, Cummings, Toolis, Ritchie, Watson, Bradbury. Replacements: Brown, Dell, Nel, Gilchrist, Fagerson, Horne, Hutchinson, McGuigan.