Pep Guardiola has a four-year itch – the Catalan tending not to stay in charge of one club for more than four seasons – and Juventus are prepared to scratch it with an audacious swoop for the Manchester City manager. So says the Sun anyhow, which makes great play of Pep having not yet signed a new deal at the Etihad and reports that the Juve president, Andrea Agnelli, sees Guardiola as the man to end the club’s long wait for a Champions League title, despite having appointed Maurizio Sarri and assigned him that task only last summer. If the Mill had a penny for every day Erling Braut Haaland has been linked with a big-money move this season, we’d have, by our count, £1.87. And even though Haaland has now made his big-money move, that hasn’t stopped even bigger-money moves being touted for the prodigious Norwegian striker. According to 90min.com, Manchester City – Pep or no Pep – want to prise the 19-year-old away from Borussia Dortmund and see him as a long-term replacement for Sergio Agüero. Another Mill perennial, RB Leipzig’s Timo Werner, has been linked with Liverpool though word is that Bayer Leverkusen’s Kai Havertz is a more realistic priority, and the Premier League champions-elect are prepared to spend big to bring the 20-year-old midfielder to Anfield. It might, too, be an easier signing than their old favourite Philippe Coutinho, who has attracted competing interest from Manchester United, City, Tottenham and Chelsea. Talking of Spurs, José Mourinho is eyeing up defenders – his hobby as well as his job – and is thought to fancy Benfica’s Rúben Dias and a £40m raid for Bournemouth’s Nathan Aké. Not content with this pair, the Tottenham manager also has designs on Norwich’s Max Aarons, who is valued at £15m, and Nice’s Youcef Atal, who would cost around £25m. Dias’s agent is Jorge Mendes, for what it’s worth (normally a lot). Down in the Championship, the Wigan left-back Antonee Robinson is firmly on the radar of Chelsea, Aston Villa and Newcastle, who are all keen on signing the American in the summer and helping him to forget the frustrating transfer deadline day he spent hanging around Milan airport browsing tourist tat and waiting in vain for a deal to join the Rossoneri to come to fruition. And finally, somewhat further down the pyramid, the young Hartlepool goalkeeper Brad Young could be set to swap Victoria Park for Stamford Bridge come the summer with Chelsea leading the race to sign the 17-year-old, though Manchester United and Arsenal are also sniffing around.