Carmakers are monitoring the development of the coronavirus outbreak in Europe amid concerns that a key motor show in Geneva could be affected. The spread of the disease has forced the cancellation of the Mobile World Congress, a tech trade fair in Barcelona that had been expected to host more than 100,000 delegates from about 200 countries. Geneva is preparing to welcome 600,000 visitors to its auto show on 5 to 15 March. The Mercedes-Benz owner Daimler, Audi, and Renault said they still planned to attend, as did the UK’s Aston Martin and Bentley. The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the Wuhan coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine. The UN agency advises people to: Despite a surge in sales of face masks in the aftermath of the outbreak of the coronavirus outbreak, experts are divided over whether they can prevent transmission and infection. There is some evidence to suggest that masks can help prevent hand-to-mouth transmissions, given the large number of times people touch their faces. The consensus appears to be that wearing a mask can limit – but not eliminate – the risks, provided they are used correctly. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office has advised UK nationals to leave China where possible. It is also warning that travellers from Hong Kong, Japan, Macau, Malaysia, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand who develop symptoms of cough or fever or shortness of breath within 14 days of returning the UK should contact the NHS by phone. Justin McCurry The show is an important event in the European automotive calendar that lures executives and car fans from across the continent to see the latest models and new technologies. A spokeswoman for the show said “so far it will be running as usual in 2020”, adding that less than 1% of visitors were from outside Europe. Switzerland has not yet reported a single case of coronavirus and there are no restrictions on travel to the country. The show’s organisers will undertake extra cleaning and disinfection, focused on catering areas, toilets and handrails. There will also be an awareness campaign aimed at staff and visitors on how to reduce the likelihood of infection. Motor shows in China, the centre of the outbreak, are also under threat. Autocar magazine reported that the Beijing motor show, which is expecting 800,000 visitors in April, could be postponed.