What were you hoping for?I had no socials to trawl through beforehand then feign surprise that he’d been on holiday recently, which was actually really nice. I tried to leave expectations at the door. First impressions?Great smile. We had the classic “Do we hug or handshake?” moment. I’m always a hugger. What did you talk about?Family, music tastes (I can just about forgive him for dissing Girls Aloud – just) and formative gay kisses on Hollyoaks. Any awkward moments?Not between us, but we got to chat to people at various stages of drunkenness round us, which is always a good way to convince yourself you are completely sober (we were not). Good table manners?Yes. Best thing about Nabil?I’d say his warmth, and how openly we were able to chat. Would you introduce him to your friends?Sure! Describe Nabil in three wordsThoughtful, engaging, sweet. What do you think he made of you?We got on well – he was definitely a fan of my dancing, and we had a lot of shared interests. Did you go on somewhere?We stayed until closing, then had a good dance in a little bar nearby. Then we went back to mine… And... did you kiss?Yup. Quite a bit. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?The place was so loud that I think we had the same conversations a few times over, but we managed. Marks out of 10?I think I’d give it a 7? I’m terrible at ratings. (My hangover was a 10/10.) Would you meet again?Happily, I had a really good time. I feel like it might be more of a friend thing though for me. What were you hoping for?A free meal and a Call Me By Your Name-type romance. But mostly a free meal. First impressions?What a great moustache. What did you talk about?Living in London, theatre, books, characters we had played in school plays, our respective love and disdain of X-Men. Any awkward moments?I went in to greet him with a handshake and he went in for a hug. The waiter later told me he thought it was a cute moment. Good table manners?Excellent; he kept my wine glass generously topped up. He came round and sat closer to me when the surrounding noise became too loud. Best thing about Jack?He was very passionate about the things he talked about, but he also just seemed like a really fun guy. Would you introduce him to your friends?I think they would probably prefer him to me. Describe Jack in three wordsHandsome, creative, articulate. What do you think he made of you?Probably a nerdy northerner with a funny hair colour and an over-fondness for free wine. Did you go on somewhere?We bought several pints at a nearby bar, then danced the night away together. And... did you kiss?Copiously. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I somehow managed to fall asleep on his sofa, and not in his bed. Marks out of 10?A solid 8. Would you meet again?I would indeed! • Jack and Nabil ate at Lost in Brixton, London SW9. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone likeminded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com