Pretending to be dead for this long is definitely Jeremy’s worst extended joke so far,” writes Sandi Toksvig in her tribute to Jeremy Hardy, one of a series of reflections from his friends that pepper a new anthology of his writing, Jeremy Hardy Speaks Volumes. A year after his death on 1 February 2019, it’s a sentiment shared by Hardy’s wife, the film-maker Katie Barlow, who co-edited the book. “I’m still half-expecting him to come back from touring,” she says. “When I read something funny, or that might interest him, I go to call out to him to come and look, as if he’s just working in his study – ” she gestures to a door through the kitchen of their south London home – “and then I have to stop myself.” A box of books has just arrived from the publisher, the first time she has seen finished copies, and for a while she couldn’t bring herself to open it. It’s partly the finality of what the book represents, as she explains in her afterword: “By agreeing to edit this book, it felt like I was accepting that Jeremy has gone. But I will never accept what happened to Jeremy… Jeremy didn’t want to die, and this book only exists because he did.” How do you sum up a life – particularly one as multifaceted as Hardy’s? So many friends and associates wanted to pay tribute at his memorial last year that it lasted more than six hours; along with fellow comedians, speakers included Jeremy Corbyn as well as Ahmad and Jawad, two young Afghan brothers Barlow met while making a documentary about refugees, and who became like family to her and Hardy. To put together a book that would do justice to Hardy’s 30-plus years of comedy, as well as his journalism and activism, seemed a daunting task, especially so soon after his death. “I would have liked more time,” Barlow acknowledges. “The publishers approached me a few weeks after he died with the idea of doing something similar to a book they did for Linda Smith, who was a great friend of Jeremy’s. He wrote a reflection for that book, so I felt reassured that it would be in good hands and he’d be with Linda. But at the time I was in no state to be trawling through all that material.” The book was going to be co-edited by David Tyler, Hardy’s longtime radio producer who had worked with him on his Radio 4 series Jeremy Hardy Speaks to the Nation. He'd passed into the digital world, where I saw him everywhere… it felt very strange “David said we needed to give Jeremy back to the people, and I felt that I hadn’t even begun to come to terms with the fact that he’d gone, so how could I think about giving him back?” she says. “But I realised I had to jump in and get involved or it wouldn’t be the book that I wanted for Jeremy. I didn’t want it just to be a radio anthology, although those shows are brilliant. But first and foremost Jeremy was a live standup, and he was also an activist and I wanted all those elements to be reflected. We had to find a compromise because I was adamant that more of his activism should be in there – it was such a big part of Jeremy’s life and also how we met.” In 2002 Barlow had a chance encounter with the director Leila Sansour, who was about to travel to Bethlehem with Hardy to make a film with the International Solidarity Movement, but her cameraman had pulled out at the last minute. Barlow offered to take his place, and a few days later she met Hardy for the first time at Heathrow airport. “I thought he was cute,” she recalls, with a smile. “We were all quite nervous about what we were getting ourselves into, but Jeremy was so funny from the moment we set off, and he put us all at ease.” They spent a week staying with a Palestinian family, filming in the camps, and fell in love among tanks and gunfire. The Palestinian cause remained a central part of their life, both personally and professionally; Hardy became an ambassador for Medical Aid for Palestinians and Barlow went on to make further films in the region. “When Jeremy died, the Palestinian ambassador wrote to me saying Palestine has lost a great friend and supporter,” Barlow says. She also shows me a moving condolence letter from Lord Alf Dubs, paying tribute to Hardy’s work for refugees. The extraordinary public outpouring of affection for Hardy since his death has at times been difficult to reconcile with private grief. “I really hadn’t anticipated the scale of it,” Barlow says. “I knew he was loved but to that extent, I had no idea and I don’t think he did. And it had been such an intense time during the last few weeks of his illness, nursing him and being in that zone with him, that it was quite overwhelming to suddenly find him everywhere. He was gone and I was devastated, I couldn’t speak to him or hold him, but he’d passed into this digital world where I saw him everywhere and everyone was talking about him. I was proud of him, but it felt very strange. There were so many people saying they looked up to him and that he inspired their career, and there are times when I think he could have done with hearing that himself, while he was alive. Because he never took his career for granted.” In a corner of the room, propped on a coffee table, is a photograph of the couple on their wedding day in December 2018. They’re captured kissing on a bus, half-hidden by a giant bouquet; they look giddy with happiness. Three days after his own wedding, Hardy walked Betty, his daughter from his first marriage, down the aisle on her wedding day. Six weeks later, he died. “Jeremy asked me to marry him in the last year of his life,” Barlow explains. Though they had been together 17 years, they hadn’t felt the need before – there’s a piece in the book from a 2017 radio show where Hardy jokes about all the reasons it’s best not to marry your partner. After his death Barlow was looking through the writing he left behind and found a diary he had started after his diagnosis in June 2018, which she had not seen before. “It was exactly what I needed to read at the time,” she says, her voice a little shaky for the first time since we’ve been speaking. “I was feeling quite lost and looking for a connection with him, something that was just ours, so I was thrilled to find this. It was incredibly emotional.” The diaries have not been published, but Barlow shows me this extract from a longer piece written on 1 September, 2018, the day Hardy received what he called the “bombshell consultation”, when he learned the cancer had spread and could not be operated on: So, having resolved to go nowhere without a fight, I was able to be calm when I called Katie. I mustered all the composure I could. I did not sound too devastated. I needed to be a greater man than I had ever been, which you might not think was much of an achievement, but it was in the circumstances… I told her I wanted to marry her, and I do. Not just because that’s what you do when you’re going to die, but because I want to marry her and then not die… And I’d have loved to be talking about marriage now, having just told her the cancer hasn’t spread, talking about many years of being married, with a love that’s renewed. But I’m telling her with nothing to offer but what courage and determination I have… And ‘till death do us part’ is an easy pledge at this moment. But marrying her means something now, everything now. Even in death, Hardy continues to surprise her. Looking through his material for the book, she was saddened to find how few recordings of his live work apparently survived. But a few days after it went to press, she received a call from the University of Kent, asking if she knew that in 2016 Hardy had deposited an archive with them consisting of 103 VHS tapes and 79 audio cassettes. “I didn’t know whether to laugh or cry,” she says, laughing. “I told them, ‘Your timing is impeccable.’” It means that Jeremy Hardy Speaks Volumes doesn’t have to be the last word. Because of the vast amount of material that necessarily had to be left out, and the new archive, there’s scope for future compilations, and perhaps a biography at some point. While the process of editing the book has often been a painful reminder of Hardy’s absence, it also gave Barlow an opportunity to appreciate his work in greater depth. “In the end it kept him close,” she writes in the afterword. In the meantime, Hardy ensured that she would keep busy. She had been working on a virtual reality art project, Parwaz, with Ahmad and Jawad, but had put it on hold to concentrate on nursing her husband through his last months. “What I didn’t know was that Jeremy had been secretly fundraising for the project,” she says. “On Christmas Day 2018 he told me he’d raised more than £20,000 so that we could finish it, so that it could be his legacy and his gift to me and the boys. I think he knew that I would need something to focus on when he’d gone. At one point last year I thought, you bastard, this means I actually have to finish it now – haven’t I got enough to deal with?” She laughs. “But that was Jeremy – he was thinking of other people, right up to the end.’  • Jeremy Hardy Speaks Volumes, edited by Katie Barlow and David Tyler, is published by John Murray Press (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15 • There is a memorial gig, Stand Up for Jeremy Hardy, at the Hammersmith Apollo, London, on 25 March. Click here for details/tickets I’ve never had much of a sex life, but I have always had lots of very close friends who “don’t think about me in that way” and I think that’s very supportive of them, really. In particular, I met a woman about 18 months ago and we became very close friends and for a while it was a very intense sort of close friendship, but there was no sex because she said that it would “spoil things”. Spoil her sex life, I suppose.Aspects of the Fringe, 1986 Clearly our society has a dysfunctional attitude to children. We use children as a status symbol, but when women carrying babies go begging on the underground, they get accused of using them as props. Where are they supposed to leave them? The beggars’ creche at Oxford Circus?Jeremy Hardy Speaks to the Nation, 2001 Middle-class people’s holidays must always be some remarkable and fantastic adventure. “Oh, we discovered this little village, completely off the beaten track, not on the tourist trail at all. Middle of nowhere. Tiny, tiny place. I think it only appears once every 200 years. Lovely people. So friendly. Tiny, tiny people, no bigger than your thumb. Simple but happy. And they had this fantastic sort of ad hoc dining room carved out of volcanic lava that was still flowing. And they cooked us this wonderful meal. There were eight or nine courses and they gave us wine and their local brandy. And they danced for us and had sex with us and I think the whole bill came to £2 a head.”Jeremy Hardy Speaks to the Nation, 2003 Our government judges people suitable immigrants only if they have the skills we’ve forgotten to train ourselves in. Racist journalists ask why we should help asylum seekers “who have done nothing for this country”. Well, give them a chance – they’ve only just got here. A newborn baby’s never lifted a finger for anyone else but you do the spare room up for them.Jeremy Hardy Speaks to the Nation, 2003 Religions have got cuter about pushing their opiates. They call themselves Faith Communities now and they call creation Intelligent Design. Design? Who would design the Earth? Are earthquakes just knocking through? “I love what you’ve done with this rift valley, there’s just so much more space. All you need is some scattered boulders and you’ll have added £15,000 to the value of the tectonic plate.”Jeremy Hardy Speaks to the Nation, 2007 Someone once said that seeing is believing, which is not the case. I’ve seen Tony Blair.Jeremy Hardy Speaks to the Nation, 2007 It is often said there aren’t enough women in the boardroom. But in reality there are thousands of women in boardrooms. It’s just that they’re the women who have to clean boardrooms at 4.30 in the morning and then be home in time to get their kids off to school before going to their other job while hoping their asylum claim isn’t turned down because they haven’t got enough documents to prove they were sufficiently tortured to satisfy a civil servant in Croydon.Jeremy Hardy Speaks to the Nation, 2013 How do we bring down carbon emissions and keep transporting food all over the world? Even if you live in the luxuriant Vale of Evesham and eat seasonally, it’s likely that asparagus you buy in May, even if grown a mile from your supermarket, is driven to an airfield, flown to Algeria for trimming and enhanced interrogation, then to a secret black site in a former Warsaw Pact country, where it’s hosed down and subjected to a cling-film restraint technique, before being rendered back to England and driven under cover of darkness back to the area where it was picked. Which is a good reason for eschewing supermarkets in favour of greengrocers and farmers’ markets. We now have lovely farmers’ markets in London. They’re a sign that an area is being gentrified and the greengrocer will soon be forced out of business by high rents. But there’s a new mini Sainsbury’s which covers you for the six and a half days when the farmers’ market reverts to being a bit of road.Jeremy Hardy Speaks to the Nation, 2014 Now, I’d like everyone in the audience and all those listening to take part in a mental exercise. Don’t be scared; it’ll be fun. Think of a number between one and 10. Any number, doesn’t matter what it is. Don’t tell anyone else, just hold that number in your head. Now double it. Now add four. Now double it again. Now multiply by the number you first thought of and add six zeroes. That’s how the government comes up with figures for benefit fraud and health tourism.Jeremy Hardy Speaks to the Nation, 2014 If you look up “sociopath”, it does fit quite well with Trump until you get to “often highly intelligent” and then it all goes tits up. So, arguably, he’s just a narcissist, but that’s an overused term that gets bandied around and very few people realise that it refers to the Greek god of ponds, who thought he was looking at his own reflection when actually it was a tiny daffodil.Jeremy Hardy Feels It, 2017 So many of my friends say: “Oh, we don’t know what to do, last of the kids are going off to uni, we don’t know what to do.” I’ll tell you what to do – get some refugees in their bedrooms before the little bastards try and come back. If you let your kids back in their bedrooms, you’ll never get shot of them. You need refugees – people with some spirit who will build a future and move on, people with self-respect and culinary skills – not your children.MAP Comedy Night, 2017 Some comedy fans just want the stuff about how hard it is to find the end of the cling film. I’d rather be doing that, to be honest. But sadly I’ve been cast a bum steer in life because I’m a political comedian. And it’s a miserable time to be a political comedian… People say: “Oh it must be good for you. Trump must be good for you comics.” But you know what, I think an untrammelled, expanding Israeli state is a high price to pay for some fake tan gags really.MAP Comedy Night, Feb 2017