Jofra Archer has been dropped from the second Test against West Indies and severely reprimanded after breaching England’s biosecure protocols by stopping off at his flat in Hove during the journey from Southampton to Old Trafford. England’s players travelled on Monday in separate cars following their four-wicket defeat at Hampshire’s Rose Bowl and were told there must be no breaks in the 230-mile journey bar the use of a designated biosecure county ground for lunch and pre-approved petrol stations. But Archer used the travel day to visit his flat en route, details of which only came to the attention of the England management on Wednesday evening after naming him in their 13-man squad for Thursday’s second Test. Archer, who must now spend the next five days in isolation at the team hotel at Old Trafford and undergo two additional Covid-19 tests, said in a statement: “I am extremely sorry for what I have done. I have put, not only myself, but the whole team and management in danger. I fully accept the consequences of my actions, and I want to sincerely apologise to everyone in the biosecure bubble. “It deeply pains me to be missing the Test match, especially with the series poised. I feel like I have let both teams down, and again I am sorry.” The statement from England, which explained the decision, but gave no details on the breach, said: “Jofra Archer has been excluded from the #raisethebat second Test against the West Indies starting today (Thursday 16 July) at Emirates Old Trafford following a breach of the team’s biosecure protocols. Archer will now commence five days of isolation and will undergo two Covid-19 tests in this period, which have to test negative before his self-isolation period is lifted.“The West Indies team have been made aware and are satisfied with the measures that have been imposed.” The three-match Test series against West Indies is being staged behind closed doors in a so-called biosecure bubble, meaning players are restricted to living in the hotels of the two grounds being used and are subject to regular Covid-19 tests. The drastic measures were put in place to get the fixtures cleared by the government, with the England and Wales Cricket Board having warned of losses of up to £380m should the global pandemic wipe out the entire season. Both teams are under the same restrictions, with Phil Simmons, the West Indies head coach, undergoing a similar five-day isolation during their warm-up period before the series after a pre-agreed departure from the bubble to attend a funeral. On the same morning Archer’s breach came to light, it emerged that Pakistan’s Kashif Bhatti has been self-isolating away from the rest of the squad in Worcester after testing positive for Covid-19 on arrival in the UK having tested negative in tests conducted before departure. The left-arm spinner has now been allowed to rejoin the squad after two more tests both returned negative. “The player had returned a positive test result for the remnants of a previous Covid-19 infection and in consultation with Public Health England and a virologist, a safety-first approach was taken to isolate the player,” an ECB spokesperson said. “The player has now returned a second negative test with no risk of infection to other players and staff.”