West Indies and England delivered a statement to the world about equality and the Black Lives Matter movement by taking a knee before the first Test, according to the former’s highly respected assistant coach Roddy Estwick. The teams and their support staff made the gesture in unison before the first ball of the three-Test series following talks during the buildup, with West Indies also wearing black gloves on their right hands and raising them in salute. Estwick said: “We wanted to make a statement and we wanted to be different from everybody else. That was our way of showing our support to the Black Lives Matter campaign. For me it was a good feeling because we have to make a change. For us it’s all about equality. It’s all about honesty, it’s all about treating everybody equally. “I thought it was really wonderful to see England supporting us as well in the whole thing. And obviously it came off very, very well.” Asked whether the black gloves were a direct reference to those worn by Tommie Smith and John Carlos on the podium during the 1968 Olympic Games, Estwick replied: “I don’t know [about that]. We just wanted to do something slightly different. We felt that if we wanted to make a bigger statement that would have more impact we would wear the black gloves. “It must have made a difference because people have commented about it. If it has brought awareness to what’s going on around the world then we are very happy.” Shannon Gabriel, the West Indies opening bowler, called it “a great moment” that showed “racism has no part in cricket”, with Jos Buttler, the England wicketkeeper, adding: “I think it was very important for both sides to do it together.” It followed a powerful speech by the former West Indies fast bowler Michael Holding on Sky Sports during the washed out morning session in which he described the “dehumanisation of the black race” in history and society’s failure to address this. Estwick had not heard the comments but said it was discussed in the West Indies dressing room. “Mikey is a very passionate individual on certain subjects and it’s good to see an icon of West Indies cricket coming out and speaking in such a strong and commanding way.”