The tide isn’t usually this high, Robert Hill says. “There is normally 150 metres of beach out the front here,” he says, pointing down past the flowers and the coastal scrub. “That’s all beach all the way down.” Today, the water is lapping at the base, not of Hill’s house, but of his neighbour’s. Overhead, a crane dips back and forth, lifting concrete blocks 20m up into the air, laying them gently in front of his neighbour Peter’s beachfront place – a protective wall for where the verandah has snapped and the lawn has sunk into the water. At Wamberal Beach, 90km north of Sydney on the New South Wales Central Coast, the houses are slouching into the sea. Last Friday night it stormed. The residents of Ocean View Drive woke to find the land had slid out from under them. The swell had grown and grown and, in the words of resident Margaret Brice, “it just comes up and bashes the dune and undermines it”. Standing on his deck in the sun in his old rugby jersey, Hill, 81, has spent more than 40 years watching the sea come in. The stairs to his house come up straight from the beach, subdivided in a coastal garden: saltbush, hard little coastal flowers and huge striped tongues of sansevieria. “The worst has been at the foot there,” he says. “But that was many years ago. Back in the 70s.” Resident Robert Hill sitting on his deck. Storms and erosion at Wamberal are not new. Dr Tayanah O’Donnell from the Australian National University says that for the beachfront (a “known high-risk location”) “there will come a time when people will have to accept that they can no longer live there”. Houses were destroyed in 1974 and 1978 and huge storms nearly did the same in 2016. “It has been happening since back in the 1970s and it is almost as regular as every four or five years, there is a major event,” Hill says. “What happens in a really bad storm event is the storms come from the south-east, they come around The Skillion, and they come in like a fishhook. They come in and scour the beach out.” Residents like Hill say the solution is for the council to build a permanent revetment wall – known as a seawall. He rejects the argument that the houses themselves are built too close to the sea. “I don’t think so,” he says. “Not in my view. Robert Hill walks down his stairs to the beach “The area was subdivided in the early 1900s, and there have been properties on the beachfront here for over 100 years.” It is bad luck, not risk, that has caused his neighbours’ houses to fall while his stays standing, he tells Guardian Australia. “I’ve just been lucky there is more accumulation of sand in front of me, at the moment,” he says. “On another occasion, they could be fine, and I could be scoured out.” He is pointing out at the sand. “Over the years that has accumulated and it is like money in the bank.” On Monday, the residents of the 18 worst-affected lots were evacuated. Owners along the strip are furious. Chris Rogers, whose house was directly affected, says the council has dragged its feet on the seawall, and even prevented residents from taking other protective action like sandbagging. Above: Chris Rogers stands on his lawn which is slowly eroding. Below: The staircase that led from his house to the beach “It’s because of them that we are here,” he says, as he packs up to evacuate his house. “They have stopped people trying to protect their homes, they have denied DAs.” Margaret Brice lives a few doors down, on the outer limits of what she calls the “green zone”, where it is still safe to stay. The edge of her lawn has a huge crack in it, steel bars stick up from the ground. “It is now illegal to walk on my deck,” she says. Brice says the council had promised as early as 2002 to build the seawall. “In the early 2000s, when I bought this house, it was in the coastal zone’s management plan that they would build a buried rock revetment wall … And that was why you were allowed to build on the beach.” Brice and Rogers say residents have offered to pay for the seawall. Margaret Brices surveys the storm damage from her deck “The solution is very simple,” Hill says. “Dig a hole along the front, fill it up full of rocks, and then cover it back with sand. It is not a difficult proposition.” But others, including O’Donnell, say the land should never have been built on in the first place. “[The seawall] might be an appropriate short-term solution, but it will come at great economic and environmental costs,” she says. “Revetment walls are not cheap and environmentally they disturb the natural formation of coastlines. Coastlines are meant to move. A hard structure like a revetment wall can simply make these natural movements occur further along a coastline.” Residents and councils in many other areas around Australia face similar dilemmas. At Stockton Beach, north of Newcastle, which has been repeatedly hit by coastal erosion, the council has attempted to defend the community by bringing in sand to fill voids. The latest plan involves importing 80,000 truckloads of sand at a cost of $52m. In Byron Bay, beachfront property owners have spent two decades in a marathon legal battle with the council over a seawall which the residents want repaired and have offered to pay for, but have been repeatedly knocked back. Similar arguments have been raging for decades at Sydney’s Collaroy Beach, which suffered massive erosion after a 2016 storm. A proposal there for a seawall received massive opposition from surfers and environmentalists because of the impact it would have on the rest of the beach. O’Donnell says the residents at Ocean View Drive may have to walk away at some point. Damage at the front of Margaret Brice’s home “Climate change will continue to exacerbate weather patterns and coastal events like what we have seen will become more common place. It is a nonsense to build, or rebuild, on soft shorelines; equally it is a nonsense for land not to be utilised for its highest and best use at particular points in time.” Local resident Susie, who declined to give her surname, lives three streets back from the beachfront strip. “I’ve lived here all my life, it’s been going on for quite a few years,” she says. “Personally, in 1974, when it happened I think they should have reclaimed the land back then.” She believes the land on the beachfront should be turned into a community area, or if the seawall is built, it should not be fully-funded by the ratepayers. Cement blocks are placed at the base of a property to save it from the erosion “I think when the owners purchased their properties they would have had to have known that this is an area of erosion, they would have done their investigations,” she says. “It’s like the one in 100-year flood – you can be guaranteed that as much as you think it is not going to happen to you, Murphy’s Law, it will. There is a huge risk you take when you want this lifestyle. “I know some of the residents along here, they are great people, the loveliest people, the most genuine people you can find, and they have worked very hard to afford these beautiful properties, so I really feel for them. But in saying that again, you have got to have known, the possibility of erosion, and this happening, again, was on the cards. “I truly believe council should reclaim the land and make it more of a community area, where the community can enjoy it, everybody can enjoy it, rather than the wealthy few.” Brice and Rogers reject the idea that the wall is just for them. A collapsed veranda at Wamberal Beach “It’s not just our homes,” Rogers says. “The beach is ruined. My point is – we get another storm? That breaches? All of this is gone.” He points to the main road and the houses behind. “There’s a lot of people saying, ‘Oh yeah, you homeowners, blah blah blah.’ No one can use the beach. If you’re walking your dog, you can’t do it now. If you’re going for a surf, you can’t. If you going for a fish, you can’t. Because they have allowed the beach to be wrecked.” “We’re not silver spoon kids,” Brice says. “It’s not about throwing stones at rich people, saying ‘Too bad, haha, you lost your views.’ “This is about protecting the whole of Wamberal. There are hundreds of homes behind us, with very little foundation and much lower level than us. We are sitting on nine metres above sea level. That road is three metres, you do the math, if the dune goes. It’s really scary.” Central Coast Council did not respond to specific questions about the revetment wall, but directed Guardian Australia to information on its website about the wall. Any eventual seawall could cost between $10,000 to more than $30,000 per metre, and would have to take into account the impact on the environment and “the impact on public access and beach amenity”, the council says. “The solution is complex, requires input and agreement from a number of parties, and no funding model has previously been developed to implement the works. An agreed funding model is a central element to delivering a terminal protection seawall structure on Wamberal Beach.” A working group is currently investigating solutions, it says, and “consideration of the impacts of forecast climate change will also be required”. O’Donnell says a wall protecting public assets such as roads and infrastructure is “an appealing option”, but “in my experience and my own research, taxpayers don’t really see it that way – and there is a general community sentiment that those who don’t benefit from the wall should not be paying for it”. Back on Wamberal Beach, Rogers is packing up. He has a place to stay, with a neighbour, who has another house in Sydney. His daughters start school again soon. “I didn’t build too close to the sea,” he says. “We built, we bought and built, if you are allowed to build, you build it efficiently. What the problem is, the coast is eroding, it happens all over the world. And the way to stop that is to build a revetment wall. It’s not us.” A set of fallen stairs lead down from a Wamberal Beach property Brice says: “We’ve done what we have been allowed to do. We haven’t built illegally. We have done what we have done within Central Coast Council’s usual building plans ... under the proviso that they were going to build a wall. “We haven’t built too close to the sea, Central Coast Council has [not] prevented the sea from coming too close to us.” A few streets back, Susie is unimpressed. “I nearly purchased a property up here a while back, but it came back that it was in a one in 100 flood zone area, and you know – there are other places you can buy, in other areas, and you can have just as beautiful outlook.”