Make UpClaire Oakley’s debut feature is a genre-defying seduction of a movie, which flirts with psychological horror before revealing itself as an enigmatically sensual sexual awakening. Shades of Clio Barnard and Andrea Arnold’s work are evident, but this is very much its own unpredictable creature. In cinemas and on Curzon Home Cinema from Friday. Wendy Ide ProximaStargazing dreams and maternal instincts collide in the excellent new film from French director Alice Winocour, with Eva Green doing career-best work as an astronaut and single mother preparing for a stint on the International Space Station. In cinemas Friday. Guy Lodge 2.0 FestThe Space’s new writing festival features eight short plays, which can be seen online on Friday and Saturday, 7pm. Subjects include losing your virginity and thinking there’s a badger in your house. The cast includes Patsy Ferran, Jill Greenacre and Keziah Joseph. Tickets from space.org.uk Susannah Clapp Mikhail Karikis: Ferocious LoveHigh political drama centring on a world racked with environmental adversities: this new audio-visual installation from the Greek-born Mikhail Karikis weaves music sung by Liverpool choirs with performances by Birmingham students to create a haunting vision of the future. Tate Liverpool; from tomorrow to 22 November. Laura Cumming Live from London festivalIn the first of 10 concerts featuring top vocal ensembles – including the Sixteen, Stile Antico and the Gesualdo Six – Voces8 sing works by Orlando Gibbons and Claudio Monteverdi, streamed live from the Voces8 Centre, London, Saturday, 7pm BST. The festival runs until 3 October; season tickets and more available here. Fiona Maddocks CoopedJamar Roberts is a dancer and resident choreographer with Alvin Ailey, already responsible for an impressive piece called Ode, a poignant response to gun violence. Now, via YouTube, you can catch Cooped, commissioned by the Works & Process programme at the Guggenheim. It only lasts five minutes, but it’s a stunning and powerful work, relating the historic confinement of black bodies to the high BAME death rate in the Covid-19 pandemic in movement of sustained, sinuous agony. Sarah Crompton B7 by BrandyThe R&B veteran’s first album since 2012’s Two Eleven features appearances from Chance the Rapper and Daniel Caesar. Out on Friday. Kadish Morris Book now: Fontaines DC: A Night at Montrose, DublinWatch the Irish post-punk band perform their new album, A Hero’s Death, in its entirety, followed by a live Q&A. To receive an invite, pre-order the album or sign up to their mailing list; the show airs on Monday 3 August at 8pm. KM Ziwe FumudohUS comedian Ziwe Fumudoh’s live weekly Instagram show is a must-watch, if only for the hilariously uncomfortable questions she asks her guests, who have included Rose McGowan, Alison Roman and influencer Caroline Calloway. Thursdays, 1am BST on Instagram. KM Miraculous: The Rise and Fall of the Miraculous VespasBorderline, Scotland’s longest running touring company, is extending its reach – to our homes. Adapted by David F Ross from his hit novel, and broadcast as three 20-minute acts, this new play charts the tensions around a 1980s small-town band aiming for pop immortality in a time of crisis.. This funny, touching production contains strong language and is free-to-view (booking required), Thursday and Friday, 7pm, followed by a live Q&A each evening, then available for at least a month. Clare Brennan