A second-half brace from Said Benrahma decided a well-matched contest in Brentford’s favour to continue the best run of form in English football (what there is of it right now). The Algerian had Ben Hamer to thank for his first after the Derby goalkeeper let a so-so shot slip through his body and into the net. But the second, well, that was superlative, cutting in from the left just after the hour. Benrahma bent a right-footed shot from 25 yards into the millimetres of room between Hamer’s outstretched fingers and the angle of post and bar. It was individual quality that decided the game. For the most part, a youthful Derby side conducted by Wayne Rooney gave as good as they got. But Brentford march on, with Leeds, West Brom and automatic promotion still in their sights. With five wins on the trot since the restart the Bees came into the game buzzing. Brentford’s forwards duly combined to open the scoring with just three minutes gone. Benrahma began the move, exchanging passes with Jay da Silva before the latter split a sleepy Derby backline. Brian Mbuemo was alert to the opportunity and span to hit a left-footed shot beyond Hamer and on to the post before Ollie Watkins snaffled the rebound, tapping home for his 24th league goal of the season. The Bees could have doubled their lead in the 11th minute as Mbuemo caused havoc again, getting onto a Rico Henry cross and curling a sweet shot towards goal. Fortunately for Derby, centre half Matthew Clarke stood tall on the line, the ball smacking off his forehead and away. Eventually the opening spell passed and Derby’s slow start evolved into a calm control of the game. At the heart of it all was Rooney, his range of passing greater than any other player on the pitch, his ability to retain possession unrivalled too. Around Rooney were a bunch of younger legs, the 19-year-old Max Bird his midfield partner and the 18-year-old Lewis Sibley in the hole. Sibley had been sent off at West Brom in midweek but his red card for violent conduct was rescinded and the teenager offered a constant option when his captain was on the ball. The pair were involved in the Derby equaliser just before the half-hour. A Rooney shot from range was blocked, but Sibley picked up the pieces and played in another teenager, Jayden Bogle, to cross from the right. A low cut back followed and after a moment’s uncertainty, Rooney laid off to Jason Knight, 19, to drive home. With the game evenly poised and Derby having looked the more cohesive, you might have looked to the hosts to kick on and close the gap on Cardiff in the last play-off place. But instead they were quickly behind again after Watkins span on the edge of the Rams box and found Benrahma. The pass was a little strong and forced Benrahma wide and as he cut back inside to shoot, the effort was too low and too central. Hamer got down to claim it but in trying to make sure he didn’t spill the ball, he let it squirm through him instead, and a late scramble to clear did not spare his ignominy. There was really little Hamer could do about the third goal, Benrahma’s 18th of the season and after that the game was done. With 10 minutes to go the match winner was replaced by Tarique Fosu, his legs saved for the three crucial encounters - against Preston, Stoke and Barnsley - to come.