Chas Newkey-Burden When you’re on holiday, it’s so natural to bask in the perfect gin moment. You’re sitting on a sunny terrace, enjoying the view, watching the locals, as you realise you’ve done it, you’re living la dolce vita – the sweet life. That’s what aperitivo hour is all about. This slow and stylish start to the evening begins just before sunset, when, in the enchanting pre-dinner twilight, Italians of all ages gather for drinks, snacks and friendship. It’s life-affirming. A slower pace has many benefits. Why rush straight from your working day into dinner, when you can first enjoy one of life’s simple pleasures: spending time with friends and family over a refreshing drink and some light snacks? This slowing, steadying hour can become the bridge between the responsibilities of your working day and the delights of your dinner. Much magic lies on that bridge. It’s still a nationwide event in Italy, observed across the generations in humble taverns, charming trattorias and trendy rooftop bars. Connoisseurs of the aperitivo hour say Florence, Turin and Venice are standard bearers for the tradition, but many agree that Milan is where its heart lies. In truth, aperitivo takes place all across Italy from the northern regions mentioned right through to the stunning Amalfi coast in southern Italy, so wherever the visitor roams, they will be able to enjoy this elegant tradition. Just sit back, relax, and bask in it. The conversations and bonding of aperitivo hour bring new perspectives on life. Many of us have been charmed by an easier-going routine during a fortnight abroad in the summer. As the taxi takes us back to the airport to fly home, we promise ourselves that we will continue to live that kinder way at home but that ambitious oath seems to get lost somewhere around the luggage carousel back in Blighty. Well, it’s never too late to start. With some travel restrictions still in place, now is the perfect moment to bring the Italian experience to your home. In a way, the events of the past few months have been training us for it. Many of us have been forced to take our foot off the pedal and ease into the slow lane, so there is no simpler time to bring the aperitivo into your home. Even as lockdown restrictions ease and the pace of life begins to pick up again, why not keep one foot in that lane by making the time and space to savour the spirit – and spirits – of aperitivo? Your patio, balcony, dining room or kitchen are all perfect venues for such an affair. Invite some family or friends to join you virtually; this is a lifestyle that can be transferred to Zoom when needed. A perfect spirit for this hour is the new flavoured range from Malfy Gin. The Con Limone weds the brand’s unique gin recipe with the finest Italian lemons, grown along the Amalfi coastline. The Rosa, meanwhile, boasts sun-ripened Sicilian pink grapefruits, cultivated on the Mediterranean coast where the mountains greet the sea. Or you might prefer the Con Arancia, with its blood orange peels, also sourced from Sicily. These clean and crisp drinks, inspired by the glamour of the Amalfi coast, are ideal if you’re looking to bring a little Italian luxury to your aperitivo hour, and all three pair deliciously with tonic water. If you want to go full-aperitivo, include some snacks. They should be small, simple and artful, because aperitivo hour is, after all, an elegant philosophy about easing out of the day and opening up the palate. In aperitivo hour, you can slow down, socialise and sip some fine drinks. The aperitivo is so much more than just a happy hour - it’s the happiest of hours. Malfy Gin is available to purchase in selected Tesco, Sainsbury’s, Morrisons, Asda, M&S, Waitrose and Co-op stores, as well as Ocado and the Malfy Gin Amazon brand store Please drink Malfy Gin responsibly. For the facts, visit drinkaware.co.uk