The four-time Tour de France winner Chris Froome is leaving Team Ineos at the end of the season to join the Israel Start-Up Nation (ISN) team. Froome’s departure will bring to an end a decade-long association with Sir Dave Brailsford’s team in which he won seven Grand Tours. He is moving on after seeing his leadership role at Ineos challenged by the emergence of Geraint Thomas and Egan Bernal, who have won the past two editions of the Tour. “I’m really excited to be joining the ISN family,” Froome said. “I look forward to challenging, and being challenged by, their talent and continuing to strive for the success that I’ve enjoyed up to now.” Brailsford said: “Chris’s current contract comes to an end in December and we have taken the decision not to renew it. We are making this announcement earlier than would usually be the case to put an end to recent speculation and allow the team to focus on the season ahead.“Chris has been with us from the start. He is a great champion and we have shared many memorable moments over the years but I do believe this is the right decision for the team and for Chris. Given his achievements in the sport, Chris is understandably keen to have sole team leadership in the next chapter of his career – which is not something we are able to guarantee him at this point. A move away from Team Ineos can give him that certainty … Like everyone across the sport, we are all looking forward to the start of racing next month.” Froome said: “It has been a phenomenal decade with the team, we have achieved so much together and I will always treasure the memories. I look forward to exciting new challenges as I move into the next phase of my career but in the meantime my focus is on winning a fifth Tour de France with Team Ineos.” The co-owner of Israel Start-Up Nation, Sylvan Adams, said: “This is an historic moment for ISN, Israel, Israeli sports, our many fans all around the world and, of course, for me personally – a moment of enormous pride,” he said. “Chris is the best rider of his generation and will lead our Tour de France and Grand Tour squad,” he added. “We hope to make history together as Chris pursues further Grand Tour victories.”