Wigan claimed the biggest league win in their history as they responded to a looming 12-point penalty in spectacular fashion with an 8-0 rout of their Championship relegation rivals Hull. The Latics struck seven in an extraordinary first half as they made sure of a win which moved them above the bottom three on goal difference at Hull’s expense – once the expected sanction for falling into administration is applied. The win surpassed their previous best league triumph, 7-0 at Oxford in 2017, and it also matched Hull’s previous worst league result, against Wolves in 1911. “It’s great for us to win as we have,” said the Wigan manager, Paul Cook, “but management is tough at the minute and I’ve got a little bit of feelings for them, because it’s very tough to be on [the end of] a scoreline like that. “We’re very proud of our supporters and the town, to raise the money and give us the support they have, and I think tonight we’ve gone a long way towards repaying that,” he added. “Can we go the extra yard to give them that full satisfaction of overturning possibly a 12-point deduction? We have to keep believing we can.” Kal Naismith put Wigan in front after a minute then Kieffer Moore and Kieran Dowell struck twice apiece and Jamal Lowe and Joe Williams also scored before the interval. Dowell completed his hat‑trick with a stunning effort after 65 minutes before Cook’s side eased down. It could have been even worse for the woeful Hull side, however, with Naismith and Antonee Robinson each hitting the woodwork. “It has hurt us, and all I can do is apologise to the fans on behalf of everyone in that dressing room because it’s nowhere good enough, and I’m so, so sorry for that,” said Grant McCann, the Hull manager. “We didn’t get going at all. We concede in the first-odd minute, giving ourselves a mountain to climb, and then we seemed to concede every time Wigan went forward. We’re stood there at the sideline thinking: ‘Is this ever going to stop?’ But I’ve just got to go and look at it now with the players and we have to try to pick a team that’s going to get three points against Luton [on Saturday].” West Brom’s hopes of securing automatic promotion remain in the balance after they were held to a goalless draw by Fulham at the Hawthorns. The result leaves them four points clear of third‑placed Brentford, but they will see their lead cut to a point if the Bees win their game in hand over Preston on Wednesday. Grady Diangana was denied by the Fulham goalkeeper Marek Rodak in the second half before Anthony Knockaert fired a 25-yard effort against the bar for the visitors. “Everything is in our hands,” said the West Brom manager Slaven Bilic, whose side are two points behind the leaders, Leeds, having played a game more. “We started the restart a bit slower, were a bit unlucky in first couple of games but after that, in the last five games, we are creating and dominating. We are in good form, playing good football. That’s where I have my optimism and belief.“We just couldn’t score but the composure, mentality, passion and quality made me really proud. It would be better if we had won the game, of course, but it’s one game less to go and it’s in our hands.” Patrick Roberts struck an 82nd-minute winner as Middlesbrough hit back from behind to win 2-1 at Reading and give a huge boost to their survival prospects. Liam Moore put Reading in front just past the half-hour mark but a header from Ashley Fletcher on the stroke of half-time hauled Neil Warnock’s side level and they went on to snatch the points. Neil Warnock, the 71-year-old Boro manager now at his 16th club in an extensive career, said afterwards: “It sounds a bit silly when I’ve only had a few games here, but it’s the hardest job I’ve ever had.I couldn’t really say that beforehand but the lads have given everything for me. I just can’t fault them at all. “That win was relief, a big relief. It was really hard work. I know we’re not there yet [safe from relegation] but it was important tonight for us to get something. And to get the three points, I thought that was deservedly so.” It was a night to forget for Wayne Rooney as Derby lost 2-1 at Cardiff. The former England captain was robbed of possession by Lee Tomlin, who then ran in on goal and hit the second for the Bluebirds. Junior Hoilett had put the home side in front before Jason Knight levelled on the half hour. While City remain in a play-off spot, Derby’s hopes are in effect over. Mason Bennett scored the only goal of the game as Millwall beat Blackburn 1-0 to maintain their play‑off interest while Luton’s survival hopes were dented as they drew 1-1 with QPR. A James Collins penalty put them ahead in the first half but Dominic Ball hit back for Rangers to seal a point. Sheffield Wednesday and Huddersfield played out a 0-0 draw.