Beijing’s far-reaching security law was foisted on Hong Kong with breathtaking speed, sweeping aside guarantees of freedom of expression and freedom of the press overnight. Analogies of slow-boiling frogs and civil liberties suffering a “death by a thousand cuts” now feel redundant as independent media outlets scramble to future-proof themselves against vaguely worded legislation that carries a punishment of life imprisonment for crimes such as “subversion” and “collusion.” I founded Hong Kong Free Press (HKFP) as a response to dwindling press freedoms after cutting my teeth reporting on the pro-democracy Umbrella Movement. As a non-profit, it was the city’s first crowdfunded outlet – transparent, impartial, governed by an ethical code and built to resist censorship. But it was all based on the free press guarantees in the city’s mini-constitution. Five years later, a draconian new law allows for “guidance, supervision and regulation” of the media and empowers police and agents to potentially conduct warrantless raids of newsrooms, seize devices, demand decryption help and conduct covert surveillance. Suspects will face closed-door trials with hand-picked judges. Meanwhile, the city’s leader, Carrie Lam, has repeatedly hit out at the press, claiming HKFP’s questions are “biased” and telling me last week that press freedom will only be guaranteed if journalists promise to obey the new law. Hongkongers were promised the legislation would affect only a miniscule number of extremists but – within a fortnight – the authorities have already made a popular protest slogan illegal, pulled democracy books from library shelves, banned a protest song in schools, raided a polling institution and arrested demonstrators for wielding blank placards. Will newspapers be allowed to report on forbidden slogans? Can we interview independence activists? Are opinion pieces questioning one-party rule illegal? The government will not give us straight answers to questions about the security law – and that is by design. Fuzziness is a feature, not a bug – the authorities want journalists to overcompensate, tip-toe around ill-defined red lines, and ultimately self-censor. Beijing’s playbook also suggests small outlets like ours will be subjected to legal and bureaucratic terrorism – dragging us through the courts and red tape to drain our meagre resources and bandwidth. Nevertheless, even if we are ultimately forced to operate from outside Hong Kong, our newsroom is here to stay. Following a year of teargas and pepper spray on the protest frontlines, our five-person team has no appetite for self-censorship, and we are having open and honest weekly discussions to safeguard against allowing fear to infect our work. We have frequent security audits, and each of us has decided that we are ready to face a fine or imprisonment to protect our sources, many of whom are reluctant to speak now at all. Over the past week, we have also consulted legal and business experts to ensure our long-term viability and income no matter what the future holds or where we may end up. Just over the northern border, a long list of ageing press freedom defenders are at risk of dying in Chinese prisons following spurious national security convictions – Ilham Tohti, Gulmira Imin, Gui Minhai, Huang Qi, Lu Jianhua and Yiu Mantin to name a few. When it comes to civil liberties in Hong Kong, it remains to be seen whether things will resemble Singapore, mainland China or – at worst – Xinjiang in a year’s time. But we should make preparations for the latter as, too often, the world has been naive when it comes to Beijing’s promises and the lengths to which it will go to suppress criticism in its restive peripheries. Hongkongers are all too aware that they cannot win. A popular song lyric and piece of graffiti last year read: “This revolution will have no winners, but bear witness to it.” As journalists in Hong Kong, things can seem equally hopeless – there is no longer such a thing as a “slow news day” and it often feels like we are just documenting the rearrangement of deckchairs on the Titanic. However, since citizens have no voice at the ballot box, and with a media landscape dominated by pro-establishment titles, there is even more motivation for us to bear witness, act as a watchdog and hold the powerful to account. It is time to stand firm and resist intimidation – our mission at HKFP will not be changing. Tom Grundy is the founder of non-profit independent news organisation Hong Kong Free Press