Supermarkets in England could be stopped from placing chocolate and sweets as impulse purchases at the end of aisles as part of a government drive to improve the health of the nation in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, it has emerged. Measures to try to nudge the public into healthier food-buying habits are among policies being considered in what has been billed a “war against obesity” being drawn up by Downing Street. No 10 also confirmed on Friday that it had held a meeting this week with Joe Wicks, the celebrity fitness coach and healthy eating guru, although there were no details given about what was discussed. One plan being considered, it is understood, is stopping supermarkets from displaying unhealthy foods at the ends of aisles, a common sales-boosting tactic to tempt shoppers as they wait in a checkout queue. While reports have said other possible ideas include an end to “buy one, get one free” supermarket promotions on unhealthy food, it is less clear if this will happen, with no policy announcement on the issue expected for some weeks. Less likely to form part of the plan would be further curbs on the advertising of unhealthy foods, or new taxes making them more expensive, with Downing Street having already denied plans to increase the tax on sugary drinks. No 10 said in May it wanted to launch a new, more interventionist public health drive, billed as a campaign against obesity, but potentially also including measures to encourage more healthy living. The idea followed Boris Johnson’s experience with coronavirus, in which the prime minister fell seriously ill and required treatment in intensive care. After he recovered, aides said Johnson was both badly shaken by the experience and convinced that his weight played a role in the illness. Reports about the apparent new health drive first emerged in May, several weeks after Johnson left hospital. Asked about the plans on Friday, a Downing Street spokesman refused to give any details. “The prime minister has talked a few times about obesity, and the fact that he views it as a serious national issue, and one that he is determined to tackle,” he said. The Department of Health had consulted on protecting children from the advertising of fatty and sugary foods, the spokesman said, adding: “The response to that consultation will be published in due course.” No 10 has previously denied that Johnson is considering increasing the “sugar tax” imposed by George Osborne to encourage food companies to reformulate their products. During the Conservative leadership contest last year, Johnson had spoken out against what he called “sin taxes”. A number of initial studies have indicated that people who are overweight or obese are disproportionately likely to have worse Covid-19 outcomes than those who are not. Obesity is also closely connected to other co-morbidities that appear to worsen the symptoms of the virus, such as type 2 diabetes, the lifestyle-related version of the condition, and high blood pressure. The UK has one of the highest levels of excess weight and obesity in Europe. As measured by body mass index, 64% of adults in England are classed as overweight or obese, and 29% are obese. Other studies have indicated that regular physical activity is also a key factor in better coronavirus outcomes. It remains to be seen whether the No 10 health plan would also include measures to help people be more active, although ministers are trying to encourage people to walk or cycle to work where possible.