New Zealand’s government has revealed that a third person has absconded from a managed isolation facility, saying a man cut through a fence so that he could go to buy some alcohol. On Wednesday a man, aged in his 30s absconded from his managed quarantine hotel in central Auckland to visit a supermarket and later tested positive for coronavirus. It came after a woman jumped over a hedge to get out of quarantine. Later, she got lost and asked a passing policeman for directions back to her hotel. In the latest case, a man in his fifties cut through ties in a 1.8 metre fence to break out of a temporary quarantine facility in Hamilton, on New Zealand’s North Island and visit a liquor store. Authorities said he was taken into police custody and was due to appear in court later on Friday. In a statement, head of managed isolation and quarantine, Air Commodore Darryn Webb, said it was believed the escapee, who had arrived from Sydney, left the facility for about half an hour, between approximately 6:30pm and 7pm NZT. “We have talked to one liquor store on Te Rapa Road where we believe the individual visited, and it has cleaned its premises as a result of our inquiries,” he said. “Police ensured no one entered the store this morning until health officials confirmed it was safe to do so.” He said the man, who arrived on 1 July had been tested twice and both times had returned a negative result. At a briefing on Friday, New Zealand’s health minister Chris Hipkins responded to concerns about how escapee investigations were being handled by authorities. “In these situations health officials along with New Zealand police undertake investigations by interviewing the people, [and tracking] CCTV movements and bank transactions, in order to get a clear picture of events,” he said Hipkins said he had asked officials to tighten up its processes in giving advice to businesses that come into contact with absconders. He said there were now two new cases of Covid-19 in New Zealand, both in managed isolation facilities. “It’s been 70 days since Covid-19 was acquired from an unknown source in the community” he said. “These cases bring our total number of confirmed cases to 1,192.” Hipkins said no one with Covid-19 was receiving hospital care and New Zealand’s total number of confirmed cases was now 1,192.