Having confirmed his status as one of the best staying horses the sport has seen with a record fourth win in the Goodwood Cup here on Tuesday, Stradivarius will now attempt to prove himself one of the more versatile as well. Bjorn Nielsen, the six-year-old’s owner, confirmed afterwards that the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe at Longchamp will be his final target this season and Frankie Dettori, Stradivarius’s regular jockey, is among those who feel it is a realistic target. This, of course, is significant because Dettori is booked to ride Enable, the Arc winner in 2017 and 2018, when she goes in search of a record third win in European racing’s showpiece event on 4 October. Love, the Oaks winner, and Ghaiyyath, who beat Enable in the Eclipse, are more obvious rivals according to the betting, but Stradivarius showed such an abrupt turn of foot to get out of a pocket here that few will dismiss his chance lightly. Santiago, this year’s Irish Derby winner, was the latest fresh opponent to challenge Stradivarius, and despite getting 15lb from the 4-7 favourite he was dispatched as readily as so many others over the last four seasons. Santiago was also a length closer to the front-running Nayef Road than Stradivarius as the race turned into a sprint from two out, but Dettori’s mount swept past in a few strides on the way to a one-length defeat of Nayef Road, with Santiago only third. This was the seventh Group One win of Stradivarius’s career, and he became the first horse in the Goodwood Cup’s 212-year history to win the race four times in what was, in all likelihood, his last race at a staying trip. Bangor12.00 Isaac Wonder 12.30 Grey Spirit 1.00 Whiskey And Water 1.30 Cotton End 2.00 Cage Of Fear 2.30 Bandsman 3.00 For Pleasure 3.30 Wisecracker 4.00 Misstree Song Goodwood 1.10 Be More 1.45 The Grand Visir 2.15 Win O’Clock (nb) 2.45 Steel Bull 3.15 Kameko (nap) 3.45 Spright 4.20 Toro Strike Thirsk 4.30 Blind Beggar 5.00 Glory Fighter 5.30 With Thanks 6.00 Admiralty 6.30 Top Rank 7.00 Wondrous Words 7.30 Polar Appeal 8.00 Forus 8.30 King’s Charisma “The plan for a year has been that if he was able to win this again and everything was right,” Nielsen said, “we were always going to give him six weeks and go to the Prix Foy [a major Arc trial], then see what he can do against the mile-and-a-half horses in the Arc. “Going up against mile-and-a-half horses it’s a different deal, but I did think he ran very well [over the trip] at Newmarket against Ghaiyyath [in June] when he was nowhere near ready. “He ran some very fast fractions in the middle of that race, so we’ll see. His preferable surface really is top of the ground but in a race like the Arc, where they go fast and it can be a bit of a stamina test, we know he goes with give so it might play to us more with a bit of cut in the ground.” Who takes the ride on the John Gosden’s stayer remains to be seen, but Dettori knows Stradivarius’s turn of foot will make him a serious threat if the race unfolds to suit. “It turned out to be a two-furlong sprint,” Dettori said, “and if you want to sprint with Stradivarius you’d better be pretty good. His great weapon is a turn of foot and I don’t remember [a stayer] with one like this before. “I’m not going to try to put him [Nielsen] off [the Arc]. If he wants to, why not? Obviously I’m on Enable at the moment, but I’m not going to discourage him. So be it, maybe.” Stradivarius is top-priced at around 14-1 for the Arc, while Aidan O’Brien’s Battleground, a comfortable winner of the Group Two Vintage Stakes, is the new 8-1 favourite for the 2,000 Guineas next year. The first foal of the 2016 Arc winner, Found, is now likely to step up to Group One company in the National Stakes at the Curragh on 13 September.