In Andy Warhol’s film Chelsea Girls, Brigid Berlin sits cross-legged issuing commands. “Donnie, comb it a little. Come here and give it a poke. Get the brush, the spray and all my tools,” she says as she sweeps a hand through her bouffant do. Her tone is haughty but her words slur slightly as she goes on to inject herself in the backside with amphetamines. In the script Warhol refers to Berlin’s character as “The Duchess”. Berlin, who has died aged 80, was playing only a barely fictionalised version of herself in the 1966 art film. She came from the kind of blue blood money that Warhol only dreamed of, but swapped the aristocratic life of the Upper East Side for the creative slums of downtown Chelsea, becoming a muse to the pop artist, starring in several of his films, as well as being a constant companion, collaborator and documentarian. In her own right she carved out a career as an artist – though she refused the label – that incorporated performance, sculpture, Polaroid photography assiduously recording her raucous milieu, and a series of paintings made by dipping her breasts in paint and smearing them on paper to produce multi-hued orbs. On stage at the Bouwerie Lane theatre in January 1968, performing a long-running act Brigid Polk Strikes! (using her nickname Polk), Berlin lay in a makeshift bed calling friends on the telephone, broadcasting the conversation unbeknown to the person on the other end. She told one victim, Huntington Hartford, the heir to the A&P supermarket fortune, that she desperately needed money for an abortion. When he agreed to help her out, Berlin left the stage and jumped in a cab, returning to the theatre triumphantly waving the wad of dollars he had given her. Her sculpture, which came much later, featured stuffed pillows decorated with penises. “Brigid would cut them out of muscle magazines while she was watching the OJ [Simpson] trial [in 1995],” the curator Jane Stubbs recalled. “She got very involved in the trial and she took out her frustrations on thousands of men, thousands of penises.” Berlin first met Warhol in 1964 at a party at the Factory, the artist’s studio. Theirs was a friendship more intimate than the fame-hungry hangers-on that Warhol surrounded himself. “Andy and I didn’t go out that much together,” Berlin said. “We’d spend our time talking on the phone. He used to call me up in the morning.” Berlin and Warhol would accompany each other to the movies and the shops, but mostly they chatted, conversations which, with Warhol’s consent, Berlin would record. She claimed she taped “everything” in her life between 1967 and 1974, the oral documentation matched by thousands of Polaroids capturing Warhol’s celebrity circle. Other images were self-portraits, the artist also experimenting with double exposure. “No picture ever mattered,” she said. “There was never any subject that I was after. It was clicking it and pulling it out that I loved.” The actor Dennis Hopper in a cowboy hat, curly chest hair poking out the top of a white shirt, stares sadly at the camera in one picture. It is typically downbeat: despite her haphazard approach, Berlin’s photographs tended towards melancholia. In a portrait of Nico, the singer’s eyes are cast down; the journalist Diana Vreeland holds our gaze grimly; the artist Donald Judd seems suspicious. Few of Berlin’s subjects – the artists Gerhard Richter, grinning, and John Chamberlain, topless and tattooed – seem to be enjoying the much mythologised New York scene. Brigid was born in Manhattan to Richard E Berlin, the chairman of the Hearst media empire, and his socialite wife, Honey (Muriel, nee Johnson). The couple hosted dinner parties at the apartment overlooking Central Park on Fifth Avenue at which Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover mixed with Clark Gable and Joan Crawford. Brigid recalled picking the phone up to find Richard Nixon on the line. She proved a disappointment to Honey, who considered her chubby, and aged 11 was put on a regime of weight-loss tablets. At 16 she was sent to a school in St Blaise, Switzerland, her European teachers instructed that their charge must “lose 50 pounds”. Instead she got drunk and high, and was kicked out. Brigid finished her education at the Convent of the Sacred Heart, Eden Hall, in Pennsylvania, with holidays spent working at Harper’s Bazaar, part of the Hearst empire. “My mother wanted me to be a slim, respectable socialite … Instead I became an overweight troublemaker,” Berlin gleefully recalled. In 1960, in yet another act of rebellion, Brigid wed a gay window dresser named John Parker. That marriage soon fell apart but not before Brigid enjoyed a wild summer with her father’s Cadillac and credit card hanging out with Parker’s gay friends on Fire Island. After a stint in rehab in Mexico (at a clinic recommended to her father by Lyndon Johnson), Brigid returned to New York and took a room at the Chelsea Hotel. The sojourn south had done nothing to quell her enthusiasm for amphetamines, and she soon earned the nickname “Brigid Polk” for the injections – the pokes – of her favourite drug. Having appeared in his films Bike Boy, Imitation of Christ, Four Stars, The Nude Restaurant, Tub Girls (all 1967), The Loves of Ondine (1968), and Phoney (1973), in 1974 Brigid was appointed Warhol’s studio manager. Interviewed in 1969, Warhol claimed Berlin made all his work, causing a fall in the artist’s prices and desperate damage limitation from his gallery. It was not true, but Berlin certainly influenced him; swathes of his 1975 book, The Philosophy of Andy Warhol: From A to B and Back Again, are from ideas she articulated; and her life story was the inspiration for Pork, his 1971 play about a society family and their rebellious daughter. Berlin had a show titled Polaroids and Tapes at Galerie Heiner Friedrich in Cologne in 1970 and in 1975 joined the staff on Warhol’s Interview magazine, where she worked throughout the 80s, even after Warhol’s death in 1987. “I would transcribe interviews, and then for many years I didn’t do anything. I used to knit and needlepoint under the desk. It wasn’t like a job, so that’s why I stayed there so long.” By the beginning of the 90s she was clean from drugs, and in 1995 she showed Cock Book, a volume of penis doodles collected from the likes of Jasper Johns, Jane Fonda and Leonard Cohen, at the Gramercy International Art Fair. A collection of Tit Prints was exhibited in a show organised by Jane Stubbs on Madison Avenue a year later. A 2008 show at Glenn Horowitz Bookseller in New York also featured cushions, this time with needlepoint replicating salacious front pages from the New York Post. A 2015 show at Invisible Exports in the city showed her photographs, which were also the subject of Polaroids, a monograph published the same year. John Waters, who cast Berlin in two of his films, Serial Mom (1994) and Pecker (1998), wrote in the foreword in prayer form. “Hail Brigid, full of attitude, Warhol is with thee. Blessed are thou among superstars and blessed is the fruit of blue blood privilege.” She is survived by her brother Richard. • Brigid Emmett Berlin, artist, born 6 September 1939; died 17 July 2020