After Michael Cohen left solitary confinement in New York on Friday, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) said the Trump administration “would do well to remember that it cannot put someone in prison for writing a book critical of the president”. Donald Trump’s former lawyer and fixer, 53, went to prison in May 2019, convicted of crimes including tax evasion, lying to Congress and facilitating illegal payments to silence the adult film actor Stormy Daniels and Karen McDougal, a former Playboy model, both of whom claimed affairs with Trump. The president denies the affairs and ordering the payments. Cohen was released after a year, due to the coronavirus pandemic, and expected to complete his three-year sentence at home in New York City. But earlier this month, after Cohen let it be known he was close to completing his book, the federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) said he had “refused the conditions of his home confinement and as a result, has been returned to a BOP facility”. Cohen was returned to federal prison in Otisville, New York. The ACLU and law firm Perry Guha LLP filed suit on his behalf. The BOP said the claim it was retaliating was “patently false” but on Thursday a judge in New York found the federal government had acted unconstitutionally in demanding Cohen not publish if he wanted to stay out of prison, and should also refrain from talking to the press or using social media. “I’ve never seen such a clause, in 21 years in being a judge and sentencing people,” Judge Alvin Hellerstein said. “How can I take any other inference but that it was retaliatory?” The Trump administration recently sued to prevent the former national security adviser John Bolton publishing his own book. The effort failed and The Room Where It Happened became an instant bestseller. So did Too Much and Never Enough: How My Family Created the World’s Most Dangerous Man by Mary L Trump, the president’s niece. Robert Trump, the president’s brother, mounted an unsuccessful attempt to stop that book, based on a non-disclosure agreement signed 20 years ago. Cohen’s attorney, Danya Perry, said his client was “extremely gratified that the court upheld his fundamental constitutional right to speak freely and publicly”. According to the ACLU, Cohen and the administration have one week to agree on Cohen’s speech while he continues to be confined at home in Manhattan. Cohen once flourished as Trump’s pitbull, acting aggressively towards journalists and making scandals go away. But his decision to turn on the president during the Russia investigation ruled out any act of clemency like that shown to Trump’s ally Roger Stone. Cohen has said he expects his book to be released in late September, a little over a month before Trump faces Joe Biden for re-election. Cohen’s lawyer, Lanny Davis, has said the book contains “detailed daily, hourly, minute-by-minute direct evidence of Donald Trump’s lies and crimes under New York state law”.