Washington’s NFL team said Friday it will begin a “thorough review” of the club’s racist nickname after years of resistance, one day after the title sponsor for their home stadium issued a statement calling for a change. The team said in a statement the review “formalizes the initial discussions the team has been having with the league in recent weeks.” It added: “This process allows the team to take into account not only the proud tradition and history of the franchise but also input from our alumni, the organization, sponsors, the National Football League and the local community it is proud to represent on and off the field.” There are literally only 5 sentences in this entire press release and “Redskins” appears 10 times pic.twitter.com/RfTNkAh9vg The Washington Post, quoting a source familiar with the discussions between team owner Daniel Snyder, NFL commissioner Roger Goodell and other league officials, said the review is expected to end with a new nickname for the team. “You know where this leads,” the person said, speaking on condition of anonymity. “They’re working on that process [of changing the name]. It will end with a new name. Dan has been listening to different people over the last number of weeks.” On Thursday, the club’s title sponsor called on “the team in Washington” to abandon the name called a “dictionary-defined racial slur” by experts and advocates. “We have communicated to the team in Washington our request that they change the team name,“ FedEx said in a statement Thursday. The company paid the team $205m in 1999 for the naming rights to FedEx Field in Landover, Maryland. In addition to the stadium name and sponsorship agreement, FedEx CEO Frederik Smith is a minority owner. Until Friday’s statement, majority owner Daniel Snyder had shown no indications he would change the name since buying the team in 1999. JUST IN: @FedEx has asked the Washington @Redskins to change its name. Here is the statement:“We have communicated to the team in Washington our request that they change the team name.“ Investors this week wrote to FedEx, PepsiCo and other sponsors asking them to request a change. FedEx is believed to be the first to take action. On Thursday night, Nike appeared to remove all Washington gear from its online store. The other 31 NFL teams were listed and a search for “Redskins” came up with no results. Nike did not immediately respond to an email message seeking comment. Asked about Snyder changing the name, a spokesman said recently the team had no comment. The team last week removed the name of racist founder George Preston Marshall from its Ring of Fame at FedEx Field, and a monument to him was removed from the site of the old RFK Stadium. Washington DC mayor Muriel Bowser also said the name was an “obstacle” to the team returning to the District. The team’s lease at FedEx Field expires in 2027, and it is still talking to Washington, Virginia and Maryland about building a new stadium.