Melbourne winters arrive rapidly. One day it’s 20C and the next, there’s fog until lunchtime and you know in your bones that the cold is here to stay. Ask the locals and they’ll tell you these days are meant for tall boots, wool scarves and thick coats. They’re for warming yourself from the inside-out: ramen in the city, canh chua in Footscray and pho in Springvale. They should be spent fleeing from one glowing shopfront to the next, watching streetlights reflected in the wet road, or racing to a tram, teeth chattering, to meet a friend on Lygon Street. They’re for hissing outdoor heaters, nooks in the State Library, bright sun in Fitzroy Gardens and talking just to see your breath. We’re supposed to be freezing our tits off on the boundary at the local footy, fighting the bracing wind tunnels of Docklands, wiping condensation from train windows and watching the rain come over the Bay. Right now, in the guts of August, we should be in front of an open fire at our favourite pub with our favourite people, ordering a local drop at the end of a long week, and on the weekend getting out of town to watch the leaves change. Melbourne winters are meant to be shared. They’re not designed for this. The novelty of home-schooling has long worn off. We don’t want to see Nick Cave play piano over a flaky connection. We don’t want to go to a Netflix party. We don’t want to follow along while a celebrity bakes scones. Last week my favourite YouTuber posted a video called “I Only Ate Green Foods for 24 Hours” and I turned my computer off for the rest of the day. I dreamed I went to a supermarket and no one was wearing a mask and I had to make more from copies of the Herald Sun before anyone breathed on me. It’s dark by 6pm. Our favourite restaurants have closed for good. There’s no warm bar with a drink after dinner, no friends coming over, no trudging through the mud to the MCG. There’s just the long stretch until the next day’s press conference. We say to each other – at a distance – it’s worse this time, isn’t it? Over the past week the premier, Dan Andrews, has stood behind his lectern and delivered figure after devastating figure. Daily cases that break their own records. Dozens of deaths. Unmitigated spreads through aged care facilities. A ‘patient’ in the NICU – the intensive care ward for tiny, tiny babies. Every day, Melbourne wakes and waits for his news. We open the Guardian live blog to find out when the presser will be (we use the word “presser” with ease, now). 11am is standard – every minute after that is disaster. There’s a rumour that the clothes Andrews wears to the presser reflect whether it’s good or bad news. A sports jacket for good news. A suit jacket for bad. We nod solemnly at “R number” and “under investigation” and “hotspot”. This is a new language we speak. The borders close – New South Wales, then the others. No one in or out. Victoria police will find you. Dickheads flout the rules for Instagram likes. Private schools dictate PPE must be in school colours. We try to remember the last time we hugged our parents or children. Our families interstate wave over a dodgy NBN link; we reach out to new nieces we’ve never met and grandparents we will never see again. On Wednesday, as he does every day, the ABC broadcaster Raf Epstein tweets the numbers early. It’s a relief to see a number with a 2 in front of it. Only 295 cases. We let out a breath (it’s so cold we can see it, like kids pretending to smoke). It’s short-lived. On Thursday, Raf tweets again: the numbers are bad. Dan Andrews wears his suitiest suit jacket to tell us there are 723 cases. How can it be so many? We shout “stage four” and “army medics” and “Christmas is off”. Our bodies are so tired we can feel every bone dragging on the floor. Is that a sore throat? How small is a small cough? We get tested. We follow a mask pattern from the internet. We stay inside. When the evening meal is finished, we try to think of one good reason not to crawl into bed and stay there. It’s not just that the actual figures are scarier. We used up our energy getting through the first round, had the fixed timeline in our heads and allocated resources accordingly. We didn’t realise (or denied, anyway) we would need to keep some in reserve. A hundred schools shut down. Early learning facilities. Distribution centres. Fast food restaurants. Supermarkets. Entire hospitals. The federal treasurer tells us “people should feel encouraged about the future”. Across the metropolitan area, people are told to stay home when they have no home to go to. Thousands are locked inside their public housing buildings without warning. Workers are scolded for turning up, when their jobs are threatened if they don’t. Hotel rooms sit empty, families are separated, people deemed “good enough” to work here are not supported in return. Just stay inside is the order, but is it really that easy, Dan? For everyone? Calls to mental health services have doubled – half of all calls to Beyond Blue are coming from Victoria. It’s worse than before. It’s so much worse. Melbourne winters come on fast. One day it’s a little crisp and the next you’re pulling on your thermals for three months. These days are meant for buying hot donuts from a market truck and writing your name in the condensation on the 86 tram and having a coffee after a show under the Arts Centre spire. But they are also short days, grabbing brief sunlight, plying your vitamin D deficiency with supplements. They are skeleton trees and hungry people and park benches so cold they burn. They are Antarctic draughts, frozen fingertips, nights chilled to the bone. And now, we are spending them alone. Melbourne winters are meant to be shared. We are not designed for this.