Failures of the government’s test-and-trace system are risking an exponential growth of coronavirus in hotspots across England, a director of public health has warned. Dominic Harrison, the director of public health in Blackburn with Darwen, said the national tracing system was only managing to reach half of those who had been in close contact with a coronavirus patient in towns with high infection rates in the north-west. In Blackburn with Darwen, where officials are battling a “rising tide” of cases, only 44% of 799 close contacts of someone with coronavirus had been successfully contacted by call handlers, according to Harrison’s analysis. In Manchester, Oldham, Rochdale and St Helens, fewer than half of the at-risk people had been reached. The government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) told ministers in May that any delay beyond 48-72 hours in isolating an infected person’s contact would result in a significant increase to the local infection rate, adding: “The sooner it is done, the better.” Harrison said it was critical that the test-and-trace system was improved if they were to avoid an exponential growth in cases. “If more of that contact tracing was done at a local authority level, I am convinced we could improve dramatically that contact-tracing rate,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Broadcasting House programme. Matt Hancock, the health secretary, is expected this week to allow local authorities access to the crucial “named patient data” they have been requesting for weeks, in another major government U-turn. Local directors of public health have said their ability to hunt down the virus has been hamstrung by the lack of timely, detailed information from the government’s “pillar 2” testing programme in England, in which anyone can be swab-tested. Andy Burnham, the mayor of Greater Manchester, said people would be “extremely concerned” by the test-and-trace data from the north-west and that the government should respond urgently. He added: “We are heading straight for a dangerous winter without a vaccine and it is absolutely essential that we see action now to plug these gaping holes in the test-and-trace system. “It is precisely for this reason that we have pushed very hard for the release of named patient data and it is good that the government has finally agreed to this. But councils shouldn’t have to pick up the pieces for an expensive, outsourced system which is costing £10bn.” Burnham also called on Hancock to address the Commons on Monday to correct the record, after the health secretary said last Tuesday that “patient identifiable data” was available to local authorities if they signed a data protection agreement. “Every public health expert I know tells me that the health secretary’s statement in the Commons was incorrect,” Burnham said. “That is proved by the fact that Public Health England have only in the last day or so agreed to provide named patient data. As a time like this, accuracy matters.” Harrison’s analysis found that many of the local authorities areas with the highest rate of infection per 100,000 population also had “amongst the lowest rates of completed contact traces”. “The implications for this are obvious,” he warned in an internal memo reported by the Independent on Sunday. The analysis highlights a fundamental problem within the national test-and-trace system, which was awarded to private companies including Serco and run alongside centralised testing in the Lighthouse laboratory network set up to support the fight against Covid-19. Close contacts of an infected person will be reached by text, email or called up to 10 times by contact tracers. However, if they do not answer or return the calls, there is little else the test-and-trace system can do. Without named patient data, councils are unable to direct a door-knocking exercise that would be likely have more success. Burnham said the issue was further compounded by the fact that many people in the poorest communities “simply can’t afford to self-isolate” and that this may be contributing to the low contact success rate. He has called for the government to increase statutory sick pay, from £95.85 a week to a level equal to earnings, and extend it to all workers, including those on zero-hours contracts. The Department of Health and Social Care said test and trace had helped isolate more than 180,000 cases and that it was working closely with local authorities in England to help manage local outbreaks, including sharing data daily. It added: “We urge anyone with symptoms to get tested for coronavirus as quickly as possible, self-isolate, and you should not leave home unless it is to get tested. The service relies on everyone playing their part. Please book a test if you have symptoms, self-isolate and help us trace anyone you’ve been in contact with.”