Victoria announced another record day of new coronavirus cases on Friday, with more than 428 people diagnosed with Covid-19 and three deaths, as authorities warned the massive growth in infections would lead to further fatalities and dozens more in hospital. The premier, Daniel Andrews, said on Friday that 370 of the new cases discovered over the past 24 hours were under investigation, while 57 were connected to known outbreaks. The deaths of three people – a man his 80s, a man in his 70s and a woman in her 80s – took the state’s death toll to 32. The 428 new cases represented a large increase on previous growth in infections, following the 317 infections recorded on Thursday and 238 discovered the day before. “These numbers are very challenging and we always said it would get worse before it got better,” Andrews said. The premier said tougher measures might be needed if the current rules did not curb the growth in infections. “If the data shows the strategy is not being as effective as quickly as we would like, then we may need to go to new rules,” Andrews said. The state’s chief health officer, Brett Sutton, said the more than 400 new infections reported on Friday meant “dozens” of additional people would need to be hospitalised and more people would die. “Certainly 428 cases, new cases, is both disappointing and concerning,” Sutton said. “We have not turned the corner here.” There are 122 people who have been diagnosed with virus being treated in Victorian hospitals, including 31 in intensive care. Sutton said one of the three people who died overnight was a resident at Menarock Life aged care facility in Essendon, which is now linked to 38 cases. In new advice, Andrews said people in regional areas should wear masks in situations where they cannot social distance, in line with the same recommendations that apply in Melbourne. Regional areas – which are not subjected to the stage-three lockdowns in place in Melbourne – have seen 42 new cases since 1 July, the health minister, Jenny Mikakos, said. Addressing the prospect of even tighter restrictions, Sutton said “everything is on the table” and that it was difficult to say whether a lockdown longer than the slated six-weeks might be needed. On Friday, the state government also tightened restrictions that apply to outdoor exercise, clarifying that Melburnians would face a $1,600 fine if they left their neighbourhood or local government area to exercise. The earlier advice had only said people could not leave the Melbourne metropolitan area to exercise. In New South Wales, where the state is under “high alert” according to authorities, the premier, Gladys Berejiklian, announced the government would impose further restrictions on group gatherings to all indoor hospitality venues. The laws – which were first introduced in response to a growing outbreak at a pub in Sydney’s south-west – will limit group bookings at cafes and restaurants, as well as pubs and clubs, from next Friday. “The reason for this is we absolutely need everybody seated when they are in a venue,” she said. “We do not want any sort of mingling, that spreads the disease.” NSW recorded eight new cases on Friday, six of which were from community transmission. Weddings and corporate events will be limited 150 guests, although Berejiklian said patrons should be seated at all times. “No dancing, no singing, no mingling,” she said. There are 42 cases linked to the Crossroads Hotel, which has become a focal point of concern for NSW authorities. “We remain in a state of high alert, we remain concerned about the underlying community transmission that could be bubbling away and in response we ask all of our citizens to think carefully about their activity,” Berejiklian said. The plight of hundreds of Victorian public housing residents placed under “hard lockdown” is expected to improve on Sunday. Andrews said the health advice suggested the restrictions – which prevent residents from leaving their homes under any circumstances – could end on Sunday after 14 days. It came as the Victorian ombudsman announced she would investigate the situation in response to dozens of complaints from residents and advocates claiming the move was discriminatory and that residents were denied adequate access to food and medical supplies, fresh air and exercise. “People on the front line are doing an extraordinary job to respond to this crisis and help keep us safe,” the ombudsman, Deborah Glass, said on Friday. “However, there are lessons to be learnt in how governments can do that in a way that protects people’s human rights, including access to fresh air, exercise and medical supplies.” Earlier this month, the government placed 3,000 public housing residents from nine towers in “hard lockdown” for five days, preventing them from leaving their homes for any reason. However, the residents of the housing tower at Alfred Street were told they would need to remain for a total of 14 days due to a large number of cases within their building. Andrews said the investigation was a matter for the ombudsman. “I am not focused on the work that the ombudsman is doing, I am focused on protecting the people in those towers and that is what we have done,” he said.