In a typically EU-baiting Telegraph column in 2007, Boris Johnson regaled his readers with a pen portrait of the kind of politician who would slap a health warning on food and alcoholic drinks. This was the kind of bossy move, he suggested, that would appeal to “some Swedish divorcee health commissioner, sitting in her velour slacks in her taupe-coloured office in the Breydel building, Brussels”. How wrong can you be? On Monday it was the blond, portly scourge of the nanny state himself who decreed that clear calorie counts must be shown on menus in restaurants and pubs, as part of his new anti-obesity plan for Britain. Leaving such ironies aside, the obesity strategy unveiled by the prime minister deserves a qualified welcome. The measures to be introduced are overdue in a country that has the biggest weight problem in Europe; almost two-thirds of adults in England are overweight or obese. As well as using calorie information to promote healthier choices, shops’ two-for-one offers on unhealthy foods are to be outlawed, and there will be a public health advertising campaign. Most significantly, Mr Johnson has heeded calls to ban TV and online adverts for junk food before a 9pm watershed. Public health experts have been calling for such a move for years, as child obesity in Britain has risen to distressing and wholly unacceptable levels. This will create a significantly easier domestic environment for parents seeking to teach their children good eating habits. In a Nixon-to-China kind of way, Mr Johnson’s longstanding promotion of blithe individualism may actually now be of some service to the public good. The prime minister’s conviction that weight problems played a part in his near-fatal encounter with Covid-19 is sincere, and the public can sense that. The coronavirus context has vastly increased general awareness of the personal risks of obesity, as well as its costs to the NHS. In such circumstances, Mr Johnson has the potential to become a successful figurehead of a campaign to change the country’s approach to its diet and lifestyle. But if that is to happen, a much deeper analysis of how this crisis has come about is required. As presented, the government’s obesity strategy still places the burden of responsibility overwhelmingly on individual decision-making. Exhortation and example-setting from the prime minister are not enough. In deprived areas of the country, where obesity rates are highest, choices are not freely made – they are constrained by low incomes and limited opportunities. A generational decline in manual labour and the digital revolution has also contributed to plunging levels of everyday physical activity. Much more must be done, at both national and local level, to address these structural and social drivers of obesity, and poor health in general. The decision not to extend, for now, a levy on sugary drinks to other products is a mistake. As Helen Whately, the junior health minister, acknowledged on Monday, the sugar tax, imposed in 2016, was a success. It led to widespread reformulation of products, as manufacturers were obliged to adapt and offer healthier drinks. A wider range of taxes could be balanced by new subsidies on healthier foods to make a better diet more accessible to poorer families. The government should also extend greater powers and funds to local authorities, allowing them better to control the spread of fast food outlets and subsidise leisure activities. Access to fulfilling exercise should not be confined to those who can afford to pay for it. A more rounded and comprehensive strategy would not only be more effective; because it would go to the social core of the problem, it is also likely to be very popular. A collaboration between the individual and the state is necessary, towards a goal acknowledged to be in the interests of the common good. Throughout the coronavirus crisis, to an extent which initially surprised the government, the public has demonstrated its endorsement of this kind of thinking. Mr Johnson’s Damascene conversion to a proactive obesity strategy is welcome but incomplete. He now needs to move further in the right direction.