Inside Siya Kolisi’s home is a photograph of his mother when she was 17. Her skin is smooth and free from the scars she would later bear from beatings at the hands of some abusive partners. Siya does not recognise the woman staring back at him but he does remember her anguished cries as he lay awake at night as a young boy, powerless and terrified by the unseen trauma being meted out in the next room. “I carry that pain with me today,” the Rugby World Cup-winning Springbok captain says over Zoom, his voice quiet and exasperated by the memory. His gaze is distant. He turns to his wife Rachel beside him, holding her hand, appearing unsure how much he wants to share. “But that is why I am speaking out now,” he declares, rising in tone and stature on my screen. “That is why I am using my platform. I cannot stay silent any longer. Rachel gives me courage. She lets me know that I am more than just a sportsman.” In March this year, Siya and Rachel launched the Kolisi Foundation to assist disadvantaged communities in South Africa hit hardest by the pitfalls of coronavirus. “I know what hunger feels like,” Siya says. “I’ve fallen asleep to the sound of my stomach grumbling. I’ve seen my mother not know what to do except offer kind words and sugar water. That stuff is real to me. I want to make sure that kids don’t go through the same thing as me.” Both Rachel and Siya reference Marcus Rashford’s work to combat food insecurity in the UK. “It’s incredible to think he’s only 22,” says Siya, who turned 29 on the 44th anniversary of the Soweto Uprising on 16 June. After dedicating their time to the distribution of personal protective equipment and hand sanitiser to areas with limited access to running water, Siya’s own experience steered them towards other grumbling stomachs. More than 25,000 families have been fed through the foundation. I still see the men in my community who committed violence against my mother and aunt. Violence is so normalised. On Saturday, Siya was named a global advocate by the United Nations for its Spotlight Initiative to end violence against women. Like the rest of the country, the Kolisis were stunned when the body of 28-year-old Tshegofatso Pule was found hanging in a field west of Johannesburg with a stab wound to her chest on 8 June. She was eight months pregnant. “Men, we are the problem, we must be the ones to end it,” Siya wrote on Instagram alongside a photo of Pule. “Men let’s speak up!” According to the independent fact-checking organisation Africa Check, a woman is murdered every three hours in South Africa. More than 50% of women in the country have experienced violence from their partner, according to government sources. President Cyril Ramaphosa likened gender-based violence to a pandemic. Alcohol sales were banned during the early stages of lockdown in an attempt to curb domestic abuse. Even so, as many as 2,300 complaints of gender-based violence were reported to police in a single week in March. Since the deaths of Pule in Roodepoort and of George Floyd in Minneapolis, the Kolisis have expanded their activism. Their Instagram feeds are now filled with messages of solidarity and calls to action. Siya and Rachel present a unified message that cuts across race and gender, providing different perspectives in the fight against gender-based violence and in supporting the Black Lives Matter campaign. At a protest on 2 July in Cape Town, Rachel held a placard saying “Enough is enough” while Siya’s read “I’m with her”. “I was scared to speak up on these issues at first,” Siya concedes. “I was scared of what others would think of me. Scared about losing sponsors or what teammates would say. But if you don’t stand up for what you believe in, what is the point of your platform? You can see this is hurting so many people and you can make a difference.” Rachel is less conflicted: “If you choose to say nothing then you are actually saying something. Silence is picking a side.” This month, Siya was named the most influential person in his sport by Rugby World magazine. A feature-length documentary on his life is already in production and a book published by HarperCollins is scheduled for release in time for next year’s Lions tour to South Africa. “People look at us [Springboks] and think we’re superheroes,” Siya says. “All these great things are happening but that makes it more important for me to help change our society. I let my kids know that it’s OK if I cry. “When I hear my friends say they’re babysitting I say: ‘No, you’re being a parent.’ I cook and clean, it should be expected of me. It sounds simple but in our country the strict gender roles lead to a mindset that leads to violence. That’s what I mean when I say we can all do our bit.” On a live Instagram video with more than 86,000 views, Siya cooked a stir-fry for his family. The kitchen is strewn with plastic cups and plates. The sound of Cocomelon nursery rhymes fills the air. He is not a menacing flanker staring down a haka or diving for a loose ball. Here he is an everyday superhero without the costume. “I’m getting better,” he says of his admittedly limited culinary skills. Watching his powerful arms navigate delicate strips of chicken is a heartwarming scene as viewers offer advice on his use of seasoning. “It’s not Masterchef. It’s about encouraging other men to be more involved at home.” When asked if there was a plan to mirror Rashford’s open letter to British MPs, appealing for the continuation of a food voucher scheme, Rachel replies with a question of her own: “Who would we write to? I think [the UK government] is a lot more responsive. And if the situation has gotten to what it is and still no one is taking charge, who can you actually address?” In November, Ramaphosa’s government allocated £75.3m to emergency interventions to eradicate gender-based violence. A strategic roadmap has been laid out to end femicide. Studies are under way to better understand this scourge. Politicians of all stripes have condemned what some activists have termed a “civil war on women”. The killings continue. “I still see the men in my community who committed violence against my mother and aunt,” Siya adds. “Violence is so normalised. I was shown how to put a condom on in sex education but we never had anyone really teach us about violence against women and girls. On the sports field sexist language was everywhere and it all adds up. If we educate our sons, we won’t have to protect our daughters.” South Africa is in the middle of its Covid-19 pandemic and is now ninth in the world in terms of confirmed cases. Only the USA, Brazil and India are on a sharper curve. The Kolisis’ work is far from over. Charitable work, commendable though it may be, is not enough for every campaign. Some require a nationwide psychological recalibration. And powerful allies. “I hope more athletes join us,” Siya says. “We have so much influence. It’s time we use it.”