Toronto Wolfpack have withdrawn from the remainder of the Super League season before its restart next week, casting doubt over the Canadian club’s long-term future in rugby league, while the Rugby Football League has also confirmed that no team will be relegated from what is now an 11-team top-flight in 2020. Toronto conceded last week that they would be unable to play any home games in Canada this season owing to the coronavirus pandemic and the loss of revenue from home fixtures is exacerbated by the fact players cannot be furloughed because they are a Canadian company. The club had a request for a six-figure loan from Super League turned down last week, but the Rugby Football League insisted they had received “firm assurances” over Toronto’s participation as recently as last Thursday. However, with visa complications meaning their overseas stars such as Sonny Bill Williams would have to leave the UK by the end of this month, Toronto have now conceded defeat, and have officially pulled out of the competition. They were due to face Hull KR next weekend at Headingley, but Super League will now operate with 11 teams in 2020. “This decision has not been taken lightly,” the club said in a statement. “The Covid pandemic has presented unexpected and overwhelming financial challenges to the Wolfpack. The Wolfpack would be left covering significant additional costs simply to complete a season of games in the UK including Covid testing, stadium rentals, medical costs and player pay increases to align with the rest of the league.” Toronto’s withdrawal came on the same day the RFL announced that there would be no relegation from Super League in 2020 because of the impact the pandemic has had on the sport. Rugby league’s governing body said the decision was made due to “integrity, player welfare and to protect the solvency of clubs”. What happens next for Toronto is unclear. They say they “fully intend” to field a team in 2021 but will face stern opposition in regards to an instant return to Super League due to the timing of their announcement. They may instead have to drop down to the Championship – the sport’s second-tier, which was officially cancelled for 2020 on Monday – with the RFL insisting discussions over Toronto’s future will take place almost immediately. A decision is excepted on their next move within days, but the timing creates an ugly situation for the sport to deal with just days before its flagship competition restarts next weekend.