GVC, the owner of Ladbrokes bookmakers, has revealed that the UK tax authorities have widened their investigation into the group’s former online gambling business in Turkey. Shares in Britain’s biggest bookmaker fell by 78p, or almost 10%, to 739p on the news, making it the biggest faller among FTSE 100 companies. The sports betting and gaming group, which also owns the Coral and Gala brands, had previously understood that HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) was investigating some of its third-party suppliers, which processed payments for its Turkish gambling site. However, GVC has now been told that “an entity or entities” within the group is also being examined by HMRC, as the authorities look into “potential corporate offending”. GVC says HMRC has not yet identified which part of the group is being investigated, or which historic conduct it is investigating, other than a reference to section seven of the Bribery Act 2010. The relevant section of the act relates to the failure of UK commercial organisations to prevent bribery anywhere that they carry out business. GVC disposed of its Turkish business in December 2017. The company said it was surprised by the tax authorities’ decision to extend their investigation and was “disappointed by the lack of clarity provided by HMRC as to the scope of its investigation”. News of the expanded investigation follows the surprise departure of GVC’s long-time chief executive, Kenny Alexander, earlier in July after 13 years at the helm. Alexander has been succeeded by Shay Segev, who was previously the group’s chief operating officer. Alexander joined GVC in 2007 when it was listed on London’s junior stock market, Aim, and steered its growth to become a FTSE 100 company that employs more than 25,000 people on five continents. GVC said it continues to cooperate fully with HMRC and will provide it with information. It provided the tax authorities with information about its Turkish business after HMRC ordered it to do so in November 2019. HMRC said it was unable to comment further due to taxpayer confidentiality. GVC is due to release its half-year results in August.