The closure of the Chinese consulate in Houston threatens to spart a fresh diplomatic row between China and the US, with Beijing accusing the US of giving it 72 hours to shut the diplomatic mission in a move it described as “unprecedented” and an “outrageous” escalation. China said the US told the consulate on 21 July to cease all operations and events, and that Beijing threatened retaliation if the decision was not withdrawn. “China strongly condemns such an outrageous and unjustified move, which will sabotage China-US relations,” Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Wang Wenbin told reporters at a regular news briefing on Wednesday. “We urge the US to immediately withdraw its erroneous decision, otherwise China will make legitimate and necessary reactions.” The US said the consulate was ordered closed to protect American intellectual property and Americans’ private information. It did not provide any details. “The United States will not tolerate the PRC’s violations of our sovereignty and intimidation of our people, just as we have not tolerated the PRC’s unfair trade practices, theft of American jobs, and other egregious behavior,” the statement from State Department spokesperson Morgan Ortagus said. Beijing’s response came after local reports of documents being burned in a courtyard outside the Houston consulate, and a day after the US accused two Chinese nationals of trying to steal Covid-19 vaccine research, accusations China described as “slander” on Wednesday. The Chinese foreign ministry also accused US authorities of restricting its diplomats in the US, including opening their pouches without permission “multiple times” and confiscating items intended for official use. The ministry said its embassy in the US had received bomb and death threats, which it blamed the US for “fanning hatred against China”. Beijing accused US diplomats of being engaged in “infiltration and interference activities”. “If we compare the two, it is only too evident which is engaged in interference, infiltration and confrontation,” it said. Ties between the two increasingly rival countries have deteriorated further in recent weeks as the US has taken a harder position against China and lobbied its allies to do the same. The closure of the consulate follows tightening of restrictions for Chinese nationals working in state media in the US, which Beijing claims as the reason for expelling more than a dozen western journalists over the last few months. On Wednesday, Chinese state media suggested the possibility of closing US consulates, posting a poll on Twitter asking users to choose between embassies in Hong Kong, Chengdu, Guangzhou or others. China has blamed international criticism of its passage of a harsh and broadly applied national security law on Hong Kong on the US, making the closure of the Hong Kong consulate a possible but escalatory measure. “In recent weeks we’ve seen some appetite on the Chinese side in trying to de-escalate tensions. Whether that agenda survives these recent developments will be a critical thing to watch,” said Nick Marro, China analyst at the Economist Intelligence Unit. “Acting on threats to close the Hong Kong consulate would be interpreted by the US as a significant escalation and could set the stage for further deterioration. China knows that, however, and so we’d expect them to tread carefully,” he said.