Funding to tackle female genital mutilation, an issue championed by former prime minister Theresa May, has been reduced by 84% since 2015 according to new figures that suggest her successor Boris Johnson has changed priorities. The money allocated to help stamp out FGM in the UK has fallen from £2,718,000 for the year to April 2016, shortly after May outlined her ambition to stop the practice, to £432,000 for the 12 months to April 2020. Campaigners said the fall in funds was extremely concerning and would affect frontline services. We have 220 schools on a waiting list wanting me to teach them about FGM, but there’s zero funding for us to go in The UK was considered a world leader in tackling FGM after May announced a broad package of reforms during a 2014 Girl Summit, an international conference in London attended by 600 people. May unveiled a cross-party unit to tackle FGM, strengthening laws, improving police responses and making it mandatory for professionals to report FGM. Aneeta Prem, founder of the Freedom Charity, said the funding decline was “really significant” and threatened progress on stopping the practice as well as educational initiatives in advance of the introduction of mandatory teaching of the dangers of FGM in secondary schools from September. “We are really concerned. We currently have 220 schools on a waiting list wanting me to teach them about this, but there’s zero funding for us to go in,” said Prem. She estimated that around 5,000 girls in the UK were affected every year and that the funding reduction meant more would be at risk. “They will be more vulnerable and won’t know who to turn to,” said Prem. “The professionals won’t know how to spot the signs. It has a huge knock-on effect.” The figures, revealed in a parliamentary answer by Home Office minister Victoria Atkins on Tuesday, show that “total domestic government spend” on tackling FGM in the UK was still as high as £1.8m to April 2019 before falling sharply. A £476,000 Home Office violence against women grant was spread over the period but could not be broken down into single financial years. However, prominent anti-FGM campaigner Nimco Ali said the reduction in financial support was not as egregious as it appeared, explaining that the issue was “not about expenditure, but about protection”. The Conservative government has overseen a staggering fall in funding to tackle this issue [of FGM] at home Ali – who has described Johnson as “a real champion of women’s rights” – added that efforts to incorporate FGM into child protection measures meant there was no “need to spend millions of pounds”. Liberal Democrat leadership campaigner Layla Moran MP said: “Brave campaigners made the UK a world leader in raising awareness of, and tackling, FGM. Yet the Conservative government has overseen a staggering fall in funding to tackle this issue at home. “The government must put the level of funding back to where it was in 2015, and commit to supporting survivors.” Maggie O’Kane, executive director of the Global Media Campaign to End FGM, also revealed that UK funding for tackling FGM abroad had been profoundly affected, largely because of delays in staffing and decision-making which she attributed to Brexit. “Application processes that started nearly two years ago are still stuck in the system. There have been constant postponements and delays in the decision to fund FGM projects in Africa during Brexit and the lockdown,” said O’Kane. The Home Office has been contacted for comment. 