I have fond memories of playing Southampton’s Nuffield theatre, which is now closing due to the pandemic – a fate likely to befall a number of venues over the next few months. It is difficult to see how the comedy circuit will come out the other side of this without taking some significant damage. Comedy tours are useful for theatres – they are easier to schedule than grand-scale productions, slot in between long runs and usually sell well. This means they are often essential to a venue’s survival. Comedians will of course find other places to play, but tours are likely to shrink, making it more difficult for people to see comedians, and fewer will bother. We are already seeing that people are less likely to book tickets to performances than they were before, so adding an extra drive or train journey certainly isn’t going to help. This possibly means in the long term there will be less money going into the theatres that do survive. Compounding all of this is the fact that comedy clubs, where our future touring comedians emerge, are currently closed. Comedians who rely on live work have had no way of doing their jobs, despite the emergence of online gigs with varying degrees of success, and the forthcoming drive-in gigs. We will see the most financially vulnerable comedians simply drop out of the circuit, and the pool from which we get our touring comedians will shrink. It is very easy to be dismissive of this when we have so much comedy on television, but it is worth remembering that almost every comic performer you see on TV cut their teeth in the live arena, working the clubs and performing in theatres. Sitcom ideas emerge from live work, and comedians gain the skills required to work in those areas from what they do on stage. In addition to this, some of the country’s very best comic performers are not on TV at all, and make all of their income from the live work they do. It is difficult to see how this is not going to have a long-term impact on the comedy output of this country, something that is saddening for me both as a performer and as someone who loves comedy so much as a fan. Performance has been ignored by a government whose actions seem to have been mainly motivated by a need to deliver people-pleasing policies to stem any disquiet over their handling of the pandemic. What this has meant is an almost wilful lack of support for the arts, which people tend to deprioritise in times of crisis. We have seen other countries step in with financial aid for their theatres and arts. Now the government must provide emergency support in response to concerns that the whole sector might collapse. I am hopeful that the announcement that Scotland is giving a £10m lifeline to theatres will foreshadow something across the rest of the UK. If not, the impact could be felt for a long while.