Ninety-one minutes had passed when Mallik Wilks’s volley not only secured Hull’s first Championship win since New Year’s Day but hauled Grant McCann’s side out of the relegation zone. Although Hull remain in acute peril, their late clamber to 19th lifts them one point and two places above Neil Warnock’s Middlesbrough at the end of an ungainly evening which emphasised precisely how far and how fast these clubs have fallen since 2017 when they were Premier League rivals. “It wasn’t pretty, I think the ball must have a migraine now,” McCann said. “But we defended very well, we’re in a good place after lockdown.” As Hull’s relieved manager celebrated the end of 2020’s 13-game winless run, Warnock received an unwanted introduction to Boro’s capacity to deceive following last Saturday’s debut victory at Stoke. The 71-year-old’s look of shock at the final whistle indicated that he had been expecting another three points here. “We were the better team and I’d have been disappointed to only get one point,” said Jonathan Woodgate’s successor. “So you can imagine my frustration.” By way of exacerbating Warnock’s subsequent pain, his new side were ahead from the penalty spot within three minutes. Britt Assombalonga’s kick arced into the top corner after Jordy de Wijs had fouled Hayden Coulson as they competed to collect the rebound following George Long’s spillage of Marvin Johnson’s long-range shot. Yet although the visitors looked stronger, with the Manchester City loanee Patrick Roberts catching the eye, Hull swiftly levelled. When Wilks, signed from Barnsley, cleverly drew a foul on the edge of the area, the Liverpool loanee Herbie Kane raised the tone by sending the resultant free-kick curving imperiously beyond Dejan Stojanovic from the edge of the area. If McCann could breathe a little easier, Hull’s manager must have felt fortune was frowning when, shortly afterwards, injury forced Kane’s replacement and a head injury dictated his sole specialist left-back, Callum Elder, also had to be withdrawn. By then the almost palpable tension had turned the play scrappy, edgy and stop-start. Big on niggling fouls and poor finishing, the game had lost its early intensity but the attendant fall in tempo seemed to rather suit Hull. Although Boro convinced in patches, their poor passing – with crosses particularly wayward – left Warnock an increasingly frustrated technical-area presence. The gifted Roberts faded but his replacement, Marcus Tavernier, soon had the ball in the net only to see the “goal” disallowed for a foul on Leonardo Da Silva Lopes in the buildup. Wilks had no such problems after meeting De Wijs’s cushioned header on the volley. “We’ve only got ourselves to blame,” conceded Warnock, who faces his old friends from QPR at the Riverside on Sunday. “Although we played quite well, we haven’t managed a decent cross in 20 attempts. But we’ve got six games left – and I think we can win them all.”