2020 is the centenary year of the Bruderhof, an Anabaptist pacifist Christian community created in the turbulent wake of the First World War. In 1920, inspired by the German youth movement, Christian theologist Eberhart Arnold and his followers moved to the remote mountain village of Sannerz, in German, to create the first hof (community), modelled on the early Hutterian Church and First Church of Jerusalem. Money, property and possessions would be shared and service to the wider community enshrined in their way of life. Community dinning room, Darvell, East Sussex. Families eat breakfast together and share a daily meal in the company of the whole community once a day. Food is both bought in with meat, honey and vegetables among the ingredients grown organically on the community. Today, in 23 enigmatic communities around the world the Bruderhof still live to these founding principles, bound to their neighbours by a spiritual commitment to god, humankind and mission, as defined in the Sermon on the mount, while living in private cooperatives to best practice community of goods and rejection of personal possessions, private technologies, liberalism and money. Students from the Danthonia academy attend an outdoor class on regenerative agriculture, NSW, Australia. Since August 2018 I have documented what the Bruderhof describe as “another life” on Hofs (communities) in Australia, Germany, the USA and the United Kingdom. I had met teenage members of the Bruderhof in Calais, where they were volunteering at an aid distribution centre. At the time, I was half way through a two-year project on the refugee crisis in Nord Pas du Calais. On my return to the UK I contacted the community in Sussex to ask if I could document them and after being asked to give slideshows and talks about the refugee crisis in their school in Kent, I was invited to shoot a book to celebrate their centenary in 2020. On the side I would be able to produce my own documentary work. Girls from the Beech Grove academy in Kent practice a folk dance with balls for thier final year show. Right; School performance, Folk dancing, Beechgrove, Kent. I was the first visual storyteller to be granted access to this modest Christian sect and as cameras are a rare sight, especially in the hands of an outsider, my process would be to live in community and take time to gain their trust and friendship, while I got a better understanding of the Bruderhof. Preparing the meeting Room, Sannerz, Germany. This is where the community was started in 1920. Mim with her daughters at the baptism spring, Sannerz, Germany. The house where the Bruderhof was originally set up in 1920, in Sannerz Germany was recently bought back by the community. The baptism spring where members were baptised is in the woods close by and is of great cultural significance to the community. Between August 2018 to August 2019 I spent from 2 days to a month in community around the world. These settlements range in size from 20 to 350 members and on the larger ones there is a school, shared homes, communal spaces like the dinning hall, where the community eat together once a day and a factory, referred in the vernacular as the ‘shop’. Here members work unpaid, creating fine quality classroom furniture, toys and adaptive equipment for children and adults. Profits sustain the community and are also distributed among the Bruderhof’s chosen aid organisations, including Oxfam, Save the Children, Tearfund, and World Vision. Children learning bush craft for their 24 hour stay in the woods, Darvell, East Sussex. Community laundry. Girl looks after her pet before breakfast, Darvell, East Sussex. Young and unmarried adults are key to the day to day life of the community, fulfilling key rolls in the kitchens, workshops and laundry. Every day begins with a family breakfast at 6.15, with work details and school starting at 7.30am. Everyone, no matter their training or age are tasked with daily chores and there seems little time for idleness. Ever hof I visited was immaculately kept and run with military precision. That is not to say that members don’t get leisure time as that is also factored into the equation and considered a vital part of a happy communal life. Girls playing basketball, Danthonia community, Australia. There is always live music or singing happening somewhere on any given day and on summer evenings and weekends families relax by the community swimming lake, fish and BBQ or play sports. There is even a ready supply of home-brewed beer and wine which can be requested from the stores, with a particularly nice recipe for an IPA doing the rounds of the hof’s kitchens when I visited. Baby show, Danthonia Community, Australia. Teenage boys learn to weld on the Danthonia Community, in New South Wales, Australia 6.15am breakfast, Danthonia community, Australia – Families breakfast together early before work and school starts at 7.30am. Jeans drying in the sun. One early morning in Australia I photographed Jeff, a gentle American man with a fine white beard and wearing a flat cap, brewing a new batch of beer. He had joined the Bruderhof in the late 60s as the community fulfilled his brief of pacifist Christian alternative living and he was also able to dodge the draft for the Vietnam war. After separating the mulch from the beer he insisted that I try an IPA chilling in walk in freezer. It was 7am and I was drinking a pint of beer in what some might describe as an orthodox Christian community. It was one of many surprises I had while documenting the Bruderhof. High School Basketball team pray before a game, Australia. I hope that the nuanced narrative of my project allows the viewer to see beyond preconceived ideas and prejudices of communities like the Bruderhof - which are more often than not seen as ‘cultish’ - and discover an unseen life of self-imposed virtue, that exists in parallel and juxtaposed to with the outside world’s rampant consumerism and 24 hour deluge of information. It examines both the communities and the liminal space between them and their surroundings through the themes of community, materialism, faith, work, play and perceived freedom. An impromptu community softball game comes together on the Foxhill community, upstate New York. A family watches the tractor work the fields on the farm in the Foxhill community. Kindergarten kids being read to at forest school, upstate New York In September 2020 the project will illustrate a coffee table book published by the Bruderhof to celebrate their centenary, called Another Life Is Possible. With a foreword from Rowan Williams it gives an insight into 100 year of community life told via testimonials of members from communities around the world. And in the spring of 2021 the photographic book publishers GOST are printing a stunning book from the project, designed by the celebrated photographic book designer Stuart Smith. The project has also been awarded a Coups de Coeur de L’ANI at the 2019 Visa Pour L’Image, was a finalist at the inaugural 2019 Prix Regnier Award, in Paris and single images won silver at the YICCA Contemporary Arts Exhibition, in Palermo, were selected for the KLP International Portrait Prize and exhibited in Studio 3 Gallery, at the University of Kent, in Canterbury.