The Battle of the Brits came alive on Tuesday evening as Dan Evans outclassed Kyle Edmund 6-4, 6-4 to win a spicy duel at the National Tennis Centre in Roehampton. Earlier in the day, Johanna Konta took an important step forward by recovering to defeat Katie Boulter 2-6, 7-6 (5), 10-6. A month after Evans ousted Edmund to little fanfare in the first Battle of the Brits, the second edition was a testament to the power of crowds. Surrounded only by their teammates, the pride of the top two male British players came to the fore. From the opening game, both punctuated their victorious points with loud cheers, seemingly determined to silence the other. After confounding Edmund with low slices and successful forays to the net, it was Evans who earned the final roar and he did not waste it. His final triumphant yell was the gesture that seemed to provoke a reaction. Instead of the delicate racket tap that has replaced handshakes since the pandemic, Edmund struck the frame of Evans’ racquet with deliberate force. Evans reacted ominously: “Be very careful, Kyle,” he said. “Be very careful mate.” As the victor returned to his box seething, he refused to entertain the suggestion from Heather Watson, his teammate, that Edmund’s gesture was in jest. “He just teed my fucking racket” he said. “It was nothing,” said Edmund afterwards. “He said he misinterpreted it. It was more like, at the end of the match, touching the racket. There was nothing there – a racket touch is not that big of a deal, to be honest.” British beef. pic.twitter.com/ljN2Zwbe1N In the battle between two of the best British female players, only the tennis was dramatic. Having not competed since early March, the difference in match sharpness between Konta and her rivals was as evident as in her loss to Jodie Burrage on the opening day. Konta quickly fell a double break down at 6-2, 3-0, but just as Boulter seemed to be rolling to victory, Konta reeled off five consecutive games as she finally found her range. By the end Konta looked like a completely different player, commanding the baseline as she secured an encouraging win. “It’s going to take time,” said Konta. “I think more than anything, I think I just gave myself a chance to start playing better. I thought in both matches I was in a good mindset, but especially today I just kept giving myself the best chance for my level to get better.” Andy Murray, who is only competing in the doubles, lost 4-6, 6-4 (10-8) with partner Burrage to Joe Salisbury and Emma Raducanu.