I remember when I was 10 and visiting the home of one of my mom’s friends. I asked on the drive over if she had kids I could play with. “No, she doesn’t,” my mom said. “Why doesn’t she have kids?” I asked. “I don’t know. But don’t ask her. She might not have been able to have them.” That was the refrain I heard growing up: be careful around childless women. Their childlessness might be a bruise; tender to the touch. Later that day, I peeked inside one of the friend’s spare bedrooms. It was an office with walls that were lined with books. Oh, I thought, that’s what people do if they don’t have kids. The moms I knew didn’t have time to read, they were too busy ferrying their kids to hockey rinks and baseball fields. Seeing that office, I began to imagine a different future for myself. Around that time, babies were on my mind – my dad and stepmom just had my brother a year before. I loved playing with him and taking care of him, but I also liked to go back to the quiet of my mom’s house and my own collection of books. “I want six kids,” my sister said once while holding my brother. I remember thinking, “Maybe I want none”. While I hadn’t wavered much in my belief that kids weren’t right for me, there was always the possibility I’d change my mind. But after being injured two years ago, it didn’t feel like a choice anymore. It happened in a split second. I was at the gym, my workout was almost done. Then I dropped a 25-pound weight on my head. A small slip. I’ve been trying to recover ever since. After my mild traumatic brain injury, it took me weeks to learn to walk without holding onto a wall. Then I couldn’t walk and talk at the same time for months. My days were filled with grueling physiotherapy and debilitating fatigue. It was so bad, I had to lie down for an hour after showering. When you get injured, everyone talks about recovery as though it’s a magical thing that restores you to who you were before. But on the two-year anniversary of my injury, I realized I had to accept that some of the deficits I still experience might be with me for life. That’s around the time that I noticed I still struggled around children. One day when a friend’s child ran up to me, a deep brain fog set in as they charmingly spoke a mile a minute and danced around. I excused myself to go to the bathroom and slumped against the door. I thought about how difficult it is for my brain to process kids’ unpredictable movements and noise. I thought about the lack of sleep, sensory overstimulation, and increased workload that parenting asks of everyone. Sitting on the floor of that bathroom, I realized that if I tried to parent I would likely live with severe brain fog, significantly decreased cognitive capacity, and intense fatigue. While this realization didn’t hit me as hard as it might have if having children had been important to me, I still felt it. After all, I was no longer choosing to be childfree. My body had made the choice for me. There was a finality to it. For the first time in my life the prospect of not having children felt like a bruise. That tenderness led me to reach out to my disabled and chronically ill friends to see how they felt about parenthood. Most were similarly struggling. “I can’t imagine having a child around when I can’t move from fatigue,” one friend told me. Another talked about how much more difficult the choice was for disabled women since they often take on more childbearing and rearing responsibilities. That doesn’t mean that disabled or chronically ill people can’t or shouldn’t parent. My friend Sanjana was so passionate about having a child that she delayed starting her fibromyalgia medication for four years as she struggled to conceive via IVF. She prepared for parenting with her chronic illness by arranging for night nurses, food prep services, and cleaners to ensure she could use her limited energy to care for her baby. When I visited Sanjana a few weeks after her son was born, we talked about how the government should provide services for disabled and chronically ill people to help them parent and how she was lucky to have the means to pay for support and a great partner. Understanding the extra work Sanjana put into becoming a mother and her acceptance of the impacts motherhood could have on her health made me realize that I just didn’t have the same drive to make parenting work for me despite my disability. It also helped me accept the ways in which my injury impacted my ability to choose. While many of my friends find a balance between parenting and following their passions, I love the freedom I have as a childfree woman to spend as much time as I want following mine. I now have my own spare room full of books. When I’m debilitated from fatigue, I go in there and read. That room doesn’t just have books, it also has a futon where friends stay when they’re in crisis, or just travelling through Vancouver. I have younger friends who I’ve “adopted” – and I’m an auntie to Sanjana’s son. In return, my friends care for me when I’m struggling with health issues. In this sense, even though I won’t ever have children, I’ll always have family. I don’t see my childlessness as a bruise anymore. It’s allowed me to create a life that I enjoy that’s full of love and care. Despite my disability, my life at 35 is much like what I dreamed it could be when I was 10: quiet and beautiful and absolutely my own. 