I don’t have many physical possessions. The important ones I lose with abandon: a passport at Newcastle Travelodge, an iPhone 4 at a club in Kingston, the family camera at a layover at Addis Ababa Bole international airport. A lot of what I spend my money on is of the edible or drinkable variety, and you won’t find many baby pictures of me – according to my parents, “it’s for the best”. There are the documents that prove my birth, my baptism, my holy communion and confirmation, but I have something else almost as significant: a collection of more than 100 music magazines. My religion began to wane around the age of 13, so our Sunday church service was swiftly replaced by an aisle-by-aisle pursuit of the NME while my mum did the weekly shop. I can’t tell you why I chose this magazine, because I had grown up around R&B, courtesy of my parents, and pop music, courtesy of the Spice Girls. Whatever it was, it broadened my world. This was my new religion: highlighting up-and-coming bands in the Radar section like they were Bible passages; reading reviews written by journalists as though their words were gospel. The Cribs, Late of the Pier, Test Icicles, the Strokes, Interpol, Bloc Party – they sounded weird and different and right. I was obsessed. My palate broadened and I started to buy Q magazine every month. This furthered my enlightenment. The retrospective and archive pages were filled with decades-old stories of debauchery, of 70s disco, 80s pop and 90s rock, and though I could never be a part of these scenes, I could touch the pictures and pore over the words. I was also a bored teenager in the Midlands with very strict parents, and magazines transported me from the beige of those streets to the brightness of London, New York and LA. They helped me to imagine. I stopped collecting magazines when I went to university, and after that I started to live what I’d read about, landing a job in London in the music industry. In publicity, no less, where print was king. It was thrilling to think that a kid like me was reading a feature I’d helped to place. At the same time, online journalism had crept in and, with that, the instant gratification of a quick click and skim-read on a screen took over from the page-turning ritual I had observed so devotedly in my teens. This week, Q announced it was closing, and with the NME now online only, the magazines that were most formative for me are either gone or completely transformed. The aesthetics of a great magazine are impossible to replicate online, and journalists will say that you can’t beat the feeling of seeing your name on a page alongside a feature you’ve written. The industry is changing out of necessity, but the closure of Q feels somehow final, as though we’ve taken for granted something so special, a unique arrangement of words and images with the power to influence the culture – and to change the odd life. I can’t say that I ever thought about restarting my collection, but I certainly didn’t think that one day I wouldn’t even have the option – or that my future kids wouldn’t either. Last year, my parents and youngest brother packed up my childhood home and shipped everything in it to Zimbabwe, where they’re originally from, to start a new “relaxed” life. We lived in that Nuneaton house for over a decade, so the scale of the decluttering was immense. When the Q news came, I anxiously messaged my mum: “You know all those magazines from my teens? Did you chuck them all out when you abandoned me for a better life last year?” She hadn’t. Given that Mum is hardly a bleeding heart indie rocker, I had expected her to send them the same way as the Charlie’s Angels: Full Throttle DVD I’d forced her to buy at a car boot sale in 2005. I asked her why she kept them, and she said she wasn’t really sure. I wasn’t sure why I was so relieved. Maybe she had gleaned a sense of how important they were in my development, a time capsule not only of a few random years in pop culture, but of my adolescence too. In any case, they now sit in a corner of my parents’ house, perhaps the most comprehensive Q collection in Harare. And though I won’t be able to add to those issues, I’m happy that they remain, just like my gold holy communion Bible, the record of a former life now changed for ever. • Michelle Kambasha works in the music industry