It has been a tough and emotionally demanding five weeks for the North West ambulance service in the BBC’s gripping documentary series, filmed pre-lockdown. In tonight’s finale, we follow paramedics Gareth and Gabby as they first attend to a patient who has collapsed in a shopping centre and then rush to a traumatic cardiac arrest. There is also a potential plane crash as a flight to John Lennon airport loses contact with air traffic control. It is a stirring testament to these key workers’ life-saving work. Ammar Kalia This week we look at the special bonds between pets and their owners through the prism of the animals that have been treated in Fitzpatrick’s clinic. Most memorable is Darcy the chihuahua, who was saved after a car crash in 2015 and provides vital support for 18-year-old TaJournee, who has autism. AK The Egyptologist Dr Glenn Godenho joins an archaeological dig that is working from a new theory about where to look for the most famous of the pharaohs. He gets fully involved in the process of conservation as well as identification, before drawing fresh conclusions on Cleopatra. Jack Seale Godfather of the gangster flick Martin Scorsese gets the retrospective treatment in this week’s episode. We see how his longstanding partnership with Robert De Niro has made both men’s careers, from 1976’s Taxi Driver to 2019’s The Irishman. A true master of the cinematic form. AK Jessica Hynes and David Tennant bring the realism of exasperated parents to this often brutal comedy. Three-year-old Rosie is obsessed with Christmas after watching Home Alone and, in a flash-forward to when she is 11, there is a major tantrum about going to the park while the couple consider their relationship. Hannah Verdier Vice has long had a knack for seeking out untold stories with universal appeal. Here, we meet baseball player Carlos Tabares, who knocked back big-money offers to move to the US, opting instead to stay in his native Cuba. Is it a decision he now regrets? Hannah J Davies Anomalisa, 1.50am, Film4What is it to be alive, ponders depressed motivational speaker Michael Stone, during a dark night of the soul in a Cincinnati hotel. This brilliant psychological drama from Charlie Kaufman and Duke Johnson muses fascinatingly on the human condition, enacted via puppet animation voiced by David Thewlis. Paul Howlett Test Cricket: England v West Indies, 10.30am, Sky Sports Main Event. Coverage of the first day of the Second Test. AFL: Essendon Bombers v Hawthorn Hawks, 10.30am, BT Sport 1. Clash from Marvel Stadium. PGA Tour Golf: The Memorial Tournament, 10.45pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Opening day’s play from Ohio.