It’s one of the great ironies of 2020 that in a year spent trying to save so many people, we’ve come to the conclusion we have too many on the planet. That was the gist of a large number of emails (our inbox was certainly overpopulated) that Upside readers sent in on the subject of global population. It’s a controversial subject but that didn’t stop scores of you weighing in, suggesting everything from fiscal tweaks and the repudiation of growth to an outright no-child policy. A random selection appears below, but before we get to them, a quick roundup of the week in Upside news. • The return of the great European sleeper train. Three-minute journey • The angel of Togo. Two-minute read • Fusion – the big energy breakthrough? 90-second reaction • Summer in the city: more trees, less asphalt. One-minute read • The startling collapse of plastic bag usage. One-minute read • Small boxer, big inspiration. Three-minute round Guardian writers have latched on to the population issue (Sian Cain on the child-free debate is particularly good). But Upside readers have been more prolific still. Here’s a flavour of what you said when asked about the impact of a levelling off of global population. Sju Thorup in Gentofte, Denmark, wants to be far from the madding crowd Nobody benefits from a world of 8 billion or 11 billion people, except for large capital interests that need cheap labour and mindless consumers. Children in smaller families receive more of their parents’ time, efforts, money, living space. Parents in smaller families enjoy more time to themselves and better opportunities for each child. No individual person enjoys being surrounded by other people at all times, competing for space and resources. Personally, I think that ideally the Earth could carry about 1 billion people who could all enjoy sufficient space, sufficient contact with nature, sufficient work and sufficient leisure, sufficient food and clean water. Such number of humans would enable us to leave enough room for ecosystems to recover and to remain fertile and robust, and to provide “ecosystem services” for a content humanity. But I know I am dreaming, for now. Such a scenario would require our decision-makers to think long-term and holistically, to decide restrictions on our activities, and enforce those restrictions all around. Too few people in power feel this need yet. Stella Dixon in Chester, England, says the debate should be about consumption, not absolute numbers of people I don’t understand what is so terrifying about the population reaching 11 billion people. There is nothing inherently threatening about more people existing, it is the conditions of their existence that count. I think it is more useful to focus on preventing the terror of human suffering, not caused by population but other factors. The world’s population is immense and almost impossible to change, while these other factors are much more actionable without signalling to eugenics. If the concern is overconsumption causing climate change, then people with the means to do so can make a difference by reducing the impact of their consumption – buying less, buying locally, and buying items sustainable both in environmental and human rights terms. Duncan Orr in Edinburgh worries about what population decline would mean for 200 years of steadily growing prosperity The problems of a decreasing population are much more extreme than most people realise. While everyone talks about the cost of caring for an ageing population, the economic effects go far beyond that… growth becomes not simply more difficult but impossible at the global level. For years the environmental movement has talked about the need for a zero-growth world and logically they are right: infinite growth is not possible on a finite planet. But all of the economics and ideologies of the last two centuries… have been built on the idea that economic growth is what leads to the prosperity and wellbeing of a country. Policymakers around the globe are going to have to come to terms with the fact that a zero-growth world is being thrust upon them, and a whole new way of operating is going to have to be devised if we are to maintain living standards into the next century. Clint Koble in the US said fiscal policy should encourage people to have fewer children Fewer people on the planet would put less stress on wildlife and the environment. It would stop the growth of large urban areas and hopefully, stop the burning of the Amazon forest. Fewer people would ensure that in the future, people would have a job. We wouldn’t have to fear automization, robotics etc.Instead of offering tax deductions for additional family members, we should penalize additional family members above 2 children as a possible way to control the population. The biggest step would be to make birth control available to every woman in the world. Robert Negut in Bucharest advocates even more drastic measures A drastic population reduction is the main necessary condition to even have a chance to solve the world’s major environmental and social problems. So it’d be great if it would fall, but what this estimate presents would be far too little, far too late. The only way to offer everyone a decent standard of living and a large amount of freedom in all other aspects of life, … and also, eventually, have a healthy ecosystem, is to not only fully embrace and encourage far fewer births but, considering how bad things are, even find ways to completely stop births for a time. Nils Wetterlind sent a postcard from the future – a rapidly depopulating province in Japan I reckon that 15-20% of the houses in this town are empty. We will leave soon, too. Although a perfectly nice town with a nice beach and a well-functioning social system, there is no getting around that it’s a dying town, and (believe me), you don’t want to live in a dying town. In my work, I travel extensively through rural Honshu especially in the central western parts, the Gifu, Nagano and Niigata prefectures, and I have seen hundreds and hundreds of villages and hamlets that are virtually abandoned. One or two old ladies pottering around, perhaps, maybe one in 10 houses inhabited. Like so often in these cases, it is the rural areas that are being abandoned first. It is here that it is startling, overpowering. The sober view of all this is of course that Japan’s population more than doubled in the last 100 years, so it shouldn’t be a disaster if it shrank back to 50-60 million living souls. That is still a huge amount of people compared to my own homeland, Sweden, which is more or less exactly the same size as Japan, and of a very similar shape, but only has 10 million inhabitants. And of course it would have a gigantic positive impact on the planet if these islands had half, or a quarter, of the people they have today. There are only benefits to having a smaller, more technologically reliant society. Apart from the fact that it is soul-crushing to live in a dying nation. Andrew Somogyi says we need a change in human nature IF people continue to be SO self-absorbed as to CONSUME as currently, no matter if there’s a population reduction, the perceived needs still rise per capitaSo, we gonna need artificial reduction in human DESIRE ... HOW will that happen is the BIG question. What do you think? Let us know. On board a small spacecraft on a seven-month journey to assess the population situation on Mars.