Until he took the Belgium job, Roberto Martínez felt much the same as any club manager: that there was rarely a timely international break. “But then, when you experience that side of football, you realise it takes the game into a different level,” he says. “Having a whole nation kicking a ball and celebrating a goal, or going through the misery of not being able to win a major tournament. Nothing unifies, or takes celebration to a global scale, like international football.” Put like that, perhaps Euro 2020 will provide a salve for troubled times when it belatedly begins next June. Had Covid-19 not intervened so tragically, it is perfectly conceivable that Martínez would have been leading Belgium out at Wembley in the final on Sunday and their “golden generation”, a decade in the making, would have achieved its crowning moment. “I can tell you that we felt ready,” he says from his base in England’s north-west, where lockdown has involved mapping the Red Devils’ short- and longer-term futures alongside attempts to home-school his six-year-old daughter. “We felt that, after two years where we won 10 games in qualifying, we had improved on what we did at the World Cup, and that was the idea. Mentally and physically we felt we were in the right moment.” It will be difficult to ensure that is the case two years running, particularly as Belgium are not getting any younger. Eden Hazard will be 30 when the tournament arrives; Kevin De Bruyne will reach the same age halfway through. There will not be many more chances to avoid remaining synonymous with the kind of anticlimax that, at Russia 2018, saw them a few crucial percentages below their best against France in the semi-finals. Martínez himself had a decision to make when it became clear the calendar would be decimated. His four-year contract was due to expire after Euro 2020 but an extension, signed in May, means he will remain in his post until after the 2022 World Cup. Martínez admits it is “something I didn’t expect, to be in the international game that long” but he was desperate to avoid the sense of a loose end. “We had to sit down and see what we were thinking about the future,” he says. “When you’re working towards a major tournament like the European Championship, and a unique kind of football celebration with 12 hosts, it felt stopping at that point would have meant a bit of an unfinished feeling around the work of the last four years. But now I hope this year is not wasted time at all.” It helps that, while he will not have managed at a football match for 10 months when the Nations League starts in September, there has been a bigger picture. He has officially taken the technical director role alongside that of manager; it is some workload, given the Belgium football federation’s CEO, Peter Bossaert, has described the period to Qatar 2022 as “probably the most important years in our football history”. There is sense, Martínez believes, in juggling the roles. “It works for us. Playing for Belgium now is not the same as 10 years ago, when you were called up to a team in the top 50 of the Fifa ranking. Now you’re going to be demanded to perform for a team in the world’s top three. So that needs long-term projects, and players at a very young age must be prepared to deal with that expectation and pressure. “These are essential years. There is a lot of support, hope and love towards this group of players. But we need those born in 2000, 2001, 2002 to be able to experience what it takes to perform in the way Belgium does now. It’s important we get inside how this generation is working and prepare them, so that we don’t lose any of the talent coming through.” He namechecks players such as Jérémy Doku, an 18-year-old forward at Anderlecht. The implication is that, with the right groundwork, the generational handover need not be dramatic. Belgium’s next wave can learn from a vintage that gives cause for pride off the pitch, too, and Martínez is conscious of the ambassadorial role footballers are invited to play in these times. While Toby Alderweireld recently laughed off the idea his likeness might replace a statue of King Leopold, whose rule killed millions in what is now Democratic Republic of the Congo, the very notion was evidence of football’s capacity to offer a palatable reality to a mixed society. In Belgium, that has rung especially true. “Footballers are becoming modern figures for communicating strong messages,” Martínez says, also making reference to Marcus Rashford. “That’s probably a job where politicians have led the way, but it feels very powerful to follow the message of a sportsperson that had to fight to take good examples. It brings them close to younger people. In Belgium it’s wonderful: they keep coming back and presenting themselves in a way that unites. Other figures in society probably can’t reach the same level now. “Belgium is a beautiful example of understanding diversity. We’ve got the Flemish, Francophone and German parts but then we’ve got huge influence from African backgrounds. I haven’t experienced any issues there, in the competitive environment of football, because everybody is there for the same reason and the same goal. The country has had tough experiences but there is a very convincing way of bringing positive messages through football.” It is almost exactly a quarter of a century since Martínez arrived in Wigan, aged 22, as one of the “Three Amigos” with Isidro Díaz and Jesús Seba. Lancashire felt a long way from Zaragoza, where he started his professional career, and at that time he had little inkling of the trail a footballer can blaze. “I think we were too young, travelling into the unknown, to be aware of how you can affect others. But further down the line we did meet people who had been on a similar journey, coming from Spain to the UK, and said our example had encouraged them to learn English or stay longer. “Looking back, it’s an advantage that you don’t know what you’re going into. If you could measure exactly what you have to go through, it becomes a bigger challenge. We were very young, very curious, and it helped that it was three of us making the step.” He does not deny they were targeted, at times, on account of their nationality during Wigan’s slog through the third tier. But his love for the lower leagues has never dimmed and, in a lengthy discussion of the existential threat posed by Covid-19, he emphasises the sanctity of a structure whose breakup would, he thinks, make English football no more special than anywhere else. “The third and fourth levels in England are model leagues around Europe and that needs to be protected,” he says. “It’s a unique environment. Preserving that professional status is under threat and we all need to be aware. This is the moment to protect them, right down to the grassroots, because we are very, very fortunate to have this pyramid and it will be a tragedy if this period damages the structure. “The English game is what it is because you’ve got those 92 league clubs, local institutions, who offer the best platforms to develop footballers. Many are going to be challenged and there’s a responsibility for the game as a whole to protect football at that level.” He does not believe the answer is as simple as airdropping cash from the top; there is, he says, still a difference between bad management and genuine need so money has to reach the right places. This conversation is taking place days before his beloved Wigan, now in the second tier, enter administration in a tale so bizarre it cannot be neatly placed within narratives about deep-set malpractice. But it still plays into his expectation that, at the higher end of the chain, Covid-19 will shine a light on awkward truths. “There’s been a lot of talk about a backlash in football but I don’t believe that. Football is still a passion for millions. But I believe there’ll be a lot of excuses, and clubs that aren’t run properly are going to blame Covid-19. Some are run with a very solid model and they’ll find opportunities. There are others that, from the outside, look great but aren’t well-run and everything is hanging on a specific TV contract or something very weak. Those clubs are going to suffer because they won’t be able to adapt like the rest.” Martínez has adjusted in his own way. Reliably optimistic, he sees benefits for Belgium in facing both England and their Euro 2020 opponents Denmark twice during a hectic Nations League schedule before they finally get their shot at glory. On 11 October there will be an appearance, three months late, at Wembley. It is not quite the one he hoped to be making but, when they attempt to return next summer, the ambition will be burning brighter than ever. “I’ve never felt football to be a job,” he says. “It’s always been a way of living, a passion. During this period you’ve got time to sit down and really value what you love. Football becomes this opportunity to fight for your dreams in life, to face adversity but then to get up again and keep fighting.”