From the station in Welwyn they walked along a farm track to Sherrardspark Wood, minding their step on the grassy floor, and made their way down to a naturally forming hollow, where they paid two shillings and sixpence to see a performance of A Midsummer Night’s Dream. Surrounded by larch trees, 130 players took to the stage of the Dell theatre. They travelled on Saturday 6 June 1925 not only to see Shakespeare performed in this oddly magical, bucolic setting, but also to visit one of the new, radical communities being built in England that people from all over the world were talking about – the garden city. This year marks the centenary of Welwyn Garden City, one of England’s two official garden cities, a concept pioneered by Ebenezer Howard in his visionary book, To-Morrow – A Peaceful Path to Real Reform, published in 1898. Disheartened by the squalor and overcrowding in England’s Victorian cities, Howard boldly promised “a new hope, a new life, a new civilisation”, and, thankfully, attached the plans to create it. His vision of a garden city married the best aspects of town and country to create a new, healthier, happier way for people to exist. And while garden cities today are usually noted for their peaceful, tree-lined suburban streets and carefully maintained Arts and Crafts cottages, there was much more to Howard’s plan than design. Influenced by utopian thinkers such as William Morris, Edward Bellamy and Thomas More, Howard created a philosophy of place. “The design and architecture was underpinned by a financial model and system of participative democracy, which meant residents had a real stake in what was built,” says Katy Lock, director of communities at the Town and Country Planning Association (TCPA). “That’s what made it different. It really was about a new society.” When Letchworth Garden City was opened in 1903 it drew worldwide attention. The TCPA, which founded both Welwyn and Letchworth, was inundated with requests for its experts to speak internationally. Drawn by its promise of a “new civilisation”, progressive, liberal-minded free thinkers began to settle in the garden cities. Mervyn Miller, in his book English Garden Cities: An Introduction, speaks of “unconventional citizens, promenading around their utopia in smocks and sandals, womenfolk resplendent in flowing robes, hatless and gloveless”. George Orwell commented on such activity with untapped disdain. In The Road To Wigan Pier, he wrote: “It would help enormously if the smell of crankishness which still clings to the Socialist movement could be dispelled. If only sandals and the pistachio-coloured shirts could be put in a pile and burnt, and every vegetarian, teetotaller, and creeping Jesus sent home to Welwyn Garden City to do his yoga exercises quietly!” Garden city life was lampooned, too, by high society, bringing a degree of notoriety to Letchworth and Welwyn. This annoyed Howard and his followers, who needed the movement to be taken seriously in order to persuade the government to build more throughout the country. Yet after the first world war, campaigns such as Homes Fit For Heroes saw David Lloyd George’s Liberal government commit to building social housing that reflected only some aspects of the garden city. “This worried the garden city purists, because everywhere seemed to be calling itself a garden suburb,” says Lock. “They were leafy green places inspired by its art and architecture that led to these sprawling garden suburbs in the interwar period.” The definition of a garden city was beginning to shift in people’s minds. According to Lock, “the label was used and abused”. Communities like Bournville and Moor Pool near Birmingham, Port Sunlight on Merseyside, and Wythenshawe, near Manchester, are still often referred to as garden cities but these were either philanthropic endeavours or social housing projects. “The garden suburbs but had nothing to do with Howard’s ideas,” explains Lock, “and this mirrors what is happening today.” In 2014 the then chancellor George Osborne announced that a brand new garden city was to be built in Ebbsfleet, Kent. In fact, the government proposed a whole series of garden towns to combat the growing housing crisis. Six years later, planning consultancy Lichfields says there are 49 schemes in the works with plans to deliver 403,000 homes for up to one million residents. But so far just 3% have been completed. “Garden communities are coming forward principally as vehicles for meeting housing needs rather than out of any philanthropic or public health motivation,” says Matthew Spry, senior director at Lichfields. As a result, residents’ groups have formed all over the country to object to garden community plans which, as Spry says, “have no uniform sense of place or design in the way that makes Letchworth or Welwyn Garden City so distinctive”. Indeed there are no requirements for private developers and local councils to implement any of the garden city principles. “North Essex went garden community mad from 2015 to 2020,” says campaigner Rosie Pearson. She has been lobbying for changes to the existing proposals in her area since their inception. “When we analysed the evidence assembled by the authorities, and developer viability appraisals, it was clear that there was an enormous gap between the pretty pictures, the talk of infrastructure first, and the reality.” In the last year, six schemes for garden communities in Essex have either been scrapped or considered unsound by planning inspectors. In Ebbsfleet, where a genuine garden city was supposed to be created, a huge chunk of land has been bought by Paramount to build a giant film and TV-inspired theme park that promises to rival Disneyland and attract 40,000 people to the area everyday. Apologies, Mr Howard. And what of Welwyn today? What does a garden city look like in 2020? Of the two garden cities, Welwyn has had the tougher ride. After the second world war there was a clear opportunity to expand which the government took under the New Towns Act 1946. In 1948, Welwyn was designated a new town, in addition to its status as a garden city. Whereas Howard’s insistence that profits from the land be repaid into the community continues to exist in Letchworth, this is no longer the case in Welwyn. A heritage fund allows Letchworth to maintain its look and unique garden city features. It’s not so easy for Welwyn. “All of those assets that had been generated through the garden city model which originally would have been reinvested in the community were just sold off,” says Lock. “So Welwyn became just like any other new town in that it had no money to look after its resources.” Businesses have closed, most noticeably Welwyn’s famous Shredded Wheat factory, an art deco building whose sleek white silos still loom over the town. It has been empty since 2008 after 73 years feeding both homes and the local economy. “The fundamental lesson for the garden cities and the new towns is this issue about stewardship,” says Lock. “If you have the right financial model for the benefit of the community you can actually look after places in the long term.” The centenary raises many questions about Welwyn’s past and its future. A Garden Cities Symposium, put back until next year, will explore the influence and challenges for garden cities in the 21st century. Excellent transport links to London from Welwyn and Letchworth attract families priced out of the London housing market. While this creates demand, it also brings concerns that the garden cities will become little more than dormitory towns, not self contained, community-minded spaces. The garden cities always had strong roots in the arts. While Welwyn’s Dell theatre has long gone, there are plans to turn the Shredded Wheat factory into an arts space with galleries and events that, it’s hoped, will bring visitors to Welwyn – just as they did 100 years ago.