The austerity decade has diminished us in many ways, and this week there came news of a new one: the birthrate is plummeting. The Office for National Statistics has revealed a fall of 12.2% since 2012. That’s a replacement rate of just 1.65 children per woman – lower in Wales. Cue panic. Who will look after the old? Who will do the jobs to pay for their pensions? Some think fewer humans are good for the environment, others that it signifies national decline: size means status and strength among wealthier nations. This comes as no surprise, looking at historical patterns: when times are hard people can afford fewer babies. In this miserable decade when wages fell back, when good jobs were replaced with insecure, disrespected work, young people struggle to pay rent, home ownership falls and many live with parents well into their 30s. We are still far from believing every woman is free to control or encourage her own fertility as suits her circumstance The Labour years saw birthrates rise. There was no conscious pro-natalist policy to boost the population, but a government full of new women MPs focused on nurseries. Primed with evidence that good early development is the best investment for education and a good life, they quoted at the Treasury the Perry HighScope project from the days of Lyndon Johnson’s presidency in the US. It proved how investment in two years of intensive pre-school help for families yielded great savings later as those children thrived. That inspired Labour’s Sure Start: its 3,500 children’s centres, one in pram-pushing distance of every young family, were popular and welcoming places providing midwives, health visitors, parenting classes, drop-in playgroups and nurseries as hubs for isolated young parents. Subsidised childcare helped mothers back to work. Child tax credits boosted family incomes, taking a million children out of poverty. Maternity rights expanded, with paternity pay introduced. Making life easier for mothers allowed them to have more children in a time of optimism amid economic growth. Another great success was the fall in teenage pregnancy, one of Labour’s poverty-reduction targets, using clinics, school nurses and sex education: since 1998 it has fallen by 60%, accompanied by a culture change in teenage aspirations. Contrast that with the last decade. Spending on children fell, family benefits were savaged, while pensions were triple-locked: without a policy change, four in 10 children are predicted to fall below the poverty line. Sure Start was scrapped, though a few excellent centres survive. Nurseries are closing in the poorest areas. School budgets fell, cuts have caused a decade of dilapidation of school buildings. The number of school nurses has fallen by 30% since 2010, with health visitors cut. Families suffered under the bedroom tax. But most emblematic was the two-child limit in benefits: it had no effect on numbers, it just impoverished families with three children who claimed benefits, as thousands more will now. Many will feed their children from food banks for the first time, and child hunger is well documented. No wonder few thought the last decade the right time for babies. The choices women make have always been economically determined – and whatever choices they make are always a reason for blame: they had too many, or too few, babies, they were too young or too old, too poor or too careerist. Women are seen as selfish for having children, or selfish for being childless. The British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS), a 1968 charity created to provide NHS abortions, campaigns “to remove all barriers to reproductive choice”. Clare Murphy, one of its directors, notes the disapproval of women, whatever they do. If they have babies early, they are “a burden on the state” but if they leave child-bearing until after 40 they are too “ambitious”. The NHS often refuses the three cycles of IVF that Nice recommends because the misery of infertility ranks unjustly low in priorities of suffering. Some choices may have just got easier: BPAS is delighted that it has been made possible to order abortion pills by phone within the first 10 weeks of pregnancy during the pandemic, but Christian Concern has been granted a judicial review to try to prevent it. We are still far from believing that every woman is free to control or encourage her own fertility as suits her circumstance. Birthrates aren’t determined by women’s whims. The social geographer Prof Danny Dorling anticipated that austerity would breed fewer babies. There was a fall in the 1970s and most dramatically in the 1930s depression, when “demographers were so alarmed they predicted the emptying out of the population by 2000”. How serious is a population fall? Dorling notes that immigration often neatly fills the missing cohorts. That’s the likely solution, since birthrates are likely to keep falling for as long as this government fails to create a child-friendly life for parents. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist