Michaela Coel’s drama I May Destroy You has passed the point where we argue about whether it is a hit. The story of Arabella, a young London writer who’s drugged and raped, and embarks on a quest for justice and self-knowledge, has been a passport for millions of BBC viewers into a world of shifting boundaries around sexual consent, generational clashes, social media addiction and drugs. Coel, 32, stars, writes and co-directs the drama, which has also launched on America’s HBO. The scrutiny means she’s been prodded to excavate her own past, after she was drugged and assaulted by an unknown assailant in her 20s. So, to Coel the same question that Arabella’s friend asks her on-screen character: why return to the worst of days with such punishing intensity? “If you are alive to reflect on a dark time, and keep returning there, it means you’ve survived it and you can keep going there until you’ve got what you need from returning , well I think that’s what she’s [Arabella] doing,” says Coel. “And I think that’s what I do, too.” I May Destroy You has proved a winning mix of modern Jacobean revenge tragedy as Arabella tracks down her assailant and allies with other victims of sexual exploitation. It’s also mordantly funny – about periods during sex and cultural misunderstandings and apprehension. “I describe the humour in this show and in life as an uninvited guest at a party,” she says. She recalls going to the police station, dazed after the attack. “Very much like Arabella in episode two, I was suddenly realising that my life was really about to change for ever. My friend was with me, and as we waited for the detective, I noticed him playing Pokemon Go on his phone. And that became the tone for the rest of my thoughts.” Race and racism are shot through the drama, which has been praised for a cast centring black actors. Paapa Essiedu and Weruche Opia co-star and there’s more nuanced depiction of black experiences than in much British TV drama. But for all the laughs and cringes about awkward moments and misunderstandings, there’s an undertow of anger about pervasive everyday discrimination. Coel discussed in detail on an Economist podcast her experience of racism at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, where she has described being the first female black student accepted in five years, after reading English literature at Birmingham University. “I think that these schools and teachers really have no idea how complicit they are in the racial inequality,” she says. “And there is trauma that black students or students of Asian origin have when on the off-chance … you get in.” The remedy, she reckons, is not just diversifying the student body with better access policies, but diversifying the teaching staff too. Delivering the MacTaggart lecture in 2018, she revealed a breathtaking encounter in a class at Guildhall, when she was called the N-word. Asked about the context, she says: “I think being called the N-word in front of all the students in the middle of a class exercise where you’re simply walking around in a space might answer your question. It sounds absolutely insane, doesn’t it? And I meet student after student from different years, who tell me the same story. What’s that actually about?” Did it happen within a theatrical exercise she felt overstepped the line, or was the word simply used as an insult? “It was: ‘Oi, N-word, what have you got for me?’” which had no relation to us just walking around in space. I mean, it was astonishing for the entire year. We don’t know why it happened.” She has never named or confronted the person responsible. Would she do so now, given that one subject of her drama is the need to confront past wrongs? “I don’t know. Why wouldn’t I say who it was? I need to have all my clarity on why on earth it happened and where they’re coming from before I throw them under the bus. Perhaps I need to have a conversation with that teacher.” She adds: “The sad dichotomy is that, you know, over those three years, I think I experienced discomfort and I grew a lot. There’s a part of me that is aware my time in drama school kind of prepared me for the world outside of it. I entered the world afterwards understanding that this is a very strange and awful place a lot of the time if you are black.” It was, she wants to make clear, not only a negative time in her career. “I learned to live in my body. I learned to be soft in my movements. I learned to bond with people who were from all parts of the UK. So it is tricky – because I’m also grateful for what I learned there.” This week, Coel revealed she turned down a $1m Netflix deal after the streaming giant refused to grant her a chunk of copyright to her drama. The physical and mental exhaustion we see her character undergoing don’t sound foreign to Coel, who wrote almost 200 drafts of I May Destroy You. This sounds hefty, even by the standards of the drama trade. A long groan. “My process is so messy … I don’t plan, and then I plan as I draft from thoughtlessly put down. I call them vomit drafts – 12 containers of vomit that I put in front of my co-execs. It requires me becoming exhausted, and I often find myself in a trance, and after 30 hours - why haven’t I felt the urge to pee for 30 hours - I am probably sending myself close to madness. It’s spiritual and emotional and exhausting. And I like it!” She also gives a nuanced take on the role of the police in responding to sexual assaults, in particular a scene when a policeman struggles to speak plainly to a young black gay man trying to reporting an assault. “The man playing [the] officer – we should always remember that he’s trying to do his best,” Coel reflects. “And then we should decide as an audience: is it really enough? I also really wanted to explore the different ways that the police handled assault when the victim is a woman and how they process that when it is a man.” One reason its appeal has now crossed the Atlantic is that I May Destroy you is a thing of TV beauty - shimmering shots of night-time London and joyous moments, such as when Coel converses while executing a perfect yoga “crow” balance. If other remedies – racial injustice and generational frustration – are a lot harder to nail, what is her fix for the perfectly counter-balanced posture eluding so many weekend yogis? “Make sure you are lifting feet as high as possible, close to your bum,” she says firmly. “Don’t look down - just look out.” Anne McElvoy is senior editor at The Economist and hosts the the Economist Asks podcast. The full Michaela Coel interview can be heard at economist.com/michaelacoel