1) On Wednesday, we will celebrate the return of Test cricket with England taking on West Indies. So here’s Sir Cuthbert Gordon Greenidge flaying England as was his wont: twin tons in 1976; 214 not out in 1984; 223, also in 1984; and a partnership with Desmond Haynes worth 289 in 1990. See also: Graham Gooch’s unbeaten 154 at Headingley in 1991, Robin Smith’s savage 148 not out a couple of weeks later at Lord’s … and Brian Lara’s 179 in the drawn final Test in 1995. And will anything this series touch this inspired spell from Curtly Ambrose and Courtney Walsh? A word for Sir Everton Weekes, who sadly died on Wednesday. The Bajan batsman was feted as one of the three Ws – the others being Sir Clyde Walcott and Sir Frank Worrell – and can be seen here limbering up before a Test series in England in 1950. A legend of the game. RIP. 2) When he’s not performing as irascible pundit “Roy Keane”, former football Roy Keane is a brilliant talker. RTE’s 1997 documentary on him, Have Boots Will Travel, is worth your time, and so is this “block-tackle” on Neil “Dissa” Pointon. 3) In various ways, Nate Diaz is the Roy Keane of the octagon. Here are his five best finishes: the third of which, against Kurt Pellegrino, is a strong contender for the coolest of all time. 4) There are some fantastic World Cup anniversaries this week. On Friday, it will be 26 years since Argentina and Romania’s World Cup classic in Pasadena; on Saturday, it will be 26 years since Leonardo had a quiet one with Tab Ramos; and it will also be 22 years since Brazil edged Netherlands in Marseille. 5) Thirty-two years ago on Friday, the great Steffi Graf won the first of her seven Wimbledon singles titles, destroying the great Martina Navratilova after losing this first set. Already the Australian and French Open champion, she went on to win the Olympics and US Open too, completing tennis’ only ever golden slam. 6) And to finish, here’s Lothar Matthäus losing his temper. Oh ja! 1) Diego Maradona scoring four as Argentinos Juniors beat Boca Juniors 5-3 in 1980. 2) Netherlands beating West Germany in the semi-finals on their way to Euro 88 glory. 3) John Fashanu’s Football Challenge, also known as Fash FC, in its wild, weird entirety. Spotters’ badges: Footballaroo, NLsigns, kisbie. Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.