Rosie Mullender Thu 23 Jul 2020 11.39 BST


Last modified on Thu 23 Jul 2020 11.52 BST Since coronavirus has shrunk our social spheres, intimate garden parties have become something of a trend. Thanks to street-wide WhatsApp chats and local volunteer groups, eclectic new friendships have been forged – and as the weather’s improved, online quizzes with distant relatives have segued into alfresco drinks with new and nearby friends. While we’re all being urged to stay alert, the easing of lockdown rules means we can meet up with more of our friends. Outside the permitted bubbles in each area, the 2-metre rule remains in place in Scotland and Wales, while individuals in England and Northern Ireland must stay at least 1 metre apart. But groups of friends can now gather together outside – any sized group from up to two households can meet in Wales; up to six people from different households in England, with no limit on people from two different households; in Northern Ireland, groups of up to 30 people can meet; and in Scotland, up to 15 people from up to five different households can meet outside per day – all while keeping a distance. All of which means summer isn’t cancelled, it just looks somewhat different to how we imagined – but we can still get ready to brush up on our barbecuing and hosting skills. Now it’s trickier to go to the corner shop for extras, planning is of the essence. Here are our tips for hosting the perfect post-lockdown barbecue, and enjoying a safely sociable summer. Be considerateThe first rule of new-normal socialising is to be respectful of everyone’s boundaries. You might not mind sharing food with your guests, but others might be more anxious. Find out what everyone’s comfortable with before you plan your party – and if one of your friends would prefer to bring their own food, be prepared to be OK with that. Shop smartThanks to socially distanced shopping, the etiquette of putting on a barbecue has changed, too – it’s now perfectly reasonable to ask people to bring their own food or drink if they want something specific. Meanwhile, make sure you provide enough basics, to avoid a dash to the shops, mask in hand. You can find barbecue calculators online that will tell you how much meat, veg, side dishes and drink to buy depending on the number of people attending. Buy localWhile your online shop is ideal for stocking up on basics, a barbecue is the perfect excuse to explore your local area and uncover some hidden foodie gems. From artisan ciabatta rolls and locally produced meats, to small-batch chutneys, cheeses and ale, it’s a great time to support the independent stores reopening after lockdown. As well as boosting the economy, buying locally sourced produce keeps your carbon footprint clean, too. Stock up on masksJust as you’d make sure a guest didn’t drive home after a few drinks, protecting them if they have to get a cab or public transport home is equally thoughtful. Buy some masks to hand out to anyone who might suddenly need one at the end of the evening. Play it safeYou can’t control the weather – but you can make sure staying safe feels like a natural part of the party, rather than a chore. Put out plenty of hand sanitisers and wipes for guests, hand out glasses marked with their names, and hang 2-metre-long strips of bunting as a visual reminder not to mingle too closely. Spacing out your garden furniture around a central hub, such as a fire pit, will also help remind people to keep a distance without dampening the atmosphere. Create a signature dishWith more of us cooking at home than ever, it’s worth taking the time to develop a dish that will really wow your guests. Whether it’s making a lip-smacking vegan pulled “pork” (try BOSH’s for inspiration) or perfecting an all-American regional burger (make George Motz your go-to for recipes), head to your local butcher or farmers’ market, and start planning a grill everyone will remember for the right reasons. This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All Together is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic