Six weeks ago, hopes were high that travel restrictions would be eased in time to save the summer for low-cost airlines. Shares in easyJet rose from 500p in mid-May to 800p-plus in the second week of June; Ryanair’s stock climbed from €9 to €13. Monday’s closing prices were 542p and €10.48 respectively and tell the tale: summer 2020 will be a washout for the budget brigade. Quarantine restrictions on UK travellers returning from Spain will dampen demand in many ways. Holidaymakers will worry about their insurance cover. Families planning a late-August trip will fret about their kids’ return to school in September. And, unlike government ministers, not everyone has a job that allows them to self-isolate at home and work on full pay. We’ll learn more about the drop-off in demand next week when easyJet reports quarterly results, but cancellations and deferrals look inevitable. “No travel is risk-free during this pandemic,” said Downing Street, adding that travel advice can change rapidly. The statement could almost have been designed to maximise holidaying in the UK. Ryanair’s Michael O’Leary raged about “a badly managed overreaction” and, up to a point, one can sympathise: Spain is a big place and regional variations in travel policy ought to be possible. O’Leary, though, should probably also count his blessings. Ryanair is better-capitalised than most of its peers; it has cut costs more quickly; and a few rivals, such as Flybe and Germanwings, have disappeared. Ryanair, when conditions eventually improve, ought to be well placed to recover. It is harder, though, to glimpse much light for long-haul operators, such as the British Airways owner, IAG. Transatlantic travel was always going to be slower to recover than the European version. Now the clock has been reset. HSBC’s political agonies go on. In the west, the bank is being bashed for its disgraceful public support for draconian security laws in Hong Kong. Over in China, state media are portraying HSBC as the evil “accomplice” of Washington in its pursuit of Huawei. The latest kicking was delivered by the People’s Daily and prompted HSBC to make the potentially risky move of telling the Chinese public, via the local WeChat social media platform, that the government-sponsored outlet is talking rubbish. HSBC’s statement, titled Explanations on the Huawei Event, was obviously more restrained in tone. The bank denied it had “set traps to ensnare Huawei” and said it had not been involved in the US Department of Justice’s decision to investigate the telecoms company. It said it had only handed over documents to the DoJ, which later requested the arrest in Canada of the Chinese technology company’s chief financial officer, when it was ordered to do so. That account seems entirely plausible, but a public spat with the People’s Daily is significant in itself. It underlines HSBC’s horribly weak position during the US-China standoff. The bank seems to have gained no credit with Beijing for being cuddly over Hong Kong. Rather, the authorities seem to enjoy making soft threats to HSBC’s ability to attract business customers in China, which is the undercurrent to the recent press coverage. It is why it may be premature to think HSBC’s board will be bounced into embracing an entirely Chinese future, complete with redomicile to Hong Kong, the source of more than half the annual profits. The terms of any redomicile would matter and, as things stand, HSBC’s political stock is falling fast. A $1bn (£800m) deal, rising to $6bn if sales targets are met, is significant but not game-changing for AstraZeneca. That, though, is partly a measure of how far the UK’s largest pharmaceutical company has travelled in the past five years. In oncology, thanks to the success of drugs such as Tagrisso, it is the natural partner for any company seeking a global stage for a potential treatment. Monday’s deal with Daiichi Sankyo involves a lung and cancer development drug, and is the second of its type with the Japanese firm. If there is a business-as-usual feel about the alliance, that’s no bad thing from the point of view of shareholders. AstraZeneca’s high-profile efforts to develop a coronavirus vaccine are set up to make no direct profits; a useful cancer drug, on the other hand, generates wonderful margins.