“What people don’t always see is that we are more than just a swimming pool and a gym,” says Natalia Stothard, the business manager of the Pelican Centre in Tyldesley, Greater Manchester, as she starts to convey just how much the unprecedented crisis facing Britain’s leisure centres also risks devastating communities across the land – including her own.“There are high levels of deprivation within this borough – that’s why we have holiday camps where children are provided with a free meal at a really reduced rate,” says Stothard, who took over the centre in 2012 after it faced being shut down because of austerity cuts. “And if somebody is in trouble in the community, they will come as they know it’s a safe space.“We also have a lot of retired members – one of our most popular sessions is Young at Heart swimming. We’ve even got a member who’s in his 80s, who only comes in for a chat, which is lovely. But now we are increasingly worried.” It is a familiar fear. As the Guardian revealed last month, nearly half of Britain’s 2,727 public leisure centres face going under by Christmas, putting more than 58,000 jobs at risk and hitting the most deprived areas of the UK hardest because of the devastating financial impact of the Covid-19 pandemic.Around 20% of the UK’s swimming pools could also close for good. And while gyms, leisure centres and pools have been given the go-ahead to reopen again from 25 July, the industry groups UK Active and Community Leisure UK are warning that many in the most deprived areas will not be financially sustainable without further support. If there’s a second wave, we won’t come back. We know that. We’ll be done On Wednesday they launched a national “#saveleisure” campaign, which is asking the government for £773 m to help sports centres to make up the shortfall caused by being closed since March. Without it, they fear the industry will be devastated – and any plans by the government to tackle obesity hamstrung.Launching the campaign, Huw Edwards, the chief executive UK Active, told the Guardian a secure and thriving sector would be crucial in supporting the nation’s health, wellbeing and recovery from the pandemic. “There is a lot of talk about the prime minister’s obesity plan – but it is inconceivable that this wouldn’t be addressed first,” he said. “Gyms and leisure centres are integral to the health of the nation.” Meanwhile Mark Tweedie, the chief executive of Community Leisure UK, said that while providers had worked hard to make their facilities safe for reopening, many were still at risk because local authorities were now not able to financially sustain them without extra government support. “Public leisure centres are at the heart of communities – they are places where communities connect to socialise and have fun, they serve all age ranges and abilities, from parents with babies, through to sports clubs, walking groups and gentle exercise classes for the less fit,” he said. The campaign has already received the backing of Jane Nickerson, the chief executive of Swim England, who said urgent action was needed to save Britain’s swimming pools. “Pools support the physical and mental wellbeing of local people, improve community cohesion and save the NHS hundreds of millions of pounds each year. The situation is urgent, without additional support too many of our swimming pools will be forced to close for good, we must not let this happen.” Lee Cotter, who runs two pools in Derbyshire, told the Guardian he was spending £13,000 a month during the pandemic because of staff wages, heating bills and other costs. “We are OK until about October at the moment,” he said. “Before the lockdown we had 1,700 kids from 3 and a half to 10 having lessons with us – and we tried to keep our charges as low as possible to make the lessons as widely available within the community. Teaching kids to swim is vital for the life skill – one that we can’t afford not to be doing.” Organisers of the campaign are hoping growing evidence of the “social value” of leisure centres – including the positive impact on educational attainment, productivity, reducing crime and loneliness, and engaging inactive and disadvantaged communities – will be enough to persuade the government to intervene. Utku Toprakseven, the director of sports intelligence at 4Global, which provides data analysis to governments, sports bodies and major sporting events, said the research showed the total social value of gyms and swimming pools in 2019 was almost £4bn – and that the projected reduction in social value could be more than £2bn in a worst-case scenario. “One important statistic is that one in every six deaths in the UK has been linked to physical inactivity,” he told the Guardian. “With the current crisis, where people have been forced to sit at home, this risk has even increased. And so many leisure centres being under threat of closure only makes things worse. “However, when we conduct surveys asking how people feel about leisure centres reopening, we find that those from more deprived areas and lower socio-economic groups value them much more – as you would expect, better-off people tend to have more access to technology and other ways to staying active.” Meanwhile at the Pelican Centre, Stothard admits she is deeply uncertain about what the future holds. “We’ve had losses of over £12,000 a month since the pandemic. That’s not a lot compared to the big operators, but we’re only a small site. Even when we reopen we will still make significant losses because there will be reduced capacity and higher cleaning costs. “I know colleagues in other leisure centres who are not reopening next week purely because the maths don’t add up. We’re also nervous about that. There are so many of us out there who are struggling, worried whether we will survive. I run two swimming pools in Derby, and between them we had about 1,700 kids having lessons every week before the lockdown. We always kept our charges as low as possible to make them as widely available within the community - our prices would be £4.50 a time while private companies would charge nearly three times that. Since March we have had no money coming in and things are tight but at the moment we are OK until about October. For while we have furloughed most of our staff, we are still spending £13,000 a month - on wages and expenses like gas, electric and water. You can’t afford to turn the pool off either. Particularly our one in Lonsdale because it was built back in the 1970s. Consequently I don’t think it has ever been emptied. It puts pools in great danger when you take 550 tonnes of water out of it. Tiles start falling over, and things start not quite working in the same way so we have had to keep it going. You have to have an element of heat in the centre as well. We are planning to open shortly after the 25th as we have a boiler problem. We will also be incurring greater costs as we will have to clean more. There will also be a one-way system in place in the pools and people won’t be able to use the changing rooms either. They will have to towel down, stick something over their tops like a dressing gown, and head back to the car. So I am not sure whether the numbers will be as high as before. It's a highly uncertain time. “But it is clear our members want us to stay around. On Sunday mornings, for instance, we do a Gentle Gym session which a group of women that are all retired used to attend. I’ve had phone calls from eight of them in the past week, telling me they want to come back. They miss it. They’re feeling isolated. “But it’s a very nervous time for all of us. If there’s a second wave, we won’t come back. We know that. We’ll be done. That’s why we have to shout about all the good we do while we still can.”