Thanks to Zoom, we’re now staring at – critiquing – our own reflection more than ever. Narcissists are in their element, but for everyone else it’s torture. If turning off your camera feels antisocial, up the ante on your makeup – you’ll look better on screen. Combine a light reflective liquid gold with bright powdery shades across the lids. Don’t worry about it being perfect – abstract art is your inspiration. Skin, as with lips, should be slightly glossy so avoid super-matt foundations – they will make your skin seem dead… which doesn’t look good on Zoom. 1. Emolyne Metamorphosis Velvet Semi Matte Lipstick in Fes £21, emolyne.com2. Morphe x Jacylyn Hill Palette Volume II £39, morphe.com 3. Dior Diorshow Iconic Overcurl Mascara £28, johnlewis.com 4. Max Factor Miracle Second Skin Hybrid Foundation £12, boots.com 5. Dear Dahlia Eye Sequins £25, feelunique.com How many of us only pay attention to skin from the chin up, leaving the rest of our body to languish in poor relative territory? The thing is, skin is skin – it all needs moisturising. At the risk of sounding smug, I have always moisturised my body. Not because I was born a skincare fanatic, but because I was indoctrinated early – my mother would never let us out of the house without being basted from head to toe. I’ve since minimised the level of grease, but the daily ritual remains. That said, there are days, more so since WFH, where I just cannot be bothered. And that explains the reticence around moisturising our bodies – it’s basically laziness. The bad news is that while body washes clean, most also strip, so foregoing moisturising will eventually leave you with skin that resembles a disintegrated road map. The good news is this amazing soap-free, vegan oil wash. The orange blossom and neroli scent alone is so exquisite that, I’m constantly resisting the urge to drink it. It’s the texture of a thick oil, but on contact with water it turns milky and foamy – and yes, properly cleans. The seven-oil formulation protects the skin barrier, softens skin, reduces the potential for moisture loss and leaves you grease free but thoroughly hydrated. Which means – and I can’t believe I’m saying this – you may not actually need to moisturise post shower. It’s a lazy person’s dream. Glossier Body Hero Daily Oil Wash, £15, glossier.com Message in a bottle To celebrate its 20th anniversary, this beautifully intense jasmine fragrance comes housed in a collectable bell jar bottle. The ultimate investment scent. Serge Luten A La Nuit, £170, harrods.com No sweat Everyday products are getting a fancy upgrade – but it’s not all style over substance. This aluminium, parabens and alcohol-free deodorant actually works. Malin + Goetz Bergamot Deodorant, £19, malinandgoetz.com Clean up your act Formulated using Augustinus Bader’s skin cell renewing complex, this cleanser also detoxes and hydrates – and works on all skin types. Augustinus Bader Clean Cleansing Gel, £50, augustinusbader.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.