Fado is Lisbon’s urban folk music, born in and around the brothels, alleyways and ​tascas ​of the city’s poorest neighbourhoods. Fado is to Lisbon what the Blues are to the Delta. Written records trace it back to the early 19th century, though some argue it is much older, connecting it to oral traditions imported from across the Portuguese empire. At the heart of fado is ​saudade.​ This elusive word – apparently untranslatable from the original Portuguese – broadly refers to a sense of sorrow, of yearning, and a resigned desire for what once was. This is the underlying emotion of all fado and perhaps of Lisbon itself. _________________ Fado performance at Mesa de Frades in Alfama. On the left sits Joel Piña, the 99-year-old musician credited with introducing the acoustic bass to fado. As a long-time collaborator of Amália Rodrigues, he is considered a living legend in fado circles. Alfama is Lisbon’s oldest surviving neighbourhood: a maze of medieval and moorish architectures arranged in a patchwork of steep cobbled alleyways and red-clay roofs, rising up from the Tagus river. Once a close-knit fishing community, it is now the heart of Lisbon’s tourist industry. A decade ago, struggling to recover from a deep recession, Portugal’s government turned to tourism and opened the real-estate market to foreign speculation. Today, more then half of all accommodation in Alfama is destined for tourism and thousands of long-standing residents have been priced out of the city centre. One after another, the shops that catered to the local community closed to make way for tourist-facing businesses – many of which are “fado restaurants” – and now Alfama feels more like a theme park than a living neighbourhood. This touristification is affecting much of the city​.​ If things keep going the way they are, one journalist wrote in 2016, Lisbon will soon have to hire extras to play Portuguese people in its streets. Seb Varela in his “outdoor living room” on a street overlooking downtown Lisbon. His family is considered fado royalty because his great aunt was Amália Rodrigues, the central figure of 20th century fado. In 2019, I spent a month in Lisbon exploring the complicated relationship between fado and tourism. On one hand, fado is often upheld as the essence of Lisbon, an incorruptible mainstay in a rapidly changing city. On the other, it is the main attraction for many of the city’s 4.5 million visitors and is increasingly commodified to meet this demand. _________________ The number 28 tram carries tourists and locals up one of Lisbon’s steep hills. A recurring feature in many fados is Lisbon itself, in particular what it used to be. In its long history, many forces have played a hand in altering the city and its social fabric, the destructive 1755 earthquake being a key example. Today’s aggressive touristification is another seismic event, the full impact of which is yet to be fully understood. Tourists on the number 28 tram. In many cases, the allusions within fado’s poems refer to both a real and an imagined history, both a concrete remembrance and an imprecise, idealised version of the way things were. In fado, truth and fiction coexist, history and myth are tangled. There is a parallel between this ambiguous relationship to the city, past and present, and the experience of modern tourism. In ​Invisible Cities,​ Italo Calvino describes travellers visiting the fictional metropolis of Maurilia. They are invited to accompany their experience of the present with the help of old postcards that depict how Maurilia once was, the “postcard city” being key to appreciating the city as it now stands. Tourists look into a shop in Lisbon’s Graça neighbourhood. Travellers​ arrive in a location hoping that it will live up to what they had imagined, and are quicker to see the postcard city than the place itself. Over time, the place changes to fit this imagined expectation. It’s paradoxical, wrote the mayor of Barcelona in 2014, but uncontrolled mass tourism ends up destroying the very things that made a city attractive to visitors in the first place. This is particularly obvious in Lisbon, where the sheer speed of change and lack of oversight have magnified the problem. Once the locals have left, once all the menus are in English and, when looking down the ancient, winding alleyways to the waterfront, one is more likely to see the hulking mass of a cruise ship than the water of the Tagus river, what remains is a longing for what has been lost – whether real or imagined. What remains is saudade​. _________________ Fadista Adriano Pina after a set at the undisclosed fado house. In an anonymous back street, far from the tourist gaze, there is one establishment like no other: a small fado house in a former Italian restaurant where fadistas meet once their tourist-facing engagements are done with. It’s an institution in Lisbon’s underground scene, open from midnight to 6am, and not featured in any guidebooks. I have been asked not to name it for fear that a surge in popularity might affect its delicate ecosystem. Inside, old fado legends glance out from yellowed posters in crooked frames and black funereal shawls – traditionally worn by female fadistas – hang proudly among them like team scarves in a football clubhouse. Thick red curtains cover the windows and the blue formica floor tiles have turned a minty green from decades of bleach and wine. Fadistas play after hours at the undisclosed fado house. This is the home of​ fadovadio,​ where amateurs and professionals take turns interpreting the canon. It is not uncommon to see a performance by a taxi driver followed by a well-known fadista, and then a butcher’s wife. One regular performer is a respected professor of Medieval bureaucracy. Any mention of this place elicits amused disdain from the owners and staff of the more “respectable” fado houses; f​adovadio ​is not serious, they will say.​ ​But it is known to them all and they, too, can be spotted here on occasion, drinking from the source. Manuelo is the master of ceremonies, a prickly and charismatic octogenarian who made a name for himself in fado circles in the mid-60s. Donna Lena, his Russian wife, is a striking blond of ferocious energy. She spends each night serving drinks, making food and tending to the guests’ every need. Donna Lena and her husband are the adoptive parents of Lisbon’s fado community. The story goes that she ran away from the Soviet ballet to marry him when on tour in Portugal. But, here too, myth and history are tangled. Fadista Dina Brito in Alto do Pina. An Alfama resident and his parrot. At 2am, the performances are about to begin and the air is thick with smoke and anticipation. Beyond the laughter and chatting, one can make out the gentle cacophony of string instruments being tuned. During each set, the fadista performs four or five pieces. Lulled by wine and the red-tinged darkness, the audience is gradually swept up by the music, taken on a hazy voyage that evokes homesick sailors, despairing lovers and death. Some rest their heads in their hands, others stare wistfully into space. There is always at least one person who closes their eyes and falls into a deep sleep. _________________ Fadista Marta Rosa at her home in Alfama. One Saturday, around 5am, Marta Rosa appeared at the door with her small entourage. We had been introduced early in my stay and she proved invaluable in helping me navigate the intricacies of Lisbon fado. Donna Lena was tallying up the night’s damage for a customer with wine-stained lips. An old woman was handing Manuelo a framed picture of herself for the wall. Aside from the table of white-haired men arguing over a card game, the fadistas had the place to themselves. Marta joined the others in the back; an L-shaped section of the room that is the domain of the performers. A fadista hands Manuelo a framed picture of herself for the wall. Five or six musicians and a handful of singers were sitting around the wonky tables that had, over the years, been demoted from the main room. By pivoting my chair I was now on the fringes of this new circle. I remember thinking it was a fitting place for me: neither a fadista nor a guest; an interloper of sorts, a tourist who looks down on other tourists. There was a loud dissonant jumble, like a music lesson before the teacher arrives. Marta removed her coat and stood with her chin raised, her hands clasped tight in front of her. Then someone played the opening melody of Amália Rodrigues’ Ai Mouraria,​ and the cacophony fell silent. Donna Lena switched off the lights and accompaniment soon came from two sides as Marta began to sing. Her voice was soft to begin with. She floated through the high notes with a plaintive vibrato, squeezing emotion out of every drooping cadence. Then her song grew more forceful. By the end, it filled the whole room as she raised her chin higher, revealing the taught muscles in her neck. Manuelo gives advice to a less experienced fadista. Almost as soon as the piece was over, amidst a few friendly heckles, a new one took off on another table. Poems succeeded each other in this frenzy into the early morning with different permutations, styles and rhythms, each singer owning the room in their own way. Occasionally, during a song, the words ​“O Fado” escaped someone’s mouth like a libation, in a voice both hushed and loud. This, I came to learn, was the signal that fado was happening. Ricardo Ribeiro, one of the icons of modern fado, had explained it to me as a “manifestation”, a moment when everything comes together and all present share a sort of metaphysical communion. When the instruments disappear to leave only music, he had said, and the words disappear to leave only feeling, that is fado. _________________ Tourists flock to the water at sunset to take photos. On my last night in Lisbon, I walked down towards the centre of Alfama. I passed a wall near a shuttered restaurant where the words “Locals Welcome” had been thinly painted over and new grafitti had appeared: “Welcome Locals”. During my stay, I saw fado in cramped apartments and concert halls, street corners, ballrooms and sticky-floored taverns where tourists queued at the door. I visited evening classes in a suburb of tower blocks where a new sense of community has formed around fado. I attended a fundraising concert for a disabled girl where fado was the order of the day. Abandoned shoes in Alfama. An orange tree in one of Alfama’s many cobbled alleyways. The roots of fado run deep in Lisbon and that doesn’t seem likely to change. More than once I heard of the three F’s that make up the Portuguese spirit: Fado, Futebol, Fátima. Just as it survived the censorship and co-opting of the Salazar regime, fado’s essence will likely survive the effects of mass tourism. In fact, singing a more predictable version to tourists allows the majority of fadistas to live from their craft and in turn, allows “real” fado to survive. Paula wears her “traje”, a traditional academic uniform symbolising equality, respect and humility. Students feel a sense of pride in upholding this centuries-old tradition. It is said that these uniforms influenced JK Rowling in her creation of those worn in Harry Potter. Trying to make sense of it all, I kept coming back to what Ricardo Ribeiro had said. He wasn’t interested in the distinction between “real” fado or tourist fado, commodification or authenticity; only that once in a while, wherever it might be, fado h​appened. Beside the church of Sao Miguel, the terraces of three restaurants share a sloping square around an old palm tree. In a doorway, a large woman was singing an epic fado about desire, loss and revenge, but her heart wasn’t in it.