Glasgow City have signed the South Africa captain, Janine van Wyk, in one of the most high-profile transfers in Scottish women’s football. The central defender, who has been capped 170 times for her country, has played at two Olympic Games and at the 2019 Women’s World Cup in France. The 33-year-old has joined the Scottish champions as the part-time team prepare to play the German champions Wolfsburg in the Champions League quarter-finals on 21 August in San Sebastián. Van Wyk represented Fortuna Hjørring most recently but her contract with the Danish club was terminated in January after injury problems. The defender has also played for, among others, Houston Dash in the NWSL and the club she founded in South Africa, JVW FC. Uefa changed the rules this month to allow for up to six new players to be registered for the final seven games of the tournament, which has led to a flurry of signings from the eight teams left in the competition. “I am extremely excited to start this new chapter in my football career with a football club that is known to be the best team in the Scottish top league,” said Van Wyk. “I look forward to playing in the Women’s Champions League, win titles and most importantly continue to learn as much as I can about the insights of the game and hopefully add value to the squad with the experience I carry.” Glasgow City have received financial backing from the fund manager and philanthropist James Anderson to enable the club to compete in the mini-tournament to conclude the 2019-20 Champions League. A benefactor of Hearts Football Club, Anderson has also given £250,000 to help the women’s game through the pandemic and £3m to the men’s Scottish Premier League. The Glasgow City co-founder and club manager, Laura Montgomery, said: “If we are talking about players who are known across the world, Janine is in that category. Her record is incredible on and off the pitch in what she has done for girls’ and women’s sport in her own country as well as in her promotion of equality. “Her jersey is on display at the Fifa Museum next to the other top female players in the world, this is the calibre of player and individual that she is. At Glasgow City, we are all about championing women and girls and Janine very much fits into that mould. Her footballing CV is very impressive and we are delighted she has chosen to continue her journey with our club.”