I love Ramy [the US comedy-drama on StarzPlay in the UK]. We’re so used to seeing the media portray Muslims in a negative way, so it’s great to watch a show that does the opposite. I like the way it deals with religion, and what it means to be religious in this day and age, which also resonates for me as a Christian. I also think I May Destroy You (BBC One/iPlayer) is amazing. I’m hoping that it opens the doors for more writers of colour – especially black writers – who have stories to tell, whether that’s about being an astronaut or a chef. I don’t watch it any more, but I loved Towie when I was in college. I used to wear skinny jeans and blazers with hi-tops, too – I don’t know what the hell I was doing. If I was off school, I would watch Doctors during the afternoon, too. There’s something nostalgic about it for me. I remember drinking hot chocolate and eating digestives in front of the TV while it rained outside. There were some crazy stories – you’d be like, “Wait – he’s stolen someone’s child?” For a single episode, I would say This Is England ’86 where Lol (Vicky McClure) is raped by her dad. It was so dark, and obviously took a lot. In terms of a series, probably Walter White in Breaking Bad. Guys who are really into comedy can be amazing dramatic actors, too. Daniel Kaluuya is one of them. The gap between comedy and drama has also closed a lot, too – you can be laughing, crying and screaming in the same show. Bryan Cranston has the comedic bones and body, and when you merge that with drama, it’s so beautiful to watch. The IT Crowd, or Just a Couple on BBC iPlayer – it was a series of shorts, and I think it needed more time to find its feet. Plebs (ITV2). It has its audience, but personally I don’t find it funny. With historical comedy it has to be very heightened, like Horrible Histories, because you’re trying to get two messages across – what it was like at a specific period in time, and the gags. It’s a lot of pressure. Misfits was one of the first shows that my black friends, my white friends and my Asian friends were all talking about. Everybody was talking about it: the guys on the streets, the guys in the barber shops, the uncles, the nerds. It was just ahead of its time, and it was sick to see two black leads, Curtis and Alisha (Nathan Stewart-Jarrett and Antonia Thomas). Silas from Hollyoaks – he caused such a stir that my sister still talks about him. Soaps felt more intense even 10 years ago because you had to watch them when they were on. Now you can pause, fast forward, and look at your phone. Back then, you just had to sit and watch these characters ruin people’s lives, which is what he did – he killed a lot of people. I would love to be in Atlanta, which I think is one of the greatest shows ever created. Actually, I think I’d prefer to be in the writers’ room. Enterprice is available on BBC iPlayer and airs from 20 Jul on BBC One