Lloyds Banking Group plunged to a second-quarter loss after putting aside £2.4bn for bad debts, forcing the bank to acknowledge that supporting customers through the Covid-19 crisis would come at a cost. Britain’s biggest high street lender reported a loss of £676m for the three months to June, down from a £1.3bn profit during the same period last year. Analysts had been expecting a £31m loss. It came after the bank took a loan loss provision of £2.4bn, as it readies itself for a surge in defaults in the coming months. Lloyds said the charge reflected the “significant deterioration in the economic outlook during the quarter.” Both business and personal customers are expected to struggle to keep up with payments as the pandemic drags on and coronavirus support programmes, such as the government’s furlough scheme and state-backed loans, are wound down. The provision adds to the £1.4bn charge that Lloyds booked in anticipation of Covid-related losses in the first quarter, and brings the banking group’s total credit impairment charge to £3.8bn for the first six months of 2020. Lloyds, which is seen a bellwether for the UK economy as it is one of the most domestically focused banks, said it expects impairments to total £4.5bn to £5.5bn by year-end. Chief executive António Horta-Osório said the bank’s support for customers would come at a cost for the bank but that this was an “investment” in the bank’s future. “We are, of course, aware that the support we are providing to our personal and business customers to help them through the current crisis will have a cost to the group. We believe this is the right thing to do, as supporting our customers directly aids the recovery of the economy from which we benefit. We view this as an investment in the business,” the chief executive said. Lloyds also suffered a 17% drop in net interest income – which measures the difference between interest earned on loans versus paid on deposits – to £2.5bn after UK interest rates were cut to a record low of 0.1% in March. It comes a day after banking rival Barclays recorded its own quarterly profits plunging 75% to £359m, after putting aside £1.6bn to cover bad debts.