On my ceaseless hunt for thrifty recipes, I was particularly excited to discover a new classic American dessert called the brown betty. It’s a little bit similar to a crisp cobbler or crumble, but one topped with sweetened breadcrumbs and spiked with liquor. The breadcrumbs go crunchy and, half-soaked in the perfumed fruits, intoxicating with the aroma of brandy. In fact, I’d be so bold as to say I prefer betty to crumble, especially if it’s doused in cream. Stone fruits smack of summer: butterscotch apricots, ruby-red cherries, plentiful plums, raspberries and blackberries (which, quizzically, aren’t true berries at all, but clusters of small stone fruits). All of these grow bountifully in our temperate climate. Imported stone fruits include mangoes, lychees, peaches, nectarines, almonds, olives and coconuts (a type of inverted stone fruit). Many of these fruits are so fragile that even the lightest touch can blemish the surface, rendering them unsellable. Once it starts to ripen, in fact, a stone fruit is already past its sell-by date, because that ripeness might in a matter of hours tip into the first stages of decay. That said, if you do find ripe stone fruit, rejoice and transform your flavourful bargain into this richest of desserts. Brown betty, named, apparently, after the person who invented it, is usually made with apples, but it works with any stewed fruit. Use what is best and in season: apricots, blueberries, even strawberries in summer; blackberries in late summer; apples or pears in autumn; rhubarb in winter/spring. And so on … I last one with a wholemeal spelt loaf topping that crisped up perfectly and took on a millefeuille-like texture. Soft stone fruit is usually transported on a bed of moulded plastic, but they they can still blemish easily and become overripe. Just the slightest imperfection can condemn a whole box or even a tonne crate of fruit to landfill, and each time a crate of fruit changes hands on its long journey to your kitchen table, a proportion is wasted. Shorten the food chain of our wondrously inefficient and behemothic global food system by buying direct from a (community-supported agriculture) veg box scheme and from farmers’ markets, or by choosing produce with a UK origin at the supermarket. This will both reduce fruit and packaging waste and provide much-needed support for the local economy. And anyway, fruit picked locally is likely riper and better-tasting, too. Serves 6 600g stone fruit75g unrefined sugar1 tsp vanilla essence50ml brandy, or other spirit3 slices stale wholemeal bread (about 125g), torn into pieces2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil50g walnuts, or other nuts, chopped1 tsp ground cinnamon To serveYoghurt or cream Stone the fruit and cut the flesh into large pieces. Toss the fruit in the sugar, vanilla essence and brandy (or other spirit), then tip into a large, 23cm-wide stoneware or ovenproof dish. Tear the bread into pieces, pulse into chunky breadcrumbs, then combine with sugar, oil, nuts and cinnamon. Scatter this over the top of the fruit and bake at 190C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6 for 40-45 minutes, until golden brown and bubbling. Serve with a big dollop of yoghurt or cream.