Prince Harry and his wife, Meghan, have distanced themselves from an upcoming book on their time in the royal family, saying they were not interviewed for the biography and did not make any contributions to it. Finding Freedom is due to be published in August and is being serialised in the Times and Sunday Times. “The Duke and Duchess of Sussex were not interviewed and did not contribute,” a spokesperson for the couple said in a statement. “This book is based on the authors’ own experiences as members of the royal press corps and their own independent reporting.” According to extracts in the Times, relations between the Sussexes and Prince William and his wife, Kate, deteriorated so much that by March the two couples were barely speaking. The book, by Omid Scobie and Carolyn Durand, claims the couples hardly spoke at an engagement at the Commonwealth service at Westminster Abbey despite not having seen each other since January amid the fallout of the Sussexes’ decision to step back from the royal family. The authors said that Harry and Meghan “liked being in control of their narrative” in the early days of their marriage. But being told to operate under Buckingham Palace’s umbrella after splitting their household from the Cambridges was “a big disappointment to them”. They write: “As their popularity had grown, so did Harry and Meghan’s difficulty in understanding why so few inside the palace were looking out for their interests. They were a major draw for the royal family.” The authors describe a culture of bitterness and resentment gradually growing between the Sussexes and other members of the royal family. They say the Sussexes felt their complaints were not taken seriously and believed other royal households were leaking stories about them to the press. The authors write: “There were just a handful of people working at the palace they could trust... A friend of the couple’s referred to the old guard as ‘the vipers’. Meanwhile, a frustrated palace staffer described the Sussexes’ team as ‘the squeaky third wheel’ of the palace.” The book is also reported to say that Harry felt “unprotected” by his family and disparaged within palace walls for being “too sensitive and outspoken”. He believed that some of the old guard “simply didn’t like Meghan and would stop at nothing to make her life difficult”. Reuters and PA Media contributed to this report