Aaron Martin’s return to Wembley on Monday did not go as well as his debut under the arch. This week, Martin was at the heart of Exeter City’s back three as they were torn apart by Northampton Town, humbled 4-0 in the League Two play-off final. Twelve years ago, he was man of the match at Wembley, putting in a commanding display for England Schoolboys in a 2-0 win over Scotland. Back then, Martin was playing his club football for Eastleigh in Conference South, the sixth tier of English football. He was joined on the Wembley turf that day by players from Winsford United, Oadby Town and Thurrock. So how did this bunch of teenage students end up playing for their country at the national stadium? It’s a strange tale. From 1950, when Johnny Haynes grabbed a hat-trick in an 8-2 thrashing of Scotland in front of 53,000, until 2009, the English Schools Football Association organised international matches at Wembley for their England Schoolboys team. The annual game provided a chance to sample a major match atmosphere, to cheer the future stars of the game, albeit in disconcertingly high voices. The tradition grew rapidly. In 1959, a crowd of 95,000 packed into Wembley to see England beat West Germany, an attendance that was matched two years later when Scotland were dismantled 8-1. Some of the finest 14- and 15-year-olds in the country pulled on the England shirt, from Bobby Charlton and Terry Venables through to Ryan Giggs (then Wilson – who attended a school in Salford) and Michael Owen. Their two Wembley fixtures – sponsored by various multinational fizzy drinks and crisp manufacturers – pretty much funded the ESFA’s annual activities. More than 50,000 spectators saw England’s goalless draw with Brazil in 1998, including guest of honour Haynes, the last Under-15s international at Wembley. As the Twin Towers prepared to be flattened, Howard Wilkinson drove a revolution of youth football, insisting that the FA seize control of the Under-15 team from the football-loving teachers of ESFA. Those PE teachers who coached England Schoolboys on a voluntary basis included John Owens, who developed Steven Gerrard in Liverpool’s academy, Manchester United’s youth guru Dave Bushell, and the man primarily responsible for Charlton producing a clutch of current Premier League stars, Steve Avory. These coaches were not Brian Glover characters from Kes. After losing their flagship, revenue-generating team, the ESFA had little alternative but to throw their Under-18 team – which had been ticking over quietly since the 1960s – on to the Wembley stage instead. These England Schoolboys were not the best young players in the country. Far from it. They were just some of the better sixth-formers who had stayed on in education, rather than joining the 1,700 apprentices at Premier League or EFL clubs. Selected via county teams and a series of trials, they were not even all the best college players in the country. Up against the best young professionals from overseas, the England Schoolboys Under-18 team understandably found it tough. It was no surprise when they lost the first Under-18 schools international at Wembley, in 1999, 2-1 to Holland. Gary Taylor-Fletcher, then with Northwich Victoria, was the only member of that team that went on to have a successful professional career, including a season in the Premier League with Blackpool. One of his old teammates is now a trauma surgeon; another is a headmaster. Brains often outweighed verve in these England teams. The few England Schoolboys players who did turn professional each year tended to have prolonged careers, often in low-profile leadership roles. Goalkeeper Ben Williams, the only notable graduate of the team beaten by Hungary at Wembley in 2000, played for 11 clubs after leaving Manchester United. There are late developers who benefit from avoiding the physical and mental grind of a decade in the academy system. Some were released by big clubs in their mid-teens and returned determined to make the most of their second chance. Others turned down apprenticeship offers to do A-levels in sixth form. Occasionally, talent just gets missed and the schoolboys team can bear fruit for EFL scouts. The back three in that 2008 team sum up the bizarre nature of England Schoolboys teams. Aaron Martin signed for Southampton soon after impressing at Wembley. To his left was Jack Thorley, who never played a minute in professional football but is now a doctor of zoology at Cambridge University. To the right was a tall, gangly lad from Maidstone United who, after being released by Millwall, had been driven to a trial at Gillingham by the Lions’ head scout because he felt so sorry for him. A riot of nerves on the biggest stage of his life, his clumsy display provided few clues that Christopher Smalling would go on to play more than 200 games for Manchester United and 31 for the full England team. Smalling had done enough before Wembley to draw the attention of Fulham, but his career trajectory is unique for an 18-year-old on the England Schoolboys team. Playing hundreds of games in the Football League is more typical. After playing in midfield for England Schools in 1997, Wade Elliott went to Goldsmiths art school. Twelve years later he scored the goal at Wembley that took Burnley to the Premier League, one of his 706 professional appearances. Of the 2004 side, three have had 15 year playing careers: Chris Lines – who was back at Wembley on Monday night on the bench for Northampton Town in the play-offs – has clocked up nearly 500 games; Russell Martin is in his first managerial role with MK Dons, having played for Norwich in the Premier League; and John Mousinho captains Oxford in the League One play-offs this week. Wycombe midfielder David Wheeler – capped by the Schoolboys team in 2009 while he was with Lewes – could make another Wembley appearance later this month, possibly against Mousinho, in the final. Chris Whelpdale – from the class of 2005 - has played 300 games in the Football League; John Brayford (2006) went from Burton College to the Premier League with Cardiff City; Ben Tozer (2007) signed for Newcastle and captained Cheltenham in the League Two play-offs last week. Smalling is not the only England Schoolboys Under-18 international who went on to win a league title. David Wetherall did it with Leeds in 1992 (although he missed the open-top bus parade to revise for exams) and Mark Atkins did it with Blackburn in 1995. But they are outliers. Wembley hosted its last England Schoolboys international in June 2009. Alexandre Lacazette missed out on a Wembley debut, replaced in the France Under-18 team by Lyon striker Yannis Tafer, who promptly scored a hat-trick as Ligue 1’s best teenage talent – including Anthony Martial’s brother Johan and Arsenal duo Francis Coquelin and Gilles Sunu – beat England 4-2. The honour of scoring England Schoolboys’ last ever goal at Wembley lies with James Norwood – then with Eastbourne, now at Ipswich. The cost of renting the new stadium was simply too much for the ESFA as crowds sank to just 9,000. Matches at Wembley had become more common and PE teachers had stopped giving up a Saturday to escort busloads of students to the annual fixture. Sponsors fell away and internationals under the arch became a serious loss-maker, not a golden payday. A splendidly unique and strange English football tradition was over. Follow Gavin Willacy and Playing in the Shadows on Twitter