Grandmother did most of her work in bed. She had a special tray with folding legs that served as a desk. She would sit up against a stack of pillows, with a cashmere cardigan over her nightdress, and write longhand on loose sheets of foolscap. Pots of tea were ferried to her by my grandfather, who would have been fully dressed in a tweed jacket and tie and working from his study downstairs. All the men in my family had a study or office, and worked jobs with regular hours; unlike Grandmother, who would break off from her writing to dig in the garden or peel the spuds for dinner. I never remember, as a child, being told to shush because Grandmother was working. The only indication of her status as a writer was the piles of New Yorker magazines scattered around the house. She published 15 stories in the New Yorker between 1959 and 1976. Many years, this was her bread and butter. Mary Lavin, or Grandmother (never Granny or Nana or, God forbid, Gran), made her name as a world-class short story writer from the unlikely setting of the Abbey Farm, near Navan, County Meath. The mother of three small children, she was widowed as a young woman, becoming a single mother and lone farmer in one fell swoop. While the male writers of her generation worked out of sight in holy sanctity, Grandmother took up a table in Bewley’s cafe on Grafton Street and wrote there until my mother and aunts joined her from school. In the evenings, the men gathered in the pubs around Baggot Street, while Grandmother cooked spaghetti bolognese and held court at her mews in nearby Lad Lane. If she broke the mould, it was for the simple reason that there was no other way for her to write and meet her peers. She had young children at home. Needs must. Of course, women’s lives have always been dominated by the needs of others. Surveys of the division of labour during the lockdown revealed – to the surprise of nobody – that women still ended up performing the vast majority of housework and caring duties. Female writers, no less today than in my grandmother’s day, must find a way of working amid all this noise, and they do. Anne Lamott famously said that, before she had a child, she couldn’t write if there were dishes in the sink – but afterwards she could write if there was a corpse in the sink. Christine Dwyer-Hickey, the winner of this year’s Walter Scott prize for her novel The Narrow Land, believes that being a housewife is the best scenario for a writer, because you use your time with great economy. Edna O’Brien worked while her children scribbled her notes and pushed them under the door. It has always been thus. O’Brien was the Sally Rooney of her day, the first female Irish writer to become a star both critically and commercially. First published in 1960, The Country Girls is a novel whose success was richly deserved, but quality alone was never enough to guarantee a female writer a hearing. It was the novel’s scandalous theme – sex – that made all the noise. Writing by women was more often dismissed as “quiet”, a label long attached to my Grandmother’s work. Curious to find out if this label was deserved, I recently set myself the task of reading through her entire body of work – more than 100 stories – and was amazed by what I found. The stories, written between the 1940s and 80s, chronicle the sinister pathologies that run through families: jealousy and treachery among women, abusive and sometimes subtle bullying by men, small-town snobbery, bigotry and savagery. In the story Asigh, a young woman is maimed by a violent father. In the Middle of the Fields features a young widow faced with an unwelcome advance from a neighbouring farmer. Sarah is about a country woman who bears three children by three different men and ends up dead in a ditch with her baby. If Ireland found these subjects quiet, Ireland needed its hearing adjusted. Grandmother’s voice – which I hear in my mind as rich and deep and assured – was only considered quiet because it was a woman’s. Women’s lives were not considered to be of general interest in Ireland until Gay Byrne started talking about them on the radio in the 1970s, but women were writing about their lives all along. Kate O’Brien was writing about female sexuality – not just heterosexual – from the 1930s onwards, but she had to live in Spain to do it. Maeve Brennan was making a name for herself at the New Yorker, if not at home, from 1950. In the decades since, we’ve had Jennifer Johnston, Maeve Binchy, Anne Enright, Marian Keyes and Dwyer Hickey – among others – producing books about love, life, pregnancy (wanted and unwanted), motherhood, alcoholism, abuse. Despite the great seriousness of their subjects, they struggled to be taken seriously by a high culture that, in Enright’s words, “automatically tilts male”. Take the great Irish poet Eavan Boland, who died in April aged 75. Boland wrote about her own life, and by extension women’s lives, including a famous poem about feeding a baby. Dismissed initially as too domestic, her stature rose steadily over the years – outside Ireland first and eventually at home – until she came to occupy her rightful place in the canon. In 1999, Night Feed was voted one of Ireland’s best-loved poems, and it is now hard to fathom how a piece of writing about the most elemental of human experiences could ever have been dismissed as unworthy. The label “women’s writing”, with its implication of being of no interest to readers other than women, is an insult that has not gone away. When I received my first contract, I was shocked – then upset and angry – to find that my work was described as “women’s commercial fiction”. I refused to sign until it had been amended to plain old “fiction”. No writer wants to be fenced off from a body of readers, because ultimately it’s the readers that matter. Publishers may have the chequebooks and the marketing budgets, but the beating heart of the business is the person standing at the display table in a bookshop. If that reader is open to picking up, and more importantly carrying to the till, a book by a female writer – or a book by a gay writer, or a black writer, or an Asian writer – then the table is level. The fact that Sally Rooney is selling like hot cakes while being acknowledged as a writer of importance would certainly give you hope. But it was only this summer that Bernardine Evaristo, who won the Booker prize last year for Girl, Woman, Other, became the first woman of colour to top the paperback fiction bestseller lists in the UK. So, we’re not there yet. There’s a famous poster of Ireland’s great writers, all male, that has long hung in classrooms all over the country. Back in 2005, the Irish Times marked International Women’s Day by producing a version that featured, for the first time, the country’s great female writers – among them, my grandmother. A similar poster is now widely on sale in Dublin’s bookshops, and you can also get it as a mug or a tea towel, which caused a great laugh in our family because Grandmother was never much of a girl for doing the dishes. In any case, it’s good to see her finally make the tea towel. I only hope it doesn’t take half a century for our writers of colour, such as Kit de Waal, Emma Dabiri and Melatu Uche Okorie, to get there too. Kathleen MacMahon’s novel Nothing But Blue Sky is published on 30 July (Penguin Random House). To order a copy, go to guardianbookshop.com.