More than 400 actors and theatre figures, including Paapa Essiedu, Clarke Peters and Hamilton star Jamael Westman, have called on the British theatre industry to implement “actionable reform” that would make the sector more inclusive and less hostile to people of colour. As the Black Lives Matter movement draws attention to structural racism and Covid-19 threatens diversity in theatre, the newly formed Black Theatre Collective (BTC), which includes some of Britain’s best-known stage actors and writers, has sent an open letter to the UK’s theatre-makers calling for action rather than “empty gestures”. The letter says diverse theatre-makers have been failed, and cites examples such as actors being given black tights and being told they are “skin-tone” and the “dog-whistle racist language bemoaning ‘diversity’ in a review”. The letter says actors are often the only people of colour working on productions with offstage roles being the preserve of white employees. Research released by Arts Council England in 2015 found that BAME employees accounted for only 5% of the workforce in some London theatres, in a city where 41% of people are from minority ethnic backgrounds. The open letter was sent to the UK’s artistic directors, executive directors, producers and members of the Society of London Theatre (Solt) on Thursday morning. The BTC suggests five measures for UK theatre to “create antiracist workplaces, equal for all your performers”. They call for institutions to hire and retain diverse talent “across all departments”, for reviewers from a more diverse list of publications to be given access to press events, and for outreach programmes to be set up in schools in order to encourage participation in theatre from underrepresented groups. The BTC’s other two recommendations are for hair and makeup teams to be trained in how to work with afro hair by summer 2021, and that the “appropriate skin tone makeup, underwear and physio strapping” is given to actors. “Across industries, from sport to education to publishing we have witnessed an unprecedented level of self-examination, attempting to address complicity in racism … as an industry, we must not be above this rigorous self-examination,” the letter states. It adds that many of the signatories had hope when theatres posted messages of support for the Black Lives Matter movement. “Yet, this optimism was tinged with the realism of our lived experience whilst working alongside many of you and the times when you have failed us,” it continues. In 2016, Andrew Lloyd Webber said British theatre was “hideously white” and that he feared for its survival unless it reflects the diversity of the nation’s population, and called for reforms, including urging drama schools to make 50% of their places accessible to students from low-income backgrounds. “We stand alongside you in this moment of self-reflection optimistic that newly awakened to these failures we shall make concerted efforts to address industry-wide issues that alienate your Black colleagues,” the letter adds. “We cannot accept empty gestures.” The playwright Gbolahan Obisesan, who is among the signatories, told the Guardian in June that diverse talent does not trust the theatre sector and that Covid-19 means already “disenfranchised creatives of colour and freelance artists will be even more underrepresented and pushed out; meaning moving away from the industry completely”. In May, an open letter was sent to the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, signed by 60 leading figures in British theatre. It said that as the industry faces financial turmoil and institutions go into administration and close their doors, diversity cannot be forgotten and needs to be protected in policy decisions. The letter’s five measures 1. Hire and retain Once offstage, the inclusivity of all departments drops immensely. Respect Black lives and careers the same way you do Black Music and Culture. You will commit to seeking out diverse teams across all departments, truly representative of the Britain we live in today. These figures will be reported back annually to Bectu and Equity representatives. 2. Hair and wigs Black performers often feel unsupported in the hair department, creating unnecessary tension due to lack of training. By Summer 2021 you will ensure that Wig Heads of Department and their deputies are trained in Afro Hair. 3. Makeup and costume There are several companies that provide appropriate skin tone makeup, underwear and physio strapping. When providing these for cast members, the appropriate provision will be made. 4. Reviews As a cultural ecosystem we are defined by our audiences. If we want to be truly inclusive, we will make space on Press Nights for a broader scope of publications to allow our work to be seen and critiqued by a diverse and equally important audience. 5. Outreach The next generation of theatre-makers are currently in our education system. We must ensure that they have access to our World-class theatre so that they may stand alongside us in a few years’ time. They must not be dissuaded or denied access because of the colour of their skin or their parents’ financial situation. So, we call on all of us, both subsidised and commercial theatre alike to identify pupils and young people from minority and disadvantaged backgrounds to partake in educational performances and workshops. We have an opportunity to stand together as a community. It may not be easy, but it is right. Read the letter in full