Lewis Hamilton issued a stinging rebuke to the leaders of Formula One and some of his fellow drivers after the sport’s failure to deliver a coherent anti-racism message before the Hungarian Grand Prix. Hamilton won the race but was highly critical of the lack of progress F1 is making in supporting its stated commitment to tackling racism. “There definitely is not enough support for it,” he said of the pre-race anti-racism gesture. “Many drivers seem to be of the opinion that they have done it once and are not going to do it again. It’s almost like it has gone off the agenda. It’s lacking leadership. There needs to be leadership from the top.” At the opening race in Austria there was time set aside for the drivers to make a collective gesture; since then it has been a decidedly ad hoc affair. In Budapest the drivers assembled for the national anthem and once more what followed was shambolic and disorganised at best. Some drivers did not attend, some were late, some did not wear the “End Racism” T-shirts and, again, only some chose to take a knee. Hamilton, F1’s only black driver, believes the issue is being dismissed by some drivers. “I don’t think it is being taken seriously,” he said. “There are perhaps people who have not grown up around it and don’t understand. There are those that think because of that it doesn’t affect me. I have heard those comments: ‘It doesn’t affect me so why should I do it?’” He was also disappointed that more was not being achieved and that other teams had not adopted the strong public commitment to diversity that Mercedes have. “We haven’t made any progress,” he said of the sport. “We have said things, statements released and gestures such as kneeling but we have not changed anything except perhaps some of our awareness.” Hamilton has been outspoken in his support for the Black Lives Matter movement, and said he would be demanding action from the president of the FIA, Jean Todt, and the chief executive of F1, Chase Carey. “I will get in touch with F1 this week and I will speak to Jean because no one else is going to do it,” he said. “My dream is by the end of the year we know and understand things better, we stand united, and F1 is on top of it.” F1 responded to Hamilton’s comments with a statement: “Ending racism and increasing diversity and inclusion in F1 is a clear priority. We set out our plans for diversity and inclusion last November and have in recent weeks announced additional plans to create a Taskforce to tackle these issues and a foundation with over $1m already donated to create apprenticeships and job opportunities for under represented groups. We want to make lasting change and are acting to do this.”