Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg has been released from a Baltimore hospital, a day after being treated for a possible infection, a supreme court spokeswoman said. The hospital admission is the latest health challenge for the liberal justice, who, at 87, is the court’s oldest member. Ginsburg is “home and doing well”, spokeswoman Kathy Arberg said in a statement. Her symptoms began on Monday night, when she was examined at a hospital in Washington after experiencing fever and chills, according to Arberg. She then underwent a procedure at Johns Hopkins hospital in Baltimore on Tuesday to clean a bile duct stent that was placed last August, when she was treated for a malignant tumor on her pancreas. Since Donald Trump’s election, Democrats have fretted wildly over Ginsburg’s health. A retirement or a potential vacancy before the presidential election in November would dramatically reshape the race, setting up a brutal nomination battle that could determine the fate of the White House and the Senate. Trump won the White House in part by persuading wary Republican voters that he would appoint conservative justices to the supreme court. Since taking office, Trump has appointed Neil Gorsuch to replace Antonin Scalia, who died in 2016, and Brett Kavanaugh to replace Anthony Kennedy. With Trump’s appointments, the court has been called the most conservative in modern history. Even so, his hand-picked appointees broke sharply with the president in a number of high-profile cases this session, including a unanimous ruling that dismissed the president’s claim of “absolute immunity” from criminal investigation while in office. Ginsburg has experienced a series of health problems in recent years, including bouts with lung and pancreatic cancer. In May, she underwent non-surgical treatment for a gallstone that had caused an infection. She was hospitalized last November while suffering from a fever and chills, but returned to work at the court the day after being released. In August last year, she underwent radiation therapy to treat pancreatic cancer. In November 2018, she broke three ribs in a fall. Subsequent medical tests led to treatment for lung cancer that caused her to miss oral arguments in January 2019. She had previously been treated for pancreatic cancer in 2009 and colon cancer in 1999. The supreme court ended its nine-month term on 9 July, after hearing a number of oral arguments by teleconference for the first time in its history in response to health concerns raised by the coronavirus pandemic. Historically, Republicans have prioritized the courts during elections. But the clamoring by conservative activists to overturn Roe v Wade, a landmark decision that established the right to an abortion, as well as a number of consequential rulings on LGBT rights, immigration and healthcare, have shifted how many Democrats view the nation’s highest court. As news of Ginsburg’s most recent health challenge spread across social media, supporters once again offered fervent prayers and even their own organs to help keep the justice well. Brian Fallon, the executive director of Demand Justice, a progressive group opposed to Trump’s judicial nominations, suggested an alternative idea. “Instead of making jokes about how you will donate an organ or whatever, please just say a prayer for RBG’s health and tell five friends why the supreme court is such an important reason to vote in November,” he wrote. Reuters contributed to this report