Donald Trump Jr appears to have forgotten one of the cardinal rules of the apostrophe: it comes after the “s” when the possessive noun is plural. The American president’s son’s forthcoming book, Liberal Privilege, is subtitled “Joe Biden and the Democrat’s Defense of the Indefensible”. Unless Trump Jr is referring to only one Democrat, then the apostrophe needs to shift one place to the right to make the title grammatically correct. The book is out in August. Trump Jr said on Twitter that he had been working on it “during the last few months of quarantine”, and that he was “blown away by what Biden has gotten away with”. “Libs,” he added, are “already triggered” by the book. But Trump Jr was careful to share only a small portion of the book’s cover on Twitter, after Axios broke the news about the title, and he was mocked for the grammar error. His previous book, Triggered, was a New York Times No 1 bestseller, but sales were reported to have been boosted by bulk orders from the Republican National Committee. According to Axios, Trump Jr is self-publishing the new book as “a shot across the bow” to traditional publishers, and “partnered” on it with the Trump Victory Finance Committee’s chief of staff, Sergio Gor. His girlfriend, Kimberly Guilfoyle, an ex-Fox News television personality who is a senior fundraiser for Donald Trump’s re-election campaign, will read the audiobook, and also helped him work on it. Guilfoyle tested positive for the coronavirus last week. “That’s how we came up with the idea for her to do the audiobook,” Trump Jr told Axios. “We would take turns reading the chapters out loud for flow ... Love in a time of Covid.” Biden’s national press secretary, TJ Ducklo, told Axios that Liberal Privilege was “the latest in a series of desperate and pathetic attempts to distract from the president’s historic bungling of the coronavirus response”. “Is there anything more on brand than Donald Trump Jr trying to cash in on a book filled with disgusting lies and smears about Joe Biden?” Ducklo added.