Not everyone sees the same things as they walk the city streets. For some women, unremarkable spots – a chipped and shuttered doorway, a litter-strewn graveyard, an alley by the railway tracks – have been regular places of work, and also sites of devastating violence. This month, photographs of some of these sites have appeared on billboards and bus shelters in Hull, part of the photo project Absence of Evidence, led by the artist duo Henry/Bragg, working with a group of former street sex workers from Hull called An Untold Story: Voices. “One is the view from the corner I worked, another is the doorway I stood in when it was raining,” says Amanda Hailes. “All the photographs represent something we have experienced, lived through and survived.” Not everyone does survive. Other photographs show sites where women were found dead. This exhibition on Hull’s streets is held in their memory: 14 images, each honouring a street sex worker who has died since 2014. Last week, the images were paraded through Hull as a moving memorial. Beneath the photographs run fragments of text that hint at unseen tragedy: “She had two little boys and it was on a boy’s birthday that she was found”; “She’d gone back to her boyfriend without enough cash.” The role of art in this story is complex. It’s not just a consciousness-raising tool or means of self-expression. The precarious and dangerous situation these women were placed in was exacerbated by legislation imposed a few months after Hull’s selection as UK City of Culture. In 2014, Hull became the only local authority in the UK to use Section 222 of the 1972 Local Government Act to target sex workers directly. Women caught working on Hessle Road could be arrested and threatened with court. While there was not a stated connection between the city of culture announcement and the change in legislation, to the women affected, the link seemed evident. “I think the intentions were well-founded,” says artist Julie Henry, of Henry/Bragg. “They wanted to clean up the city. But rather than looking at the whole problem, they decided that the girls were not allowed to work in that area any more, without thinking what was going to happen. Street sex work is going to go on. They moved to areas where there was no CCTV. There was no one to see if anything happened to the girls. So violence became more common.” Hailes, an outreach worker in Hull’s red-light district for 12 years, says the gulf widened between police and street sex workers. Women would not report violent attacks because they feared the injunction. They felt there was no help or support. This is the absent evidence of the project’s title: reports of violent and sexually violent crimes reduced during a period when sex workers were frightened to report them. Absence of evidence is not evidence of absence. Susie Winter, a former street sex worker who works with An Untold Story saw an immediate shift in attitude after the legislation came in. Sex workers became fair game in the press, with names and mugshots of five women published on the cover of a local paper soon after the introduction of Section 222. Both Hailes and Winter also contributed to the book An Untold Story, detailing the experiences of sex workers in Hull. As a group of former street sex workers and allies, they took legal action and challenged the renewal of the 222 order in December 2019. The order was applied to be withdrawn by the council in April this year. It is hoped that Absence of Evidence will foster understanding about the realities of sex work, and help shift attitudes. The photographs “put meaning into something you’d not give a second glance to normally”, says Winter. “Sex work was not a life choice for the women I spoke to. They felt it was a necessity,” says Debbie Bragg of Henry/Bragg. “A lot of them have experienced mental health issues and extreme poverty. One went into prostitution early because that’s just what her mother did. That’s all she knew. These stories were really tragic.” Hailes details multiple traumas that compound to make women feel trapped in sex work, among them childhood abuse, homelessness, violent relationships, substance abuse and depression. To her these creative projects make different sides of the story accessible to everyone. “We hope to not just challenge the stigma surrounding multiple disadvantages but to shatter it.” Later this summer the images will appear in Shoreditch and Soho in London. For Bragg, it’s significant that they are not hidden in a gallery. “We want to be where people are walking past: out on the streets where anyone can see.” • Absence of Evidence, in collaboration with Henry/ Bragg, is in Hull until 26 July; in Shoreditch, London, until 2 August; and Soho, London, 27 July-9 August.