For 67 years, I have run the bakery and shop in the village of Guiting Power in Gloucestershire. I still get up at 5am every day and work till we shut at 5pm. We get about 40 people a day and always find something to talk about. They’re more like friends than customers. I never planned to be a baker; it was my husband’s idea. We met during the war on a bus in West Bromwich. He sat next to me and didn’t leave after that. He wasn’t an Adonis but he was a nice man, and kindly. We married in 1941. It was nothing exciting – we went to the cinema after the service. There wasn’t much else you could do then. After the war, we went to visit my sister and her husband, who were running a bakery in the Cotswolds. My brother-in-law, Ted, would show off, saying how wonderful his life was in the countryside and how he was making a fortune. None of that was true, but my husband was jealous and said we should open a bakery of our own. The kids and I were quite happy in West Bromwich and didn’t want to go. It was very much my husband’s decision. He thought baking looked easy, so in 1953 we moved to Guiting Power. Electricity had only just reached the village and the equipment was rather primitive. There was bare earth under the tables, and the roof was held up by a car jack. Our bread oven was coal-fired and my husband would fill up the whole valley with smoke – it was like the Queen Mary. We had to get up every morning before dawn to make the dough. Once the bread was ready, I did all the deliveries because I was the only one who could drive. It was hard work. We sold white or brown bread for nine pence a loaf, as well as Chelsea buns, Easter biscuits and jam tarts. They were nothing fancy. People didn’t have the money back then. The year we arrived was the coronation. It was a special day so we had to make more than normal, but rationing meant we had to buy things from places where they knew us, and would keep extra under the counter. Our wholesalers in Gloucester were very good to us. Eight years after we arrived, a man called Mr Cochrane bought the village. He took a shine to my family and offered us new premises in the former police station. The bread oven was installed in the old prison cell. My son, Chris, did an apprenticeship under his father before going on to work at Mother’s Pride, one of the big bread factories. I ran the grocery shop next door, which I enjoyed, as I could chat with all the customers – I’ve always liked people. I was queen of my domain in the shop and took care of all the orders. In 1969, my husband died of a heart attack. It was a bitterly cold day, a week before Christmas. I remember following behind the ambulance in our Mini; it felt like a fridge. Things were chaotic after that: I was 49 and struggled running the bakery alone, so Chris came to help. It was my husband who had dragged us down here and now it was up to us to make it work by ourselves. Business was at its best in the 1970s, but then a Tesco opened up down the road in Stow. Trying to make the books balance got harder after that. Shopping habits continued to change: we used to sell VHS tapes and a lot more bread, but now it’s hard to compete with the supermarkets. Some weeks it’s a struggle, but we’ve never got overdrawn. We do well during special occasions. For the millennium, we roasted 12 whole pigs in the bread oven. It wasn’t pretty but they tasted very nice. The village had a little party when William married Kate, and again for the Queen’s Jubilee. Both times we made iced buns for everyone. After my 100th birthday, I thought it was time to consider retiring. I used to pay about £3 a week in rent; now it’s more than £500 a month. I’ve got seven great-grandchildren so it’s probably time to stop. My son isn’t walking at all well and I want him to stop so he can rest. At the moment we’re still baking but we’ve ended our lease, so the trust that owns the village will look for a new tenant. It’s been quite a good life, really. I’m going to move into a little bungalow, and my son says he will still make bread for us at home. So we’ll never be without. • As told to Jack Losh