If Romelu Lukaku had been a little more selfish, then perhaps there would be life in the Serie A title race yet. He stepped up in a high-pressure situation on Sunday night, burying an 88th-minute penalty to bring Inter to 2-2 at Roma. It was the sixth he had taken this season, and the sixth he had converted. A penalty he chose not to take, however, continues to linger in the memory. Inter were already a goal and a man up at home to Bologna on 5 July when they won a spot-kick in the 61st minute. Lukaku handed the ball to Lautaro Martínez, kissing his strike partner on the head in encouragement. The Argentinian’s weak shot was saved, and Inter collapsed to a 2-1 defeat. Lukaku could not have known that his gesture would backfire so dramatically. To the contrary, he likely considered that a goal for Martínez in that moment would have done Inter’s title bid the world of good. His strike partner had scored only once in five games following the restart, and was in need of a confidence boost. Still, in a season of “what ifs” for so many teams, that will be the one that haunts Inter the most. It seemed at the time that their title challenge was over, as they fell 11 points behind Juventus. But the Old Lady has since suffered her own midsummer swoon, losing to Milan before drawing with Atalanta and Sassuolo. Inter had a chance to pull within three if they could win in Rome – piling pressure on Juventus before Monday night’s game against Lazio. The Nerazzurri got off to a positive start, Stefan De Vrij heading them in front from a corner in the 15th minute. But on the stroke of half-time, the same player deflected Leonardo Spinazzola’s shot into his own net. The goal should not have stood. Replays showed Aleksandar Kolarov kicking the heel of Martínez as he won possession at the start of the attack. Yet referee Marco Di Bello declined to overturn his decision after an on-field review. The visitors had controlled the tempo for most of the first half, but Roma came out sharper after the interval. Jordan Veretout went close, before Henrikh Mkhitaryan put them in front. The ball fell to him via a fortunate ricochet between two defenders, but Inter’s midfield had been far too slow to check his advance when he brought the ball forward from the centre-circle to begin. Mkhitaryan’s goal arrived in the 57th minute. Antonio Conte waited another 10 before making his first substitutions. Lukaku, Cristiano Biraghi and Victor Moses were first on, followed swiftly by Christian Eriksen. The change of personnel made little difference. Roma were defending well, Paulo Fonseca’s recent switch to a back three continuing to pay dividends. An equaliser did not seem to be on the cards until Spinazzola gifted Inter a penalty. He had been attempting a clearance, but the ball bobbled off his standing leg. The defender swung through into Moses’s thigh. Lukaku sent Pau López the wrong way from the spot. Inter needed another goal to keep their slim title hopes alive. They could not find it. Conte lamented the decision not to overturn Roma’s first goal, but his greatest ire was reserved for the fixture list which he believes to have undermined his team. “Our schedule, which is mad, is going unobserved,” he said. “It seems to have been made to put us in difficulty, against teams who have always had one day more of rest, with us playing away from home and kicking off at 9.45pm. That means getting home at 4am and barely being able to train the next day. Other teams rest for five days.” He finished with a classic Conte rejoinder that, “I don’t want to stir up a controversy”, having just done precisely that. His anger was not just directed at the league but his own club’s directors, with a suggestion that Inter clearly had not been as “present” as they needed to be when the calendar was made. His words were interpreted as a dig at the CEO Beppe Marotta, with whom he previously worked at Juventus. The substance of his claim merits scrutiny. If Inter’s title bid has died prematurely, it is not because of a creditable draw away to Roma but because they have thrown away second-half leads against Bologna, Sassuolo and Verona. As Eurosport’s Enrico Turcato observed, they were given the same amount of rest as their opponents coming into all three of those games. To blame the schedule, in any case, is a cop-out. It is not the fixture list that has caused Martínez’s form to drop off so sharply since the restart, nor can that explain why Eriksen – who sparkled briefly in games against Napoli and Sampdoria – looks once again like a foreign object in this team. The true concern is that Conte and Marotta may not share a vision for how to proceed. The expectation was never that Inter should win the Scudetto this season – even if the manager himself has confessed he would not have taken the job if he thought there were no chance. Sunday’s draw secured their place in the Champions League with four games to spare: clear progress after late scrambles in each of the past two seasons. Yet more will be expected next term. Inter have been aggressive again in the transfer market, completing the permanent sale of Mauro Icardi to Paris Saint-Germain and signing Achraf Hakimi from Real Madrid. They are understood to be close to a deal to sign another bright young talent, Sandro Tonali, from Brescia. Yet when Conte discusses what he believes to be missing from his team, he speaks always of a need for experience and veteran knowhow. He wanted Arturo Vidal in January, and his admiration for Edin Dzeko is well known. As Sunday night ticked over into Monday morning, sports radio shows in Italy were alive with speculation as to what Lukaku might have said as he threw an arm around the Bosnian at full-time. And then there is Alexis Sánchez – a player whose seven post-lockdown assists are second only to Lionel Messi across Europe’s top five leagues. Conte, plainly, is enamoured. But are Inter as enthusiastic about investing long-term in a 31-year-old whose Manchester United contract pays £390,000 a week? They have covered less than half of that during this season’s loan. Milan 5-1 Bologna, Cagliari 1-1 Sassuolo, Verona 1-1 Atalanta, Roma 2-2 Inter, Brescia 2-1 Spal, Fiorentina 2-0 Torino, Genoa 2-1 Lecce, Napoli 2-1 Udinese, Parma 2-3 Sampdoria Monday: Juventus v Lazio These are the questions that come next for Inter, as those last hopes of dethroning Juventus recede. A sense of frustration at opportunities thrown away too cheaply can only be dispelled by making sure it does not happen again next year.