Lewis Hamilton has said that making the black power salute at last week’s Styrian Grand Prix felt as if it was a pivotal moment for him and one he would never forget. The world champion won the race in Austria and stood with his fist raised on the podium, inspired by the actions of Tommie Smith and John Carlos at the 1968 Olympics. Speaking before this weekend’s Hungarian Grand Prix he said his intent remained to raise awareness of racism. Hamilton has been an outspoken supporter of anti-racism and the Black Lives Matter movement, speaking out on the subject since the killing of George Floyd. He remains Formula One’s only black driver and led the initiative for collective action by F1 and for drivers to show their support of anti-racism. He has taken the knee before both grands prix this season and is expected to once more make a gesture on the grid at the Hungaroring. Not all drivers have taken the knee but they have worn “End Racism” T-shirts. Last week the image of Hamilton with his fist raised on the podium was published around the world. For the British driver it was a gesture of genuine emotional import. “It felt like the right moment, it felt an important moment for me,” he said. “I will never forget that moment. I haven’t met Tommie Smith or John Carlos but of course I remember seeing and reading about their experience and the iconic image of their salute. That was inspiring for me.” Hamilton felt he was duty bound to make a public declaration of his commitment to anti-racism, because of the high profile he enjoys. “Racism is something that has been around for hundreds of years and it continues so the fight continues,” he said. “When you have icons, people like [Carlos and Smith] who have stood up in this battle I find it inspiring and I took a page out of their book. Realising I had this platform, this opportunity to continue to raise awareness, to try and unite people and educate myself and other people that is where it came from.” This weekend’s race at the Hungaroring is the last in the season-opening triple header. With the early part of the calendar now confirmed, F1 is set to hold two more triple headers in quick succession, bringing the total to nine races in 11 weeks. F1 is targeting holding 15 races and the remaining six are also expected to be held in batches of three consecutive meetings. Hamilton acknowledged that while the openers had been an enjoyable return to racing, the schedule was likely to begin placing a toll on the teams. “At the moment it’s not an issue but I can see it being strenuous in the following three back-to-back races we get to have,” he said. “The men and women of the team generally keep their feelings to themselves, and channel their feelings into their work, you don’t normally hear anyone complaining. We just have to manage it.”