After a highly successful ­hosting of the British Masters, it would never have been the intention of Lee Westwood to overshadow a ­comprehensive success for the young Italian Renato Paratore. Yet as the game adapts to its new normal, Westwood’s refusal to travel to the United States for ­upcoming and significant events ­naturally turned heads. Quarantine restrictions as eased on Friday mean players ­arriving from Europe for a World Golf Championship in Memphis – ­beginning on Thursday – or the ­following week’s US PGA Championship will not have to spend 14 days in isolation. If the theory would be Westwood and company would now leap across the Atlantic, the 47-year-old rebuffed such a notion. “I know they’ve dropped the two-week quarantine but I still don’t feel comfortable and I don’t feel like it is right to jump on a plane for 12 hours,” he said after a closing 79. “I’ve felt like out of my comfort zone this week, so if I got to Memphis I would feel uncomfortable playing tournaments at the moment.” Interestingly, Westwood came close to mirroring the sentiments of Andrew Johnston, who withdrew from the British Masters after nine holes. The restart does not sit entirely comfortably with all concerned, despite the European Tour’s ­thoroughly professional processes. “Whenever I come out and play the tournaments now it is almost about seeing my mates and the sociable element of it all and you’re not ­getting that at the moment,” Westwood said. “I’ve never seen so many players on the range at eight o’clock at night trying to avoid their hotel rooms. It’s just not the life I’m used to. I go out on the course and I am struggling for motivation a little bit. “The two America tournaments, next week and the following week ... I’m still more concerned that America doesn’t take it as seriously as the rest of the world. It still seems to be one of the hotspots for outbreaks. I can control me not getting the virus and take all the measures I can, but somebody might pass it on. I don’t really want to get ill with it and I’m slightly ­asthmatic. “If I tested [positive] in Memphis I would have to stay there for two weeks and I’m not sure about ­insurance policies etc. Right now there are too many what ifs. If you take all them into consideration, there is something wrong.” Likewise does not apply to Paratore. He dropped two strokes in 72 holes, ultimately winning the first event of the European Tour’s resumption by three at 18 under par from Rasmus Højgaard. Paratore was afforded a socially distanced guard of honour following his final round of 69. “That was amazing,” he said of his reception. “The European Tour has done a great job this week.” Justin Harding finished third at minus 14. Andy Sullivan, Robert Rock and Dale Whitnell formed an English trio tied for fourth.