Barnet were 11th in the National League when the pandemic struck, so reaching the penultimate stage of the play-offs could be considered something of a success. But their defeat at Notts County last Saturday means the club will not only spend a third season outside the Football League, but will do so without a fully fledged, EFL-funded academy. They will now become like any other non-league club, able to run community and college programmes for local kids, but all self-funded and without the weekly fixtures against EFL clubs they have enjoyed for the past 11 years. More than 100 young Barnet players are now free to join other clubs – if they can find one that wants them. Having been relegated from League Two in 2018, Barnet – and Chesterfield, who have known their fate for far longer – will no longer receive the parachute payments devised to soften the blow for clubs who have dropped into non-league football and jointly fund their academies. Even if they had the money to pay for it themselves, Barnet’s time is up: the Football League cut teams off after two years. If Notts County lose to Harrogate at Wembley on Sunday, their academy will be on borrowed time, too. Failure to win promotion back to the Football League is not only life-changing for the club’s young players – from the Under-9s up to the Under-18s – but also to their staff, most of whom have been furloughed or were seeing out redundancy notices. A lot has changed at the club in the last three years. Back in May 2017, just after the first team had finished midtable in League Two, Barnet Under-21s hosted Bristol City Under-23s in the Central League Cup final. It was a glorious sunny evening in north London and Barnet’s teenage talents played with gusto. They took the lead against the Championship club and their superb goalkeeper, Kai McKenzie-Lyle, pulled off a string of miraculous stops, even saving a penalty. With four minutes to go, the Bees were 1-0 up and had one hand on the trophy. But City scored two late goals to snatch the cup. The disappointments kept coming. By the following summer, McKenzie-Lyle had joined Liverpool on a free transfer, Barnet’s first team had been relegated from the Football League (for the second time in five years), and the clock started ticking on the club’s academy. London has one of the world’s most crowded sports markets and the city’s biggest non-league clubs can struggle when they reach the Football League. Barnet, Dagenham & Redbridge and nearby Stevenage have all been relegated from League Two within the last five years. However, the huge, diverse population in London provides Barnet with sufficient raw material to cultivate future professional players. While funding was in place, they persevered admirably with their academy despite their two relegations, even retaining an Under-21s team. They produced a string of players for their own first team – six of the Barnet squad involved in the play-offs came through their youth team – and exciting talent they sold to other clubs. Eight years ago, Barnet were a match for Brighton at academy level. The pair challenged for the Under-18s South-East title, and many of the same players soon met in the Under-21 Professional Development League after both clubs were granted Category 2 status under the Premier League’s new Elite Player Performance Plan. Envious of Barnet’s new training ground at The Hive, Brighton had to work around the needs of Sussex University students for access to pitches and a gym. But while Barnet had the facilities, a fourth division club surviving in Category 2 is an almighty challenge.. In theory, a League Two club could have a Category 1 academy – if they could afford it - and a Premier League club could have a Category 4 academy, should they so desire, as Huddersfield Town did in 2018-19. The reality is most academies reflect their first team’s status. When the Elite Player Performance Plan started, clubs had to field Under-16, Under-18 and Under-21 sides as well as their first team all on the same day. It was not a system built for minnows: Barnet simply did not have enough players. If two of their junior teams were playing away games, one group had to make their own way there as the club only had one minibus. This was not what the Premier League had in mind. While Barnet only lasted a season at Category 2, Brighton moved to Category 1 in their £20m training facility. Now Barnet have followed Dagenham & Redbridge, York and Hartlepool out of the EFL Youth system altogether. The demise of Barnet’s academy, which has produced club legends such as Joe Devera and Mauro Vilhete as well as Luke Gambin (Colchester), Jamal Lowe (Wigan), Jack Taylor (Peterborough) and Dillon Barnes (QPR), is not just sad news for the club. It has wider repercussions. As one of England’s most multicultural clubs, they have played a vital role in developing the capital’s BAME talent. Of the 16 players who almost won that Central League Cup in 2017, two were white. The vast majority of their Under-18 team, who went further in the FA Youth Cup this season than any Barnet team ever has, are BAME, as is their manager Danny Senda, now back in the EFL, coaching Leyton Orient’s first team. Barnet provided young men an opportunity. For that alone, their academy’s demise is something to regret. The Leeds first team will mix it with the elite next season and so will their academy players. Leeds, Crystal Palace and Burnley have been awarded Category 1 status this month, meaning their Under-23s will be in Premier League 2 Division 2. Their places in the Professional Development League will be taken by Bournemouth, Luton and Peterborough if and when their applications for Category 2 status are approved. That would leave Preston North End and newly promoted Wycombe, who closed their academy eight years ago, as the only Championship clubs without a second team. As it stands, Sheffield United are now the only Premier League club not in Category 1. Several Under-23 regulars were given their first taste of Premier League football in July. Everton promoted Jarrad Brathwaite and Anthony Gordon; Joel Mumbongo appeared for Burnley; defender Jake Vokins was handed his first start for Southampton; and Leicester introduced Luke Thomas and George Hirst. Like Hirst, three of the six youngsters shortlisted last week for the Premier League 2 Player of the Season award have featured in this column over the past season: Derby striker Jahmal Hector-Ingram, prolific Swansea goalscorer Liam Cullen and exciting Liverpool attacker Curtis Jones. The other nominees are Chelsea midfielder Billy Gilmour, West Ham winger Nathan Holland and West Brom teenager Rayhaan Tulloch. Given the previous winners are Brighton’s livewire striker Aaron Connolly, Arsenal player Reiss Nelson and Sheffield United striker Ollie McBurnie – now all Premier League regulars – the victor is likely to have a very bright future. Former Aston Villa striker Marcus Allbäck is helping his local club Järpens rise up the ranks in his native Sweden. The ambitious club, from a small town by the ski slopes midway between Östersund and Norway, have signed keeper Andrew Walklate from Crewe Alexandra and defender Vik Milton from Oxford United. Also heading to Sweden rather than wait around for non-league offers are former Macclesfield keeper Conor O’Keefe (now with Piteå) and Ipswich full-back Dylan Ruffles, who has joined a clutch of other Brits at YIK. Across the Gulf of Bothnia in Finland, former MK Dons striker Recoe Martin is getting among the goals having signed last month for UMF Einherji. Wycombe Wanderers Under-18s went on a pre-season trip to the Netherlands without their coach Richard Dobson, who had been asked to stay behind to help newly appointed manager Gareth Ainsworth with the first team. That worked out pretty well. In a 2-1 defeat to Vitesse Arnhem youth team, Wycombe’s standouts were keeper Matt Ingram, and 15-year-old striker Jordan Ibe and flying left-back Nathan Mavila, who combined for their goal. Ingram made his Hull City debut in their final and disastrous game of the season last week; Ibe has been released by Bournemouth amid all sorts of personal problems; and Mavila is now in Canada having failed to make a professional appearance in the UK. Wycombe closed their academy within a year. Follow Gavin Willacy and Playing in the Shadows on Twitter