As the coronavirus crisis takes its toll on the UK labour market, the hunt for jobs has intensified. Last week, a Manchester restaurant said it had received nearly 1,000 applications for a receptionist post within 24 hours, reflecting the pressure that the jobs market is under. Paid employment in Britain has fallen almost 650,000 employees since March, which has left some businesses inundated with applications. ‘It’s frightening that so many people in the industry are out of work’ The soon-to-be-opened Queens of Mayfair has seen an up to 900% increase in applications since the start of lockdown. After the launch of the central London café and wine bar was delayed from March to August owing to the pandemic, sisters and co-owners Grace and Victoria Sheppard had to re-list a number of roles for which they had already started recruiting in January, using a graduate recruitment agency and LinkedIn, as well as fielding CVs sent from other hospitality companies that had made redundancies. One front-of-house position, paying £10-12 an hour, had more than 400 applications, compared with 40 in February, and 200 people applied to a full-time barista role at the same hourly rate, up from just 25 people at the start of the year. “We’re delighted to have such experienced candidates coming to us for jobs,” says general manager Victoria Sheppard, who has received applications from “really prestigious” hospitality backgrounds. “The downside is that it’s frightening so many people in the industry are out of work. You wish you could help more people.” Victoria expected an increase in applications due to the scale of recent job losses in the industry but says it is “tricky” to see overqualified candidates. “We were quite shocked to see people applying who were paid considerably more than we had advertised. We’re a mid-range, luxury hospitality company, but we’re not Michelin-starred.” ‘I’ve not seen this volume of people applying for roles in over 20 years’ “I’ve worked in recruitment since 1998 and I’ve never seen this volume of people applying for roles,” says Adam Jennings, director of JMF Associates, a recruitment company based in Beckenham, south-east London, that specialises in accounting and finance. He recently advertised online for an accounts assistant role for a client in the capital. “Last year, if we received 10 or 20 applications, I’d have been happy,” says Jennings. He received 262 applications from all over London. “That’s phenomenal,” he says. “Staggering.” He estimates that half of the applicants could have done the job, but only 25% were suitably experienced and lived within a realistic travelling distance to the workplace. Jennings has heard “many dreadful stories” from people not entitled to the government’s furlough scheme – which covers 80% of an employee’s wages – or stuck between jobs with no income. He’s also seen many people applying for senior roles who have dramatically reduced their salary expectations. “I’ve seen applications from people earning six figures who are willing to drop to £50,000 or £60,000 as they’ve lost jobs in hotel management, retail or the arts and leisure sector,” he says. ”It’s really tough, and it’s likely to get worse before we see any improvement.” ‘There’s a different calibre of applicants applying’ The Oxfordshire-based Evergreen Agency has received a 10-fold increase in the number of applications for its digital marketing roles since March. “We’d normally get half a dozen good applicants for a role,” says the managing director, Aaron Rudman-Hawkins. Not only has the digital marketing agency received 70 to 80 applications for recent postings in roles such as digital PR, but the quality of applicants has increased too. “It’s rich pickings,” says Rudman-Hawkins. “There’s a lot of talent out there – fantastic people with great skills sets. There’s a different calibre of applicants applying, which is great.” Its location might also be a factor. People might be more reluctant, because of the pandemic, to commute by public transport to London, says Rudman-Hawkins. ‘I can see my mental health declining massively’ Ellie, based in Devon, has applied for 100 jobs since she was made redundant from a food service company the day before lockdown. She had been in the job for less than a month but with cafes and pubs closing, the business went downhill “really rapidly”. Ineligible for the government’s furlough scheme Ellie, 25, found herself out of work for the first time. “I had a good few weeks of being really down and depressed. I didn’t have the strength to job hunt,” says Ellie. She eventually landed a temporary contract with a call centre in May but knows that the work could end at any time. “It’s really stressful not knowing if I could be let go tomorrow,” she says. In the meantime, she has applied for all manner of permanent jobs – in pubs, restaurants, supermarkets, other call centres and offices – but is yet to get an interview. “I don’t think employers want people my age because we get a higher rate of pay,” she says, referring to the national living wage bands that rise to £8.72 an hour over the age of 25. “Even random pub jobs get 100 to 200 applicants … I don’t stand a chance.” “I’m worried for my future. I don’t know how long this is going to go on for. I’m really anxious and depressed all of the time,” says Ellie. “I can see my mental health declining massively, not getting out of bed in the morning. I expect it’s going to be really hard.” Sign up to the daily Business Today email here or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk.