England’s morning collapse may have had the West Indies quicks pondering their options for an early lunch only for Stuart Broad to yomp out to the middle with mischief on his mind. Shannon Gabriel had vaporised Ollie Pope’s hopes of a first Test century on home soil, Kemar Roach had become the first man from the Caribbean to pass 200 wickets since Curtly Ambrose 26 years ago and from an overnight 258 for four the scorecard read 280 for eight. But over the next hour or so Broad the batsman produced what Broad the bowler had made his trademark: a spot of momentum-shifting madness, in the form of a swashbuckling 62 from 45 balls that swelled England’s position to a far healthier 369 all out. These days Broad only rarely lasts long enough for Varun Aaron to get name-checked on commentary in reference to the scene at Old Trafford in 2014 when the India quick burst one through his grille for a splash of claret and a couple of panda eyes. Here it came early. That was 73 matches into his 140-cap career – by which time he had 10 of his current tally of 13 half-centuries and a career-best 169 against Pakistan at Lord’s – and Broad’s candour at the time, the way he has lined up since and the numbers either side tell of a significant blow. He used to make 24.5 runs and last 36 balls per dismissal, on average, figures that drop to 13.5 and 21 post-Aaron’s Exocet. There have been some slightly embarrassing dismissals too, such as in Cape Town last winter when bowled with his bat stuck in his pads. But Broad has still dutifully strapped on the pads and, it should be said, with his eye still good and his golf swing well grooved, there have been a few thunder claps of old along the way. At Edgbaston last year he spent two hours at the crease for 29 precious runs but such innings are now few and far between. Instead, Broad with bat these days is as frantic as one of those inflatable dancing men you see on the forecourts of car dealerships. Indeed, three of his four 40-plus scores during this time have come at well over a run a ball; even the slightly longer 56 he made on a dreadful Melbourne featherbed during the 2017 Ashes was still an exhibition of giving the Australia bowlers some humpty. Here the charge was signalled with a mown six over deep-midwicket fourth ball that brought Roach back down to earth after his earlier milestone. Broad, a man who loves Saturdays, was clearly in no mood to simply scrap and hustle for his runs. Jason Holder lost the plot a touch too, at times not even bowling to plans he had set. Six of Broad’s nine swatted boundaries came off the West Indies captain including the pull that brought up a 33-ball half-century – the third quickest by an Englishman. Dom Bess, theoretically the senior batsman, had the best seat in the regrettably unfilled house during a stand that ended when Broad eventually picked out deep midwicket. All the No 8 needed to do was graft the odd run and admire a spot of agriculture at the other end. That said, there were still some flashes of that upright off-side game that once drew hushed words about a young David Gower. Andrew Strauss, commentating for Sky in this match, recalled “a time where people thought Broad might become a Test six or seven”. Strauss did not mention that he was the nutty professor who tried this experiment first, entrusting a young Broad with the No 7 spot for three Test matches in 2009 when Andrew Flintoff was injured. Only once, in the third Ashes Test at Headingley, did the long tail blow up his face. It will remain a prophecy unfulfilled, sadly, with Aaron the man to blame. But when Broad sits back in his later years and recalls a remarkable Test career, he may crack a smile at his second incarnation as a batsman and the occasional fun he still had.