Deep floodwaters and the risk of further mudslides have hampered search and rescue operations after heavy rain in southern Japan, including at elderly home facilities where more than a dozen residents died and scores were left stranded. Helicopters and boats rescued more people from their homes in the Kumamoto region. More than 40,000 troops, the coastguard and fire brigades took part in the operation. Large areas along the Kuma River were swallowed by floodwaters, and many houses, buildings and vehicles were engulfed. Mudslides smashed into houses, sending people up on to rooftops waiting to be rescued. At a flooded elderly care home in Kuma village, where 14 residents were presumed dead, rescue efforts continued for the dozens of remaining residents and caregivers. Sixty-five residents and about 30 caregivers were trapped at the riverside care facility when floodwaters and mud gushed in. By Sunday afternoon the remaining 51 residents, including three who had hypothermia, had been rescued by boats and taken to hospitals for treatment, officials said. Overall, 18 people were confirmed dead, while 16 others, including those at the nursing home, were presumed dead. Fourteen more were still missing as of Sunday afternoon. Dozens of other people were trapped in inundated areas waiting to be rescued, according to the fire and disaster management agency. In Hitoyoshi City, the deluge poured into houses near the main train station. “The water rose to the second floor so fast and I just couldn’t stop shivering, a 55-year-old woman who was visiting her relatives told the Asahi newspaper. She and her relatives ran upstairs, swam out of a window and eventually took refuge on the roof to wait for their rescue. As floods eased in parts of Kumamoto on Sunday, vending machines and cars lay scattered on mud-coated streets. Some people were cleaning their homes, taking out damaged furniture and rinsing off mud. More than 200,000 residents in Kumamoto prefecture were urged to evacuate following heavy rain on Friday evening and into Saturday. The evacuation was not mandatory and many people opted to stay home because of concerns over catching coronavirus, even though officials say shelters are adequately equipped with partitions and other safety measures. Flooding also cut off power and communication lines, further delaying the search and rescue. Nearly 6,000 homes in Kumamoto were without electricity on Sunday, according to the Kyushu Electric Power Co. Rainfall that exceeded 100mm (4in) per hour has subsided, but the Japan Meteorological Agency kept mudslide warnings in place across Kumamoto. Prefectural officials said evacuation advisories were still in place as more rain was predicted.