At the beginning of part two of The Rise of the Murdoch Dynasty (BBC Two), the question of succession seems to have been parked, if not settled. In 2003, Rupert Murdoch’s youngest son, James, is installed as chair of the satellite broadcaster BSkyB. Accusations of nepotism dog the appointment – James’s main qualification seems to be his surname, his main talent finding ways to tell reporters he is too busy to talk to them – but an heir has apparently been found. A few years later, elsewhere in the empire, another star is rising: in 2009, the editor of the Sun, Rebekah Wade, marries the racehorse trainer Charlie Brooks. The wedding reception, attended by Murdoch and various top politicians eager to curry favour, has the romantic atmosphere of the lunch break at an arms fair. Before the year is out, Wade – now Brooks – will become CEO of News International. Up until now, the drama in this soap opera has been largely generated by internal friction – sibling rivalry, divorce, remarriage – but a storm is breaking outside. As the guests are mingling at the Brooks’s wedding, the first phone-hacking scandal story is being written by the Guardian journalist Nick Davies, after a tipoff from an anonymous whistleblower known as Mr Apollo. Murdoch’s eye is on another ball. He is busy engineering the outcome of the 2010 general election – or, if you prefer, switching sides to back the likely winner. It is difficult either way, because relations between the Murdoch empire and the political establishment are preposterously cosy – Brooks is good friends with the prime minister’s wife, Sarah Brown, but she is also mates with David Cameron. The former News of the World editor Andy Coulson is now the Tory party communications director. Not that Murdoch is worried about being pals with politicians. “He doesn’t care whether they like him or not,” says Piers Morgan. “He just cares: are they gonna damage my interests?” We are all still getting used to the idea of Morgan being astute, but this summation sounds like Murdoch’s political philosophy in a nutshell: if it is bad for my interests, it is bad. If he seems enigmatic, perhaps it is only because he has nothing else to say. The phone-hacking story takes a final dark turn when it emerges that an investigator for the News of the World had hacked the phone of the murdered teenager Milly Dowler. As part of a damage-limitation strategy, Murdoch met the Dowler family, but they were not assuaged. “He disappeared,” said the Dowler’s lawyer, recounting the meeting. “He just had his head in his hands, and his head was almost down to the table level, because he’d been caught out.” While this political drama is no less gripping for being so familiar, it also feels strangely remote. On the one hand, it is hard to believe these events happened as long as a decade ago; on the other, it is difficult to recall the mood of a time when phone hacking was all we had to worry about. Even as you watch the Murdoch empire start to quake, you are reminded that it did not crumble. The News of the World closed – and was replaced. Rebekah Brooks resigned – and returned. The Leveson inquiry happened – but Leveson II was cancelled. The climactic reckoning is Murdoch’s appearance before the inquiry, alongside his son James, when he says: “This is the most humble day of my life.” He seems confused and diminished, although there are accusations that the frailty is an act. It is not a convincing performance, even if the former News International chair Les Hinton insists Murdoch’s contrition is sincere. James, meanwhile, tries prissily to remain above the fray, calling the Labour MP Tom Watson’s characterisation of the family business as a mafia “inappropriate”. The really memorable bit – the bit you know is coming – is when Murdoch is hit with a foam pie smuggled into the inquiry by a comedian labouring under the stage name Jonnie Marbles. The power of the moment lies in the fact that the cameras largely missed it. There is a closeup of James looking panicked, followed by a wide shot from the rear that just catches Wendi Deng, all in pink, flying through the air to land a slap on her husband’s assailant. “The phone-hacking saga never really was about reporters breaking the law,” says Davies. “It was always a story about power and the fear that people have of that power.” The pie seemed to signal the power was waning, but this saga has a whole episode left.