Regally bred, he’s a son of Galileo, from the family of New Approach and a brother to the Oaks winner, Was. That, along with his name (the Irish national anthem) are the most impressive things about him so far but he showed promise when fourth in a Leopardstown maiden; the first three were then second, third and fourth in the Irish Derby. Finished weakly that day. If that was down to lack of fitness, he could be placed here. A possible pacemaker, though not brilliantly drawn if that is the plan. A half-brother to the Derby winner Workforce, he comes into this with the same form figures as that one had, having won a maiden on his sole juvenile start and then been beaten in his trial. But Workforce had shown rather more quality in his races and it will be a surprise if this one has it in him to go close. Was not suited by the steady pace when a neck behind Khalifa Sat at Goodwood and can at least turn that form around. Made a big impression in winning the Lingfield trial four weeks ago, when he was obviously going to win two furlongs out. Runner-up was then beaten the same distance at Royal Ascot by the subsequent winner of the Irish Derby. No question about his stamina but must now prove his quality in a much hotter contest. Badly drawn in stall one but, as a hold-up horse with a fair cruising speed and Frankie Dettori aboard, could be good enough to overcome it. Very impressive from English King in the Stradivarius colours 🙌He wins the Betsafe Derby Trial Stakes at Lingfield ParkWatch LIVE now 📺 @ITV4 & @itvhub💻 https://t.co/lkgYKPtUFp pic.twitter.com/bpOv5YefC2 Winless after four starts, he looked a tired sixth in the Irish Derby a week ago. Failed to settle through the early stages that day and must be at risk of doing something similar here. Likely to be a weak finisher, therefore, despite having Derby winners on both sides of his pedigree. Stormed home to win a Royal Ascot handicap under top weight a fortnight ago, suggesting that another quarter-mile will be most helpful. Even in victory he looked a tricky ride and not for the first time. Both his wins have come on soft ground, which he won’t get here but there has been enough rain this week to give him a chance. Likely to be flying at the finish but something else may have got there first. The only Group One winner in the field and he’s done it twice, in the Futurity last autumn and in the Guineas a month ago. Was strong at the finish both times but has to go another half-mile here, which is asking a lot. Shows plenty of pace and doesn’t use himself like a horse who will be suited by this distance. Not really bred for it, either. Would be just the third Guineas winner in 30 years to follow up in the Derby. How @oismurphy & KAMEKO 🐢 won the QIPCO 2000 Guineas 👇pic.twitter.com/RkodZPJ4Qz Was gifted a soft lead by his three rivals when winning a trial three weeks ago. Showed toughness to hold off Emissary that day but this will be much, much tougher and he will have to fight for the early lead if he wants it. Twice a winner at Goodwood, so should be fine on these undulations but hard to believe he can be good enough. The bare form of his October win in Newmarket’s Zetland Stakes would put him in the argument but his stable was on fire at the time and the soft ground also suited him. He looked small and was always scurrying to keep up in the Classic Trial on Kempton’s all-weather a month ago, finishing four lengths behind Pyledriver. Looks up against it. Looks the part and bred to be good, as a brother to Japan, who was beaten just half a length in last year’s Derby, and also to an Oaks runner-up in Secret Gesture. But his preparation has been rushed and his trainer wanted to get two races into him before coming here. Has looked short of pace, when fourth to Pyledriver at Royal Ascot and to Kameko in November, but also in victory at Leopardstown in September. Tactical speed would be very helpful from a tough draw in a big-field Derby but he just doesn’t have it. Needs a really strong pace so he can mow them down late and even then may not be quite quick enough. His short odds reflect reputation, not form. Stayed on past Mogul to be third behind Pyledriver at Royal Ascot, his first run since scoring at Salisbury in August. Was given plenty to do that day and probably needed the run, so there’s a chance he could turn things around with the winner. Will be helped if this turns into a real stamina test but form and pedigree leave him with plenty to prove. No friend of the punter, he has been the unplaced favourite three times from five starts. No one wants to back him now, so perhaps this is where he’ll finally make good on the promise of his eight-length success in a Gowran maiden last year. Moved with real menace through the first half of the Zetland Stakes but when the time came to do some real work he didn’t seem to fancy it. Disappointing again when fifth on his reappearance in the Gallinule, form which is not working out. https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2020/jul/03/talking-horses-trailblazer-aidan-obrien-on-cusp-of-derby-history-horse-racing A big animal who struggled to keep command of all his moving parts on a couple of occasions last year, he grew into himself in time to win over this distance at Royal Ascot last month. He travelled strongly that day and over-raced early, so ought to be helped if the pace here is even stronger, as it may be. The runner-up was well beaten in last weekend’s Irish Derby but had excuses. Will have to improve again. Been doing his best work at the finish in all four career starts and will surely relish the extra quarter-mile here. Preparation must have gone smoothly, since he was ready to win in March on a day when his stable was otherwise blanked. Undone by a steady pace and a fast surface at Leopardstown last month but came good at Royal Ascot, finishing powerfully to collar a useful rival. Will be harder to repeat that trick against twice as many rivals. Thursday’s rain was helpful. A 60th Royal Ascot winner for jockey Ryan Moore as he partners Russian Emperor to victory in the Hampton Court Stakes By Galileo out of the Australian champion Atlantic Jewel, Russian Emperor looks to be a colt with a big future #RoyalAscot pic.twitter.com/fgsDdh4f3M The fitting of cheekpieces and a switch to front-running tactics paid off when he broke his duck in a maiden race at the Curragh last Saturday. Was spoken of as a St Leger type in the winner’s enclosure. Could be here in the role of pacemaker. Probably lacks the quality and experience to make a big impact unless given a complete freebie at the front. The best pedigree on offer, as he has a brother and a sister who won a Guineas each, as well as a third top-class sibling, while his mother was a sister to Giant’s Causeway, the iron horse of 20 years ago. Upheld family honour by running second in the Irish Guineas, a big effort on his first race outside maiden company. Finished well enough to suggest he can go further than a mile but a Derby on rain-softened ground looks a really demanding test for him. Most of his family would be rolling around like drunks in the final furlong. Stretched out nicely to win a Newbury maiden three weeks ago, his only race so far. Extremely inexperienced but, given his trainer, physical gifts and pedigree, he can fare respectably. Two siblings were fourth in the Derby and no surprise if he can do something similar. Chris Cook’s prediction: 1 Russian Emperor 13-2 2 English King 11-4 3 Highland Chief 16-1