One person was killed and another was seriously injured after a car sped through a protest-related closure on a freeway in Seattle. Video taken at the scene by protesters showed people shouting “Car! Car!” before fleeing the road. The driver, Dawit Kelete, 27, from Seattle, was taken into custody. A state patrol spokesman, Ron Mead, said Kelete was suspected to have driven the wrong way on a ramp. Mead said troopers did not know whether it was a targeted attack. Police said impairment was not considered a factor. The person who died was named as Summer Taylor, 24, from Seattle. Diaz Love, 32, from Bellingham, was in a critical condition in hospital with multiple injuries. Love had hosted a near-two-hour-long Facebook livestream captioned “Black Femme March takes I-5”. It ended abruptly. With about 15 seconds left, shouts of “Car!” could be heard as the camera started to shake, before screeching tyres and an impact could be heard. Video showed that a white car travelling at high speed navigated around two vehicles positioned across lanes as a barrier. The car then careened towards a small crowd of protesters on the freeway, striking two who flew into the air and landed on the ground. Mark Taylor-Canfield, a journalist, said the car had plenty of time to slow down before smashing into the protesters. “It sped up and went right into the middle of the crowd, so most of us assumed it was a purposeful attempt at vehicular homicide.” He said he had been in the adjacent lane to the protesters who were hit. Seattle has been the site of prolonged unrest following the killing of George Floyd by Minneapolis police in May, which sparked nationwide protests. Dozens of people were arrested in Seattle this week and demonstrations continue after authorities cleared the Capitol Hill Occupied Protest zone. Mead said on Saturday that protesters had shut down the interstate for 19 days in a row. He emphasised that the freeway was “simply not a safe place” for pedestrians, and said he hoped protesters would cease what he called their “unlawful behaviour”. “My hope is, as a result of this tragedy, protesters will reconsider their desire to be on the interstate because I cannot guarantee their safety, plain and simple,” Mead said. Protesters were on the freeway for more than an hour before the car drove around the blockade around 1.36am, he said. The state patrol tweeted two pictures of the driver’s car, a white Jaguar with significant damage to its bumper and windshield. Seattle police tweeted that they were assisting with the scene, as southbound lanes of the freeway remained closed for investigation. Seattle’s mayor said the city stood beside the friends and family of the victims. “No one should risk their life for demanding better from our city, state and country,” Jenny Durkan wrote on Twitter.