South Korea’s economy has recorded its worst performance in more than 20 years amid plummeting exports as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. Asia’s fourth-largest economy contracted 2.9% year-on-year in the April-June period, the Bank of Korea said, after a fall of 1.3% in the first quarter, putting the country into recession for the first time in around two decades. It’s the fastest decline since the aftermath of the 1998 Asian financial crisis, when it fell 3.8%. South Korea was one of the worst hit countries outside China in the early part of the pandemic, recording around 900 new cases a day in February. But by April, an intensive tracking and tracing campaign had reduced the daily figures to single digits. The country is now battling new outbreaks, including one centred on bars in Seoul. South Korea’s economy is highly trade-dependent, and exports plunged 13.6% year-on-year in the second quarter – the sharpest decline since 1974, in the wake of the OPEC oil crisis. It was largely driven by falls in car, coal and petroleum products, according to the Bank of Korea. The International Monetary Fund last month also cut its growth forecast for South Korea, predicting it would shrink 2.1% this year - compared with an average 8.0% decline for the world’s advanced economies. Australia too published sobering economic figures on Thursday, announcing its biggest budget deficit since the second world war. The deficit – almost $A86bn (US$61.5bn) would grow to $184bn in the next financial year, according to the country’s treasurer, Josh Frydenberg. “These deficits reveal the real cost to the budget of protecting lives and livelihoods as result of coronavirus,” he said. It’s second biggest city, Melbourne, was again announced more than 400 new coronavirus cases, as the pandemic in the city continued to grow. Residents there were compelled to wear masks from Thursday. The United States neared four million cases of coronavirus, and more than 143,000 deaths, as the pandemic surged in the south and west of the country. President Trump held another coronavirus briefing on his own, at which he cited Black Lives Matter protests as among the likely cause of the recent surge in cases. He also pointed to Memorial Day, young people congregating and increased travel. “Cases started to rise among young Americans shortly after demonstrations, which you know very well about, which presumably triggered a broader relaxation of mitigation efforts nationwide,” he said. One of his key coronavirus task force members, Dr Deborah Birx, who has not appeared at the recently restarted briefings, told Fox News that opening up the country was also a factor. “This is a very different epidemic that we had in March and April ... and it will require additional tests. And so this surge and this degree of cases is so widespread compared to previously. It does have to be addressed,” Birx said. The US has carried out some 51.6m tests, with 4.9m positive results, or a 9% positive rate for those tested. California recorded 12,807 cases, surpassing New York as the state with the most cases recorded in a single day. Globally, infections passed 15m, with 622,207 deaths. Hong Kong reported a record 113 new cases for Wednesday, with only five of them important and 63 with an unknown source. The government said the risk of large scale community outbreak was now the highest since the pandemic began. “New cases recorded during the period from July 15 to July 21 include 393 cases without travel history during the incubation period and 56 imported cases,” it said in a statement. “The recent emergence of local cases of unknown infection source indicates the existence of sustained silent transmission in the community.” In other coronavirus developments: South Africa recorded a 24-hour increase of 572 Covid-19 deaths, bringing its total number of fatalities to 5,940. This week the WHO warned that infections in the country may be a “precursor” to a surge in Africa. It has 394,948 infections – around half of those on the continent. Mexico’s president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, on Wednesday downplayed the importance of wearing face masks during the pandemic, calling his treasury secretary’s assertion that using them would be a factor in reactivating the economy “disproportionate”. The country has more than 362,000 infections and more than 41,000 deaths. Chilean senators have approved a controversial bill that allows citizens to withdraw 10% of their pension savings to help ease the economic impact of the virus.