Costco Karen; Walmart Karen; Starbucks Karen; Target Karen. Name a US retail establishment and there’s probably a viral video of a “Karen” (internet slang for an angry white woman) fuming about face masks in it or getting chased out of the store for refusing to wear one. “Mask meltdown” videos have become a feature of the pandemic, part of a larger trend of mask-shaming. Sneering at people who refuse to wear face coverings has become a particularly viral form of virtue signalling. Britain is a few months behind parts of the US in terms of masks. In New York, where I live, they’ve been compulsory in most public places since April. But with face coverings becoming mandatory for English shoppers this week (and already compulsory in Scotland) I’m sure it won’t be long before mask-shaming is as rampant in the UK as it is over here. Yes, people who refuse to wear face masks are selfish. Yes, they’re putting lives in danger. But do they deserve to be vilified and publicly shamed? I don’t think so. Not just because public shaming is often ineffective but because they’re not the biggest villains here: the people who truly deserve our anger are the public figures and authorities – everyone from the US’s surgeon general to representatives of the World Health Organization – who, until fairly recently, told us that masks were useless if not dangerous, before doing a U-turn and insisting we all wear one. The most generous assessment of the rapidly changing guidelines around mask wearing is that experts have adapted their views as new evidence emerges. But there’s also plenty of evidence that experts have simply lied to us. The French doctor and TV personality Marina Carrère d’Encausse has said that her government’s early insistence that masks weren’t necessary was a “lie” told “for a good cause” to ensure health workers wouldn’t run out. In the US, Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, has said the same thing. Meanwhile, the UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, just says whatever he reckons will play best at that particular moment. It still boggles my mind that he blithely dismissed masks as just “extra insurance” on a Monday and then announced the next day that they would be mandatory in shops and enforced with fines. And you wonder why people don’t trust experts or the government? Aggggg! Hear that? It’s the muffled sound of me screaming into the void through my face mask. • Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnist