Last week, the government announced the countries that UK nationals could take holidays to without facing quarantine on return, also known as travel corridors. However, confusion remains over which countries Britons can visit without facing restrictions on arrival. Currently, this is 24 – out of the government’s list of 74. Many of the destinations on the list still have their own restrictions in place. Australia and New Zealand’s borders remain closed to international tourists; and Austria, the Netherlands, Cyprus and Japan have restrictions on countries that have seen high levels of coronavirus, including the UK. On Friday, the Department for Transport (DfT) published its list of  travel corridors, with 74 countries (including 14 British overseas territories). Arrivals from this list of countries (both overseas tourists entering and UK nationals returning) will not face quarantine in England – although Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have yet to announce if and when they will lift the restrictions. In addition, the Foreign Office (FCO) updated its advice for a list of 67 countries it no longer considers high-risk, to allow for non-essential travel, although many of these countries still have their own restrictions or bans in place. Regardless of whether the UK government says it is safe to travel to a country, each destination has its own rules on who can enter. Some countries may not permit UK nationals to enter and they may ban anyone who has been in the UK in the previous 14 days. Security measures could also be in place at borders to prevent potential loopholes for passengers attempting to transit through other “safe” countries in order to dodge travel bans. Although there are now many destinations open to UK tourists without restrictions, some may still have health screening on arrival or an entry form to complete before leaving. Arrivals from the UK may also face restrictions if they have travelled to other countries in the 14 days prior. Countries not listed below may require testing on arrival, mandatory quarantine or have outright bans on arrivals from the UK. The situation is constantly changing and travel restrictions and quarantine measures could be subject to re-enforcement without notice. This article was first published on 6 July. It will be updated regularly. Countries and territories with no current restrictions (such as testing or quarantine) where UK nationals can go on holiday now Andorra ArubaBelgium Croatia (tourists must complete an entry form online in advance) Czech Republic Denmark (tourists must provide evidence online of a holiday stay for six nights or more) Faroe Islands France Germany Gibraltar Greenland Italy and Vatican City Liechtenstein Luxembourg Monaco Poland Réunion San Marino Serbia South Georgia and Sandwich Islands Spain Switzerland Turkey 