A Zimbabwean health minister charged with corruption in connection with the awarding of a multimillion dollar contract for Covid-19 medical supplies has been fired by the president. Obadiah Moyo was sacked by Emmerson Mnangagwa this week for inappropriate conduct by a public official. Last month, Moyo was arrested and charged with criminal abuse of office over the awarding of a $60m (£47m) contract to a company that allegedly sold supplies to the government at inflated prices. According to court papers, Moyo allegedly awarded a multimillion tender to Drax International LLC, headquartered in the United Arab Emirates, which was concluded without the consent of the Procurement Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe. Moyo is currently on bail and is expected to appear in court again at the end of July. A representative of Drax, Delish Nguwaya, is facing charges in connection with the contract. He was arrested and has been released on bail. The company has denied any involvement. The Zimbabwean government has been criticised for failing to deal with corruption at a time when the country is in desperate need of an international bailout package to save the economy from collapse. The country is also facing a looming health crisis as it continues to record more Covid-19 cases, which currently stand at 885. Nurses are also on strike demanding better salaries, personal protective equipment and better working conditions. Recently, widespread online campaigns by social media influencers and NGOs have called upon Mnangagwa to root out corruption, particularly in the public sector where it is endemic. According to Transparency International, corruption is costing the country $2bn annually. Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (ZACC) chairperson Loice Matanda-Moyo has often expressed frustration over the government’s lack of resolve in tackling the problem. ZACC has drawn public ire for the “catch and release” of public officials, in which cases of graft are never concluded. Earlier this month, Zimbabwe’s former tourism minister Prisca Mupfumira appeared in court facing two counts of criminal abuse of office and concealing a transaction. She is accused of misappropriating of $95m from the national pension fund. She pleaded not guilty and is due back in court on 27 July.