The New South Wales premier, Gladys Berejiklian, has said there are “no exemptions” from hotel quarantine for returned travellers despite reports Nicole Kidman and Keith Urban were allowed to isolate at their holiday home in regional NSW. Media outlets reported on Tuesday that Kidman and Urban, and their two daughters, flew back to Sydney from the United States on a private jet and were allowed to isolate at their home in Sutton Forest ahead of the filming of Kidman’s new mini-series, Nine Perfect Strangers, in August. Pre-production will be done at the home, with filming in a number of locations across NSW, including Byron Bay. IF.com.au reported that an agreement had been reached between the federal government, Screen Australia and the NSW government to allow the overseas cast to quarantine in Australia for 14 days at an unspecified facility. Berejiklian on Wednesday said the cast and crew had not been given an exemption but were allowed to quarantine at a separate location from the hotels currently being used to hold other people returning from overseas. “Apparently there is strict quarantine, it’s just a question of where you have the quarantine, and the whole film crew is all in one hotel,” she said. “The only issue there was the location of the quarantine but please know that everybody, it doesn’t matter who they are – can I be very clear on this – there is no exemption for anybody from quarantine and that’s why NSW has been so successful.” Berejiklian said the health department had ensured quarantine was being enforced and health officials “have been all over it with a fine-tooth comb and made sure that’s in place”. Under NSW rules for returned travellers, except in very limited circumstances on medical, health, or compassionate grounds, everyone is required to stay in pre-arranged hotel accomodation in strict quarantining for 14 days. Since 18 July, returning travellers have had to pay $3,000 per adult. A spokeswoman for NSW Health refused to provide details on how many exceptions had been granted during the pandemic but each request for an exemption was assessed by a “dedicated team of senior clinicians”. This team balanced the need to keep the community safe with the needs of individuals who have returned from overseas, she said. “Requests for exemption are taken very seriously, and any request which is not granted is discussed in detail with each applicant.” Victoria and Queensland health authorities did not respond to questions about their arrangements. Victoria has stopped accepting returned travellers due to the second wave of cases that has forced Melbourne into a six-week lockdown. Queensland gave Dannii Minogue and her son an exemption from hotel quarantine earlier this month, but the state’s chief health officer, Dr Jeanette Young, said the pair were two of 38 who had been granted exemptions on the grounds they had quarantined in a place that met the requirements. “[Minogue] has a Covid-safe plan that is being managed by an independent third party – that’s the reason she got that exemption.” Media mogul Kerry Stokes and his wife avoided mandatory hotel quarantine on medical grounds when they arrived in Western Australia by private jet in April. Attempts have been made to contact Kidman and Urban for comment.