The UK government is to build “10 to 12” new Brexit border customs and controls sites across the country as it unveils the biggest shake-up to trading with the EU for 50 years. Five of the sites are likely to be in Kent and are expected to be operational by 1 January, when the UK leaves the customs union and single market. They will handle up to 400m customs declarations a year, insiders said on Monday, with HM Revenue & Customs writing to 12,000 businesses trading with the EU – who up to now have not had to fill in customs declarations – warning them of the changes ahead. The new checks were unveiled to businesses by the Cabinet Office in a 206-page border operating model document that lays bare the complicated and intricate web of controls that will apply to all goods crossing into the EU both to the east and west (to Ireland) of the country. Four hundred and seventy million pounds will be spent on the infrastructure, the price tag for accommodating the required checks on food and goods of animal origin, as well as customs declarations on imports and exports at the border. The document, together with easier to understand step-by-step guides, were published on the government website on Monday. It came as government insiders warned the new systems and process would apply whether or not there is a free trade deal and said it was “an important message” to get across to businesses. Extra layers of controls with veterinary certificates and health checks will be required for the import of food, live animals including racehorses, and the wooden crates or pallets on which they are carried. If a trade deal is struck there will be additional checks on the origin of the goods and possible tariffs, depending on the agreement with the EU. Together they represent the reversal of 47 years of removal of trade barriers, including when the single market was launched in 1993. Sources say five of the Brexit clearance sites will be in Kent, which through the Port of Dover and Eurotunnel in Folkestone handles up to 11,000 trucks a day. One of those earmarked is a 27-acre site on the outskirts of Ashford revealed to the local council on Friday, but it is understood the contract for the land has not yet been signed, leading to delays to construction preparations that were due to start on Monday. After 47 years and 30 days it was all over. As the clock struck 11pm on 31 January 2020, the UK was officially divorced from the EU and began trying to carve out a new global role as a sovereign nation. It was a union that got off to a tricky start and continued to be marked by the UK’s sometimes conflicted relationship with its neighbours. The French president, Charles de Gaulle, vetoes Britain’s entry to EEC, accusing the UK of a “deep-seated hostility” towards the European project. With Sir Edward Heath having signed the accession treaty the previous year, the UK enters the EEC in an official ceremony complete with a torch-lit rally, dickie-bowed officials and a procession of political leaders, including former prime ministers Harold Macmillan and Alec Douglas-Home. The UK decides to stay in the common market after 67% voted "yes". Margaret Thatcher, later to be leader of the Conservative party, campaigned to remain. Margaret Thatcher negotiated what became known as the UK rebate with other EU members after the "iron lady" marched into the former French royal palace at Fontainebleau to demand “our own money back” claiming for every £2 contributed we get only £1 back” despite being one of the “three poorer” members of the community. It was a move that sowed the seeds of Tory Euroscepticism that was to later cause the Brexit schism in the party. Thatcher served notice on the EU community in a defining moment in EU politics in which she questioned the expansionist plans of Jacques Delors, who had remarked that 80% of all decisions on economic and social policy would be made by the European Community within 10 years with a European government in “embryo”. That was a bridge too far for Thatcher. Collapse of Berlin wall and fall of communism in eastern Europe, which would later lead to expansion of EU. Divisions between the UK and the EU deepened with Thatcher telling the Commons in an infamous speech it was ‘no, no, no’ to what she saw as Delors’ continued power grab. Rupert Murdoch’s Sun newspaper ratchets up its opposition to Europe with a two-fingered “Up yours Delors” front page. A collapse in the pound forced prime minister John Major and the then chancellor Norman Lamont to pull the UK out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism. On 1 January, customs checks and duties were removed across the bloc. Thatcher hailed the vision of “a single market without barriers – visible or invisible – giving you direct and unhindered access to the purchasing power of over 300 million of the world’s wealthiest and most prosperous people". Tory rebels vote against the treaty that paved the way for the creation of the European Union. John Major won the vote the following day in a pyrrhic victory. Tony Blair patches up the relationship. Signs up to social charter and workers' rights. Nigel Farage elected an MEP and immediately goes on the offensive in Brussels. “Our interests are best served by not being a member of this club,” he said in his maiden speech. “The level playing field is about as level as the decks of the Titanic after it hit an iceberg.” Chancellor Gordon Brown decides the UK will not join the euro. EU enlarges to to include eight countries of the former eastern bloc including Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic. EU expands again, allowing Romania and Bulgaria into the club. Anti-immigration hysteria seems to take hold with references to “cockroches” by Katie Hopkins in the Sun and tabloid headlines such as “How many more can we take?” and “Calais crisis: send in the dogs”. David Cameron returns from Brussels with an EU reform package - but it isn't enough to appease the Eurosceptic wing of his own party The UK votes to leave the European Union, triggering David Cameron's resignation and paving the way for Theresa May to become prime minister After years of parliamentary impasse during Theresa May's attempt to get a deal agreed, the UK leaves the EU. It emerged on Monday there are separate plans for what has been dubbed a “lorry park” that will act as a holding pen for trucks in the event of chaos at Dover or Calais. Sources in Kent believe the government is proposing to dust down last year’s plans to use the disused Manston airport, near Ramsgate. It has recently been given the green light to reopen as an air freight cargo hub but could still be used next year as a contingency for traffic congestion on the roads to Dover. Ebbsfleet International, a stop on the Eurostar route, is also a possible site as it was earmarked in no-deal contingency plans last year. Tim Reardon, the head of EU exit at the Port of Dover, welcomed the confirmation of inland controls as gridlock was otherwise almost a certainty in the town. “They’ve taken onboard the key principles that they need to get the processes moved away from the border, but there is still a lot of work to be done to finalise everything,” he said. Many industry leaders have warned that the government has left the infrastructure and IT systems too late to develop, threatening chaos in the first few months of next year if lorries show up in either Dover or Calais without the right paperwork. The government has already delayed the implementation of full border controls for EU imports for six months because of the coronavirus pandemic. Michael Gove, who is charged with implementing Brexit, announced last month there would instead be a phased implementation of controls in January, April and July next year. The plan has caused internal friction at cabinet level, with the international trade secretary, Liz Truss, last week protesting it would leave the UK vulnerable to smuggling and a legal challenge by the World Trade Organization. Monday’s document also reveals new customs declarations reminiscent of pre duty-free days. From January, anyone carrying goods in a small vehicle worth more than £1,500 will have to declare the goods using the red channel with additional controls for more than £10,000 in cash. This will apply to couriers who are transporting it on behalf of business. Customs forms will also have to be filled out for people receiving goods through the post that do not exceed £900 in value.