The US recorded more than 44,000 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, a new record one-day increase as it struggles with the pandemic, while concerns mount over Donald Trump’s handling of the crisis and his recent silence on the issue. Eight states reported new single-day highs of freshly diagnosed cases, and the dire numbers follow a warning by the public health expert Dr Anthony Fauci that the US is “going in the wrong direction” and infections could more than double, to reach 100,000 cases a day. Rather than addressing the rise, however, and the European Union’s exclusion of most American travel there while the virus is not under control in the US, Trump spent Wednesday morning posting a series of erratic tweets, as he attacked media organizations and used a racial slur to target a Democratic politician. Officials in Alaska, Arizona, California, Georgia, Idaho, Oklahoma, South Carolina and Texas announced single-day-high case numbers for Tuesday, according to the New York Times, while the paper reported that the number of new cases in the US has increased by 80% over the past two weeks. The Covid Tracking Project said that the US’s seven-day average for new daily cases has doubled since 13 June, and that hospitalizations jumped by the highest number since 21 April, as the European Union confirmed on Tuesday it would bar Americans from non-essential travel to the bloc. A number of states have been forced to roll back reopening efforts. Arizona’s governor, Doug Ducey, abruptly ordered bars, gyms, movie theaters and water parks to shut down this week, as the state became one of the worst hit in the US. In Texas, which experienced a record number of new cases on Tuesday, elective surgeries in some counties were hastily abandoned, as the state grapples with more than 6,500 people hospitalized from Covid-19. As the number of new coronavirus cases again breached 40,000, Fauci warned that without a more robust response, the daily number of cases could more than double. “I would not be surprised if we go up to 100,000 a day if this does not turn around,” he said. As the new details on the extent of the crisis emerged, Trump – whose press secretary said this week only “embers” of coronavirus remain in the US – launched a series of attacks on Joe Biden, CNN, the New York Times, Elizabeth Warren and MSNBC. The president tweeted that the report his administration ignored intelligence about a Russian plot to offer bounties to Afghan militants to kill US troops was a “hoax”, and demanded that the Times, which first reported the story, reveal its source. Trump has claimed he was not briefed on the bounty plot – although the New York Times and CNN have reported that the information was included in a daily intelligence briefing in February. The Washington Post has previously reported that Trump rarely reads those briefings. The White House national security adviser, Robert O’Brien, said early on Wednesday morning that Trump was not verbally briefed on the reported Russian effort to pay the Taliban to kill US soldiers in Afghanistan because the allegations were not corroborated at the time. O’Brien, however, declined to say whether the intelligence, which US ally Britain has said it was aware of, had been included in a written presidential briefing earlier this year, Reuters reported. A little later, O’Brien told reporters in Washington that the president has now been fully briefed on the bounty reports. In other tweets early Wednesday, as TV and newspaper headlines were focused on the coronavirus crisis, Trump said that Biden was “corrupt”, suggested people damaging federal statues and monuments could spend more than 10 years in prison, and again used the racist term “Pocahontas”, to criticize a plan by Warren to rename US military bases. Warren has claimed to have Native American ancestry. Amid his frenzy of internet use, Trump also retweeted a post from himself, made a day earlier, which read: “THE LONE WARRIOR!” and lauded the conservative channel Fox News for having bested its rivals in TV ratings, adding “Thank you President Trump”. Late on Tuesday, Trump had used Twitter to criticize Fox News, for hosting the former Democratic political strategist Donna Brazile. Trump wrote, “Where are you Roger Ailes?”, referring to the former Fox News chairman who died three years ago.