Paris Hilton likes hers made from mesh, encrusted with rhinestones, Amber Heard and Johnny Depp have opted to wear bandanas for their dramatic daily court appearances. Meanwhile, for most of us it’s the disposable versions that can be bought from most high-street chemists. But whether they are bejewelled with diamante or made out of beautiful cotton fabrics, wearing or not wearing a face mask in shops has become the latest polarising debate on social media – with the reaction ranging from the humorous to downright outrage. It will be compulsory to wear a face covering in shops and supermarkets in England from 24 July, with those who fail to follow the new rules facing a fine of up to £100. During a recent work trip to Mallorca, my first foreign excursion since the world hit self-destruct, I was confronted with the prospect of wearing a mask for long periods of time. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/07/15-53148-gdn.pw.200715.ds.to_mask_or_not_to_mask.mp3 My choice was a Superdrug pack of 10 single-use medical masks hurriedly purchased a day earlier. My mask went on the moment I stepped into Manchester airport and, bar a few short breaks to sip a drink and hurriedly eat a sandwich, it remained on for six hours until I reached my hotel. The following day, walking through the streets of Palma, popping into shops and getting on a bus, I once again donned my three-ply, ear-looped travel buddy, as it is mandatory to wear a mask on public transport and in stores on the Spanish island. But as temperatures hit 30C the mask got sweaty and, with no escape for the warm air, nausea set in. I instantly started to regret not having bought one with air vents, jealously eyeing up those who had obviously done their research. I began to suffer from mask envy. Next came the not-so-attractive steamy sunglasses as my mask flipped about, not quite fitting the bridge of my nose. After hours of wearing the elasticated loops my ears began to chafe, an unusual, but distinct, discomfort behind my lobes. Lessons were well and truly learned, and I will be armed with research before future mask purchases, as more countries globally make it mandatory to wear them in public spaces. The Costa del Sol, where around 2.3 million Britons holiday every year, recently made it compulsory to wear masks in public at all times, in line with the other tourist hotspots of Mallorca, Menorca, Ibiza and Formentera. Exceptions are made only for sunbathers on beaches and pools, when eating or drinking, while practising sport and while playing a wind instrument. However, in Catalonia tourists are still required to wear masks at the beach or by the pool. Some countries and states have been recommending that everybody wears face masks in indoor settings where social distancing is difficult or impossible. They have been made mandatory on public transport or in shops in many countries. According to guidance from the World Health Organization, people over 60 or with health issues should wear a medical-grade mask when they are out and cannot socially distance, while all others should wear a three-layer fabric mask. The WHO guidance, announced on 5 June, is a result of research commissioned by the organisation. It is still unknown whether the wearers of masks are protected, say its experts, but the new design it advocates does give protection to other people if properly used. The WHO says masks should be made of three layers – with cotton closest to the face, followed by a polypropylene layer and then a synthetic layer that is fluid-resistant. These are no substitute for physical distancing and hand hygiene, it says, but should be worn in situations where distancing is difficult, such as on public transport and at mass demonstrations. The WHO has been reluctant to commit to recommending face coverings, firstly because the evidence on whether they offer any protection to the public is limited and – more importantly – because it was afraid it would lead to shortages of medical-grade masks for health workers. Sarah Boseley Health editor Across the border in France, the rules are slightly less stringent. While it is compulsory to wear face masks on public transport, it is up to individual shop owners to ask their customers to wear face coverings. This, though, could be subject to change, with the French prime minister, Jean Castex, recently signalling that face mask use in enclosed public spaces was under consideration. Meanwhile, in Italy, although holidaymakers will not receive a fine for non-compliance, it is mandatory to use masks in enclosed public spaces. Flout it at your peril, as mask-less people will be removed from public transport. Surgical grade N95 respirators offer the highest level of protection against the virus, followed by surgical grade masks, but they are costly and reserved for healthcare workers. Then there are the homemade reusable cloth versions and the single-use paper ones. Whatever you decide on, face masks are here to stay – for a while at least – so spend the next week choosing wisely.