As mirror twins born just 14 minutes apart, Lisa Macfarlane and her sister Alana Macfarlane Kempner – DJs known as “the Mac Twins” – have long been curious about the physiological basis for the differences between them. The duo have always had quite noticeable contrasts in personality and health, despite their genetic similarities. “I think we had a natural instinct to want to understand the differences,” says Lisa, the younger of the two. “Behaviourally, our personalities are the complete opposite. Alana’s annoyingly calm, and I’m not! And our health growing up was very different. We never had anything at the same time, so I knew there were potentially other factors at play.” The twins, who made their names as DJs on BBC Radio 1Xtra and on ITV’s hit show Love Island, first had the chance to investigate these factors five years ago. It came about when they heard that the British Gut Project – run by Prof Tim Spector at King’s College London and a team of US scientists – was looking to sign up twins for a study. For two months, the duo had to follow the same diet and post stool samples to the US on an almost daily basis. “It was tricky following the same eating pattern as we weren’t living together at the time,” says Lisa. “But we loved being involved.” They also agreed to have colonoscopies. “I didn’t realise just how invasive that would be until I signed the waiver form,” she says. The results showed that, despite being twins, Alana and Lisa had just 30% of the same gut bacteria at any one time, a level that would be found in two strangers. Scientists have since discovered a similar pattern in many twins. Some experts believe this is because the colonies of microbes in our gut, known as the gut microbiota, are constantly changing due to factors ranging from diet to how much exercise we do. The twins were so fascinated by their newfound knowledge, and a growing body of research linking the gut to many aspects of health, that in 2016 they launched their YouTube channel, the Gut Stuff. Fans can browse videos covering everything from the importance of fibre to interviews with scientists about the connection between the microbiome and the immune system. “We’re super-interested in all the things the gut is linked to,” says Alana. “And it’s our passion to educate and empower people with the facts and the science.” They’ve certainly been inspired to alter their own lifestyles. “A lot has changed, certainly from our days as working-class Scottish teenagers,” she says. “We realised that a healthy diet is really about adding stuff in, such as fibre or fermented foods. It’s about changing behaviours long term, and that’s what we promote.” The twins are particularly keen to draw attention to the value of fibre, something they say is the “unsung hero of nutrition”. In particular, they want to look at ways that people can achieve the UK recommended intake of 30g a day. “When we did the British Gut Project, the diversity of the bacteria in our guts went up, largely because we were eating more fibre,” says Lisa. “It’s an easy thing to add to the diet because Mother Nature has given us so many types.” With guidance from nutritionists, scientists and doctors, the Gut Stuff is at the forefront of efforts to promote the importance of gut health. Such is the interest that its videos have been viewed nearly 70,000 times, and it has more than 79,000 followers on Instagram. The twins still take part in scientific studies, the most recent being one that aimed to quantify the effect of different foods on blood glucose levels. “We were fascinated to see how our results differed even after the same foods,” says Alana. “Our microbiome may play a role, but the science is still so new that we’re not quite there yet in terms of getting enough data to confirm how and why.” With gut health going mainstream, the twins have decided for now to commit much of their time and energy to running the Gut Stuff. “We knew interest was growing when at dinner parties, or if we were with friends, people wanted to talk to us about their bowel habits rather than what DJ set we’d done,” says Lisa. “We saw then that we were on a new track in life.”