“I took my inspiration from medieval manuscripts. I wanted to create an image that felt precious and spiritual, that shone a light and memorialised the BAME victims of Covid-19. The picture was created to recognises the contribution of the key workers who have died. Around the edges of the image is a border created out of the transport and NHS symbols, the professions of those who have been the worst affected. The portraits are of (from left): Andrew Ekene Nwankwo, a nurse, Donna Campbell, a healthcare support worker, Belly Mujinga, a rail worker, Mary Agyeiwaa Agyapong, a nurse, Ranjeet Riyat, a consultant in emergency medicine, Khulisani (Khuli) Nkala, a mental health nurse, Meks Nyack Ihenacho, a London bus driver. Written in the background are all the names and occupations of people who have died. I have left room to imply that there are more names to come. On a number of levels, I was very keen to support Patrick Vernon’s fund. From a personal perspective, as a family we have a huge debt of gratitude to the NHS. The Homerton ICU in London saved my daughter’s life. Before Christmas, we spent five weeks in intensive care with my daughter, who was on a ventilator with pneumonia. The ICU staff at the Homerton became like family to us, and when Covid-19 hit we felt intensely worried and upset for them, especially knowing how many fantastic BAME members of staff there were and how much more they were at risk. I have been appalled by the government’s handling of the crisis and the unnecessary deaths caused by lack of PPE, planning and the late lockdown and, ultimately, the systemic racism that has caused so many unnecessary deaths. I am deeply saddened for all the families who are suffering with the loss of their loved ones. I hope this picture in a small way can help raise awareness and funds for the families who are in need.” Henny Beaumont Buy your exclusive print here PriceThe 18cm x 24cm print costs £35, including free UK delivery. Profits from sales will be donated to the Majonzi Fund to support bereaved BAME families affected by Covid-19. PrintsPhotographs are presented on museum-grade, fine-art paper stocks, with archival standards guaranteeing quality for 100-plus years. All editions are printed and quality checked by experts at theprintspace, one of the UK’s leading photo and fine-art print providers. DeliveryArtworks are dispatched by Royal Mail and delivered within three to five working days. Theprintspace takes great care in packaging your artwork, with a no-quibble satisfaction guarantee should you be unhappy in any way. Global shipping is available. ContactEmail: guardianprintsales@theprintspace.co.uk