This spring, I wrote an essay for the New York Times about my experience as a young, apparently healthy person hospitalized by a brutal attack of Covid-19. After my essay came out, I was contacted by media outlets all over the world. In many ways, I was the perfect person to raise awareness about the virus: my initial symptoms neatly fit the CDC description; I was young and lacked pre-existing conditions; and I could prove my diagnosis via a positive Covid-19 test. But my experience actually became far more complicated. After I was released from the hospital, I assumed I was in the clear. Instead, my symptoms morphed to include issues that were not yet understood to be associated with the virus. I dealt with gastrointestinal problems, sinus pain, rashes, and memory loss. My illness lasted for months. I couldn’t find any public information or patient stories that reflected my experience. I realized there were likely many other patients whose stories weren’t being told. I’ve been calling this phenomenon “the myth of the perfect patient,” and over the past few months, I’ve connected with thousands of other people living with Covid-19, many of whom also feel left out of the public discourse on the disease. Some of these patients have wide-ranging symptoms or long recoveries, like I did. Others struggle to test positive for the virus, making it difficult for them to “prove” their illness. Part of the problem is how we talk about Covid-19. The general narrative tells us that people who contract the virus fall into two categories – those who experience acute or fatal symptoms and require hospitalization, and those who are able to ride the virus out at home, like the flu. This dangerous narrative fails to recognize the experiences of “long-haul” Covid-19 patients, many of whom are initially diagnosed with “mild” cases, but remain sick for months. Since my hospitalization, I’ve heard from hundreds of patients with lingering and debilitating symptoms, including prolonged fevers, extreme weight loss, and neurological issues, despite initially mild diagnoses. Many feel isolated and invisible, as mainstream news coverage and scientific studies are only just starting to delve into the experience of what many are now calling “long-haulers.” Xi Bing Su, a 32-year-old attorney in New York, says that she felt alone in her experience of the virus until very recently, when stories about other long-haulers began to emerge. “I felt so seen, so relieved,” she told me. Su had felt self-conscious requesting more time off from her job, even though her employers were willing to provide it, because she thought most Covid-19 patients recovered quickly. “Seeing more media coverage of the long hauler experience…and knowing that other people are now more aware of it as well, has made a huge difference to the stress and anxiety I felt about taking extended time off work to recover.” Other patients face a different roadblock: verifying their illness through a test. Angela Meriquez Vázquez, a 33-year-old activist in Los Angeles, has been sick since March with what she believes are Covid-19 symptoms, but she never tested positive for the virus. Testing was largely inaccessible when Vázquez first became sick; protocols required patients to meet a certain set of symptoms and have confirmed exposure to Covid-19, which Vázquez didn’t. She wasn’t able to procure a nasal swab until June 1, months after she first became sick, and the result was negative. Some researchers estimate that there is at least a 20% false negative rate for Covid-19 tests, possibly with an even higher rate for people who are asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic. Consequently, many doctors presume their patients to be positive, even after negative test results, and the FDA has warned that a negative test result does not necessarily mean patients are virus-free. Patients like myself, who test positive, are often the lucky ones, since we were able to access testing at the right time. Unfortunately, most scientific studies won’t include patients who have not tested positive for Covid-19, and many media outlets don’t cover their stories. The general public still doesn’t seem to understand that Covid-19 tests lack reliability, and that many patients are still unable to access them. As a result, patients like Vázquez sometimes struggle to be taken seriously by friends, family, employers, and even doctors. When Vázquez went to the ER for what appeared to be severe cardiovascular and neurological issues, including disorientation, short-term memory loss, red and purple swelling in her hands and feet, and heart palpitations, the doctor and nurse who saw her diagnosed her symptoms as due to anxiety. Because Vázquez didn’t have a positive test result she could show the doctor, he was quick to dismiss her symptoms. Vázquez thinks medical bias also played a part, and she is filing a complaint against the ER doctor who discharged her. “My treatment has been subpar, and in some instances cruel and demeaning,” Vázquez told me. “I never got a positive infection test, so doctors have diagnosed me as an overly anxious, young, Brown woman, not someone still dealing with Covid-19.” Vázquez eventually managed to get an ER doctor to perform blood work, and she says one of her tests showed that she was clotted at ten times the clinically significant norm; blood clots have been a cause of death in some young Covid-19 patients. But Vázquez is still struggling to find a doctor who understands the long-hauler experience, and is willing to treat a Covid-19 patient without a positive test. Testing accessibility is a social justice issue; people who have trouble accessing tests and adequate medical care often come from marginalized backgrounds, including the undocumented, the uninsured, people in rural areas, people unlikely to seek care because they have experienced medical bias in the past, and people who lack the resources to travel to testing centers. We often hear that Covid-19 is disproportionately impacting communities of color, especially Black, Indigenous, and Latinx populations, but rarely do we hear individual testimonies from patients in these communities. I’ve been interviewed dozens of times about my experience, almost always alone, or alongside other white patients, something I now work to prevent. There is no perfect patient model for those who contract Covid-19, and the public focus must expand beyond patients who experience classic symptoms and test positive for the virus. There is no perfect patient model for any disease, and attention and care must be given to all patients, especially those who are more likely to be ignored due to their identity or inability to access early testing and care. There have been some wins for Covid-19 patients this summer. There are more stories about “long-haulers” who experience symptoms for months, and several centers have emerged worldwide to treat and study the long-term impact of Covid-19. But we can’t claim any wins for Covid-19 patients until all of them are able to receive the care and attention they deserve. Fiona Lowenstein is a producer and yoga teacher and the founder of the queer feminist wellness collective Body Politic