On 21 July last year Hong Kong police took 39 minutes to arrive at the Yuen Long metro station where mobs of white-clad men attacked commuters and pro-democracy protesters, beating them with metal and wooden rods. At least 45 people were injured, including a pregnant woman. The closest dispatch station was about one mile away. The incident shocked the city, marking a turning point in the protests with public anger toward the police reaching new heights. Almost a year later it remains a flashpoint for anger towards the authorities. The attack sparked a unique protest among Hong Kong’s jogging community, who have been using fitness apps to log runs of exactly 39 minutes to show how much further they can travel than the police officers responding to the tens of thousands of distress calls from Yuen Long. “We don’t even need 39 minutes to walk one mile,” said Ah Po, administrator of a Facebook community with over 1,500 members called Running for Freedom & Democracy which arranges and promotes a run held on the monthly anniversary of the incident. “One mile is a piece of cake, nothing challenging. It’s easy for us to run for 39 minutes to prove how absurd and outrageous the Hong Kong police is.” Thousands have posted screenshots of their performances across social media under hashtags like #runfor721 and #39Mrunfor721, with the last three digits standing for the date of 21 July. Po said the group wanted to tell Hongkongers that the police must be held accountable for their actions – and inactions. But last week sweeping new national security laws were imposed by Beijing. The broad and vague definitions appear to have criminalised acts of protest as benign as holding a pro-independence flag, or adding a post-it note to a Lennon Wall. What then for the runners? “We probably can’t publicly advocate for the run anymore, but runners can still do it,” said Po. “Running is not illegal. If today was the 21st, people would still do it. Be water.” Dr Joanna Chan*, a 30-year-old orthopaedist and ultra-marathon runner, watched the Yuen Long attack on live streams in Switzerland. She said she’s worried about the pro-Beijing wing’s attempts to whitewash the incident. “We can’t let the government alter history,” she said. “The authorities and Beijing’s supporters are resorting to disinformation to change the narrative, and it’s up to us to remind the outside world and future generations of what really happened.” But she is worried about the new laws. “The good old days when everyone can express themselves freely have gone completely. Running is really the most benign activity to express our opinion. If one day Hong Kong police really arrest someone who runs with a “Stand with Hong Kong” tee, I think I shall leave Hong Kong.” The #runfor721 movement want the Yuen Long assailants arrested and prosecuted, and for police officers who may have turned a blind eye to be held accountable, said Po. “We need to remind people that justice has not yet been achieved,” said Po. “Right now, no officers have been arrested or punished for their misconduct.” The police force has denied accusations that they were late arriving to Yuen Long, saying they were also responding to protesters on Hong Kong Island, and alleged that some of the 24,000 distress calls received in a three-hour window were a coordinated attempt to paralyse the city’s emergency hotline service. In May a report by the police watchdog agreed that officers were slow in responding on 21 July, but otherwise largely exonerated the force over hundreds of accusations of misconduct and violence. *Names have been changed