The New York Liberty and Seattle Storm made a statement before tipping off the WNBA season on Saturday at the IMG Academy in Bradenton, Florida. Both teams left the court and returned to their locker rooms during the pre-game playing of national anthem in protest of racial and social injustice, then held a 26-second moment of silence in memory of Breonna Taylor, the 26-year-old certified EMT who was shot to death by plainclothes police officers while asleep in her Louisville apartment in the early hours of 13 March. As the national anthem was played, the @nyliberty and @seattlestorm walked off the floor as part of the social justice initiative. pic.twitter.com/VihH5X3Yzh “We are dedicating this season to Breonna Taylor, an outstanding EMT who was murdered over 130 days ago in her home,” Liberty point guard Layshia Clarendon said at mid-court alongside Storm star Breanna Stewart. “Breonna Taylor was dedicated and committed to uplifting everyone around here. “We are also dedicating this season to ‘Say Her Name’ campaign, a campaign committed to saying the names and fighting for justice of black women – black women are so often forgotten in this fight for justice, who don’t have people marching in the streets for them. “We will say her name. Sandra Bland. Atatiana Jefferson. Dominique Remy Fells. Breonna Taylor. We will be a voice for the voiceless.” Taylor’s full name appeared on the back of both teams’ jerseys during Saturday’s game as part of a campaign that will honor female victims of police violence, including Sandra Bland and Vanessa Guillen. Stewart, the Most Valuable Player of the regular season and finals in 2018, led the Storm to a 87-71 victory, finishing with 18 points, eight rebounds and four steals in her first WNBA game since helping Seattle win the 2018 championship, . The 2020 WNBA season, delayed and shortened by the coronavirus pandemic, will be played in a bubble at the IMG Academy. Stewart missed all of last season after tearing her achilles tendon while playing for her Russian club team Dynamo Kursk during the Euroleague Women championship game in April 2019. Jewell Loyd scored 14 points and Sue Bird, who also missed the 2019 season because of a knee injury, added 11 points, hitting 3-of-5 from three-point range and dishing five assists for Seattle. Sabrina Ionescu had 12 points, six rebounds and four assists in her WNBA debut. Ionescu, the No 1 pick in April’s draft, was 4-of-17 shooting, including 0-of-8 from three-point range, and committed four turnovers. Clarendon led the Liberty with 20 points. Loyd hit a three-pointer and then converted a three-point play before Stewart made a layup to make it 34-26 and the Storm led the rest of the way. Jordin Canada scored six points during a 14-4 run to open the fourth quarter that gave the Storm their largest lead when she found Stewart for a three-pointer that capped the spurt and made it 80-61 with 4:44 to play. New York’s Kia Nurse left the game early in the second quarter because of an ankle injury and did not return.