My two essentials for alfresco evenings right now are a natty lime squeezer that has elevated my margarita game to Stanley Tucci levels, and this cardigan. The lime squeezer was a steal from KitchenCraft; this cardigan, the Folley by the American brand Love Shack Fancy, wasn’t such a steal, but at cost-per-wear is turning out to be a bargain. It is light and frothy enough not to be a downer when you have to concede defeat and reach for a layer to wear over a summer dress. It also works as a top in its own right with my favourite cropped Mother jeans. Introducing your new summer must-have: the party cardi, a comeback that is excellent news for those of us who have loved these knits all along. For years, my favourite throw-over summer layer was a navy crewneck cardigan, which I found in the now discontinued Classics section at Marks & Spencer. Chunkily woven and completely plain, except for gold buttons, it falls heavy and straight to the hip bone – a bit like a Chanel jacket, but for £30 – and I still love it. But a new cardigan era dawned late last year, when Katie Holmes wore an oatmeal cashmere one that was brief enough to reveal, when she raised an arm to hail a taxi, both an inch of tanned tummy and a flash of the matching bra underneath. A new twinset – the bradigan – was born. The bradigan itself was completely daft, but it did wonders for the cardigan brand. The cardigan has always been too sensible, too wallflower, too downbeat. The bradigan showed that a cardigan could shake its hair loose and take its specs off, sort of thing – and lo, the party cardi was born. Shape is key. The most useful party cardi is fitted to the waist, like this one. You need it to work both tucked into jeans or trousers and worn over a summer dress, so it has to hug, not sag. Have a look at French brand Sézane for cardi eye candy, or & Other Stories. At Zara or Asos you can buy a party cardi that comes with matching hot pants, if that is to your taste. It also goes very well with a margarita. • Cardigan, jeans and shoes, all Jess’s own. Makeup and hair: Alexis Day using Marc Jacobs Beauty & Fudge. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.