The Football Association is investigating after Adebayo Akinfenwa lodged a formal complaint alleging he was repeatedly called a “fat water buffalo” by a Fleetwood Town representative during Wycombe’s play-off on Monday and said it left him feeling dehumanised, hurt and angry. The striker was told after the game he had been referred to in that way “in a derogatory tone” and believes the alleged remark indicates the need for education about issues regarding race. “Regardless of whether or not there was deliberate racial intent by using that language and irrespective of the context in which it was used, if we are to make real and longstanding change then we must strive to educate each other about these issues,” Akinfenwa said in a statement published on Twitter. “We must work together to ensure those who have not and do not face racial prejudice understand that what may appear to them to be a throwaway remark can have such a big and hurtful impact. “I believe that it dehumanises me as a black man by associating me to a Water Buffalo, a dark animal, in a derogatory manner. “I feel passionately around raising this because we as a sport and as society must wake up. We must do more. We must educate ourselves and understand the potential repercussions of using such language and be aware of the hurt it can cause. The bigger issue to me would be the lack of understanding as to why calling me this term would not be hurtful to me as black man, and this must change. “Taking a knee, supporting social media campaigns and wearing a logo on our kits is a start, but it is not enough. It will not result in real and long standing change. The real work must start now and the only way to move forward collectively is through education.” The alleged comments are understood to have been heard by several Wycombe players, as well as staff, during the second half, which culminated in Wycombe winning 6-3 on aggregate to reach Monday’s play-off final against Oxford. The FA would typically seek observations from those involved in the allegations and, if necessary, support the police. An FA spokesperson said: “We have been made aware of the allegations and will be investigating the matter.” Fleetwood could not immediately be reached for comment. It is not suggested the club condone any such behaviour. However, a Wycombe statement read: “The club fully stands by its players and supports all campaigns to end discrimination.” Akinfenwa, a former Swansea and Northampton striker, is renowned for his upper-body strength and previously told the Guardian: “People said: ‘You’re too big to play football.’”