Promotion hopefuls West Brom were left frustrated after being held to a 1-1 draw by Blackburn Rovers. Filip Krovinović swept Slaven Bilic’s side into the lead but substitute Joe Rothwell cancelled that out when he converted a Sam Gallagher cross just two minutes after he had come on. Things could have been worse for Bilic, who was booked for an altercation on the sideline, as Rovers missed two late chances to win it, the best falling to Jacob Davenport, who was repelled by Sam Johnstone when through one on one. The result leaves West Brom in second, three points above Brentford who secured a 3-1 victory at Derby in the day’s early kick-off. Middlesbrough still sit just two points above the relegation zone after they were thumped 3-1 at home by Bristol City. Nahki Wells scored the first and last goals for the visitors, with Jamie Paterson hammering a shot into the top corner in between. Britt Assombalonga hit a late consolation for the hosts late on but it was not enough to ignite a comeback. Friday: Huddersfield 0-2 Luton, Fulham 2-0 Cardiff. Saturday: Charlton 0-1 Reading, Derby 1-3 Brentford, Barnsley 0-0 Wigan, Blackburn Rovers 1-1 West Brom, Hull City 0-1 Millwall, Middlesbrough 1-3 Bristol City, Preston 1-1 Nottingham Forest, QPR 0-3 Sheffield Wednesday Luckily for Boro boss Neil Warnock, Hull City were despatched at home by Millwall thanks to a 30-yard Ryan Leonard strike after just 75 seconds to leave the Tigers in the final, third-bottom relegation spot. The points were shared at Oakwell where neither Barnsley nor Wigan could find the back of the net. The Latics ended the match with 10 men after Danny Fox saw red for a late challenge on Elliot Simões. A point each leaves Barnsley still three points adrift of a safe position and Wigan in effect one point worse off, although they have appealed against the points deduction which is to be imposed at the end of the season after they entered administration on 1 July. George Puscas’s early penalty handed Reading a battling 1-0 Championship win at toothless Charlton. Romania forward Puscas slotted home from the spot just three minutes in, for his 13th goal of the campaign to leave the Addicks just a point above the drop zone. Sheffield Wednesday ended a run of three straight defeats by cruising to a 3-0 victory over QPR. Dominic Iorfa and Josh Windass set the Owls on their way, before Jacob Murphy completed the scoring with a sublime strike from 18 yards. Fifth-placed Nottingham Forest are closing in on confirming their play-off spot after drawing 1-1 at Preston. Lewis Grabban netted from the spot after five minutes but Forest could not complete the win, as Jayden Stockley levelled soon after.