Earlier today I set you the following two puzzles. Here they are again, together with solutions. 1. A 12cm x 12cm square piece of paper is marked as below. If you fold along the dotted lines and position the white triangles upwards so they touch, you get a pyramid with height h. What is h? Solution: 4cm The area of the square piece of paper is 12 x 12. = 144 cm2. The area of the three triangular folds is (12x6)/2 + (12x6)/2 + (6x6)/2 = 90 cm2. (I’m assuming you remember that the area of a triangle is half x base x height) Thus the area of the shaded triangle is 144 – 90 = 54cm2. The volume of a pyramid, is (1/3) x (area of base) x height, which I mentioned in the caption. So the volume of this pyramid is (1/3) x 54 x h, or 18h, since the shaded area is also the base. Now for the ‘aha’ moment. TURN THE PYRAMID ONTO ITS SMALLEST FACE! One of the edges is now vertical. (We know this fact since the three folded right-angled triangles meet at their right-angles, and thus each of the three folded triangles are perpendicular to each other). The base of the pyramid now is (6x6)/2 = 18cm2, and the height is 12cm, which is the side of the the unfolded square. So the volume is (18 x 12)/3 = 72cm3, which we know is 18h. Thus h = 4cm. 2. The second problem involves the equilateral triangle below. It has side length 6cm, and is cut by two straight lines through the triangle’s centre. One of them cuts the bottom edge 1cm along, and they intersect at a 60 degree angle. What is the ratio of the total area of the two red regions to the total area of the two blue regions? Solution: 2 to 1. Draw an extra line through the middle that creates four new 60 degree angles at the centre, as below. The triangle now contains six shapes: three triangles (two pink and one blue) and three quadrilaterals (two red and one blue). Now for the ‘aha!’. All the triangles are the same size and shape, and likewise the three quadrilaterals are also identical. (You realise this by considering the symmetries of an equilateral triangle. Consider a line from the centre to a fixed point 1cm along a side. A 120 degree rotation of that line will cross the adjacent side at a point that is also 1cm along.) The red areas of the first image are thus twice as big as the blue areas in the first image. The 1cm, by the way, was a red herring. It does not matter how the two original lines are positioned, as long as they intersect at 60 degrees at the centre. I hope you enjoyed today’s puzzles. I’ll be back in two weeks. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. Thanks again to Manfred Pietsch for today’s puzzles. If you are reading this in the Guardian app, and you want a notification each time I post a puzzle, or its solution, click the ‘Follow Alex Bellos’ button above.