There is another factor that has increased the difficulties experienced by those shielding due to the fact they are extremely vulnerable (‘Boris Johnson is gambling with shielders’ lives by ending support on 1 August’, 1 July). Throughout the pandemic, government advice has seemed to suggest that shielding was simply a more extreme version of lockdown. However, the lockdown regulations were put in place to protect communities and the NHS, whereas shielding measures were extra precautions that individuals might choose to take to protect themselves. Indeed, the original notification about shielding contained a rather chilling piece of advice that people with terminal conditions might choose not to shield, presumably so that they could make the best of the time left to them. Now that restrictions are being eased on the rest of the population, the implication is that shielding can be proportionally stepped down – shielding people are being told what they are “allowed” to do, whereas what they would like to know is what they are advised to do to protect themselves in light of what is now known about the coronavirus. When everyone else is free to go where they choose and mix freely, it is assumed that shielding people will not be far behind. However, some will remain aware that they are at high risk and would like to choose to continue to shield to protect themselves. With the removal of any government support from 1 August, there is an added implication that no further community support will be needed, which will make it increasingly difficult for shielding individuals to exercise their choice to remain isolated and remain safe. Shielding is a choice, not a punishment, but it is a choice between the lesser of two evils.Fran StokesGrange-over-Sands, Cumbria • Frances Ryan’s article is very timely. My sister, who is 89, lives alone and has obeyed lockdown rules. She has had two online food deliveries from a major retailer with no problems. Last week, she was unable to book a slot. The retailer said she was not on the NHS list. Her medical practice says she has no underlying medical problems and it cannot give her a letter. It seems to me that her underlying problem is that she is 89, lives alone and can’t go out. How old does one have to be to be allowed to eat?Joan LangrognatHarrow, London