The Manchester restaurant 20 Stories, a popular hangout for the cast of Coronation Street, received nearly 1,000 applications for a receptionist post within 24 hours, in the latest indication of the dearth of hospitality roles available and the huge rise in unemployment. Carol Cairnes, the director of people at the restaurant’s owner, D&D London, said: “The sheer number of applicants is staggering, we’ve never seen such a large number come through in such a short amount of time. “While it means we will have the pick of an incredibly large number of highly qualified candidates, it’s very sad to see how many people are in need of employment.” New jobs in hospitality are at a premium as thousands of roles are being cut by restaurant groups, some of which have announced the closure of hundreds of outlets. In the past fortnight, casual-dining chains including Pizza Express and Azzurri have announced restructures that are likely to lead to more than 2,000 job losses. Social distancing measures, which have reduced the space available for diners and drinkers in restaurants and bars, have also led to venues cutting back on staff numbers to save costs. Shops have also been closing at a rapid rate, leading to thousands more high street job cuts. Marks & Spencer, John Lewis and Boots have announced closures in recent weeks. On Wednesday, it emerged that the confectioner Thortons would not be reopening 23 of its 90 outlets. D&D is not the first restaurant group to report a high number of applicants. A pub in Wimbledon, south-west London, recently said it had received more than 400 applicants for two bar jobs within hours. Mick Dore, the general manager of the Alexandra pub, said he received applications from former air stewards, restaurant managers and shop workers recently made redundant. The Fitzrovia Belle pub and hotel in London also reportedly received 400 applications for just a handful of roles. D&D has reopened about 18 of its restaurants, including Le Pont de la Tour, Coq d’Argent and the German Gymnasium, and plans to gradually open more. The group has advertised only three new roles since the end of lockdown because it had brought staff back from furlough. Two jobs in London were advertised late on Wednesday and received dozens of applications within hours. The company said 20 Stories had been fully booked in its first weekend of trade and was continuing to perform well since then.