After a New Zealand MP quit and a minister was fired in successive days over allegations of sexual misconduct or inappropriate relationships, New Zealand’s prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, was asked by a reporter whether it was “open season” on any member of parliament who had “ever had an affair”. “I don’t want to get drawn into hypotheticals,” Ardern replied as she faced questions about the sacking of Iain Lees-Galloway, her minister of workplace relations and safety, over his workplace relationship with a former staffer in his office. The revelations about Lees-Galloway, an MP from Ardern’s centre-left Labour party, came a day after the resignation of an opposition MP, Andrew Falloon, who is accused of sending unsolicited sexual images to several women. Police are investigating those allegations. Analysts believe the two cases – though they involve very different types of allegation – coming just weeks before an election, could lead to a cultural reckoning over the sexual behaviour of those in power, particularly men. Political sex scandals are rare in New Zealand, and two emerging in one week is almost unheard of. “The fact that this moment’s got so much tension at a crucial time before the election kicks off may mean that there will be more reflection and attention paid to this long-term,” said Jennifer Lees-Marshment, an associate professor in politics and international relations at the University of Auckland. She said a report published in 2019 that found a fraught culture of bullying and harassment in New Zealand’s parliament had not generated “much action”. But there was a chance, others said, that the disclosures instead presaged a new attitude towards publicising MPs’ behaviour, in a culture where the private lives of politicians had traditionally been off-limits. Bryce Edwards, a political commentator, said that with Lees-Galloway’s case now public, it would be difficult for parties to “pull back from the brink” of exploiting information about others’ private lives. “There are heightened returns right now from politicians being able to weaponise this sort of information,” Edwards said. The most recent chain of events began last week when Ardern was sent information by the concerned parents of a 19-year-old woman about sexual images Falloon had allegedly sent to their daughter. A spokesperson for his centre-right National party said he appeared to have sent images to three women that they knew about. Ardern’s office quietly passed the information to the Nationals’ leader, Judith Collins, who had taken the job only that week after her predecessor had suddenly quit. On Tuesday, the same day Falloon resigned, Collins divulged to Ardern the revelations about Lees-Galloway’s affair. The National leader announced she had spoken to the PM when she was asked in a news interview on Wednesday morning. Ardern held a news conference about Lees-Galloway’s sacking hours later, in which she tried to differentiate her tack from her opponent’s. “We each have our own ability to handle information that is provided to us in our own way,” she said, referring to “clear differences” in how she and Collins had handled the bombshells. Edwards said affairs at New Zealand’s parliament had not previously been considered a public matter. “There’s no doubt it’s part of an escalating narrative of politician wrongdoing,” he said. This month another National MP quit after it emerged he had shared private medical information about coronavirus patients with reporters, and the Labour government’s health minister, David Clark, resigned after controversies over his handling of the Covid-19 crisis. Referring to Lees-Galloway, Edwards said: “He’s been tarnished by that same brush as Falloon.” But some in parliament said the most recent cases, although very different, were both symptomatic of matters that should be addressed. “The last couple of weeks is just more evidence that our parliament has a very long-standing problem in terms of workplace culture and safety,” said Jan Logie, a lawmaker with the left-leaning Green party and its spokesperson on workplace relations. Female MPs had experienced “direct sexist and sexualised comments”, sexually violent behaviour and instances where they were spoken over or ignored by their male colleagues, Logie said. She added that women of colour had been especially targeted, according to a survey carried out as part of the 2019 review of the parliament’s culture. Ardern said on Wednesday: “We all have a role to make sure that we maintain standards in this environment.” When asked by a reporter whether men at parliament “should do better”, she demurred. “I’m not going to start casting judgments on specific genders here,” she said. “It’s been a culture, an environment, that for a long period of time has needed to make improvements, and I will continue to do my bit to make sure that I can lift the bar of expectation among the public.” Lees-Marshment urged Ardern and Collins to consider reforms of a system where MPs are given sweeping powers over staff with no management or human resources training, and party leaders have few options to discipline them for wrongdoing. In the meantime, Lees-Marshment said, a “strange” and “worrying” political environment meant more revelations could emerge. Ardern seemed eager to quell such moves on Wednesday. “In a political environment, we do often hear rumours and hearsay that is very often incorrect,” she said. “That is something that all members of parliament need to keep in mind in a highly politicised environment during an election year.” Ben Thomas, a public relations consultant who formerly worked at parliament for the previous National government, said while he did not expect that cases like either Falloon’s or Lees-Galloway’s were widespread, some MPs would be concerned. “It will force people who have positions of power to re-examine a lot of conduct that they previously didn’t reflect that hard on,” he said. “A lot of MPs will probably be searching their consciences and, if they’re worried, having frank talks with leadership right now.”