Slowly and agonisingly Aston Villa’s grip on a precious victory slipped away at Goodison Park and their Premier League status may soon follow suit. Dean Smith maintained relegation is not a formality after two points were lost but the reaction of his players to the final whistle, sinking to their knees almost to a man, painted perhaps a more accurate picture. A must-win game in the bid to avoid relegation, the Villa manager had admitted beforehand, and his team were deservedly on course courtesy of the first Premier League goal of Ezri Konsa’s career. They should have had more, not least when Anwar El Ghazi spurned a gilt-edged chance to double Villa’s lead with 11 minutes remaining. A crucial miss not only in the context of the game. With three minutes remaining, and after Everton had created precious little all evening, the substitute Theo Walcott sent a header arching over Pepe Reina in the Villa goal. Konsa’s attempted clearance on the line only took the ball over the line before Reina collected. All eyes turned to referee Anthony Taylor. His watch buzzed and signalled despair for Villa. “I know we are not out of it because I can see the fight in the players,” said Smith, whose team must beat Arsenal and West Ham in their final two games to have any hope of survival. “Our defensive organisation has been really good but unfortunately we have been lacking a bit in the final third. It was a crucial moment for El Ghazi. If he scores in that moment it is a huge win but not making it 2-0 cost us. We will have to win our final two games now, but we have a lot of players playing well again and that gives us the belief we can go and win them.” It took a while for Villa’s performance to reflect the urgency of their predicament as Everton started with the energy and purpose Carlo Ancelotti had demanded following their abject display at Wolves. But that was not sustained and Villa, threatening through the gaps behind Everton’s midfield and a series of inviting crosses from the right, gradually took control. The hosts were not helped by an early injury to Mason Holgate, whose departure led to a home debut for 18-year-old Jarrad Branthwaite. The teenager, signed for £750,000 from hometown club Carlisle in January, received a painful introduction in a collision with Tyrone Mings but otherwise enjoyed an assured Goodison bow. A busy one, too. Jack Grealish released Trézéguet inside Everton’s penalty area only for the forward to overrun the ball and allow Séamus Coleman to intercept. Mbwana Samatta squandered a decent opportunity having peeled away from Michael Keane to meet Ahmed Elmohamady’s excellent delivery. His header, high over Jordan Pickford’s bar, illustrated the flaws that have hindered Villa all season. The visitors’ confidence and composure increased noticeably but they needed the clinical touch to capitalise when on top. Villa were in the ascendency immediately after the restart by which point Everton’s decent reaction to Ancelotti’s stinging pre-match criticism had faded into distant memory. Grealish should have tested Pickford when picked out by John McGinn’s fine crossfield pass. The Villa captain attacked Coleman inside the area but dragged a shot well wide. He was off-target with another effort from the edge of the box but the visitors stayed patient, continued to stretch Everton, and were rewarded with the late breakthrough. An ugly goal was a thing of beauty in Villa eyes. Conor Hourihane created the opener with a delightful free-kick following a foul by André Gomes. His delivery, from the productive right flank, was drilled in behind the Everton defence and begged for a Villa player to apply the finishing touch. Two responded. Substitute Keinan Davis connected with a diving header that sent Pickford sprawling to his right. Konsa, arriving behind the striker, diverted the header past the keeper with an outstretched foot. It should have been the platform for a priceless victory but El Ghazi somehow volleyed high and wide when Grealish’s perfect cross picked out the substitute two yards from goal. Villa’s belief waned and it was a question of holding on. Dominic Calvert-Lewin spurned a fine chance from Gomes’ cut-back and the Portugal midfielder then created Walcott’s equaliser with a cross to the back post. An agonising end for Smith and Villa.