About 200 workers at a vegetable farm and packing business have been ordered to isolate in mobile homes on the property after an outbreak of coronavirus. At least 73 of the workers at AS Green & Co, near Malvern in Herefordshire, have tested positive for Covid-19, and more are awaiting results. All of the farm’s workforce have been told to isolate in mobile homes used by pickers and packers during harvest season. The group is being treated as an “extended bubble” to reduce the risk of the outbreak spreading outside the farm, an official said. Food and essential supplies are being provided by Herefordshire council as an emergency measure. The farm, which specialises in growing broad beans and runner beans, said in a statement: “Our staff are our priority, they are hardworking key workers helping us provide food for the country during these unusual times. We contacted Public Health England (PHE) and we are working closely with them and public health at Herefordshire council to prevent the spread of Covid-19.” PHE has provided on-site testing facilities and provided workers with personal protective equipment to try to contain the outbreak. Last month more than 450 workers at four food factories across England and Wales tested positive for coronavirus, raising concerns that food processing sites were spreading Covid-19. Those cases were contained and did not spread to the community, it is believed. Katie Spence, the heath protection director at PHE Midlands, said all 73 people who had tested positive at AS Green were being asked to self-isolate for seven days, while those in their households and other close contacts had been asked to isolate for 14 days. She said: “As we have seen a global trend of large food producers being subject to outbreaks, as a precautionary measure the decision was made to test the entire workforce. The initial batch of results showed a significant percentage of positive cases, despite these individuals being asymptomatic. We are still awaiting a few final results, but currently we have 73 positive cases of Covid-19 among the workforce. “PHE Midlands and Herefordshire council are therefore working with AS Green & Co to closely monitor and manage the outbreak and support individual workers.” Karen Wright, the director of public health for Herefordshire, said: “Prompt testing on the farm has allowed us to understand transmission and control the spread of infection. We continue to support the farm management, their workers – who form an important part of our local economy – and the local community through this challenging time. Anyone who has a fever, persistent dry cough, or loss or change in their sense of taste or smell should call 119 or go online to arrange a test.” Research by the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine found that food processing plants have been particularly prone to localised outbreaks. Unions claim that living conditions of many low-paid workers in such plants is a contributing factor, as well time spent working in communal spaces.