The European Tour has provided support to Andrew Johnston after the Englishman withdrew following nine holes of the British Masters on Wednesday, citing unease over the post-lockdown environment. The event at Close House, which marks the resumption of the European Tour, is being played in a strict and biosecure format where no one is allowed beyond the course or hotel. “I’m struggling to get my head around it all,” Johnston said. “One minute I’m coming out of lockdown, going out for dinner, and then the next I’m back in lockdown in a hotel room.” Although the Tour will not comment specifically on individual player cases because of confidentiality agreements, it is understood the chief medical officer, Dr Andrew Murray, has offered assistance to Johnston. The Tour said: “We offer all of our players a comprehensive programme to support their mental health and wellbeing. This includes a mental health support hotline, which operates 24 hours a day, 365 days of the year. We are also aware that everyone has their own unique circumstances at the moment, which is why the 2020 season is an optional one for our players.” Johnston explained he considered not entering the British Masters . “I’ve been on-off saying I’m going to play, I’m not going to play, for months,” the 31-year-old said. “I kept changing my mind. But being here and being confined to the hotel, confined to the course and not being able to bring my family is ultimately not what I want and not how I want to live my life. “We like to travel as a family and it’s just been very difficult to get my head around being stuck in those two places and then coming out and trying to compete. It just doesn’t feel right. I tried to come up here but I was leaving it later and later. I came up Tuesday morning to try to be away as small a time as possible, but it’s not good prep for a tournament and it shows I don’t really want to be here. “I’ve learned to be honest about it, whereas in the past I might have just swallowed it up. I’m not going to do that anymore. If I’m not happy, I’m not going to be here. That’s the golden rule for me now. If I’m not in a good place, or I haven’t got the right set up around me, then it’s not right for me.” In a blog post for the European Tour last year, Johnston spoke of struggles after a tie for 27th at the Nedbank Challenge in late 2018. “I went straight back to the hotel and just cried,” he said. Ryan Fox’s journey to Close House was the longest of all. Fox left his native New Zealand at the weekend to return to the European Tour; the effort is paying off after back-to-back rounds of 67. “I was expecting a bit of jet lag but I’ve come out and played some pretty solid golf for two days,” he said. “I’m very happy. “Entering the tournament bubble has been pretty simple. The process of getting me into the bubble was a little different – getting out of New Zealand was pretty tough as no one’s getting out of there. “Unfortunately my wife is not travelling with me like she usually does but I’m out here for three months, then two weeks of managed isolation when I get back to New Zealand, which will be quite difficult. But at least we’ve got some events on the schedule, that makes the trip worthwhile.” At 11 under par, the Italian Renato Paratore holds the 36-hole lead.