Paulette Wilson, a prominent Windrush campaigner who has died unexpectedly at the age of 64, was a “precious gem … broken by the government”, a family friend and fellow campaigner has said. Wilson was wrongly detained and threatened with deportation by the Home Office, and campaigned for justice for herself and others affected by the government’s “hostile environment” policies. Last month she was among those who presented a petition to Downing Street calling on the government to deliver justice to those affected by the scandal. Leading the tributes to Wilson, Patrick Vernon said that while she was lively and fun, the effects of her treatment had taken a toll on her health. “It’s a complete shock. She died a broken woman, that’s all I can say. “The impact of the hostile environment on her mental health ... people underestimate the impact of the hostile environment, which is based on fear and intimidation.” Vernon described a tweet posted by the home secretary, Priti Patel, as “rubbish” and predicted there would be a lot of anger in the community. Patel’s tweet said: “Deeply saddened by the passing of Paulette Wilson who dedicated her last years to highlight the terrible injustices faced by the Windrush generation. “Together we must continue on her mission to right the wrongs.” Vernon said: “By the end of today, there’s going to be so much anger in the community about how she’s been treated. “She was like a gem, a precious gem, who got broken by the government.” Jim Wilson, the lawyer who had been helping Wilson pro bono, said: “She was an inspiration. After her release all she wanted to do was to fight for all the other victims of the cruel system, especially those poor souls she had lived with in the detention centre.” Daniel Ashwell, from the Refugee and Migrant Centre in Wolverhampton, said her smile and laughter would be missed. “Paulette was thrust into the spotlight out of necessity due to the injustice of the hostile environment. She dutifully carried the fight for others from the Windrush generation and was instrumental in bringing about change.” The Labour MP David Lammy, who met Wilson at Westminster, said: “It breaks my heart that Paulette has died. She fought her battle for justice with dignity, purpose and incredible force. She deserves our thanks because her fight was always on behalf of others not just herself. “She will be remembered by her family and friends as she lived, not by the Windrush scandal that brutally affected her. However it should anger us all that the stress of that state-sanctioned cruelty has taken yet another life long before its time.” Harriet Harman, who met Wilson and her daughter, Natalie Barnes, when they gave evidence to the joint committee on human rights, said: “So sad to hear this. How shamefully she was treated. She was detained and were it not for her daughter fighting for her she would have been deported. How proud she must have been to have raised that daughter.” Yvette Cooper, the chair of the home affairs select committee, which has done extensive work on Windrush, said: “This is incredibly sad news. Paulette Wilson faced terrible injustice – she fought against it and fought hard for others in the Windrush generation. Her bravery in speaking out was what helped expose the appalling Windrush scandal, and ultimately bring relief for so many other families too. “We are losing so many of the Windrush generation now, yet too many of them who were wronged still haven’t had the compensation they deserve. For Paulette Wilson’s sake, and for many more, we urgently need to make sure that all the Windrush generation get the support and compensation they deserve.”