The Unite union has warned British Airways to expect an “immediate” ballot for potential strike action over plans to cut up to 12,000 jobs following the collapse in demand for air travel because of the coronavirus pandemic. Unite, the trade union which represents thousands of BA employees including cabin crew, engineers and maintenance staff, accused the airline of planning to “fire and rehire” thousands of its workers on reduced terms. Len McCluskey, the general secretary of Unite, said BA bosses had “published a timetable to fire and rehire thousands of your workforce on 7 August”, and the union would “defend our members by moving towards industrial action with immediate effect”. McCluskey said he was “both staggered and offended” by BA boss Álex Cruz’s treatment of the airline’s workers. He said Cruz and BA executives had “dragged the good name of British Airways through the mud”. In a letter to Cruz, first reported by the BBC, he said: “Have you ever asked yourself why so many MPs from all parties, at the highest level, have condemned British Airways or why newspaper and media outlets have been appalled at your actions? “Perhaps you don’t understand that the British sense of fair play runs deep in the psyche of the British people.” BA, which is owned by International Airlines Group, said it needed to cut costs to cope with the collapse in demand for air travel. The airline has reached a deal with its pilots that involves making 270 redundancies rather than the 1,250 planned in return for other staff taking pay cuts. The airline’s plan for cabin crew and other staff would involve significant pay cuts for long-serving employees, and unfavourable changes to terms and conditions. BA said the pandemic lockdown had created “the biggest challenge the airline and our industry has ever faced”. “For more than 100 years British Airways has been flying millions of people around the world. Today that world remains largely closed,” a spokesperson said. “Sadly, the global pandemic has resulted in job losses across every industry. Many airlines have already made thousands of staff redundant. “We are not immune to this crisis. We have to adapt to survive, so we will continue with the proper, lawful consultative process and we will keep inviting union representatives to discuss our proposals to the serious challenges we face. It is not too late to find solutions – as we have done with Balpa – and to protect jobs.​” BA said the new contracts would help BA compete with low-cost airlines. The airline said 40% of cabin crew would get a pay rise, but the changes to conditions could lead to a 40% drop in pay for some staff.