Coronavirus deaths in England and Wales fell to their lowest levels since lockdown in the first week of July, signalling a sustained decline in the toll from the virus. Fatalities fell 31% in the week ending 10 July, to 366, continuing a downward trend for the past month. The overall number of deaths from all causes recorded across the two nations stood at 8,690 in the same week, 560 below the five-year average, making it the fourth week in a row where excess deaths were lower than in a typical year. However, the number of deaths in private homes remains higher than normal. There were 2,960 deaths in homes, 706 higher than the five-year average. The latter figure brings to 19,767 the total number of excess deaths in private homes in England and Wales since the beginning of the pandemic, suggesting people who might typically go to hospital or into care homes are remaining at home or not seeking treatment. Deaths in care homes, by contrast, have been below the five-year average for the past four weeks, although there have been more than 26,226 excess deaths in care homes since mid-March. The Office for National Statistics data offers the best available figures on fatalities from the virus in England and Wales. Last week the health secretary, Matt Hancock, ordered a review of the daily death count for England produced by Public Health England, after two academics pointed out that the counting method meant that anyone who had ever had coronavirus would be included in the PHE data, regardless of the cause of death. The ONS figures show that as of 10 July there had been at least 48,532 deaths in England alone, compared with 40,213 deaths reported to the same date by PHE, which only includes deaths in certain settings where the patient has first tested positive for coronavirus. Daniel Lawson, a lecturer in statistical science at the University of Bristol, said the trend was “good news and shows that we have control over the outbreak as few Covid-19 deaths now go undetected”. He added: “Interpreting the fact that fewer people are dying – of any cause – is hard. There are still excess deaths in some places, for example in people’s own home, but deaths in care homes appear to be under control. All-cause mortality is the best measure of whether the system is coping, and currently it is.” However, he cautioned: “There is evidence that we are building up a backlog of future deaths due to reduced routine healthcare for other diseases including cancer.”