The 2016 Olympic medallist Amy Tinkler wants British Gymnastics to be more proactive in tackling the abuse culture in her sport after revealing her complaint over bullying is likely to take at least a year to be resolved. Tinkler – the youngest member, at 16, of Team GB in Rio – revealed this month that she had complained to British Gymnastics last December about a bullying allegation but said she had been left in limbo by the sport’s governing body. In a follow-up statement on Tuesday Tinkler said her complaint was related to her experience at South Durham Gymnastics Club and against part of the British Gymnastics coaching team. “I’ve also been chasing British Gymnastics for a timeline on their investigation into my complaint,” she said. “I understand it could still take four months or more to reach a conclusion, making it nearly 12 months from my original complaint. “I’m unhappy at the length of time this is taking as it leaves vulnerable gymnasts at risk of abuse from known clubs and coaches. I beg British Gymnastics to move swifter and take proactive action about our complaints.” British Gymnastics said: “We have been in regular touch with Amy Tinkler and her mother throughout this process. It is wrong to suggest otherwise. An initial summary of the complaint was made in late December 2019. Full evidence was provided in mid-March 2020. As we have already advised Amy and her family, the investigation phase is now complete and we have moved to the next stage of procedures. “To be clear, every complaint is looked at in accordance with our procedures by our integrity unit to assess immediate risk to gymnasts. If the evidence available at the time of the initial complaint suggests an immediate risk of harm to gymnasts, we take immediate action to protect gymnasts.” British Gymnastics has launched an independent review after more than a dozen gymnasts spoke out about abuse in the sport. Tinkler said she had been contacted by girls and parents from her former club and the gymnastics community “who have told me of similar stories, some of whom have spoken to the media, and others who are still scared to talk”. “I hope by speaking up again, it encourages those who have yet to share their story to come forward. Please, please, please don’t be scared.” The NSPCC helpline is available between 8am to 10pm on weekdays and 9am to 6pm on weekends on 0800 056 0566.