Some travellers returning to New Zealand will have to pay the costs of their quarantine, after the government partially backed down from a controversial plan to bill all arrivals for their two-week isolation stay. The costs will apply only those who chose to leave the country after the charges are imposed and then return, or those staying in New Zealand for fewer than 90 days, the government said on Wednesday. Temporary visa holders will also be charged, but New Zealanders returning home permanently will avoid any costs. The isolation stays will cost NZ$3,100 ($2,050) for the first adult in each hotel room, $950 for each additional adult and $475 for each child sharing the room. Megan Woods, the housing minister, said on Wednesday those who could not afford the fees could apply for waivers. She added: “This solution balances the rights of New Zealanders to return home, while ensuring those who choose to holiday here, or holiday overseas before returning home, are contributing to the considerable cost of managed isolation.” The government would recoup up to NZ$10m by charging some returnees, against $497m it had allocated for the costs of quarantine to the end of the year, she told reporters at Parliament in Wellington. With just over 6,100 places available in designated hotels and about a million New Zealanders spread around the globe eyeing the relative safety of their home country, the government had said for weeks that it was looking to start charging for quarantine. The ruling centre-left Labour party hopes to pass a law next week allowing the fees. If it passes, the country will join Australia in charging for quarantine, costs that states implement on a case-by-case basis, mostly covering more travellers than the New Zealand rules will. On Wednesday, New Zealand’s move was decried by one of Labour’s governing partners, and by the centre-right opposition National party, as too weak – for failing to cover all returning travellers. Winston Peters, the leader of the government coalition partner New Zealand First, said that forcing taxpayers to foot the bill for quarantine was “grossly unfair”. His fellow parties in government “leave themselves open to the perception that they see New Zealanders overseas as a source of votes for the looming general election, so public policy integrity has given way to electoral strategy”, Peters said. David Seymour, the leader and sole lawmaker for New Zealand’s libertarian ACT party, said in a statement that the narrow-ranging fee was an “underwhelming and unimaginative response to the challenges New Zealand faces”. Woods said a universal charge would have collected just $125m for the government, while costing $33m. But she added that it was not “fair for the New Zealand taxpayer to pay for managed isolation if you’ve elected to go on holiday”, and those who did should “factor into the cost of that visit the cost of your isolation”. Campaigners against the fees had mounted a “Team of Six Million” Facebook group – referring to the 5 million New Zealanders who live in the country and the one million more who reside abroad – and collected 4,000 signatures on a petition against the charges. Some who had been opposed to the costs welcomed the compromise, but the move was criticised by others who did not believe fees should be imposed at all. The left-leaning Green party, another government coalition partner, claimed the fee structure as a political victory, saying it was they who had dissuaded Labour from wider-ranging charges. “It would have always been incredibly unfair to charge New Zealanders overseas who had left New Zealand before it was clear a returning cost would be imposed,” said Golriz Ghahraman, the party’s immigration spokesperson, in a statement. “We’ve heard the distress of New Zealanders overseas, for whom the cost of quarantine would be a huge barrier to return.” megan woods saying that nzers wanting to come home for a holiday will simply have to budget the cost i am screamming Only New Zealanders, their families, and certain temporary visa holders are permitted to enter New Zealand, and must spend two weeks in quarantine at government-managed hotels. All diagnosed cases of Covid-19 in New Zealand are contained in the managed isolation facilities, and there is no known community transmission in New Zealand.