When Anne Mayer’s husband, John Bird, died just before Christmas last year, she unsurprisingly turned to her three daughters for help. Now 86, the veteran arts PR had never before lived alone. But just six weeks later, in a cruel twist of fate, the husband of her youngest daughter, Catherine, a women’s rights campaigner and author, himself died. The two widows were united in grief, but were also determined to fight on. Now, mother and daughter are jointly writing a book, spelling out their shared experiences of loss and coping despite the difficulties due to Covid-19. Catherine says: “In losing the loves of our lives, we have found an ever closer relationship.” Good Grief, with its deliberate echo of Charlie Brown’s catchphrase from Peanuts, will be published in December. Both personal and practical, it will include letters Anne has subsequently written to her late husband. Anne consciously tried to get on with her life in the aftermath of John’s death, still going to her weekly pilates class until immediately before lockdown, even though that meant travelling from her north London home to south of the river. She has also turned to social media, helped by Catherine and one of her grandsons. On Friday nights, she now holds Zoom dinners with her first husband, David Mayer, and other members of her family in Manchester. Because of Christmas and New Year, Bird’s funeral, attended by about 200 people, was not held until 22 January. It had been arranged by Catherine, while the wake was sorted out by another daughter, Lise Mayer, a writer best known for the TV comedy series The Young Ones. But, just three days before the funeral, Catherine’s husband, Andy Gill – a stalwart of the band Gang of Four, and also a producer of albums for Red Hot Chili Peppers and the Stranglers – was admitted to St Thomas’ hospital. It initially seemed to be a fairly mild case of pneumonia, but within two weeks he was dead. Good Grief will be part personal and part practical. Anne says: “We hope to help some readers grappling with their own losses or uncertain how best to help their friends and family, deal with grief.” She makes it clear, however, that this will not be a lugubrious book. It will, for example, include poignant memories of meetings every Sunday, post-lockdown, with 59-year-old Catherine, who got permission as an NHS volunteer to come to Anne’s house as she herself was shielded. “The primary purpose was to provide care,” says Catherine. “I also brought food. Our conversations became a by-product, which has been valuable for us both. We also compare notes on the experience of widowhood – the practicalities as well as the emotional and social dimensions.” One of the most moving aspects of Good Grief will be Anne’s emailed love letters to John, which she began writing soon after his death. She has so far penned about 10, and plans to continue. “I tell him things like how wonderful the spring weather was, how the garden is, and other domestic matters,” says Anne, who over many years worked for theatres such as the Royal Court in London. Anne, whose brother died as a child in the United States, where she was brought up before coming to the UK, has also begun a blog. A recent one spelt out how “older people have been made to feel like excess cargo during covid”. She finds this blog and her Facebook page, along with her letters to John, “beneficial to write”. She married John in the mid-1970s. Towards the end – even though he was suffering from poor health – he helped her just before his death on a staging of TS Eliot’s Murder in the Cathedral at Southwark Cathedral in November. Anne is well aware of how unprepared people are for the deaths of their loved ones. She points to how few make wills, which in turn leads to so many complications. Few know what probate is, or how to deal with the necessary individuals and organisations before death, such as end-of-life charities. Nor, after the bereavement, are they prepared for dealing with funeral directors, the Inland Revenue and lawyers. This, she and Catherine call the “sadmin”. They will also spell out in the book how to cope with the social etiquette surrounding death. Catherine says: “Many people feel uncomfortable talking about loss, and we want to offer some thoughts on how to do this. And how not to do it.” The very title of Good Grief hints of positives, even some joy, in death too. Catherine says: “Even on bad days, my mother and I know how fortunate we are. Both of us had the luck to have many years loving and being loved.”