“Do you need help?” I’d heard this a dozen times from at least eight different relatives at our most recent family gathering as smoke poured from my oven. Each time, I told them I had everything under control and shooed them toward the makeshift bar I’d set up on a card table. Where there’s alcohol, there’s my family. After what felt like just a few minutes of peace in my respite that was the kitchen, I heard the question I’d been hoping my diligent (fail at) cooking would protect me from: “Hey, Krissy!” Uncle Billy hollered from across the room, a double whisky in his hand, “What’re you, like, thirty-eight now? When’s that man of yours finally going to knock you up?” Then he stumbled into the hearth and the hem of his pants caught fire. The funny thing is, there were more eyes looking at me waiting for the answer than there were on Uncle Billy’s roasting jeans. Luckily my partner wasn’t there for that particular gathering. I hated it when liquor loosened the kinfolk’s tongues enough to start asking this very personal question as if it were everyone’s business, especially in front of him. He also hadn’t yet seen us at our “best”: Uncle Billy falling into the Christmas tree last Christmas, or Uncle Steve passing out at the dinner table almost every Easter, or Cousin Johnny’s car crash outside Grandpa’s house a few Thanksgivings ago after one too many Wild Turkeys. My partner didn’t know about any of this, but he did know something the others still don’t: the real answer to The Question. And it’s a result of all these years of boozy shenanigans, both my family’s and my own. The reason I’m not planning on becoming a mother is because of my genetic predisposition to addiction. I’ve tried almost everything when it comes to vices, but, like almost everyone else in the family, alcohol was always my go-to. My torrid relationship with it started when I was 17 – I had just dropped out of high school, run away from home, and become a professional showgirl in Las Vegas. Ironically, one of the very things I’d been trying to escape – alcoholism, which I’d grown up seeing every day at home – ended up being the first thing I embraced out in the world on my own. Before long, my addiction was bad. Then worse. Then life-threatening. At one point, I became homeless because of it. I remember seeing other homeless young women, who, unlike me, had children, and as much as they tried they just could not stop drinking or doing drugs. I remember wondering even back then how those children would turn out, not recognizing how my own experience as a child of alcoholics (even though they were very functional) had affected my adult life. I remember being grateful that, in spite of the many mistakes I’d made by that point, I hadn’t brought another being into this world knowing I couldn’t take care of myself, and knowing I was passing along genes of addiction to a helpless being. Admittedly, I was still thinking selfishly at the time. I blamed my parents for being weak, and criticized them for having no self-control, for normalizing excessive drinking. At the time, I thought they had a choice. I now know it’s not their fault, either – the battle is in our blood, in the family members who came before us, the family who’re still with us, and the family who will come after us. But there’s something we can do about it – there’s something I can do about it, at least. After six years in Vegas, I moved back to my hometown of Los Angeles and spent a year in rehab. There, I learned about the basic makeup of addiction, about brain chemistry, and why some people can put the glass down and others can’t. If you’re in my family, there’s a good chance that one drink is too much and twenty is not enough. Now, as a PhD candidate in English and Cultural Studies, I’ve become interested in the science of addiction, especially the genetics of it. It’s a complicated matter, but children who are born to parents with addictive tendencies (which, of course, are passed on by their parents and so on) are 60% more likely to develop these tendencies themselves (the “nature” part of it), especially when they’re exposed to addictive “agents” (the “nurture” part): the usual suspects like alcohol and drugs and cigarettes and sex, but also benign things like watching television (think binge-watching), gaming, eating, exercising, phones and tablets, work, even information. I’ve seen all of these “smaller” addictive behaviors in myself. They’re better than drinking beyond oblivion, but I know the addiction is still there, and always will be – it’ll be a lifelong challenge. At this point I try to channel it into more positive pursuits, but I know that one of those pursuits will never be parenthood. I don’t mean to judge those who have, but: it feels irresponsible in some ways for a person with a history of addiction, even if that addiction is under control, to pass the battle on to the next generation. That battle could be my child seeing me struggle with addiction (what if I fall off the wagon? What if I end up homeless again?) or it could be my child struggling with addiction herself. It could be both. Having an addictive personality results in a challenging life, and one I wouldn’t wish on anyone else, certainly not my own child. I choose to break the cycle in the best way I know how: I choose not to have children. For me, it feels right to prevent unnecessary suffering, and that, to me, seems like the best contribution I can make to the world.