US military medical teams have been deployed to five California hospitals to assist in a war against coronavirus that has taxed healthcare staff in hard-hit areas of the state. Doctors, nurses and other professionals dispatched by the US air force will join medical staff in northern California’s Lodi, Fresno, Visalia and Stockton, and in southern California’s Rancho Mirage, illustrating the sweeping toll the virus is taking on the nation’s most populous state. Work is already under way for the 100 military healthcare professionals who reported for duty on Friday after the state requested assistance; 60 more staff members are expected to deploy by the end of the week, a military spokesman told the Los Angeles Times. The relief comes as medical officials describe a shortage of medical workers as the biggest challenge to responding to the ongoing surge. Coronavirus continues to spread rapidly across the Golden State, with total cases now topping 387,000 and 7,700 deaths attributed to the virus. The virus’s growing spread has 33 counties placed on a state monitoring list, based on healthcare metrics, accounting for 92% of the state’s population. The number of cases continues to climb and, while the positivity rate of those tested has dropped slightly over the past week from 7.7% to 7.2%, nobody is comforted while rates are north of 7%, Governor Gavin Newsom said in a news conference on Monday. Hospitalizations continue to rise, creating pressure for hospitals in the state’s hotspots. In rural Placer county, for example, just 18% of ICU beds are available. San Benito county currently has no capacity to handle more ICU admissions, Newsom said, a reminder that “county by county, things look very different than they do statewide.” Military doctors have also joined the ranks of healthcare professionals in Texas and Florida as the states continue to set daily records for deaths and new infections. California’s rising numbers prompted Newsom last week to roll back reopening plans and close all bars and indoor operations at movie theaters and museums. As cases in Los Angeles over the weekend topped 2,200 for the first time, Mayor Eric Garcetti told CNN that the city opened too quickly, and said he was on the “brink” of issuing a new stay-at-home order. Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti says that they are on the “brink” of issuing another stay-at-home order as coronavirus cases increase in the city #CNNSOTU pic.twitter.com/3Ppgv98946 “I think a lot of people don’t understand, mayors often have no control what opens up and doesn’t – that’s either at a state or county level,” Garcetti said. “And I do agree that those things happened too quickly,” Garcetti told CNN. Local leaders challenged Garcetti’s claim, pointing out that mayors can issue local orders that are stricter than the state’s, but can’t be more lenient. Three suburban counties surrounding Los Angeles are on watch as coronavirus cases per capita in Riverside, San Bernardino and Orange counties last week surpassed per-capita infections in Los Angeles. Even as some residents of Orange county continue to organize resistance against face masks, evidence that masks can effectively slow the spread of covid continues to mount. Last week, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the nation could flatten its curve through the use of masks. “If we could get everybody to wear a mask right now, I think in four, six, eight weeks we could bring this epidemic under control,” said the CDC director, Robert Redfield.