It is unlikely to have escaped Marcos Alonso’s attention that Frank Lampard wants to sign a left-back. Although there is talk that Chelsea have reservations over Leicester’s hefty asking price for Ben Chilwell, the search is unlikely to end if Lampard’s top target proves too expensive. Another option is Nicolás Tagliafico, available after asking to leave Ajax and potentially better value at £22.4m. Whatever happens it is not hard to read between the lines: Chelsea want an upgrade on the left side of their shaky defence. It has been a problem position. Lampard has not been sold on Emerson Palmieri, who could join Internazionale or Juventus, and Alonso’s more impressive performances have tended to come at left wing-back, a role that suits him more than playing in a back four as it covers up his defensive shortcomings and enhances his goalscoring threat. For all the talk of new arrivals, however, Alonso has never downed tools. The Spaniard has been in and out of the team and his days in west London looked numbered after Lampard hauled him off at half‑time when Chelsea were 3-1 down at home against Ajax in November. Ajax had targeted Alonso’s poor positioning – Hakim Ziyech, who will wear a blue shirt next season, tormented him – and Lampard was quick to act. It was almost two months before Alonso played again. What a performance he produced when he came back, though. Restored at left wing-back, Alonso was excellent when Lampard took Tottenham by surprise with a switch to a back three just before Christmas. Chelsea won 2-0 and Alonso’s revival hinted at Lampard’s ability to build connections, keeping players motivated when they are on the sidelines. Some players sulk while they are out. Yet Alonso is not the only Chelsea player who has dealt well with adversity this season. Plenty within Lampard’s squad have experienced tough spells. Christian Pulisic struggled at the start. Olivier Giroud was the forgotten man until February. Reece James, Billy Gilmour and Mason Mount were substituted at half-time during the FA Cup quarter-final win against Leicester last month. Jorginho was out in the cold when football resumed. Yet when Chelsea reached the FA Cup final with a fine 3-1 win against Manchester United on Sunday, there was clear evidence of how Lampard is capable of extracting performances from players who have received some tough love from their inexperienced manager. The wing-backs, Alonso and James, worked hard to establish supremacy on the flanks. Jorginho, never short of doubters, flourished alongside the outstanding Mateo Kovacic in midfield. Mount, substituted midway through the defeat at Sheffield United last weekend, returned and capped an energetic display with a goal. Then there was Giroud, leading the line, bullying the United centre‑halves and opening the scoring just before half-time. The French striker almost left Chelsea in January; now he has six goals in his past nine games. “When I speak to him man to man he is so easy to speak to because he exudes professionalism,” Lampard said after the win against United. The relationship would not work if the professionalism was one-way. Young players would not bounce back from being hooked at half-time if they did not respect Lampard, who is not interested in picking fights. A coach learning on the job has clicked with youngsters and experienced internationals, handing everyone an opportunity to prove themselves. Even Ross Barkley, dropped after a night out ended in a row with a taxi driver before a Champions League game against Lille in October, has had a decent campaign after being handed a second chance. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/07/20-58891-gnl.fw.20200720.ic.Leeds.mp3 There are no vendettas. Lampard, who worked relentlessly on his flaws during his playing days, talks a lot about putting in the hard yards during the week. At the start of the season he was unsure on Pulisic. The winger was struggling after his £58m move from Borussia Dortmund and Lampard told the American he needed to improve in training. Yet there was trust and support. Lampard was protective of Pulisic, who has gone on to become one of Chelsea’s most dangerous forwards. The competition for places in attack will intensify next season, though. Chelsea, who have already bought Ziyech and Timo Werner, are favourites to sign Bayer Leverkusen’s Kai Havertz. If they finish in the top four and beat Arsenal in the FA Cup final on Saturday week, Lampard will not be satisfied. There are standards to uphold, title challenges to mount, and not everyone will come along for the ride. Emerson and Michy Batshuayi have almost certainly run out of road at Stamford Bridge, while Lampard continues to have misgivings over Kepa Arrizabalaga’s inconsistent form in goal. Chelsea have inquired about Atlético Madrid’s Jan Oblak, though any deal for the Slovenian goalkeeper is likely to depend on triggering his €120m (£108m) release clause. As it stands Arrizabalaga, who has been linked with loans to Valencia and Sevilla, is likely to be Chelsea’s goalkeeper next season. Lampard is showing he is prepared to work on weaknesses. He is ready to coach the person and the player.