Welcome to theguardian.com review of the 2019-20 Premier League season. We have nominated some contenders for this category but this is just to get the discussion going: offer your suggestions below the line … For all his undoubted qualities Ayew has rarely set pulses racing in the same way his father, the great Abedi Pele, achieved in the 1980s and 1990s. But sometimes genetics still have their say. Palace and West Ham were grinding to a forgettable draw when Ayew, fed by Connor Wickham in an area of absolutely no danger on the right touchline, scored probably the best goal of 2019-20. It is the 90th minute and Ayew could be forgiven for slinging a cross into the box; instead he drives towards it with the air of someone imbued with a greater purpose, his cause aided slightly when James McCarthy’s run takes Mark Noble away. He appears to have reached trouble when Declan Rice stretches to intervene – and at this point there are four West Ham players between Ayew and the goal – but a gyrating pirouette sees to that. Incredibly he retains the composure to dance between Fabián Balbuena and Angelo Ogbonna, leaving him with only Roberto to beat. Obvious jokes about that last bit aside, he finishes the job in style with a perfectly-weighted chip. It was a Christmas miracle and such extraordinary feats of soloism are – with Son Heung-min and Moussa Djenepo offering honourable exceptions – becoming rare in the modern top flight. Goals have meant more, been hit harder and screamed into the top corner from further out – but this one was just pure Wolves. João Moutinho plays a short corner to Diogo Jota, who has run from the near post to a spot just inside the area, and receives possession straight back. The cavalry are all up, the angle now perfect to whip a moving ball on to the head of Willy Boly or Raúl Jiménez. Instead, Moutinho rakes a low, diagonal pass beyond the edge of the ‘D’, wrong-footing everyone except Neves. A touch to tame it, another to create half a yard for the shot, and then Neves is curling a picture-perfect strike in off the crossbar before two onrushing United players can reach him. As rehearsed set pieces go, it was something special. As a snapshot of the practice, precision and clarity, topped off by moments of brilliance, that characterise Nuno Espírito Santo’s side it could hardly be bettered. Jahanbakhsh had arrived at Brighton in July 2018 with a £17m price tag and a burgeoning reputation after an outstanding season with AZ Alkmaar. But, in common with a number of the Seagulls’ high-profile signings that year, things never really took off in his first season and by December 2019 he was yet to score. He opened his account against Bournemouth three days after Christmas and broke down in tears. The emotions spilled out again on New Year’s Day with Brighton six minutes from a home defeat to Chelsea. When Lewis Dunk gets his head on to a deep corner but aims it away from a crowded six-yard box there seems little risk to Chelsea’s lead. But Jahanbakhsh, who has hardly even glanced at the goal, throws himself into an overhead kick and none of the three players running out to meet him can intervene in time. He is at least 12 yards out and at a slight angle to the goal, so to leave Kepa Arrizabalaga standing with a perfectly sliced effort into his far corner is some achievement. Given that he has not scored since, it may prove his final significant act for the club. There is no better footballer in the country than De Bruyne. His vision, touch, use of space and running power are all for the ages. And, you know what, he can’t half strike a ball. Benjamin Mendy’s delivery from the left at St James’ Park is headed away firmly enough and De Bruyne, chesting the clearance down 22 yards out, has plenty to do. He is moving slightly away from goal and has Jonjo Shelvey charging into his line of vision to his left. His response? A volley of simply startling power, and yet total control, that rasps past everyone and gives City a lead that, with an impressive strike of his own, Shelvey will soon cancel out. You can argue about its place in the top five but a De Bruyne contribution had to make it: very honourable mentions, too, to a brilliantly controlled finish at the Emirates and a wondrous dipping post-shutdown free-kick against Chelsea. In the absence of anything truly resembling a “Vincent Kompany moment”, perhaps this goal was the nearest thing in terms of significant title-race timing. Liverpool are six points clear of City when they meet at Anfield but a defeat would make things very interesting. They look vulnerable early on when the visitors have loud appeals turned down for a handball by Trent Alexander-Arnold. City have a case but Liverpool show, in the next 22 seconds, why they are the most ruthless top-flight side of the modern era. They flow straight upfield, Sadio Mané carrying the ball to the byline, and Fabinho is more than 25 yards out when the centre is half-cleared to him. His thudded drive past Claudio Bravo is excellent in its own right but, most importantly, it sends Liverpool on their way to a resounding win and a lead at the summit that they never look like surrendering.