Spaniards fear that the sacrifices made during the coronavirus lockdown will be in vain after tourists from overseas flouted regulations about wearing masks and social distancing. As footage of drunken British tourists dancing on cars in the Mallorcan resort of Magaluf went viral, one Twitter user commented: “Parts of Spain in lockdown, the elderly shut away in care homes, we all wear masks in the street, but in Magaluf the antisocial and irresponsible Brits do whatever they please. It’s shameful.” There have been altercations between locals and tourists over the issue in Magaluf and other Mallorcan resorts, and at least 60 illegal parties have been reported to the island’s authorities. Organisers of such parties face fines of up to €600,000. Jens Spahn, Germany’s health minister, has condemned the behaviour of young Germans partying in Mallorca for failing to take any precautions. “We have to try to prevent infections, particularly now in the holiday season,” Spahn said. “We don’t automatically have to see a second wave in the fall and winter. Together as a society we can prevent that, as we did before.” Along with Catalonia and Andalucía, the Balearic Isles have made masks compulsory outdoors, even in situations where social distancing is not a problem. The only exceptions are on the beach and during sport. Mask-wearing and distancing have become the norm for the majority of Spaniards, who are appalled at the spectacle of young visitors getting drunk and roaming the streets in large groups with not a mask in sight. Spaniards in general have been aghast at what they see as the UK’s laissez-faire approach to Covid-19 and fear that tourists will provoke a second wave just when the country has brought the disease more or less under control. However, there are even greater fears about the long-term economic damage to the country if tourism does not pick up. The industry represents 12% of Spanish GDP, and in coastal areas and the islands it is the major source of income and jobs. Mallorca, with a population of around 900,000, received 10 million visitors last year. Obligatory mask-wearing in all situations was introduced in Catalonia and the Balearics in the past week. Many in the hospitality business oppose the measure, claiming it drives visitors away. Gabriel Escarrer, the president of the tourist body Exceltur, said visitors were shocked that they were expected to wear a mask on holiday, and there have been numerous cancellations since the measure was announced. “Many have opted for destinations where the rules are not so strict,” he said. Last month the Spanish government launched a campaign under the slogan “Spain for Sure” in an effort to reassure tourists and lure them back. Spain has the sixth highest number of coronavirus deaths and the third highest death rate per capita from the virus in the world. The Balearics have reported 2,377 cases of Covid-19 and 229 deaths, the majority in Mallorca.