When face masks and coverings became widespread, a daily battle started for deaf people like me. We rely on seeing people’s faces to understand them, but this was suddenly impossible. What started in medical appointments and on public transport will now spill over into shops, supermarkets, cafes, restaurants and social occasions. Nothing is more important than public health and if we’re told to wear face masks, we will (Coronavirus: shoppers in England must wear face masks from 24 July, 13 July). But the lives of deaf people have just got much harder. Clear face masks would really help us, and governments across the UK have the reach and the budget to make these widely available. If people also repeat what they say if we miss it, write things down and use gestures where necessary, it would go a long way to combating the loneliness and isolation many of us are now destined to face. Susan Daniels Chief executive, National Deaf Children’s Society • I sympathise with Simon Fairlie’s problem with masks and lack of facial expressions (Letters, 15 July). Given that the wearing of face masks is to become mandatory in shops, is it time we adopted a universal “smile” gesture? Perhaps drawing a semi-circular shape in the air or even the good old thumbs-up? Verbal messages would still be necessary for visually impaired people.  Tricia Mitchell Morecambe, Lancashire • One thing being noted frequently in these times of Zoom and masks is the difficulty of maintaining conversation and communication when you are missing body language and expressions in real time. Spare a thought for people who, like me, find body language and facial expressions hard to read, if not impossible, even in normal times. I was diagnosed autistic at the age of 50, and as a younger man I honestly believed that everyone else must be telepathic. They could all communicate effortlessly, taking their turns to talk, seeing each other’s emotions – and there I was, talking over anyone and everyone, and boring or annoying people, with no idea until they walked away or started shouting. I do find a certain wry amusement in the constant surprise expressed at just how awkward conversations are now. Welcome to my world! Mark Earls Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters