In the archipelago of offshore European islands we inhabit, a new nation is growing in importance. This new nation is not the divided, tragi-comic “global” Britain of Boris Johnson’s sloppy and incontinent imagination. It is not even the independent Scotland whose birth Mr Johnson is himself doing much to foster – though one day it may be, given his slapdash premiership. The new nation is the Irish Republic. There are three connected reasons for saying a 98-year-old nation is new. The first is Ireland’s latest government, which took office in June. For almost a century, Irish politics have been shaped by the civil war of 1922-23. Ever since then, the country has been ruled either by Fine Gael, which is descended from the group that supported the treaty of 1921 with Britain, or, more often, by Fianna Fáil, whose forebears rejected it. Until now the two ancient rivals have never been willing to serve in the same coalition. Since last month they are doing so, along with the Greens. This is because, after the three-way tie of February’s general election, it is the only way of governing without Ireland’s other main party, Sinn Féin. Some fret that Sinn Féin’s strings are being pulled by the (officially disarmed) IRA. For two and a half years, the government will be led by Fianna Fáil’s Micheál Martin; in December 2022, leadership will rotate to Fine Gael’s Leo Varadkar. A generation ago, this coalition was unthinkable. Now it feels inevitable. The second reason why this feels like a new Ireland is Covid-19. Before Brexit and Mr Johnson, Ireland might have taken an informal cue on handling the pandemic from its larger and richer neighbour. But Britain’s Covid-19 response has been shambolic. It has been infected from the start by Brexit exceptionalism. Like Scotland and Wales, Ireland has steered a different and wiser course. None has had an easy pandemic, Ireland included. But Dublin has watched what is happening in Europe and followed WHO advice. The upshot is a coronavirus death rate that is half Britain’s. Fine Gael’s recent rise in the polls reflects a widespread view that Mr Varadkar’s outgoing government handled Covid-19 well. This elides into the third reason. Unlike Brexit-deluded Britain, 21st-century Ireland is a firm believer in multilateral institutions and cooperation. Ireland’s influence over the EU’s Brexit stance is immense. Its EU commissioner, Phil Hogan, has the crucial trade portfolio. Ireland’s finance minister, Paschal Donohoe, has just become president of the Eurogroup of finance ministers. Last month, Ireland beat Canada to a seat on the UN security council. In the words of the Economist: “On a per-head basis, Ireland has a good claim to be the world’s most diplomatically powerful country.” The contrast with “Great” Britain is humbling. Where is this leading? The coalition has a clear majority. All three parties voted decisively for it. But the early weeks have been messy. There was Fianna Fáil infighting over ministerial jobs. Last week Mr Martin sacked the agriculture minister Barry Cowen over a drink-driving case. The post-pandemic reopening of pubs this week has had to be pushed back because of a spike in cases. Sinn Féin has plenty to aim at. This is nevertheless a salutary moment. Step by step, Ireland’s old nationalist politics, shaped by Britain in so many ways, have moved on. Ireland is prospering by doing things more rationally and in ways that are firmly rooted in the state’s membership of multilateral institutions. The many in these islands who yearn for Britain to do likewise can only look on as, in Ireland, an enviable beauty is born.