Wash 150g of brown basmati rice in a bowl of deep water. (I do this three times, some might say once is enough.) Put the rice in a medium-sized saucepan, cover it with twice the volume of water and bring to the boil. Add half a teaspoon of salt, 6 black peppercorns and a couple of bay leaves and cover with a lid, lowering the heat so the water simmers gently. Leave for 15 minutes, or until the rice is as you like it, then remove from the heat and set aside, still covered, for 10 minutes. The tomatoes provide a sweet-sharp sauce to which you can add almost anything you like Cut 2 small to medium courgettes into 1cm dice. Finely slice 2 medium leeks. Melt 30g of butter in a large frying pan, add 3 tbsp of olive oil and heat until they start to sizzle. Add the courgette, lower the heat, and cook until they start to soften and turn pale gold in colour. Finely chop the leaves from a couple of bushy sprigs of rosemary and add to the courgette. Fry for a minute or two then stir in the leeks and leave to cook for 7-10 minutes, until the leeks have softened. Chop 3 medium tomatoes and scatter among the vegetables, cover with a lid and leave to cook for 2-3 minutes. Season with salt, quite generously with black pepper and a generous squeeze of lemon. Run a fork through the rice to separate the grains, then fold into the vegetables and serve. Enough for 2. I like the inherent chewy quality of brown rice, especially when the juices from a vegetable stew such as this trickle through the grains. It takes a little longer than white rice to cook, but not as much as is often suggested. I would normally recommend not to lift the lid from a pot of cooking rice to check its progress, but as brown rice is generally more variable, it is worth checking regularly after the first 10 minutes. I do this sort of impromptu “stew” most often in summer. The tomatoes provide a sweet-sharp sauce to which you can add almost anything you like. Steamed French beans or broad beans; peas or pencil-thin carrots; young, steamed beetroot or small summer turnips will all work. Basil leaves are a favourite addition, as are young leaves and flower of thyme. A scattering of mint is something to think about, as is the addition of a bunch of washed and shredded spinach at the very end. Follow Nigel on Twitter @NigelSlater