A “fantastic and exciting” list of ten artists who would all have been in the running for this year’s Turner prize have been named as the recipients of £10,000 bursaries. Tate Britain on Thursday announced the names of artists who will receive no-strings-attached cash awards in place of this year’s abandoned competition. Alex Farquharson, the director of Tate Britain, who chaired the jury choosing the artists, said the list reflected “the exceptional talent found in contemporary British art”. It features artists whose practice includes ceramics, photography, film, performance, sculpture, poetry and personal history. Most defy easy categorisation and are tackling issues that include marginality, identity, death and robotics. Farquharson agreed they were not artists who dealt in trivialities. “I’m sure one can give examples of humour and visual pleasure in there but yes, they are reflecting on very serious issues,” he said. The Turner prize is one of the world’s best-known contemporary arts prizes and annually picks up on trends and themes occupying the minds of artists working in Britain. “Obviously every artist and every practice is particular but I do think the idea of care came up a lot,” said Farquharson. “Care for oneself, care for a community one identifies with … sometimes in the face of hostility, or threat, or vulnerability. “I think that theme of care, for each other, for oneself, in all kinds of different ways does resonate strongly with the current moment.” The ten artists were chosen by this year’s Turner prize jury, who had already done most of the legwork in seeking out candidates for the cancelled 2020 prize. The discussions were familiar but the task was much simpler, said Farquharson. “Usually that extra step of getting down from 10 to four is quite time-consuming and the most painful because you are dealing with artists whose work the jury feels the strongest allegiance to.” Among those to get bursaries are the Israeli artist Oreet Ashery, chosen for a piece at the Wellcome Collection that explored the lived experience of care and chronic illness. Liz Johnson Artur, a Ghanaian-Russian artist who for 30 years has been photographing the lives of people from the African diaspora, was praised for her show at the South London Gallery, which aimed to capture the richness and complexity of black British life. The other artists to get the bursaries were: Arika, a political arts organisation based in Edinburgh; The Oxford-based artist Shawanda Corbett; The Glasgow-based artist and singer Jamie Crewe; Sean Edwards, whose work was in the Welsh Pavilion of the 2019 Venice Biennale; The London-based artist Sidsel Meineche Hansen; Ima Abasi-Okon, who lives and works in London and Amsterdam; The London-based artist Imran Perretta; and Alberta Whittle, who lives and works between Barbados, Scotland and South Africa.