A military reservist who allegedly rammed his truck through a gate on the grounds where Justin Trudeau lives has been charged with threatening to kill or injure the Canadian prime minister. Police allege that Corey Hurren was armed with a prohibited M-14 rifle, as well as two shotguns and a revolver, when he entered the grounds of Rideau Hall on 2 July. He is also charged with possessing a prohibited high-capacity magazine. In addition to 21 weapons charges, Hurren is accused of “uttering a threat to ‘cause death or bodily harm’ to the prime minister. Rideau Hall is the official residence of the governor general, Julie Payette, but Justin Trudeau and his family have been living at Rideau Cottage, in the grounds, during renovations to 24 Sussex, the prime minister’s official residence in Ottawa. Neither Trudeau nor Payette were present on the grounds at the time of the incident. Hurren, a 46-year-old on-duty member of the Canadian Rangers, the branch of the military that typically operates in remote and coastal regions, allegedly drove more than 20 hours from Manitoba to Ottawa and crashed his truck through the gate at 6.30am on Thursday. The truck was disabled upon impact with the iron gates of Rideau Hall, but Hurren is believed to have hidden in a rose garden before making his way toward a greenhouse close to where the prime minister and his family live. It was nott until 13 minutes after Hurren first apparently breached the gates that police first spotted him, armed with a gun. The incident has since raised serious questions over a major lapse in security. Before Hurren entered the grounds of Rideau Hall, a post appeared on the Facebook page of the sausage-making business which Hurren runs, referring to a conspiracy theory that Bill Gates, the Microsoft co-founder, was responsible for the Covid-19 pandemic. In March, Hurren’s company posted a meme on Instagram refering to QAnon, the American far-right conspiracy theory that claims elements of the “deep state” are working to undermine Donald Trump. “Has anyone else been following ‘Q’ and the ‘White Rabbit’ down the rabbit hole, and how this all relates to the coronavirus/Covid-19 situation? Lots of coincidences in all these ‘Q’ posts if this turns out to be a ‘Nothingburger’,” the caption said. Hurren will remain in custody until his next court appearance on 17 July.