In the basement of an old church building, not far from Kingsland Road in the buzzing east London hipster haunt of Dalston, Maudette Uzoh is struggling to keep her nursery business alive in the face of the Covid-19 pandemic. Amazing Days Nursery opened four years ago at a time when the area was booming. The waiting list was full, with parents from diverse backgrounds, including many who worked in the arts and creative industries, all looking for childcare for their babies and toddlers so they could get back to the office. Today however, the nursery has just three children to care for. The rest are at home with their families and Uzoh is trying to be optimistic, hoping against hope that business will pick up and more parents will sign up later this year. A recent survey of 3,000 pre-schools, nurseries and childminders by the Early Years Alliance in April found that one in four felt it was “somewhat unlikely” or “very unlikely” that they would be operating in 12 months’ time, with the figure at one in three in disadvantaged areas where need is greatest. The government has been urged to provide more financial support for a sector which will be crucial if the economy is to pick up, but so far the chancellor has not obliged. The parents who used to bring their children to Amazing Days are now either working from home, or have been furloughed or – worse – made redundant. As a result, their childcare needs have changed, or they are still too scared to send their children to nursery and are trying to juggle everything from the kitchen table. Before the lockdown, a team of eight staff at Amazing Days looked after 41 children aged from 18 months to seven years, with a very busy baby room, as well as after-school and holiday clubs. Then Boris Johnson ordered shutdown, and Uzoh’s business has not recovered. “When they made the announcement in March, we closed straight away. I didn’t have any key worker children. We closed completely. We had no income coming in, other than what we were receiving from the government in statutory funding for three- and four-year-olds, which I used to pay staff salaries. “Then, when we reopened on 1 June, only seven kids came back. The majority of parents are still terrified and they kept their children at home.” Four of the remaining seven children are moving on to primary school – it was their last day this week and they all donned caps and gowns for their “graduation” photoshoot. Just three two-year-olds and one three-year-old are left, which is not sustainable. Uzoh has faced challenges meeting her fixed costs, and her landlord has threatened legal proceedings. Whether parents return, she said, depends on infection rates, adding: “If they think the numbers are not going down enough … they will not come back. “It’s been extremely stressful,” said Uzoh, who has multiple sclerosis and suffered a flare-up as a result of the pressure. “I have children myself. I do empathise with how parents are feeling. I want to be really positive and say we will survive. It should be OK, as long as the infection rates keep dropping.” While many more families are likely to lose jobs and therefore not be in a position to pay for childcare, Uzoh is worried that even for those who keep their jobs, the pandemic may have triggered a shift in working culture. “We are reliant on parents going to work, with us looking after their kids. It could wipe out the childcare industry.” Uzoh is trying to stay positive, but she’s worried about having to lose staff, adding: “I’m optimistic that things will pick up in September, and by October I’m hoping to have 60% capacity, but the cashflow element is challenging. We’ve got lots of viewings coming up. I will know by mid-August who I’m going to be able to keep on and who I’m going to have to let go.” Wonderland Day Nursery in Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, is facing similar challenges. It was refurbished in January 2019 at a cost of £25,000. The opening ceremony was covered by local media who photographed the Broxbourne MP, Charles Walker, cutting the ribbon and the business began to take off. “It was going well,” said owner Diloushka Fernando. Numbers were growing, with 23 children attending each day, aged between three months and four years, and 35 children on roll. Then the pandemic hit, lockdown began and Wonderland has been unable to reopen since because of a lack of demand. “Prior to Covid-19 we were operating with a good mix of children from all ages, but we have been unable to reopen due to diminishing numbers post-pandemic,” said Fernando. “We initially tried to open for a three-day week, but even this did not have enough demand with most parents working from home, so not needing childcare or being afraid to send their children to nursery. “We have stayed in contact with parents in the hope they will be interested in starting at least in September, but so far the feedback has not been positive. We have arranged open days and are advertising heavily, but numbers do not seem to be high enough to warrant re-opening, even in September. “It is not looking promising for the business, nor the early years childcare sector in general. We refurbished the whole nursery in January 2019 and have lovely premises which are going to waste. Our staff team are eager to come back and reopen and losing this beautiful homely setting will be a loss for the local area.”