China has said the UK will be heading “down the wrong path” if, as expected, Dominic Raab announces on Monday he is suspending an extradition treaty with Hong Kong due to its new national security law. Speaking at a media briefing, Wang Wenbin, a spokesman for China’s foreign ministry, said the decision, plus other mooted plans such as actions against individual Chinese officials due to rights abuses, would harm relations between the two countries. “These HK-related remarks turn a blind eye to the basic facts that the national security law is for the sustained success of One China, Two Systems,” Wang said, referring to the name by which Hong Kong has been governed since it returned to Chinese rule in 1997. “We strongly condemn these actions. We urge the UK to take no more steps down the wrong path, so as to avoid further damage to China-UK relations.” Raab, the UK foreign secretary, is due to update the Commons on Monday afternoon about a Foreign Office review into the UK’s extradition treaty with Hong Kong, and is expected to follow the US, Canada and Australia in suspending it. This would be in response to China’s imposition of a sweeping national security law on Hong Kong, which criminalises a range of free-speech and political issues in the former British colony, and introduces secret trials. Nathan Law, one of Hong Kong’s most prominent young democracy activists who recently fled to London, said the extradition suggestion had gained traction in Westminster. He wrote on Twitter: “Talked to many members of the parliament on this issue, and got very strong support on the idea of suspending the extradition treaty with Hong Kong. Change is happening.” Iain Duncan Smith, the co-founder of the Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China, also backed the proposal, tweeting: “This is the right thing to do in response to the Chinese government crackdown on people in Hong Kong.” Separately, the UK government is considering whether to take action against individual Chinese officials under the so-called Magnitsky laws over widespread reports of mass repression and rights abuses targeting the Uighur population in China’s north-western Xinjiang province. The government said last week it would strip the Chinese telecoms firm Huawei of any role in the UK’s 5G network from 2027 due to security fears, which also enraged Beijing. The government is under pressure from a number of Conservative backbenchers to take a more robust line over Huawei. On Sunday evening, the chair of parliament’s defence select committee, Tobias Ellwood, said Britain has “been duped over the last couple of decades” by China. The Uighurs are a predominantly Muslim Turkic-speaking ethnic group, primarily from China’s northwestern region of Xinjiang. They have been subject to religious and ethnic persecution by Chinese authorities, with rights groups claiming that in recent years more than 1 million people have been held in detention camps. Having initially denied the existence of the camps, China has described them as “vocational education centres” in the face of mounting evidence in the form of government documents, satellite imagery and testimonies from escaped detainees. Satellite images have also suggested that more than two dozen Islamic religious sites have been partly or completely demolished since 2016. In July 2019 China claimed that most of the people sent to the mass detention centres have “returned to society”, but this has been disputed by relatives of those detained. Around 1-1.5m Uighur are estimated to live overseas as a diaspora, many of whom have campaigned against the treatment of their families. China repeated these claims in December 2019, but offering no evidence of their release. In July 2020, China's UK ambassador denied abuse of Uighurs, despite the emergence of drone footage of hundreds of blindfolded and shackled men. Martin Belam He told BBC Radio 4’s Westminster Hour programme: “I really want to see a reset of our entire foreign policy, bearing in mind that we are sliding towards a cold war. We can’t do this on our own, we need to work with our allies. “We turned a blind eye to what was going on with the Uighur population, we turned a blind eye to the uneven trade situation whereby Chinese companies could operate quite liberally within the UK and elsewhere but our companies couldn’t operate within China and now I think it’s time to say enough is enough.” The UK has already promised that up to 3 million Hong Kong residents will be offered the chance to settle in the UK, and a path to permanent citizenship, in the wake of Beijing’s imposition of the national security law on Hong Kong. China will be high on the agenda when Raab meets his US counterpart, Mike Pompeo, in London this week.