Brentford moved to within a point of the automatic promotion places after a 1-0 win against Preston at Griffin Park. Ollie Watkins scored the only goal of the game after just four minutes and the Bees held on to maintain their flawless record since the resumption of the Championship in June. The victory also equals a club record of eight successive league wins in the same season in what could be their penultimate match at Griffin Park, the club’s home since 1904. After being played through by Emiliano Marcondes, Watkins took a touch before firing past the goalkeeper Declan Rudd for his 25th goal of the season to move ahead of Fulham’s Aleksandar Mitrovic in the race for the Championship golden boot. Preston have endured different fortunes since the restart, having been sixth in February. They sit ninth, five points behind Cardiff who occupy the final play-off spot with two games left to play. Lee Bowyer criticised his Charlton players after a last-gasp Lukas Jutkiewicz leveller denied them a priceless win at Birmingham. Victory would have moved the Addicks four points clear of danger with two games left, and the manager’s disappointment was clear afterwards. “It hurts a lot. But we could not see the game out. The whole team has to manage the game better,” Bowyer said. “I feel like I’m saying the same thing again and again; we should have won this game comfortably.” Macauley Bonne had opened the scoring in the 58th minute, but Jutkiewicz’s close-range finish eased the hosts’ own relegation fears. Sammy Ameobi scored twice to leave Nottingham Forest with one foot in the play-offs after a 2-2 draw with Swansea at the City Ground. Ameobi scored from the edge of the box in spectacular fashion in both halves to earn a draw that leaves Swansea three points off the top six with two games to go. The visitors took the lead after eight minutes thanks to Rhian Brewster’s fine strike, only for Ameobi to equalise 12 minutes later. Just before half-time, Ryan Yates clipped André Ayew on the edge of the box and Swansea were awarded a penalty, converted by Ayew. Ameobi levelled on 50 minutes, cutting inside and firing low into the corner, before Swansea’s Kyle Naughton was sent off late on. Stoke inched towards safety with a 1-1 draw at Ashton Gate that dented Bristol City’s slim play-off prospects. Danny Batth’s second-half header gave Stoke a share of the spoils their endeavour deserved after Filip Benkovic, another central defender showing a striker’s instinct, had given the Robins the lead just before the break. Victory would have almost secured Stoke’s Championship status but the manager, Michael O’Neill, will be confident they can finish the job now they are five points above the relegation zone. Bristol City are five points outside the top six, and their play-off hopes appear all but over.