When their 2,300-mile row from San Francisco to Hawaii was called off due to the coronavirus pandemic, Duncan Roy and Gus Barton opted for a staycation of the extreme sort – attempting to row around the UK in record time. With only two weeks of preparation behind them, the two endurance athletes set off on the 2,000-mile journey from Ramsgate on 14 June. By Tuesday, more than five weeks in, they were heading south along Scotland’s east coast. For Roy, 29, from near North Allerton in North Yorkshire, and Barton, 30, from Balham in London, the challenge – encompassing rocky shorelines and busy shipping lanes – was a natural alternative to the cancelled Latitude 35 attempt in the Pacific. “We had everything lined up, the boat was at the start line in San Francisco,” said Roy, a former British army Royal Engineer and two-time Guinness world record holder in ocean racing. “We’d been planning that for well over a year, we’d done our training camps. We thought, well, actually, if we’re here, a circumnavigation of the UK could be a good challenge.” A project like this one would usually take nearly two years to pull together, but sponsors quickly seized the chance to back a feel-good story in the midst of a crisis. “People loved it because it’s crazy,” said Roy, speaking via a satellite phone. The challenge has been greater than either he or Barton, a former professional rugby player and personal trainer who has also rowed the Atlantic, had anticipated. They have passed the third largest whirlpool in the world – Corryvreckan, off the Scottish western isles – and endured the “pretty spicy” turbulence of the Ramsey Sound, a tidal passage separating Ramsey Island from mainland Wales. “I think people’s perception of rowing across an ocean is, like, ‘wow, that’s incredible,’ whereas rowing around Britain doesn’t seem as prestigious. But I can tell you now, rowing around Britain is the hardest thing Gus and I have ever undertaken. It’s so technical.” Between rowing shifts averaging 1,200 strokes an hour, 18 hours a day, Roy and Barton are attempting to consume around 6,000 calories daily from ration packs hydrated from desalinated sea water and huge tubs of peanut butter, and grabbing four-hour pockets of sleep. Keeping the coastline so close rather than crossing an expansive ocean was “like a carrot dangling in front of you”, Roy said. “We’re looking at the land now and seeing cars whizzing past. Last night we could’ve just pulled in and had fish and chips.” But in some ways being stuck indoors during the lockdown had well prepared them for the trip, he said. Before setting sail, the pair had met twice since last October after being picked for the Latitude 35 training camp. “Even though we’re going around the entire UK, we’re stuck on a seven-metre-long boat together. It’s very comparative to a lot of what people have experienced. I know more about Gus than I know about friends I’ve known for 10 years now.” The pair have raised £10,000 to date for NHS Charities Together – Roy’s choice after witnessing the work his girlfriend, an ITU nurse, was doing during the height of the pandemic – and the mental health charity Sport in Mind, which Barton chose after his friend’s father took his own life in February. They hope to raise much more but are not confident of beating the record time for the journey of 41 days, 4 hours and 38 minutes. Adverse weather conditions have set them back and they have 450 miles still to go. The goal now is to finish before 1 August, when Barton is scheduled to be the best man at his brother’s wedding. “In this sport, you’re so completely at the mercy of the elements,” Roy said. “While it’s nice to get a certificate at the end, the real prize is just finishing.”