The abrupt closure of the Spain-UK air bridge came from nowhere for thousands of British tourists and an industry trying to get back on its feet. Whitehall sources insist the swift and blanket nature of the decision – to advise against non-essential travel to Spain and impose quarantine measures on travellers arriving from the country - came because government scientists had been concerned by the coronavirus infection figures from Spain. Yet it was also down to lessons learned the hard way about slow v speedy decision-making over the course of the pandemic – the decision-making was as much about politics and messaging as hard data. Advisers studying the figures at the end of last week say they were deeply concerned about the rate of the rise in Spain, and the potential for thousands of cases to be imported by tourists. Though low in number, the coronavirus cases detected in holidaymakers returning from Spain are believed to be the first from a country which had been previously deemed to be safe to visit. During a meeting before the quarantine’s reimposition, England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, made clear his strength of feeling about the level of risk from returning tourists. Ministers wanted to act fast and make the advice clear rather than risk another major fallout by delaying a week – or even 24 hours – when it had the potential to cause an exponential increase in cases imported to the UK. They did not want to be dogged by further accusations of tardy decision-making on lockdown measures; at one point the government was accused of doubling the Covid-19 death toll by delaying lockdown by one week. “There was a genuine risk of the country seeing significant new infections from abroad,” one source said of the Spain quarantine decision. “If we had waited a week … people want to see quick and decisive action.” The initial mismatch in Foreign Office advice – with non-essential travel to the Spanish islands still permissible – gave false hope to the travel industry that ministers might see fit to change the quarantine advice and allow visitors to go to favourite holiday destinations such as Mallorca, Ibiza, Tenerife or Lanzarote, where the small-business minister Paul Scully was holidaying when he was caught out by the quarantine imposition. That was never on the cards, government sources insist, despite fierce lobbying by the travel industry and the Spanish government. Instead the advice was hardened overnight on Monday to advise against all non-essential travel to the islands as well as mainland Spain. Again, the decision was based on risk – but also on needing a clear communications strategy. There was another challenge to navigate – the holiday plans of two key ministers, Michael Gove and Grant Shapps. Shapps, the transport secretary, departed for his family holiday in Spain knowing the advice could change at any moment but unwilling to appear as if he was acting on inside information by cancelling his trip. Gove had booked a holiday to Ibiza and also knew the risks of appearing to be prioritising his own holiday plans by excluding the Spanish islands from the quarantine restrictions. Shapps will fly back to start his quarantine from Wednesday – and to continue discussions about how the “blunt instrument” of a 14-day quarantine could be refined, whether through airport or home testing, regional quarantines or shorter isolation periods, which are all still believed to be in the early stages of exploration.