TikTok is to withdraw its app from Hong Kong app stores and Zoom will stop complying with city authorities’ data requests as technology companies react to the sweeping new national security laws imposed on the city by Beijing. Facebook, Microsoft, Twitter, Google and Telegram have already said they are “pausing” cooperation with requests for user information, putting pressure on Apple – the largest technology company with Hong Kong operations to have said nothing about the national security laws – to do the same. Apple has previously come under fire for its relationship with the Hong Kong authorities. TikTok, a video-sharing social networking platform owned by the China-based ByteDance, has consistently denied sharing any user data with authorities in China, and was adamant it did not intend to begin to agree to such requests. The company expected to take several days to wind down its app operations in Hong Kong. Despite its ownership, TikTok has never been available in China. Instead, Bytedance operates a more heavily censored version of the platform under the name Douyin. A TikTok spokesperson said the company had no plans to launch Douyin in Hong Kong. TikTok’s decision, which a spokesperson said was made “in light of recent events”, came after the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, said the US was “certainly looking at” banning Chinese social media apps including TikTok. On Monday, Whatsapp, Facebook, and Telegram said they had paused cooperation with data requests from Hong Kong authorities pending human rights reviews. Google announced its own freeze on co-operation later that day, and on Tuesday morning, Microsoft confirmed it too “was pausing our responses to these requests as we conduct our review”. Hours after Tik Tok’s announcement, the video conferencing platform Zoom told Hong Kong Free Press it would also stop complying with data requests. A spokesman for Zoom said the company “supports the free and open exchange of thoughts and ideas”. Zoom was criticised last month after it admitted to suspending or cancelling the accounts of Hong Kong activists on the request of Chinese authorities. Following the backlash, the company said it would stop complying with such requests, but would also explore technology to block users from inside the country. The freezing of relations between technology companies and Hong Kong law enforcement bears a resemblance to the erection of the Chinese “Great Firewall”. During the 2000s, many tech firms gradually ended co-operation with the Chinese authorities, spurred by the arrest of a journalist, Shi Tao, who was sentenced to 10 years in jail based on the contents of his Yahoo Mail account, handed over by the company in 2004. Apple remains the largest US-based company to continue co-operation with law enforcement in Hong Kong. Unlike many of its competitors, the company has significant business on the Chinese mainland, where it has both a large market for its devices, and a substantial manufacturing base. It has already come under fire for its closeness to the Hong Kong authorities. In October 2019, its chief executive, Tim Cook, personally defended a decision to remove a mapping app used by protesters at the request of the police. An Apple spokesperson did not reply to requests for comment.