This epic, New Zealand-set adaptation of Eleanor Catton’s Booker prize-winning tome comes to a tumultuous end. With Emery (Himesh Patel) still missing and his alibi for Anna on the night of the murder floundering, Lydia (Eva Green) decides to host a seance to implicate her further. Meanwhile, Moody comes into possession of a trunk of letters that reveal secrets surrounding Crosbie’s death. All eventually comes to a head in a tense trial sequence, masterfully orchestrated by Eve Hewson as Anna. Ammar Kalia Jimmy Dougherty continues his year-long timelapse of a Norfolk wood, this week reaching autumn. With fruit and nuts abundant, Jimmy tasks two visiting friends with foraging for dinner while he learns about the kestrel’s super-sensitivity for hunting prey, and meets a man who claims he can speak to owls. AK More fetid adventures with the nation’s most dedicated “waste warriors”. It’s a big day for Martin and Glenn when a mystery fiend fly-tips 40 tonnes of crud in the Midlands. Meanwhile, toilet specialists Anna and John face a monster blockage, and we pick through the aftermath of bonfire night in Lewes. Jack Seale The omnipresent comedian continues this retrospective of the globetrotting TV adventures that saw him travel everywhere from Haiti to the Sahara. This week, he reunites with old pals from the Arctic, Albania and Mongolia to reflect on near-misses. Hannah J Davies Polly Findlay’s locationless 2015 production of Shakespeare’s treatise on prejudice and wealth is screened as part of the BBC’s Culture in Quarantine offering. Makram J Khoury shines as Shylock and Jamie Ballard’s Antonio is a frantic presence. AK What turned the Egyptian resort of Sharm el-Sheikh, a usually attack-free zone, into a literal red sea in December 2010? In the first of this graphic new series exploring big fish monsterings around the world, we see how several snorkellers had their limbs subtracted all within the space of under a week. Ali Catterall Hell Or High Water, 9pm, Film4 David Mackenzie, British director of Starred Up, makes an assured transition to Texas with this spare and violent modern western. Toby and Tanner (Chris Pine, Ben Foster) are small-scale bank robbers hunted by Jeff Bridges’ Texas ranger Marcus, who is baffled by the brothers’ high-risk, low-reward tactics. Paul Howlett Test Cricket: England v West Indies, 10.30am, Sky Sports Cricket. Day four of the second Test. Premier League Football: Tottenham Hotspur v Leicester City, 3.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Spurs play at home. FA Cup Football: Manchester United v Chelsea, 5.30pm, BBC One. Semi-final from Wembley.