Fortress Anfield has been rebuilt to such an impregnable extent under Jürgen Klopp that any breach constitutes a shock. Liverpool’s hopes of finessing a glorious Premier League season with a flawless home record ended at the feet of Jay Rodriguez and the hands of Nick Pope as Burnley became the first visitors since Leicester in January 2019 to leave Anfield with a point. Pope was inspired and the main reason the champions’ run of 24 consecutive home league wins is over. Liverpool were aiming to become the first top flight team since Sunderland in 1891-92 to complete a campaign with a 100% home record but Burnley’s organisation, strength and rousing finish put paid to that. Another record, Manchester City’s tally of 100 points, was also jeopardised by the draw, with Klopp’s team now requiring to win their three remaining games to take that mantle. Liverpool will find home comfort in a 58th league game without defeat at Anfield, and the knowledge that sequence could have ended too had Johann Gudmundsson not rattled their crossbar late on. Andy Robertson’s fine header was all the hosts had to show for a dominant first half before Rodriguez’s immaculate equaliser rewarded Burnley’s vast second-half improvement. “I can’t deny it feels like we’ve lost the game,” admitted Klopp. “In some moments it felt like Liverpool versus Nick Pope. The biggest challenge in football is to create against a team that is as well organised and has an outstanding attitude like Burnley. We did that, but there was always one guy who wanted to deny us.” This was a fiercely and refreshingly competitive contest. Liverpool controlled the first half, switching play superbly and combining sharply. Burnley, their resources stretched to the extent that left-back Erik Pieters was stationed on the right of midfield, fought tirelessly to resist the pressure. Sean Dyche’s two tight banks of four also tested the patience of the champions, who started with two academy products in Neco Williams and Curtis Jones. Both impressed but this would prove a trying afternoon for Liverpool. Mohamed Salah needs one goal to become the first Liverpool player since Roger Hunt in 1965-66 to score 20 league goals in three successive seasons. Hunt’s World Cup-winning teammate, the late Jack Charlton, was remembered with a minute’s silence before kick-off. The Egypt international almost had the goal from Liverpool’s first incisive attack but Kevin Long made a perfectly timed interception to prevent him reaching Robertson’s centre. Salah then volleyed towards the top corner from Roberto Firmino’s lay-off but Pope clawed the ball to safety with an excellent save. Burnley’s keeper started the game leading Alisson 14 to 13 clean sheets in the race for the Golden Gloves award but a 15th at Anfield was a tall order. He thwarted Jones and Salah again after Sadio Mané released his striker partner inside the area. From Robertson’s resulting corner, however, the resistance was broken. Fabinho floated a delightful cross into the area and Robertson, left unattended, ghosted in to send a header arching inside the far post. It was a finish that any one of Liverpool’s world-class forwards would have been proud of. The visitors had started to threaten by that stage, especially from set pieces, and Rodriguez should have tested Alisson when Phil Bardsley’s ball caught the Liverpool defence square. The striker dragged his angled shot well wide. Pope produced another superb save to deny Mané and, when beaten by Firmino early in the second half, he was saved by a post. The Brazilian’s wait for a first league goal at Anfield this season continues. Burnley remained under pressure until the closing stages, Jones driving a good chance wide, and levelled when Bardsley sent a free-kick deep into the Liverpool box, where James Tarkowski’s towering header fell for Rodriguez. The striker had plenty to do with the ball spinning away from goal and Virgil van Dijk closing in but he swept a clinical finish inside Alisson’s right-hand post. Klopp was unhappy at the lack of protection afforded Alisson – not with the decision to refuse a penalty when Gudmundsson caught Robertson after the ball – and the keeper presented the substitute with a glorious chance to win it in the 87th minute. Gudmundsson struck the bar, however, but the plaudits belonged to Pope regardless. “He has been performing like that all season,” said a delighted Dyche. “He is unorthodox in terms of making saves that people don’t expect him to make but he enjoys the group he has in front of him.” They could well be England players on this form.