Hawaii prepared for Hurricane Douglas on Sunday, with predictions of high winds, rain and storm surge. “It’s definitely going to be a triple threat,” said National Weather Service (NWS) meteorologist Vanessa Almanza, adding that rainfall could be anywhere from 5in-15in. Douglas weakened on Saturday to a category 1 hurricane as it approached Hawaii, but officials warned people should not be lulled into complacency. The NWS said Douglas should remain a hurricane as it moved through the islands on Sunday. “Douglas is continuing a gradual, slow, weakening trend, which in itself is good news, but the bad news is that this hurricane is going to come very close to the islands even as it’s weakening,” said Robert Ballard, the science and operations officer at the Central Pacific Hurricane Center. “And we do expect significant impacts as it makes its point of closest approach or possible landfall as it comes through.” Oahu, home to the state’s largest city, Honolulu, was placed under a hurricane warning. Kauai and Maui were also placed under warning status, while a hurricane watch was canceled for the Big Island. Officials on Maui planned to sound warning sirens, alerting residents to shelter in place or take refuge at one of seven shelters around the island. The hurricane was packing maximum sustained winds of 90mph. The NWS said parts of Maui would feel the first impacts of Douglas on Sunday morning, followed by Oahu about midday and Kauai and Niihau in the evening. Maui officials said they would assess damage on Monday. “We know that it is weakening as it approaches, but it still will have significant impact on each island,” Hawaii governor David Ige said. State health officials contacted each of the 625 people currently in isolation or quarantine because they are either Covid-19 positive or have been in contact with someone who is. Every one indicated they would shelter-in-place and not seek refuge at a hurricane shelter. “That gives a sigh of relief,” said Honolulu mayor Kirk Caldwell. Hawaii has some of the lowest coronavirus infection rates in the nation, but numbers have been rising. Every day since Thursday, Hawaii has reported record highs of new cases, including 73 on Saturday. Caldwell said 13 shelters were to open at 9am on Sunday around Oahu, well ahead of the hurricane. People will have to wear face coverings to be admitted, and will have to wear them unless they are eating, drinking or sleeping. The storm was about 185 miles east of Honolulu, moving west-north-west at 16mph. Donald Trump issued an emergency declaration for Hawaii, directing federal assistance to supplement state and local response efforts. Hawaiian Airlines canceled all Sunday flights between Hawaii and the mainland and between the other islands. Ige said residents should have 14-day emergency supply kits in place, but because of Covid-19 he encouraged people to add masks, hand sanitizer and sanitizing wipes.