Interracial marriage was illegal in Mississippi when Natasha Trethewey’s parents, Gwendolyn and Eric, met there at college in the mid-1960s, so they crossed the river into Cincinnati, Ohio, to wed. After they divorced in 1972 Gwendolyn moved with her daughter to the more racially progressive Atlanta, Georgia, where she took a master’s degree in social work and began a successful career. There she also met Joel Grimmette, the man who would shoot her dead at the age of 40. We arrived in a city [Atlanta] in the midst of dramatic demographic, social, and political change. Just over a decade before, the schools had been officially desegregated. The physical barricades that prevented blacks from moving into white neighbourhoods were, by court order, removed, and what had been a gradual flight of white residents to the surrounding suburbs had rapidly increased. In 1960 blacks had made up less than a third of the city’s residents, but by 1970 they represented more than half of the population. How long after we arrived was it, the evening my mother called me out of my playroom to meet a man standing in our kitchen doorway? He was tall and slim, his face outlined by long sideburns. He looked at me a little sideways. “Joel, this is Tasha,” my mother said to him. I could see that his hand trembled a bit as he reached for the back of a chair. “What should I call you?” I asked. Something about the way he answered unsettled me. “You can call me whatever you like,” he said, grinning, his smile uneven, a twitch in his upper lip. I shook my long braids, as was my habit, as if to banish a thought. “I’ll call you Big Joe,” I said, skipping out of the kitchen and back to my playroom. You decide that you must do something. You think somehow you can protect her Perhaps that’s what made me wary of him – something in his gestures – even as he played the role of helpful boyfriend to my mother, volunteering to babysit me in the afternoons whenever she was in class. On the days that he kept me we’d often take drives around the city. He seemed to like driving without a particular destination, as if simply to be in the car. I’d sit far against the passenger door, trying to breathe in fresh air from the barely open window as he smoked. I was careful not to fidget, or do anything to attract his attention, speaking only if he addressed me. Each time we arrived back at the apartment I let out a sigh of relief. I did not tell my mother anything about those afternoons with Big Joe, nor that I was afraid of what, one day, he might do. I spent all of that summer vacation at my grandmother’s house in Mississippi and when my mother had come to take me back to Atlanta it had been three months since I’d seen her. “I have a surprise for you. You have a new baby brother,” she said, as declarative and matter-of-fact as she’d always been. “And Joel and I are married. We’ve moved to a new apartment where you have a much larger room down the hall.” Standing speechless before my mother I asked no questions, deciding that Big Joe must have come to the marriage with a baby just as my mother had come with me. You now have a stepfather and a stepbrother, I told myself. This was the story I held on to for years, telling it again and again to distance myself from this new family I did not want. Often, I wonder whether the course of our lives would have been different had I told my mother, early on, the ways Joel had begun to torment me when she was not at home. Would she have wanted to save me right then? And in so doing, gotten out of the marriage early enough to save herself? Why didn’t I tell? I don’t recall exactly when it began. Always, there was some small thing he’d accuse me of, some transgression he invented in order to punish me. “I know how to fix you,” he’d say. “You’re like those retarded kids where your mother works [as personnel director, at the Georgia Retardation Center] and you need to be committed.” He’d tell me to pack my bags and stand over me in my room as I emptied the contents of my chest of drawers into a suitcase. Then he’d load me into the car as I sobbed. Joel would drive me around for nearly an hour, saying nothing, until he decided I’d had enough. Then he’d take me back home, my face streaked and puffy, hours still before my mother would return. Though he did this again and again, the threat he made always the same, I was young enough, or frightened enough, to believe that he would one day carry out his promise. You are in the fifth grade the first time you hear your mother being beaten. You have moved to a new house only a few months before, and sometimes your brother is still afraid to sleep in his new bedroom alone. His room is right next to the bedroom your mother and Joel share. You tuck Joey into the top bunk and listen from the lower as he falls asleep. This is when you hear it, the loud smack as Joel’s fist hits her. And then your mother’s voice, almost a whimper but calm, rational: Please Joel. Please don’t hit me again. For all you know this is the first time. Most likely it is not. You decide that you must do something. You think somehow you can protect her. After school the next day you catch your mother alone, sitting on the bed, her left temple dark and swollen. Standing in front of her, eye level, you say quietly: “Mommy do you know how, when you love someone and you know they are hurting, it hurts you, too?” You hold her gaze for the moment it takes until her mouth falls open. It’s as if she is about to speak, but then she only nods, her lips pressed tight against any words. Later that night you hear it, your mother’s voice as she tells Joel: “Tasha knows.” You are ashamed and you don’t know why. The need in the voice of your powerful, lovely mother is teaching you something about the world of men and women, of dominance and submission. You hear in your mother’s words a plea to get him to stop. You hear her desperate hope that his knowing you know will put an end to the abuse. As if that will change anything at all. And now you know that there is nothing you can do. Cognitive theorists suggest that speaking about trauma or writing about it may help heal the fissure in the fabric of selfhood brought on by the event. I think now that’s why my mother gave me the diary. She knew that I was hurting; I had told her so. The diary gave me a crucial outlet. My mother had chosen a lined leather volume with a gold border around the front cover, and a brass lock with a tiny key. Inside, she inscribed these words: “For my daughter, Natasha, on her 12th birthday. Love, Mom.” Even the edges of each page were tipped in gold, as if to add a shimmering frame to whatever I might write. I was thrilled to have a book for my thoughts, for my eyes alone. That feeling was short lived. It wasn’t long before I came home from school one day to find the lock on the diary broken. “Who said you could go to Washington?” Joel said, standing in the doorway to my bedroom. I had been excited about the school trip for months, and my father had promised half the cost so that I would be able to go. “Mom did,” I said, the diary in my hand open to the page on which I’d written of my excitement. “We’ll see about that,” he said, turning to walk back down the hall. When the time came, I was indeed allowed to go, most likely because my mother had intervened, telling Joel that my father would be upset when he found out that I was being kept from going on an educational field trip. I don’t think Joel ever mentioned the diary to my mother, that he had broken the lock and read it. Neither did I. Knowing that what had happened was between us alone, I was determined to respond on my own. No longer was I content to describe my days, to begin my entries “Dear Diary”. “You stupid motherfucker!” I wrote. “Do you think I don’t know you’re reading my diary.” I realised there could be power in articulating what I needed to say. Even more, there was something powerful in writing it. My first act of resistance. This was long before I knew what Joel was actually capable of, which allowed me a certain fearlessness. One day I come home from school giddy with news. I have been promoted to editor on the newspaper staff. I can see the delight in my mother’s face. She is smiling at me and I am like a daffodil, lifting my face to the sun. “I’m going to be a writer!” I announce. “You not gonna do any of that,” Joel says, shrugging his shoulders. He doesn’t even look up from his plate when he says it. My mother is seated to my right and I see her out of the corner of my eye, a deep furrow between her brows, her jaw clenched so tight she seems to speak with her mouth closed: “She. Will do. WHATEVER. She wants.” For years she has held her tongue, encouraging me mostly in private so as to avoid his jealous anger. This moment is different, and I know the cost. She’s going to be beaten tonight for that, I think, the tone – even inside my head – resigned, matter of fact. I’ve replayed this scene in my head countless times: She. Will do. WHATEVER. She wants. Even now I hear in my mother’s voice, her measured restraint, the origins of my own. Not long after I went to the kitchen to announce that I needed to walk up the street on an errand. Joel was sitting at the table watching her wipe down the counter. It was a small gesture that struck me, something girlish in the way she cried: “I’ll go with you!” I was surprised how tightly she held my hand as we walked, swinging it a bit, as I’d done long ago, a small child skipping beside her. Before I knew it I was telling her, at last, all the things I had been holding back for years. He torments me when you are not at home, I heard myself saying. I used to be able to stay in my room on Saturday mornings when you went shopping, pretending I was asleep until you returned. But now he just comes into my room and starts harassing me as soon as you leave the house. It was not long after that, on a Monday evening in October, that she knocked on my door and came quietly into the room, her arms crossed as if she were holding herself as she spoke. Put everything you want to take with you in the front of your closet and stacked on your dresser. Don’t ride the bus home from school. I’ll pick you up. I will go to sleep, I remember thinking, and when I wake I will never see him again. She seemed tired and moved slowly, limping a bit. She winced when I hugged her But then I did. Less than a week later, unable to find the women’s shelter we moved to, he came to the place he knew I’d be on a Friday night: the high school football game at Panthersville Stadium. I was down on the track with the other cheerleaders when he walked onto the landing. I spotted him at the top of the stadium, in the doorway, and watched him – though I pretended not to – as he made his way down the bleachers. When he chose a seat just in front of my friend and her father, I could no longer pretend not to notice him, so I waved, smiling and mouthing the words, “Hey, Big Joe.” After that, he didn’t stay much longer. Years later I would read in the court documents that he told his psychologist at the hospital he’d brought a gun with him, planning to kill me right then and there, to punish my mother. He hadn’t, he said during his trial, because I’d waved and spoken kindly to him. Had I known it even then, known it in my body first, that something I’d done had changed the course of events? Had he killed me then, as he claimed to have intended, he would have been apprehended, convicted, and imprisoned. By smiling and speaking a greeting to him, I had unwittingly saved myself. We only had two short months of respite before Joel made his first attempt to kill her, on Valentine’s Day 1984. That morning, I was in my room in our new apartment getting dressed for school when Joey knocked on the door. He’d been sitting at the kitchen table, eating his breakfast. “I just saw Mama and Daddy get in the car and drive away together,” he told me. I knew immediately something must be wrong but I didn’t want to let on that I was worried. “OK,” I said. “Go back and finish your breakfast. I’ll take care of it.” I called the battered women’s shelter. The woman on the phone said: “Maybe they just went somewhere to talk.” “No,” I said. “My mother would never get in the car and go anywhere with him. Never.” It’s odd to me that I don’t recall anything about being at school the few hours before I finally heard from my mother. I recall only the moment I saw her again that evening. She seemed tired and moved slowly, limping a bit. She winced when I hugged her. The detail that has always stayed with me – from what little she told me of her ordeal that day – is that there was a knock on the door of the apartment, to which Joel had brought her once he could assume Joey and I had left for school. Before that, she had been stalling him, trying to prolong her life, even buying some time by having sex with him when he blamed her for his impotence. And then the knock came – the women’s shelter had called the police – and in that moment, she said, she knew that she’d been saved. Joel went to prison, nearly a year-long sentence ahead of him, and she was, for the first time in 10 years, free. By December the divorce she requested was final and my mother, Joey and I had moved into our new apartment on Memorial Drive in Stone Mountain. In the afternoons I’d come home without having to worry that Joel might be there. On the refrigerator my mother would have posted the weekly breakfast and dinner menu. For the first time in years everything felt normal. It was not to last. After his release from prison, Joel began calling my mother repeatedly and, as the district attorney’s record states, “making terroristic threats”. What the DA needed was evidence of those threats – not simply her word – so the assistant DA installed a recording device in her apartment, connected to her phone. With the evidence obtained in several recorded conversations, the magistrate issued an arrest warrant at 1am on 5 June 1985. Still, the police officer posted to watch my mother’s apartment left in the early morning hours – even though it was his assignment to stay. Later that morning, with the police watch discontinued, Joel arrived at her apartment. The autopsy records her death from two gunshots, at close range, in the face and neck. One bullet went through her raised right hand before entering her head. It lodged near the base of her skull, behind the blood-red bloom of her birthmark. The next day my father, Joey and I go to her apartment to collect some of her things. Entering the parking lot of the apartment complex, I see what’s left of the chalk outline on the pavement where her body had lain. There is a stain that travels downhill from the spot, a dark rivulet alongside the white curb. In front of the apartment a television news crew waits beside a van. There is yellow police tape still stuck to the apartment door when I pass through it. Later, at a hotel downtown where we spend the night, the local evening news comes on and I see my likeness on the TV screen. The clip is on a loop as the newscaster speaks, showing over and over the same scene: a young woman walking up to the door of an apartment and stepping in, shutting it behind her. This is where it begins, my estrangement from myself. For several minutes I watch her, the girl I have left behind, stepping again and again into the last place I saw my mother alive. This is an edited extract from Memorial Drive: A Daughter’s Memoir by Natasha Trethewey, published by Bloomsbury, £16.99, on 28 July. To order a copy, go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply