The Premier League is too predictable these days, isn’t it? Not for us, apparently. We thought Manchester City would retain their league title; they surrendered it with seven games to spare. We thought Sheffield United would finish last; they ended up challenging for Europe. We thought Newcastle and Brighton would go down; they were safe weeks ago. We thought Norwich, Bournemouth and Watford would stay up; they are off to the Championship. We thought Spurs would canter into the Champions League places; they celebrated Europa League qualification on the final day. Although, to be fair, we knew that Chelsea would finish fourth. What we said: “Liverpool have shed the substantial weight of nearly men and look the only team capable of denying Manchester City a hat-trick of league titles.” What happened: Liverpool lifted the Premier League trophy for the first time after winning 32 of their 38 games and finishing 18 points clear of their nearest challenger. They were relentless from start to finish. What we said: “Might Pep Guardiola slacken off even half a per cent? It is unlikely. Given his love of the pursuit of excellence, plus the chance to claim a third successive title and make City only one of five clubs to do so in England – Manchester United (twice), Liverpool, Arsenal and Huddersfield Town are the others – the manager’s hunger should remain unsated.” What happened: City scored the most goals, had the most shots, made the most passes, kept the most clean sheets, had the best goal difference and, in Kevin de Bruyne, had the best player in the league. Yet they finished 18 points behind Liverpool. What we said: “A top-four place is an outside prospect. Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s focus is to gel the squad into a recognisable unit that features a discernible style and spirit and shows evidence of an upward trajectory.” What happened: After a tough start – they were 14 points behind Leicester City on New Year’s Day – Manchester United came good with a run of 14 games unbeaten at the end of the season to clinch third place and Champions League football next season. What we said: “For all the romance of Frank Lampard’s homecoming, there are awkward realities to confront. He cannot make any signings and Eden Hazard’s departure to Real Madrid leaves an enormous gap.” What happened: Chelsea’s young players and the odd veteran – here’s looking at you, Olivier Giroud – stepped up and took the club back to the Champions League on the final day of the season. Lampard also has an FA Cup final to enjoy on Saturday. It is rare for a footballer to win the FA Cup as a player and a manager, although Lampard was on the pitch the last time that happened, in 2012 when Roberto Di Matteo guided Chelsea to the trophy and was was then sacked six months later. Lampard seems to be at the Bridge for the long haul. What we said: “Leicester City’s plan to evolve from blue sky champions into contenders for all seasons is advancing nicely. Their squad is full of energy, invention and versatility, and they should threaten the elite this season even without Harry Maguire. The captures of Ayoze Pérez and Youri Tielemans have the potential to lift Brendan Rodgers’ buoyant side up another level.” What happened: A season of two halves. Having sat among the elite for most of the campaign, Leicester lost their way after the lockdown and fell short of the Champions League places on the final day of the season. They exceeded expectations overall but, having been 14 points above Manchester United on New Year’s Day, missing out on the top four feels like an opportunity missed. What we said: “After reaching the Champions League final, there is an appetite for silverware at Spurs. The biggest trophy of them all certainly not out of the question either after last season’s exploits in the Champions League. But ensuring he can retain the services of Mauricio Pochettino for the long term should remain Daniel Levy’s highest priority.” What happened: Spurs won the Audi Cup in the summer but things soon fell apart once the real action returned. Pochettino’s services were not retained for the long-term. Instead, Levy showed him the door in November while the club were 14th in the table. José Mourinho arrived and guided Spurs to sixth, claiming the title of “the champion of the last five matches”. Mourinho dug out the results he needed and deserves credit for that. However, having followed their team to a Champions League final and prepared for a tilt at the title, Spurs fans must wonder how they ended up watching their manager celebrating on the touchline on the final day as the club qualified for the Europa League. What we said: “Nuno Espírito Santo is counting on the players who did so well last season to do so again. Wolves have kept them all. They know the formula and they apply it well. They are solid and fluent, a serious team.” What happened: It’s still happening. Having finished seventh in the Premier League, Wolves still have two eyes on European football next season. They will qualify for the Europa League if Chelsea beat Arsenal in the FA Cup on Saturday and could even end up in the Champions League. Their Europa League campaign resumes next Thursday, when Olympiakos are the visitors in the last-16. Football never stops at Molineux. What we said: “The time for excuses is over. Unai Emery must return Arsenal to the Champions League. This season will be a battle to show that Arsenal’s long-term transition into also-rans can finally be arrested.” What happened: Emery was sacked in November when Arsenal were eighth in the table, the position in which they finished under Mikel Arteta. Their season of transition and mediocrity could still have a happy ending though. Arteta was the Arsenal captain when the club won the FA Cup in 2014; now he has the chance to win the trophy as the club’s manager. What we said: “Sheffield United have broken their transfer record four times since securing promotion to the Premier League, but the most important signature they acquired in the close season was on Chris Wilder’s new contract. The club have reported record season-ticket sales and Bramall Lane is likely to be sold out for most of the season. Why so cheery? Perhaps because fans have seen the full extent of the Wilder effect at close quarters.” What happened: Sheffield United had just finished 11th in League One when Wilder took over as manager in 2016. In the last four years, he has produced miracle after miracle. Promotion to the Championship, promotion to the Premier League and now a ninth-place finish in the top. They nearly made it into Europe, and they proved a lot us wrong. What we said: “With no European distractions this year, Sean Dyche’s tight-knit side can continue what has been a gradual improvement” What happened: Burnley finished 10th in the table, up from 15th last season. You could almost say that, with no European distractions this year, Sean Dyche’s tight-knit side continued what has been a gradual improvement. What we said: “Ralph Hasenhüttl has generated a palpable degree of confidence around the club, in the same way Pochettino and Ronald Koeman did before him. The way in which Hasenhüttl galvanised a dejected group of players has been impressive, with St Mary’s transformed from a breeding ground of pessimism into one of positivity.” What happened: Having flirted with relegation early in the season, Southampton battled back and finished the season brilliantly, going unbeaten in their last seven games. Hasenhüttl deserves a lot of credit for the way he turned the club’s season around. Their home form remains an issue – they were the only team in the division who won the majority of their points from away matches, and there was this result, which feels an awfully long time ago now. What we said: “Marco Silva has foundations to build on and after some shrewd signings should be aiming for Europa League qualification.” What happened: Silva was sacked in December after a 5-2 defeat to Liverpool that left the club in the relegation zone. Duncan Ferguson took the reins, beat Chelsea in his first game and enjoyed every second on the touchline. That was a hoot. With Carlo Ancelotti now in charge Everton should be on the up, but they have been in transition for a long time. What we said: “Having lost Rafa Benítez as well as their two top goalscorers last season, Solomón Rondón and Ayoze Pérez, Newcastle are relegation candidates.” What happened: Steve Bruce kept the club away from the relegation battle, which must go down as a success, but the real battle for Newcastle fans is off the pitch. They will be a club forever in limbo until Mike Ashley leaves. What we said: “Crystal Palace find themselves in an all too familiar position. Roy Hodgson is desperate for additions to an ageing squad whose fate could rest on Wilfried Zaha’s future.” What happened: Having spent last summer worrying about Wilfried Zaha’s future and the age of their squad, Palace fans are back in familiar territory. It was a decent campaign – including a long awaited win at Old Trafford – but their run of seven defeats in their last eight games was troubling. What we said: “Brighton are targeting the hallowed next step that has so far eluded them. Graham Potter has his work cut out to get the club moving in the right direction.” What happened: Brighton enjoyed some great results, thrashing Spurs 3-0 and beating Arsenal home and away, as they secured another season in the Premier League. Potter’s signings worked well, particularly Neal Maupay, who finished the season as the club’s top scorer. What we said: “West Ham remain difficult to read. There has been undoubted improvement under Manuel Pellegrini, who has the backing of the board, but the Chilean struggled to stamp out his side’s inconsistency.” What happened: After a dire run of nine defeats in 12 games, the board lost patience with Pellegrini in December. The club were 17th in the table at the time, hovering above the relegation zone. David Moyes took over and declared: “I’m here to get West Ham wins and get them away from the bottom three. That’s what I do, I win.” He was as good as his word but, in light of the expectations last summer, it has been a frustrating campaign overall. What we said: “Villa have signed 11 players at a combined cost of more than £100m this summer. Despite all the fresh blood, a more familiar face is most likely to provide a touch of class: the boy who used to run into the bushes of the back garden as a kid pretending to embrace the Holte End and conducted the impromptu singalong to toast promotion from the balcony of the team hotel in May. When Jack Grealish plays well, so do Villa.” What happened: Grealish scored on the final day, Villa stayed up and the captain went out drinking with his manager to celebrate a job well done. They stayed up and that is all that really matters. Now they have the chance to consolidate – and pray that Grealish stays. What we said: “Eddie Howe has held on to his indispensable players – Ryan Fraser, Nathan Aké and Callum Wilson – as well as recruiting from the Football League to freshen up his squad. When Bournemouth are firing on all cylinders, they are a match for anyone but conceding too many goals is their frailty.” What happened: Bournemouth started the season brilliantly. When they beat Manchester United in early November, they moved up to seventh in the table. But it was not to last. Their sloppy defence caught up with them and, after five years in the top flight, they are going back to the Championship. What we said: “Watford have not invested heavily but believe Javi Gracia will be able to continue his impressive work with the players available.” What happened: Gracia was sacked in September. His replacement, Quique Sánchez Flores, was gone by Christmas. And his replacement, Nigel Pearson, was relieved of his duties with two games to go – when the club were above the relegation zone. In the end, Pearson’s temporary replacement, Hayden Mullins could not keep them up. A mess of a season. What we said: “Daniel Farke’s side were excellent going forward last season but will need to improve defensively against stronger opposition.” What happened: Norwich were hapless in attack and defence, and went down without much of a fight. They lost all nine of their games after the restart, scoring just one goal in that dismal run. They did not win a point in the league after February. Still, they will always have that 3-2 win over Manchester City in September. In a season of unpredictable outcomes, that result stands out as the most ludicrous of them all.