The Swiss special federal public prosecutor has opened a criminal investigation into Fifa’s president Gianni Infantino, following inquiries into meetings he had with the Swiss attorney general, Michael Lauber, and another law official, Rinaldo Arnold. Infantino has said that he arranged the meetings shortly after he became the Fifa president in February 2016, followed by one in 2017, to assist with Lauber’s investigation into alleged corruption at Fifa during the tenure of the previous president, Sepp Blatter. However the prosecutor, Stefan Keller, had proceeded with inquiries into the meetings, and in a statement, the Swiss federal council said Keller had concluded that there are “indications of criminal conduct” in connection with them. The statement said: “This concerns abuse of public office (Article 312 of the Swiss Criminal Code), breach of official secrecy (Article 320 of the Swiss Criminal Code), assisting offenders (Article 305 of the Swiss Criminal Code) and incitement to these acts.” The statement added that Keller is seeking approval from the necessary Swiss parliamentary committees to open criminal proceedings against Lauber, who resigned last week after being accused of lying about the 2017 meeting, which he denied. Both Lauber and Infantino have denied any wrongdoing. Arnold is understood to be a longstanding friend of Infantino’s whom the Fifa president had asked to arrange a meeting with Lauber. Infantino has repeatedly rejected allegations that there was anything wrong with him having the meetings, and described the complaints as “absurd” when asked about it at a Fifa council meeting last month. He insisted then that meeting with the Swiss attorney general was “perfectly legitimate” and “perfectly legal,” saying it was “part of the fiduciary duties of the President of Fifa,” given the volume of allegations being made against some previous Fifa figures and under investigation in Switzerland as well as the US. In a combative statement issued by Fifa after the criminal investigation was announced, Infantino said: “It has been my aim from day one, and it remains my aim, to assist the authorities with investigating past wrongdoings at Fifa. Fifa officials have met with prosecutors in other jurisdictions across the world for exactly these purposes. People have been convicted and sentenced, thanks to Fifa’s cooperation, and especially in the United States of America, where our cooperation has resulted in over 40 criminal convictions. Therefore, I remain fully supportive of the judicial process, and Fifa remains willing to fully cooperate with the Swiss authorities for these purposes.”