Neil Lennon said he was encouraged by the possibility of having fans back inside stadiums in time for the first Old Firm game of the new Scottish Premiership season, which will kick off on 2 August with Celtic aiming to win a historic 10 successive title. As it stands, fans are still unable to attend matches, although the first Old Firm game of the season, at Celtic Park, has been scheduled for Saturday 17 October – a date subject to change for TV reasons – when the SPFL is hopeful that restrictions on social distancing may have been relaxed enough to allow some supporters through the turnstiles. “Hopefully we may get permission to get the punters in through the door, which would be fantastic,” the Celtic manager told Sky Sports News. “While it’s great to see football back, it’s just not the same without supporters. “We are very excited. It’s a big season for us domestically and obviously on the European front as well. It will be difficult playing without supporters and that’s something we’ll have to adapt to very quickly. We’ve got to take it as the next title, really. For some of the players who come in, it will be their first. For some, they will be going for their 10th. “But we’ve just got to keep a balance and say it’s the next challenge. There is going to be a lot of hype surrounding it. It is monumental what we’re going for but we can’t let it distract us from actually playing the games and not look too far ahead.” Fixtures for the forthcoming Scottish Premiership campaign were released on Monday and Celtic will kick off their bid for a historic 10th successive title at home to Hamilton on Sunday 2 August. Neil Lennon’s side were crowned champions for the ninth time in a row in May, after the campaign was curtailed prematurely by the coronavirus crisis, and begin their attempt at a record-breaking triumph when they welcome Brian Rice’s side to Celtic Park for their latest flag-raising celebration. Rangers will be determined to halt their rivals’ reign and Steven Gerrard’s team start their season with a trip to Aberdeen on 1 August. There will be extra poignancy on 2 January when Glasgow’s big two meet for their traditional New Year showdown as the clubs mark the 50th anniversary of the Ibrox disaster, while the third derby is back at Celtic Park on the weekend of 20 March. Dundee United – who have confirmed former Tranmere coach Micky Mellon as their new manager – will make their return to the top flight after a four-year absence, so long as the legal challenge launched by relegated Hearts and Partick Thistle does not scupper their plans. St Johnstone are scheduled to be their first opponents at Tannadice on 1 August, when Callum Davidson will take charge for the first time after taking over from the departed Tommy Wright. The opening day also sees Hibernian welcome Kilmarnock to Easter Road and St Mirren facing off against Livingston in Paisley. Motherwell’s trip to Ross County has been pushed back until Monday 3 August. The winter break has been scrapped as the league aims to make room for cup ties that went unplayed last season, with games scheduled across the four weekends in January. The SPFL chief executive, Neil Doncaster, said: “The pre-season fixture announcement is always a key event in every football supporter’s calendar, but it feels particularly important this year, given the challenges caused by Covid-19. “Football plays a unique role in the social, cultural and economic life of Scotland, and I’m sure the millions of passionate fans who follow our game will welcome this significant step towards the resumption of matches. But it must be stressed that they remain subject to approval from the Scottish government for the restart of football in Scotland.”