The soul singer Mica Paris explores the church-based roots of her music in this documentary history of gospel. Paris traces gospel’s journey from the American south to artists such as Sam Cooke who sang the music in a secular context and then to Stormzy’s use of gospel in his 2019 Glastonbury headline set. She is candid about her emotional connections to the genre, questioning why she left it as she hears from the royal wedding singers the Kingdom Choir. Ammar Kalia The UK’s biggest TV awards show takes place behind closed doors this year, hosted by Richard Ayoade. It may be a less glamorous affair, but tune in nonetheless to see whether the thrilling British-Japanese drama Giri/Haji or royal period piece The Crown will come out on top. AK With Richard Ayoade set to pass on the Travel Man baton to Joe Lycett, this series rounds up his most memorable mini-breaks. Adventures range from scaling Dubai’s Burj Khalifa with a queasy Johnny Vegas to whale watching with Lena Dunham in Tenerife. Hannah J Davies Freewheeling Margolyes continues her entertaining tour of her adopted home, this week exploring the concept of “mateship”. She witnesses the often traumatic divide between aboriginal and non-aboriginal citizens in Alice Springs, yet a drag show in Darwin gives her hope. AK Love is in the air – and the water – as the staff of the floating Dubai hotel gear up for Valentine’s Day. That means Chef Dino is including oysters in his menu and a tour guide is reminiscing about the ocean liner’s history. Nelson Mandela proposed to his third wife here, apparently. Ellen E Jones Another enjoyable outing with lovable scumbags Conor and Jock, who this week steal “the slowest bikes on the entire planet”, leading to the “slowest bike chase in the history of bike chases” with a determined Sergeant Healy in panting pursuit. How will they wriggle out of it when he traps them in a warehouse? Ali Catterall Peeping Tom, 10pm, Talking Pictures TV After all the delightful dreamlands Michael Powell created, from A Matter of Life and Death to Red Shoes, this study of a serial killer (Carl Boehm) who films the death throes of his victims is his late-career nightmare: a sardonic thriller that unveils the dark side of Powell’s craft. The critics reacted with loathing and the director’s career was virtually ended. Paul Howlett Australian Rugby: Brisbane Broncos v Cronulla-Sutherland Sharks, 10.55am. Sky Sports Main Event. Twelfth round NRL fixture. Snooker: World Championships, 2.30pm, Eurosport 2. First round matches from The Crucible. European Tour Golf: The English Open, 3pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Day two coverage.