My father was diagnosed with terminal cancer on Christmas Eve and called me at 6pm to tell us. We had no idea. He had been going for tests but hadn’t told us. He became unwell quickly, to the point that my sister and I had to swap care the day before lockdown so he would have someone with him. I joined her and her partner to care for him in the final couple of weeks, when all I could do was draw as the waiting and stress were unbearable for us all. He couldn’t manage conversation so it gave me a role to sit silently beside him, drawing the garden he designed so beautifully. In the following excruciating days it was the only thing that felt remotely OK. We had no palliative cancer team because of Covid, but had a fabulous GP and district nursing team for the last few days. Seeing his garden appearing through the end of my pen gives me something to hold on to. Kara Christine I was inspired by all of the key workers during the pandemic as my parents both work for the NHS. I wanted to design something as a tribute to everyone, from cleaners to bin men, putting in the effort especially for those who have been forgotten. Niamh McBride Lockdown has given everyday objects I took for granted a deep and renewed significance. Every single day I see, use and sometimes even talk to them. Recently I have become fixated with a bathroom sink – the one I wash my hands in for 20 seconds every time I come inside. I am furloughed from my job and I shut myself in to a tiny downstairs bathroom and spend hours drawing or painting it each day, whether I feel happy, anxious, upset, excited, or just bored. The sink has become a mirror of how I feel, an image of the claustrophobia of lockdown, and, in a strange way, a companion. Claire Parker I have painted nearly every day during lockdown as a form of therapy, as well as a great mindfulness activity. I was inspired to paint this picture of Rachel on her roof, not only because it was such an unusual, wistful pose, but also no doubt a reflection of the anxiety and frustration felt by many young people during the lockdown. Vicki Maguire, Belfast During the early weeks of lockdown here in France I came across these trees in an empty railway station. They were completely bare in the early morning sun and looked as if they were grasping for something. It seemed to sum up how I felt at the time. Now that restrictions have been relaxed and things appear to be less surreal, the tress are covered in dense, lush foliage. James O’Hanlon I work in TV as a graphic designer but, with my show on hiatus during lockdown, I have been trying out lots of types of art. This is the first time in years that I’ve had time to be creative outside of work. I’ve set up a weekly challenge with my friends. Tasks have ranged from making a pet from recycling to writing a song. I’ve done lots of painting and sculpture using things lying around my house. Caroline Sandford-Muir During lockdown I have mainly been drawing birds. I have never seen such an abundance and variety of birds – both in my garden and when walking locally. I don’t think most people, including myself, have seen spring happen like we have had the opportunity to this year. It has been incredibly inspiring. Jessica White I live in Oslo and my normal urban wandering and museum visits have been abruptly curtailed, so I have been forced to wander through the city in my head. It is absolutely necessary to create art if one is denied viewing it. I normally experience an uptick in my desire to paint as the sun appears here, but I have had an almost manic need to paint since the lockdown. This has been to the detriment of my ability to work at home. Steven Gersh Prior to lockdown I created illustrations for newspapers and magazines. Unfortunately, with print circulation and advertising revenue shrinking, the publications that commissioned me have stopped calling. I also make art just for the sake of it; as an indulgence just for me. My output has always been prolific and has relied on using whatever resources I can get hold off. Be that envelopes, Amazon packaging or found objects. Upcyling may be trendy but, as many artists have discovered, it’s the only way we can obtain the raw materials we need to continue to be creative. However, the first non-essential shopping I do when lockdown lifts will be to replenish art supplies. My glue stash is running precariously low. David Smith I haven’t painted before, other than my GCGEs 25 years ago, and really had no idea I could paint. It’s freaked me out slightly. I can’t quite believe I painted these. It just came out of nowhere. I painted this one for my mum’s birthday, based on a scene near where she lives in Marple, near Stockport. Paul Lomax I made art when I was younger but being in lockdown and the events that are happening around me, has inspired me to take up my paintbrush again. After the tragic death of George Floyd I felt an overwhelming sense of emotion, which inspired me to create this portrait of him. I also wanted to pay tribute and show that I support the black lives matter movement in my own way. Ruby Djordjevic Initially in lockdown I was doing some landscapes from drawings I made in March. When I ran out of inspiration, the images of the virus started to interest me and I have produced a number of pictures of it in response. I’ve been dabbling and daubing all my life. I believe that those of us lucky enough to be able to do it solely for pleasure should share it by giving our work away. Roger Hulme