Manchester United have announced the signing of the Spain full-back Ona Batlle from Levante and appointed the former academy coach Martin Ho as assistant to the manager, Casey Stoney. Batlle, who has signed a two-year deal, is United’s second signing of the transfer window, the England international Lucy Staniforth having been unveiled last week. They have also given one year-contract extensions to Kirsty Hanson, Amy Turner, Jess Sigsworth and Ella Toone. The 21-year-old Spaniard has five senior international caps and began her career at Barcelona before joining Madrid CF then Levante. “Ona is an exciting young full-back with fantastic pace and a real attacking mindset,” said Stoney. “Her style of play fits perfectly with the philosophy we have at the club. She is a hard worker and broke into the senior Spain side last year which shows the talent she possesses.” Ho, meanwhile, has moved up to the senior side following the retirement of the former Doncaster Rovers Belles manager Glen Harris – the father of the United right-back Martha – as United’s assistant. Ho previously worked in the boys academy at Everton before becoming assistant manager of Everton Women and worked for as technical director of Liverpool’s girls Regional Talent Club. Stoney said: “I cannot express enough gratitude to Glen for his efforts, he came in 18 months ago and seamlessly slotted into the club at a time when we were still a new squad finding our way. I’m delighted to have Martin as my assistant going into the new season. He is a great leader and understands the values and culture of this club which is so important.” Brighton have signed the teenage forward Katie Robinson from fellow Super League team Bristol City. The 17-year-old made seven appearances for City last season and the Brighton head coach, Hope Powell, said: “To break into the WSL as Katie did for Bristol City last season was quite an achievement for a 17-year-old. “She’s a versatile player because she plays up front or out wide and offers a goal threat. We’re looking forward to see how she develops, and I am sure she will want to be pushing for the first team squad as soon as the season starts.”