Returned travellers who went through Melbourne’s hotel quarantine have tested positive to Covid-19 in New South Wales and the Northern Territory. One man, who previously tested positive to Covid-19 during the two-week quarantine appears to have been released, travelled to Sydney and worked at a Woolworths supermarket while still displaying symptoms. “Our preliminary information is that he was assessed as not having persistence of symptoms and that he was released from quarantine in the usual way,” the NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, said. “In our investigations, he does report some persistence of the symptoms, so as for the abundance of precaution, we’re treating him as infectious. The level of virus detected is very, very low and what this may reflect is just the tail-end of the infection.” Fifty staff at Woolworths in the inner-west suburb of Balmain have now been asked to isolate for two weeks. The second returned traveller has become the Northern Territory’s first case of coronavirus in almost three months. It’s understood he spent time in a Melbourne infection hotspot before flying to Darwin. The man is a Darwin resident in his 30s who came back to Australia from overseas, the territory health minster, Natasha Fyles, said. He completed two weeks of quarantine in Melbourne before flying to Brisbane and then to Darwin, arriving on Monday. But before travelling he stayed with family in one of the hotspots for the virus in Melbourne. On arrival in Darwin he started to feel unwell and was tested for Covid-19, returning a positive result on Wednesday night. The man was taken to Royal Darwin hospital and was in isolation but experiencing only mild symptoms. “This individual has followed all the precautions and we wish them all the best,” Fyles said. “I want to reassure the community there has been minimal contact with the broader community … This is not a case of community transmission.” The retired judge and former royal commissioner Jennifer Coate will head up a judicial inquiry into the Melbourne hotel quarantine system after the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said a “significant” number of cases in the community stemmed from infection control breaches inside quarantine hotels by contracted security staff. On Thursday, the Victorian police minister, Lisa Neville, gave details of changes already enacted. “We now have the sheriff that is running the hotel quarantine program. In every single hotel where we have hotel quarantine, we now have Corrections Victoria supervisor, a senior person, in each hotel as we move to provide direct employment of people who will run that program no longer through contracting.” MUST WATCH: For everyone wondering what happens in a Lockdown police check #VicCorona @BreakfastNews @abcnews #Broadmeadows pic.twitter.com/WcGSh5ce0B Following the Darwin man testing positive, passengers on Qantas flight QF836 from Brisbane to Darwin on Monday were being traced. Queensland authorities will check on people who left the flight in Brisbane while Victoria health officials will also investigate the case to try to determine the source of the man’s infection. It is unclear whether he contracted the disease before arriving in Australia, or while staying with family members in Melbourne. The NT recorded its last case of coronavirus on 6 April and the territory’s chief health officer, Hugh Heggie, said the new case was a reminder to all Territorians that Covid-19 had not gone away. “What’s important is that everything that we have put in place seems to have worked and Territorians need to be assured that there’s no risk to the community,” he said. “In this case, the traveller did have some symptoms and he did contact the team to have a test … He did all the right things.” Fyles said the new case would not change the NT’s decision to relax border restrictions on 17 July, when only travellers from hotspots would be required to quarantine. She said closing the borders completely to all Victorians would be a “very simplistic response”. The minister said it was understandable that Territorians would be anxious and alarmed by the new infection. “But we have to understand that we’re stepping forward into what is our new normal,” she said. “We’re changing those restrictions and measures, we’re keeping measures in place to protect the community and they’re based on clinical advice.”