While the tentative resumption of the performing arts is officially allowed in England, singing, along with the playing of woodwind and brass instruments, is deemed a special case. Some serious early outbreaks of Covid-19 were associated with choirs and the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport has taken a precautionary approach. Concerns have also been raised about possible risks posed by the airflow from wind instruments. The current advice for England – other UK governments have yet to issue specific guidelines – is that while professional musicians can get back to work observing strict regulations, singers and woodwind and brass sections must be subject to particular precautions, such as distancing of 3 metres. For amateurs in England, though, singing or playing wind instruments in a group is forbidden. A vibrant culture of amateur choral societies and wind quintets, gospel choirs and brass bands has been silenced, with no indication of when they can get going again. While the precautions are sensible, facts are thin on the ground. In the case of the outbreaks that caused the anxieties about group singing, it has not been proven how transmission occurred. Was it because of physical proximity – sharing snacks in the tea breaks and hugs – or because of some property of singing itself? It is known that Covid-19 can be spread by droplets produced by talking, singing, coughing and other vocalisations. Some of these droplets are relatively large, and fall to the ground at a distance of 1-2 metres. Some, however, are much smaller. These aerosol particles remain in the air until blown away. There is still scholarly debate about the precise role that these latter particles play, but opinion is tending towards the view that the virus may indeed be transmitted by them. The practical question is whether singing and the playing of woodwind and brass instruments produce more of these droplets and aerosol particles than speaking, decibel for decibel. If they do not, then it would be illogical to attach specific regulations to these musical activities. If volume is confirmed as the major determinant of the number of droplets produced, as a 2019 study on speaking suggested, there could also be interesting consequences for any group activities involving raising one’s voice indoors – for example, cheering at a televised football match inside a pub. Better information is needed. Fortunately, research is being undertaken by scientists from Bristol University and Imperial College London. Experiments have taken place on professional and amateur singers, and woodwind and brass players, comparing the number of droplets and aerosol particles generated by these activities with speaking. The study is peer-reviewed and publication is expected within weeks. The livelihoods of professionals, the wellbeing of amateurs and the pleasure of audiences depend on it. It will be a wonderful moment when England, and the other nations of the UK, can start singing again. But it has to be done safely.