At some point in the 1970s, the late, great Bill Withers did a live recording of his song Grandma’s Hands. In the recording, he speaks plainly to the audience, folksy and casual, and introduces the song by saying he was raised by “just a nice old lady who used some very nice old gnarled hands to make life kinda nice for me at the time, when I really needed somebody”. He proceeds to sing one of the most beautiful songs I know, celebrating all that his grandmother’s hands, and the work they did, meant to him, and how much he misses them. The absence of the touch of all those we love is a profound loss. And so we grieve. As I, too, grieve the loss of so much of our beloved world, I think of my other griefs and the touch I miss most of all – my father’s. He passed away in May 2018, after what many called a “short illness” but in reality took an agonising three months. During those long days, I held his hand. It became a routine. I’d go into the room and tell him that “pumpkin is here!” and search underneath the hospital blankets for those big, strong hands, with long fingers that helped make him such a nimble guitarist. He didn’t always have energy for talking, but he always, always had the energy to squeeze my hand back, his skin still incredibly soft. Even weakened by illness, they still seemed like the kind of hands that could raise you, guide you, save you and keep you. Sturdy, consistent, loving. In the days before he was leaving us, I played him Grandma’s Hands. He whispered “that’s always been a great tune” and squeezed my hand. A musician by trade for all of his working days, music was often the centre of our conversations. In days when he couldn’t speak much, playing him songs that I loved, that our family loved, that he loved, was a way to pass the time, and a way to talk to one another, too. It wasn’t like the pre-hospital days, but it was something. Sometimes less than you want can mean more to you than words can say. “Most of us, at some point in our lives, have somebody that means more to us than anybody else has ever meant before or will ever mean again,” says Withers of this song. For me, that person was my father. I think of him so much, in so many different ways. But I know that the purest exchange of love I have ever felt was to lay my hand in his as he faded away, to know that he would muster the strength to clasp my hand until he truly could no longer. Withers sings the final lines: “If I get to heaven I’ll look for / grandma’s hands.” If I get to heaven, I’ll certainly look for my father’s hands. And in the meantime, perhaps the paradise on Earth we’ve all wished for for so long is the simple ability to hold, and be held again by our given or chosen families. I wish that for us all. • Lisa Lucas is executive director of the National Book Foundation