The Indian actor Aishwarya Rai Bachchan has tested positive for coronavirus, a day after her father-in-law and fellow actor, Amitabh Bachchan, and her husband, Abhishek, also both actors, were admitted to hospital for Covid-19. Rajesh Tope, the health minister for Maharashtra state, tweeted that Rai Bachchan and her eight-year-old daughter had tested positive. However, it is unclear whether the actor has been admitted to hospital, as her husband and father-in-law were on Saturday, with what they said were mild symptoms. Hospital officials and government health authorities said on Sunday that both men were in stable condition. Rai Bachchan, 46, has worked on several Bollywood and Hollywood films and is a brand ambassador for several multinational companies. On Sunday, India registered a record increase in coronavirus cases, taking its total to nearly 850,000 and forcing authorities to reimpose a partial lockdown in some densely populated areas of the country. Federal health ministry data showed more than 27,100 new cases reported in the last 24 hours while the number of deaths increased to 22,674, after 551 people died from Covid-19 in a day. Amitabh Bachchan, one of India’s best-known actors, tweeted on Saturday night that he had tested positive. Within minutes, his son Abhishek , 44, tweeted that he had also tested positive. Both were moved to the Nanavati hospital in Mumbai despite showing only mild symptoms. Both men appealed to their millions of fans to stay calm. Authorities launched a massive sanitising drill at Bachchan’s residence in Mumbai, spraying disinfectant in the large compound and on cars parked there. Amitabh Bachchan, 77, has been a prominent figure in the fight against the coronavirus by appearing in public service advertisements in which he urges people to wear a mask, wash their hands frequently and maintain physical distance. India’s film industry recently resumed shoots after a months-long hiatus following the imposition of a nationwide lockdown in late March. Actors over 65, such as Bachchan, are banned from the sets because of their vulnerability to complications caused by the virus.