The summer transfer window will run well into autumn this year after the Premier League and EFL agreed that moves could continue to be made until 16 October. Players across English football will be able to join new clubs from 27 July, the day after the restarted Premier League season comes to an end. For international deals the window will close 10 weeks later on 5 October, with a further domestic-only window running for another 11 days. A cut-off date of 5 October had been recommended by Uefa, so that club squads at the top of the men’s game would be completed in time to register for European competition. An extension was agreed independently between the leagues, however, with an agreed priority of allowing extra scope for Football League clubs hit hard by Covid-19 to trade their way back to some kind of financial health. The extended domestic window would allow for movement between EFL clubs and between the EFL and Premier League. Premier League teams will not be able to trade with each other during this time. Any player who transfers during the window would not be registered to play for their new club until the beginning of the 2020-21 season. This rules out the possibility of someone signing for one of the teams set to play in the Championship play-offs, where the final is scheduled for 4 August. The details of the window were agreed by Premier League clubs and the EFL board. They are subject to approval from Fifa. The controversial five-substitute rule is to be extended for the duration of next season, Ifab has confirmed. A measure intended to help prevent players from succumbing to injury after the Covid-19 lockdown has been criticised for being advantageous to clubs with bigger squads. Competitions were given the go-ahead to continue with five changes, however, after a ruling from the body which decides the laws of the game. Ifab said it had determined that the reasons behind the change are likely to pertain in a compacted 2020-21 season. “The main reason for the temporary amendment to [the substitution law] was the impact on player welfare of competitions being played in a condensed period and in different weather conditions,” Ifab said in a statement. “The recent review has shown that the reasons for the temporary amendment remain valid.” Implementing it is optional. The Premier League and EFL are to consult their clubs, and it is thought there are dissenting voices in both competitions.