The Duke of Portland’s boathouse is probably the most popular holiday let in the Lake District, booked up for at least 340 days each year at an average cost of £350 a night. But for the past 103 days, the luxury one-bedroom property, perched on the shores of Ullswater – once used by the 3rd duke of Portland, AKA William Cavendish-Bentinck, a three-time prime minister – has lain empty. The last entry in the guestbook is dated 24 March, the morning after Boris Johnson put the UK into lockdown. Two nurses from Barnsley said they had enjoyed “social isolating at its best”. It has been remarkable how many people have tried to sneak in over the past three and a half months, said Gail Corbishley, the property’s manager: “I had people writing and saying: ‘I want to come with my girlfriend and we live together so it’s OK.’ And I would think: ‘Well, Mr Johnson says you can’t.’” This Saturday, the boathouse will accept its first guests since March, when England’s hospitality industry opens up for its belated summer season. In tourism honeypots across the country this week, an army of cleaners and maintenance workers have been making thousands of B&Bs, campsites hotels and holiday cottages “coronavirus-secure” as they bite their nails about what lies ahead. On a drizzly morning this week, Sonia Dodgson returned to give the boathouse a once-over with her duster. Her cleaning business could not operate at during lockdown. She ended up £8,000 out of pocket and having to take a temporary job doing home care instead. “Oh it’s good to be back,” Dodgson said, dressed in an apron and mask, scattering petals on the boathouse bed, admiring the gleam of the copper bath tub. “I’m a cleanaholic.” She insisted she was not worried about catching Covid-19 from guests. A laminated sheet on the kitchen work surface asks guests to strip their own bedding and open all the windows when they are packing up before her arrival to clean. The boathouse is just outside Pooley Bridge, a village at the north end of the lake, where the Ullswater ‘Steamers’ normally set sail. Covid-19 has been tough on the local tourism industry, which was badly hit in December 2015 when Storm Desmond washed away its 18th-century stone bridge. More than four-and-a-half years on, the new bridge is still not finished, with no vehicular access from the west. In the garden of the Sun Inn, John and Jane McGuire were putting the finishing touches to their new beer kiosk – an addition that gets round the indoor ban on customers queuing at the bar. “I’ve not managed to sleep beyond 5am yet,” said John McGuire, of the stress caused by the sudden three-month closure. He estimates the pub has lost £250,000 of trade, as well as 100 gallons (455 litres) of beer they had to pour down the drain. “We’re opening with a bit of trepidation,” he said. “I’m amazed Boris has opened all hospitality on a Saturday. I would have done it on a Monday to give us time to get used to it.” McGuire is trying to stay optimistic but said he did not know whether they would survive to 2021. “It will be touch and go. Between May and September we usually generate enough to get us through the quiet times between November and March, and we’ve lost half of that already,” he said. Up the road at 1863, an award-winning restaurant and boutique B&B, the owner Mark Vause was trying to level the carpark before Saturday’s reopening. Bookings have been strong since the reopening date was announced, but profits will inevitably slump, he said, showing the Guardian around the reconfigured restaurant. “Normally on a Saturday night we can do 46, 50 covers. Now we will be down to 24. We won’t be turning tables. Booths that normally seat four will take just two, to avoid our serving staff having to lean over anyone. It’s going to be tricky, I must admit. But we are doing our damnedest not to let staff go.” Back in the heart of the village, Andrew Kaye says he has had a pretty good crisis, all things considered. Since May 2016 he has run Chestnut House, a grocery store specialising in Lake District produce and 400 kinds of gin. During lockdown the shop began a delivery service, serving shielding residents all over the region using a van loaned for free. “It was mad, there were two weeks when we were doing 14- to 16-hour days – 50 deliveries a day in the peak,” said Kaye. “But that fortnight was probably the only time we were turning over anything like what we normally would. Overall, I’d say we are 50% down.” Normally, during the summer Kaye sets up a tasting table outside the shop, offering visitors thimbles of gin. “We can’t do that now,” he said. “Even though the cups are disposable, we can’t do anything which will encourage large groups of people to congregate.” Some residents are looking forward to visitors returning – largely those with a stake in the tourism industry. Others preferred it during lockdown. Members of Maggie Tindall’s family run a cafe in nearby Glenridding, as well as a boat rental company. “We need to have the tourists back but we need them to be sensible. The amount of litter that has been left has been awful,” she said. “I like it without the tourists,” said her friend Sylvia Tiffin with a guilty laugh. “Since the restrictions on movement were lifted we have been inundated. People have been wild camping, having parties on the fells. Apparently some people got out to Peel Island on Coniston and chopped down trees for firewood. It’s awful. We belong to Penrith Ramblers and bring packed lunches on our walk. None of us would even think about leaving the tiniest scrap of tinfoil behind. Yet people having been coming here and abandoning their tents, nappies, all sorts.” Visitors are welcome, insisted Tindall. “We just want them to be responsible.”