‘Sufferin’ succotash!’ was one of my favourite things to say when I was about eight, thanks to Sylvester the Cat on Looney Tunes. Back then, I had no idea that it was the equivalent of a gentle swear word, nor that succotash was a wonderful old Native American stew. And what a stew it is: a joyful, rollocking medley of vegetables such as beans, corn, peppers and tomatoes – a catwalk of summer’s best vegetables, in other words. Now, I like to think that the two are actually related, and that ‘Sufferin’ succotash!’ is what you’d be forced involuntarily to utter when trying succotash for the first time. Traditionally, there are lima beans in a succotash, but given that they’re not readily available in the UK, I’ve used delightful, kermit-green broad beans instead. This is perfect for dipping, scooping and mopping up with crusty bread. Prep 15 minCook 25 minServes 43 tbsp neutral oil – I like Mr Organic rapeseed1 big onion, peeled and finely chopped1 red pepper, cut into 2cm dice2 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed1 green finger chilli, finely chopped3 medium vine tomatoes, quartered (250g)2 small cobs of corn, kernels shaved off with a sharp knife – you need 150g2 courgettes, cut into 1cm pieces (400g)250g mixed broad beans and peas500ml vegetable stock, suitable for vegans¾ tsp salt10g, or 1 handful, finely chopped chives10g, or a handful, finely chopped parsley To serveOat creme fraiche – I like Oatly’sCrusty baguette Heat the oil in a large casserole and, when hot, add the onion and pepper and fry for about 10 minutes, until the onion is soft and golden. Stir in the garlic, cook for a couple of minutes more, then add the chilli and tomatoes. Cook for about six minutes, until the tomatoes have broken down and become a bit paste-like. Throw in the sweetcorn and courgette, leave to cook for a few minutes, then add the broad beans and peas, stock and salt, and bring to a boil. Turn down to a simmer, cook for five minutes, then divide between four bowls, and serve topped with a spoonful of vegan creme fraiche and with crusty bread for mopping up.