Some positive news to start the week (though there will, of course, be some caveats to consider too). Initial figures on betting turnover and gross win on horse racing for the first four weeks of the sport’s resumption from 1 June imply a Levy yield for the month that is short of the pre-lockdown level, but not by as much as could have been expected. Tracks may be spectator-less at present and the good ship racing is still slowly sinking as a result, but the betting public is bailing it out at sufficient speed to keep it afloat for now. The total number of races held between 1 and 28 June – including a Royal Ascot with six extra handicaps added to the traditional schedule – was around 80% of the norm, while year-on-year turnover was about 75% of the norm. Thanks to a slightly better than normal gross win margin for the betting firms, this should mean that Levy yield for the month was at least approaching the normal average of around £8m. And so to the caveats. These are big numbers, and still a little fuzzy around the edges. These are also early days for the resumption, and initial levels of turnover could just reflect pent-up demand from the previous two-and-a-half months, as well as the early absence of any competition for the punter’s pound, from Premier League football in particular. There is also an obvious possibility that betting turnover will decline sharply if, or more likely when, the economy plunges into a deep, post-lockdown recession. All the same, the return from betting in June was towards the top end of the Levy Board’s expectations, although its modelling assumed that betting shops would be shut for the whole of June when in fact, with ideal timing, at least some of England’s betting shops opened their doors 24 hours before the opening day at Royal Ascot. Caution remains the watchword, however. The Levy Board guaranteed a significantly higher contribution than normal to prize funds for the first three months of the resumption, to partially offset the huge drop in revenue as a result of racing behind closed doors, as well as the fact that media rights income from betting shops will pick up only slowly and seems unlikely to ever return to pre-lockdown levels. The Board will decide later this month on its contribution from September onwards, but anyone expecting a sudden, multimillion pound injection of cash into prize funds seems sure to be disappointed. The news on betting turnover and Levy yield is still positive, though, as well as a reminder of how important betting is to the sport’s funding, now more than ever. ITV’s viewing figures for Royal Ascot were excellent, but the conclusion which was drawn from this in some quarters – that there is an audience for “pure racing” with little or no interest in betting – was some way wide of the mark. ITV’s contract – which, incidentally, has less than six months to run and has yet to be renewed – only worked because of the revenue gained from advertising, mostly for betting firms, and is believed to have been worth £30m over four years. Around £7.5m per annum, in other words. Or what the Levy brings in every month. Ayr 12.05 Star Citizen 12.40 Dodgy Bob 1.15 Star Of Emaraaty 1.45 Great Colaci 2.20 Cmon Cmon 2.50 Flying Moon 3.20 Le Reveur 3.50 CalliopeWindsor12.25 Creedmor 1.00 Zamaani 1.35 Magical Ride 2.10 Nugget 2.40 French Asset 3.10 First Winter 3.40 Propriety 4.10 Sherpa Trail 4.45 MolinariKempton Park4.40 Rhoda’s Choice 5.10 Moment Of Hope 5.40 Feel Good Factor 6.10 The Blue Bower (nap) 6.45 Dark Phoenix 7.15 Volcanic Sky 7.45 Roar 8.15 Mayson Mount 8.45 Ubla (nb) Ayr gets Monday’s action under way shortly with an eight-race card and Great Colaci could be the pick of the prices in the seven-furlong handicap at 1.45. Gillian Boanas’s small string of Flat horses has been in excellent form since the resumption, with seven of her eight runners finishing in the places and Great Colaci registering a win at Newcastle on 27 June. He was a good second to Moretti at Thirsk last time out off today’s mark of 54 and though the seven-year-old is not getting any better, his usual, dependable level of form gives him every chance in today’s field. Dodgy Bob (12.40) is another with an obvious chance on the same card, while Nugget (2.10) and French Asset (2.40) are fairly priced at the other afternoon meeting at Windsor. The best bet of the day, though, could be at Kempton Park this evening, where The Blue Bower (6.10) attempts to make it three out of three since joining Jonathan Portman. She needed every yard of the six furlongs to keep her streak going at this track last time and the return to seven could reveal further improvement.