Britain has a once in a generation chance to transform racial inequality through a public inquiry into the Covid-19 pandemic, according to Lord Woolley, the chair of the government’s race disparity unit’s advisory group. Calling for a full statutory inquiry which Downing Street is so far resisting, Woolley said the pandemic has “laid bare those elements in our society that are deeply racialised”, citing the number of black, Asian and minority ethnic health and care workers who have died, the exposure to the virus of zero-hours worker who are more likely to be from ethnic minorities and housing conditions which have enabled the spread of Covid-19. He said an inquiry would expose “the uncomfortable truths and build something that would last for generations”. “We have never had a better opportunity in our generation to dig deep and reconstruct and make sure this never happens again,” he said in a seminar exploring the prospect of an inquiry, broadcast on Wednesday. “Historians will look back and ask: what was our response [to the pandemic]? We can do nothing, a little, our normal default, or we can do something special.” The prime minister said in a speech on Tuesday: “There must be time to learn the lessons and we will.” But fears are growing among lawyers that ministers do not want a full statutory process. A Downing Street spokesperson said: “In the future there will be an opportunity for us to look back, to reflect and to learn some profound lessons. But at the moment, the most important thing to do is to focus on responding to the current situation and that’s exactly what we’re doing.” But Woolley’s call was backed by Dame Una O’Brien, the permanent secretary at the Department of Health between 2010 and 2016, who said there was “a sense of passion and anger that needs to be heard”. She said that as well as probing government “mistakes and omissions” in its handling of the crisis and a lack of preparation, an inquiry should “bear witness to the separation, pain and loss too many people have experienced”. Key topics would include: whether an earlier lockdown was realistic and how many lives that could have saved; why 25,000 people were discharged from hospitals into care homes without being tested; the disproportionate impact on people from black and minority ethnic backgrounds; and whether it was right “to sideline local government”. Any statutory inquiry into the pandemic threatens to be vast, take years and cost hundreds of millions of pounds, especially with hundreds of thousands of bereaved people potentially wanting to have their say. Sir Robert Francis QC, the chair of Healthwatch England, said an inquiry would need to consider public health messaging, analysis of incidence and mortality, recent concerns about the advice around shielding, “the pressure on care homes to take untested residents” and the knock-on effects on mental health services and maternity services. “I wish good luck to whoever has to sort all of that out,” he said. A former head of the civil service, Sir Bob Kerslake, led calls for a public inquiry in mid-April, but more than three months later, there has been no announcement. “This government appears increasingly resistant to a statutory inquiry,” said Daniel Machover, the head of civil litigation at the law firm Hickman & Rose, and chairman of the charity Inquest. “I’m afraid the evidence is pointing more and more to no such overarching statutory inquiry.” He said it appeared to be “the last thing the government wants”. A key question will be how far any inquiry probes structural issues such as racial disparities and society’s treatment of the elderly, given that more than 16,000 people died from confirmed or suspected Covid-19 in care homes. Chairing the seminar, Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the Royal Society of Arts, asked: “Are we going to have to think more deeply about the way we treat, value and resource older people in our society?” Vic Rayner, the executive director of the National Care Forum which represents charitable care providers, replied: “Of course. When you realise 89% of those that are likely to become ill are older people and you don’t prioritise older people there seems to be a conundrum. “We absolutely do need to think about what sort of integrated system do we want now and for 15 years’ time. There is a big cultural issue around our values and our treatment of older people.”