The sports industry has been dealt another blow after the government withdrew permission for limited numbers of fans to watch events inside venues with immediate effect because of rising Covid-19 infection rates. It is understood that the World Snooker Championship in Sheffield, which was planning to operate at one-third of capacity over the next two weeks, will lose around £700,000 in ticket sales as a result. While Goodwood racecourse, which was expecting 5,000 paying racegoers in a pilot event on Saturday, is expecting to lose £100,000. The Oval and Edgbaston, which were due to stage Bob Willis Trophy matches in front of 2,500 county cricket fans this weekend, have also been affected. The new policy was announced by Boris Johnson, who confirmed that no crowds would be permitted inside sporting venues for at least the next fortnight. “Pilots of larger crowds in sports venues and conference centres will not take place. We must squeeze the brake pedal,” the prime minister said. The chief medical officer for England, Chris Whitty, went further in warning: “We have reached the limits of opening up in society. The idea we can open up everything and keep the virus under control is clearly wrong.” Reacting to the government’s announcement, an ECB spokesperson confirmed the two Bob Willis Trophy matches would still go ahead this weekend, but without fans. “We understand this is disappointing for supporters who have waited a long time to see their clubs in action,” he said. “However, we understand the reasons the government has made this decision.” Goodwood racecourse also confirmed in a tweet that Saturday’s races wouldcontinue behind closed doors. “The government has informed racing’s leaders in the past hour that it has withdrawn permission for a pilot event involving customers, to proceed at Goodwood tomorrow,” it said. “The racing on Saturday 1 August will continue behind closed doors as it has on the previous four days of the meeting.” World Snooker allowed fans to attend Friday afternoon and evening sessions of the world championship at the Crucible. But no spectators are to be allowed in from Saturday. “We realise this will be a huge disappointment for fans who were excited to witness the magic of the Crucible over the next fortnight, and we feel the same ourselves,” said Barry Hearn, chairman of the World Snooker Tour. “Above all it’s a great shame for people who had those golden tickets, but in the circumstances we are now living in we have to accept the decision and move on.”