Exeter Chiefs were accused on Wednesday of being “tone deaf” and “sticking up two fingers” to all minority groups after resisting calls to drop their name and logo out of respect for the Native American community. The club’s board met on Wednesday following a petition from the fans’ pressure group Exeter Chiefs For Change which demanded an end to the club’s use of “harmful imagery and branding”, which included a Native American headdress, saying there was no place for it in a predominantly white British environment. Another supporters group launched a counter-petition, saying the club’s use since 1999 of a Native American in its logo was a mark of respect and honour. The board considered both petitions and voted against a rebrand with its one concession being to retire the club’s mascot, Big Chief. “It is extremely disappointing that Exeter Chiefs has thrown away this opportunity to show itself as an inclusive club,” Exeter Chiefs 4 Change said in a statement after the board decision. “Indigenous people have made it clear time and again that all uses of their imagery in this way are offensive, harmful and unacceptable. “Exeter’s refusal to fully listen to these pleas is tone deaf and sticks two fingers up not only to them but to all minorities. We accept that the intention of the club for the branding was originally positive and not derogatory, but now they know it is not perceived in that way, they are making a conscious decision to be intentionally offensive by continuing to use it.” The NFL’s Washington team this month dropped its Redskins name and imagery before the new season after 87 years, having come under scrutiny amid the Black Lives Matter movement. They have adopted the temporary name of Washington Football Team. Exeter have been known informally as the Chiefs for some 100 years. The nickname was adopted because of a tradition of clubs in Devon at the time to refer to their first teams as the Chiefs but in 1999, four years after professionalism, a rebranding led to the introduction of the existing badge and mascot. The club said in a statement that it had considered lengthy submissions from those who wanted the club to drop its nickname and all the imagery associated with it and supporters who felt the branding was not disrespectful to indigenous groups. “A detailed dossier of all evidence was compiled ahead of the meeting and was reviewed by all members of the board,” the statement read. “Part of the club’s review has seen it engage with sponsors and key partners to seek their views – and we have also listened to the response of our supporters, the wider rugby community and certain sections from the Native American community, all of whom have provided us with detailed observations in letters, emails, social content and videos. “Content provided to the board indicated that the name Chiefs dated back into the early 1900s and had a long history with people in the Devon area. The board took the view that the use of the Chiefs logo was in fact highly respectful. It was noted over the years we have had players and coaches from around the world with a wide range of nationalities and cultures. At no time have any players, coaches or their families said anything but positive comments about the branding or culture that exists at the club.” An assistant professor in modern American history at Cardiff University, Rachel Herrmann, had argued that supporters who wore Native American headdresses and war paint at matches and brandished tomahawks were evoking a history of settler colonialism, but Exeter’s only concession was to get rid of the club mascot ahead of the Premiership’s resumption next month. “This decision will not age well for the club,” said Exeter Chiefs For Change. “There is no doubt the branding will eventually have to change. By refusing to deal with it now, the club is lining itself up for extensive reputational and commercial damage and bringing shame on all those connected to it. It reflects badly on rugby.”