As a teenager, a visibly giddy Micah Richards famously dropped the F-bomb in an interview on the BBC, so it seems fitting that 14 years later he has become a popular addition to the squad of pundits from which various networks chose their talking heads. Effing and jeffing remains off limits, but Richards is inexperienced and unpredictable enough to have producers twitching nervously, while it is nigh on impossible not to warm to his infectious good humour and natural gregariousness. Although recently retired, he has few qualms about pointing out the shortcomings of contemporaries with whom he shared dressing rooms, while his insights regarding the goings-on in such sanctuaries are more relevant than most. Recalling how he “burst on to the scene” as a player, he was challenged by a clearly sceptical Roy Keane on Sky Sports. “I played for England at 18! Youngest ever defender to play for England! I would say that’s bursting on to the scene!” countered Richards, putting the Irishman firmly back in his box. The former Rangers striker forged a memorable partnership with Jon Champion during the 2018 World Cup, the commentator providing the perfect foil for McCoist’s flights of fancy and popular mid-match diversions into the colourful local history of whatever city in which they happened to find themselves. Rarely given high-profile games, the duo still have an unerring ability to make even the most mundane football match seem compelling. Elsewhere, McCoist’s apparent love of life and combination of wit, intelligence, diligent research, football experience and general good humour have made him an invaluable sidekick to Laura Woods in her new role as presenter of the TalkSport breakfast show three times a week. Under the pressure of live radio, running orders are regularly torn up and rewritten as often bad-news stories break, requiring constant gear changes. With their natural chemistry, Woods and Coisty invariably seem to cope effortlessly, whatever the mood or tone. Few pundits divide viewer opinion as much as Roy Keane, whose famously blunt and belligerent appraisals of what he perceives to be the many shortcomings of pretty much everyone on his radar appear to have stalled a once promising career in management but are catnip to TV executives who cannot get enough of his abrasive style of punditry. His detractors argue that he has long since become a parody of himself and they may well be right. Keane has little or no time for the nuanced tactical insight a former player of his talent and experience could surely provide. Instead, he prefers to go about his business swinging verbal haymakers, memorably eviscerating Harry Kane, Luke Shaw and David De Gea for their defensive slovenliness during a post-lockdown match between Manchester United and Tottenham Hotspur. Subtlety is not his forte, but his low tolerance threshold for “bluffers” mean he is rarely anything but box office. It was two years ago that TV executives started routinely introducing women into the traditionally alpha-male environment of punditry, the heads of various networks desperate not to be left behind after one of their number took the enlightened and long overdue step of soliciting the opinions of women in a bid to increase diversity in their coverage. Greeted with predictable horror in some quarters, experts Eni Aluko and Alex Scott were first out of the traps and seem to have won over all but a depressingly loud minority of implacably dunderheaded sexists. They have since been joined by Karen Carney, Emma Hayes and Rachel Brown-Finnis, to name but as few, most of whom perform admirably in the face of social media abuse that is as toxic as it is relentless. Scott remains the standard-bearer for female punditry, although we have yet to see a woman make the potentially lucrative contrarian female analyst role her own. The former USA goalkeeper Hope Solo seems a likely candidate, while on the Guardian’s Football Weekly podcast, outspoken QPR fan Flo Lloyd-Hughes is never backwards in coming forwards when it comes to offering strident, informed and potentially unpopular opinion. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/07/27-36762-gnl.fw.20200727.sj.fw2707.mp3 One or both of Sky Sports analysts Gary Neville and Jamie Carragher traditionally occupy slots in this particular end-of-season appraisal and remain worthy of inclusion, but the duo are being unceremoniously benched this time to make room for a tip of the hat to BT Sport’s Premier League Tonight. A Saturday night analysis show that encourages viewer interaction through the medium of social media and homemade videos seems like an inherently terrible idea, but presumably strict quality control helps make this one work. Chaired by Jake Humphrey and featuring a panel of in-house and guest pundits such as Joe Cole, Rio Ferdinand, Steven Gerrard, Michael Owen, Peter Crouch and Owen Hargreaves, there’s no obvious reason why this effort should stand out from others of its ilk, but it just has that little extra bit of moxie. What’s moxie, I hear you ask. Well, I don’t know but this show’s got it.