Only 19 families of NHS and social care workers who died after contracting coronavirus have so far been approved for the £60,000 compensation payment from the government. At least 540 health and social care workers have died in England and Wales during the crisis but, as of 8 July, just 51 claim forms for the taxpayer-funded bereavement scheme had been received. None have been rejected, with 32 still under consideration, according to the figures, provided by the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC). Layla Moran, the Liberal Democrat MP who obtained the numbers in response to a written parliamentary question, said they showed more needed to be done to increase awareness among bereaved families and ensure all those entitled to claim did so. “It is concerning that so few families of NHS and care workers who tragically died on the frontline against coronavirus have so far benefitted from this scheme.” she said. “The government must ensure more is done to promote awareness of this scheme to eligible families. “No amount of money could ever compensate for any loss of life. But we must honour those who have made the ultimate sacrifice and provide security and comfort for their families.” The NHS and Social Care Coronavirus Life Assurance (England) Scheme 2020 opened on 20 May. Announcing the scheme on 27 April, the health secretary, Matt Hancock said that 82 NHS workers and 16 social care staff had died during the crisis and he felt “a deep personal sense of duty” to look after their loved ones. Those figures have risen to 272 and 268 respectively, according to Office for National Statistics data for deaths registered in England and Wales between 9 March and 25 May. A report by Amnesty International earlier this month suggested the total was second only to Russia, where 545 health workers have died. To be eligible for the English scheme (there is a separate one for Wales): Covid-19 must have been a cause of death. The individual must have contracted coronavirus in the course of their work. They must have been exposed to a “high risk” of contracting the virus during their work, which could not reasonably be avoided. It was announced amid concerns about whether frontline workers had enough personal protective equipment (PPE) to prevent them from contracting the disease. Moran, who is standing to be the next leader of the Lib Dems, said on Sunday the compensation scheme should be widened to include the families of other key workers. “I would also like to see this scheme extended to all key workers who have been on the frontline against this pandemic, including those working in transport,” she said. “All of these essential workers have put their lives at risk to protect others, and they should be reassured that if the worst happens the state will step in to help their loved ones.” In April, Hancock said the government was looking at other groups of key workers who do not have a life assurance scheme in place. A DHSC spokesperson said: “Information on the scheme has been shared with NHS and social care employers who are responsible for informing their employees. If employers become aware of a death where there may be eligibility for a claim, they are asked to contact the next of kin.”