The FIA is to investigate Valtteri Bottas and Charles Leclerc for breaking the sport’s Covid-19 protocols. Both drivers returned to their homes in Monaco after Sunday’s Austrian Grand Prix before coming back for this weekend’s race at the same circuit. F1 personnel must remain within isolated social bubbles during race weeks. A picture of Ferrari’s Leclerc on social media appears to show him with a waiter at a Monte Carlo restaurant this week while Bottas posted on Instagram from Monaco. When asked about his trip, Mercedes’s Bottas insisted he had remained within his social bubble and that he was confident he had not broken any regulations. Leclerc believed his actions were acceptable because he had tested himself before returning. “I did go back at home,” he said. “On the other hand, I’ve been tested twice before coming back. So in two days, testing twice, both negative obviously. Yes, I went back home for two days and then the two tests to be sure of the results.” The code of conduct does not preclude personnel leaving venues between races but is specific about them not leaving their pre-designated social bubble should they do so. Ferrari have already been warned about protocols after Sebastian Vettel was seen speaking to Red Bull’s Christian Horner and Helmut Marko without a mask. The FIA is likely to issue a warning to both Ferrari and Mercedes on following protocol. The code of conduct does allow for repeated failures to obey procedures to to be reported to the stewards which could result in racing penalties. Meanwhile in Spielberg, Bottas’s teammate Lewis Hamilton has said he was not distracted by his outspoken commitment to anti-racism in the buildup to the Austrian Grand Prix last week. The world champion finished fourth in the opening race of the season which was won by Bottas. Hamilton insisted that he had not lacked focus nor would he step back from drawing attention to the pursuit of racial equality. Hamilton, F1’s only black driver, had been the focal point of attention before the race in a debate on how drivers would make a gesture toward anti-racism on the grid. While 14 including Hamilton took the knee, all 20 wore “End Racism” T-shirts. Hamilton did not enjoy his best weekend on track, however. He was beaten to pole by Bottas and then penalised with a grid penalty for failing to slow under yellow flags in qualifying. In the race he was running second when he hit Red Bull’s Alexander Albon and was given another penalty, relegating him to fourth. Hamilton was unequivocal that he had not been distracted. “I don’t feel like I need to refocus, on Sunday my race was pretty strong,” he said. “I would not say I was distracted by any means. I continue to stay focused as I was before. Both to fight and win this championship but also fighting for equal rights.” Hamilton has yet to decide whether he will once more take the knee before this weekend’s race, the second in a row in Austria, designated the Styrian Grand Prix. McLaren’s Lando Norris confirmed that the matter would be discussed again in the drivers’ briefing on Friday. Hamilton emphasised that he would not take the knee during the national anthem and that any gesture would be dependent on the time he and his team had on the grid. Last week several minutes had specifically been allotted for the drivers and F1 to make their gesture. This week that is understood not to be the case. The British driver was, however, uncompromising in his determination that his efforts to promote the equality agenda would continue. “What is important is people of colour don’t have the time to just have this as a small moment and then go back to things as normal,” he said. “We have to continue to speak out and utilise the moment to spread awareness and continue to push for change. That is not going to go away anytime soon. I am not against taking the knee again. If I can find a way of making sure that it doesn’t get in the way of us doing our job then I will.”