Dame Vera Lynn has been honoured with a flypast in her beloved East Sussex village before her funeral. Two second world war fighter planes flew over Ditchling to remember the singer, who died at the age of 103. The aircraft made three passes over the quiet village before departing to applause from the crowd. The singer, who entertained troops with morale-boosting visits to the frontline during the second world war, died on 18 June. The cortege bearing Lynn’s coffin, which was draped in a union flag, arrived in the village centre as a bell tolled. Hundreds of people gathered at the crossroads before the procession, which was led by soldiers. Representatives from the Royal British Legion stood in the road with flags as they waited to honour Lynn. A small police presence was also on hand to ensure proceedings went smoothly. The cortege paused for several minutes in the centre of the village where Lynn lived for 60 years. There was applause from the crowds as the two fighter planes flew over Ditchling. Sounds of the roaring engines filled the streets as the aircraft banked around the Sussex countryside. The cortege then made its way out of the village as it continued its route to the crematorium in Brighton. It was followed by a spontaneous rendition of We’ll Meet Again, Lynn’s most famous song. The cortege was due to be greeted in Brighton by a tri-service route-lining party outside the chapel, together with a military bearer party ready to receive the coffin. A bugler from the Royal Marines was drafted in to provide a musical tribute inside the chapel. The Ministry of Defence will be represented by a senior officer who, along with the bugler and a small family group, will be the only people to attend the funeral service. A full memorial service will be held at a later date. Beforehand, a giant portrait of Lynn was beamed on to the cliffs at Dover to commemorate her life. Virginia Lewis-Jones, Lynn’s daughter, said: “We want to thank everyone for their tremendous support over the past few weeks. My mother always appreciated receiving messages from all over the world, and Ditchling was always particularly special to her. That is why we know she would be touched that so many people want to pay their respects.” Steve George, 59, a second world war re-enactor, came to Ditchling to pay tribute. He described how he met Lynn at a re-enactment in a marquee surrounded by veterans. “We had a group photograph with Dame Vera, we were all gathered round her dressed as the different generals. She was wonderful, absolutely wonderful, she had time for everybody. “It’s the end of an era. But she will never be forgotten.”