At least three pubs in England that reopened their doors for the first time on Saturday have been forced to close again after customers or staff tested positive for Covid-19. The Lighthouse Kitchen and Carvery in Burnham-on-Sea, Somerset, said a customer had tested positive and it was making its way through a list of people who were in the premises on Saturday. In a statement posted on Facebook, it said: “This isn’t the message we wanted to write so soon but the Lighthouse will be closed due to a customer testing positive. We are slowly getting through our list of customers that were in the pub on Saturday. All our staff are going to be tested and we will reopen when the time is safe to do so.” Also in Burnham, the Indian takeaway Saagar said it would be closing until Friday to undergo a deep clean after one of its drivers had been to the Lighthouse Kitchen, along with the Vape Escape bar, which has also closed for a full clean after a customer’s positive test. Leanne Underhill, the owner of the Vape Escape, said all staff tests had been negative and customers in the bar on Saturday had been contacted, in accordance with government advice. Somerset county council say they are not treating the cases as an “outbreak” and asked people to keep to social distancing guidelines and to regularly wash their hands. The Fox and Hounds in Batley, West Yorkshire, said it would be closed until further notice after receiving a call from a customer on Monday to say they had tested positive for coronavirus. It said it was waiting for “further guidance from [the] NHS and track and trace”. Staff have been tested and expect to receive their results within 48 hours. In a statement, it added: “The pub will be fully deep cleaned and when safe to do so we will reopen our doors. We fully understand this is a scary time but want to ensure our customer safety is our main priority in these tough times. “Over the past few weeks we have put a lot of hard work into the pub following government guidance to get us opened back up. Anyone that has visited us this weekend can see our new layout of tables of 1-metre-plus, our one-way systems, full table service and continuous cleaning throughout.” The Village Home pub in Alverstoke near Gosport, Hampshire, said it had also had a case of coronavirus, adding that “some of us are in isolation”. Its statement said: “The pub is now shut but all being well will open again on Saturday. Anyone who was in the pub over the weekend there is no need to isolate unless you show symptoms or are contacted direct by the trace group. Thank you and hope to see you soon.” All three pubs had previously posted about implementing new social distancing and safety guidelines in line with government advice. Under the measures, pubs can offer only table service, and customers must give contact details upon entry. UK pub and hospitality trade bodies have also published guidance for bars and restaurants on how to operate contact tracing. Contact details need only to be taken from one person in a group and must be kept for 21 days. Owners are also asked to note the arrival times of customers and how long they stay. People can refuse to give information, but owners can choose not to serve them. Tens of thousands of people flocked to pubs across England on Saturday as pubs and restaurants reopened. There were a number of arrests but police said a majority of people had acted responsibly.  