Before Covid-19, thoughts of the future for Bristol’s Bottle Yard involved lasers and LEDs. How would they incorporate the matter transporter for Crystal Maze contestants to “beam down” to different zones, or the computer-controlled mechanism that makes the set turn? And could they accommodate yet more of the big productions, from Poldark to The Pale Horse, jostling for time at the well-equipped West Country facility? “We were booming, hosting 10 to 12 productions per year with a full order book until the end of 2021,” says Fiona Francombe, who founded the council-owned studios a decade ago in almost three hectares (seven acres) of Whitchurch warehouses where Casualty was previously filmed, and will soon move to the Bristol Old Vic theatre school as its chief executive and principal. Since then, this quiet corner of south Bristol has been bathed in Hollywood lustre, courtesy of Dennis Quaid and Richard Dormer working there on the Arctic western Fortitude, and blessed with Bafta-winning shows including Broadchurch and The Lost Honour of Christopher Jefferies. When the pandemic hit, thoughts of the future became a lot less fun. “Lights went off, doors were locked, that was it,” says Francombe, whose husband – a production designer on the Sky series Riviera – only just arrived home in time after filming wrapped in Argentina. After months of uncertainty, production in Bristol has just started up again. However, negotiating the hazardous “new normal” has meant complying with reams of guidance from the British Film Commission, which outline Covid-19-secure measures, ranging from open-air rehearsals to putting coronavirus liaison officers in place. Needless to say, there’ll be no more morning dips in The Crystal Maze’s 18,000-litre (4,000-gallon) heated water tank, and no sharing of makeup brushes or cutlery, and no communal buffet-style catering. On a Thursday afternoon, everyone’s mucking in. “We’re on all fours drawing dots on floors, endlessly laminating [signage], having in-depth conversations about sanitiser, hooting over how glamorous TV is,” says Francombe. With supply-chain businesses suffering, it’s encouraging to see cameras being delivered again, taxis coming and going. “It’s the ripple effect, the money we push out into local economy.” CBeebies series Andy’s Aquatic Adventures was first back at the studios, albeit with a reduced but highly experienced crew. The show incurred minimal extra costs because of the delay and stripping back meant the camera operator doubled up as his own assistant. BBC Studios Natural History Unit series producer Mark Jones served as director, assistant director and script supervisor. It made him appreciate the team he couldn’t bring back all the more, he says. Working with the presenter Andy Day has been a constant giggle. “His high-spirited antics are motivation for all,” says Jones. With an ample mane that had grown considerably, Andy was concerned for his on-screen appearance. “It took practice to apply his own makeup, using a video tutorial. We pointed out if he needed concealer or should tuck a lock of hair behind his ear, but we let him dress himself in the morning!” There has been no huddling round for read-throughs and stunt demos at Bottle Yard unless there is PPE. Output is viewed on individual monitors. “It felt strange at the beginning – like a scene from ET,” says Jones. Gone is the greenroom, but there’s 25 metres (80ft) of greenscreen, which is used to place the studio-bound presenter over footage from Blue Planet II or Seven Worlds, One Planet, which can then be edited remotely. The Natural History Unit’s children’s department hasn’t slowed down – rather, it has found fresh content opportunities. A period drama was due with us, but unlike the soaps, they can’t refer to the virus or have cast attempt the hairstyles Shows based on entertainment formats can put coronavirus-safe systems in place, although there’s no chance the producer RDF will get contestants over for the US version of The Crystal Maze, scheduled to film its second series at Bottle Yard studios but now postponed. While crew can wear masks all day, actors can’t, and it’s easy to see how having to isolate before going on set or rent a house rather than being put up in a hotel could take the fun out of applying to appear in a gameshow. As for drama, Covid-19 poses problems for commissioners of anything but the most up-to-date shows. “There was a period drama due with us, but unlike the soaps, they can’t refer to the virus or have cast attempt [to create] the hairstyles,” says Francombe. “It would rely on wigs and intricate costumes. It’s all surmountable but more convoluted in terms of organisation and practicalities. Large dance sequences with a lot of supporting artistes wouldn’t be possible.” Working through the pandemic is easier for studios than for location shoots, however, as they offer controlled spaces. They may host half the shows that they normally would, owing to time-consuming procedures, but occupancy remains the same at present. “The Bottle Yard has maintained its income, which goes into council coffers to support struggling services”, Francombe explains. “Location filming, by nature, is slower so it’s all coming off the road; people are only going out for key shots. The last thing the inhabitants of Bristol need is more disruption.” Everyone wants more studio space and time, including a Netflix title which has just booked in. Thankfully the vast hangars have the floor space – 28,000 sq metres of it, 60% of which is studio space. Nickie Sault, producer of Shane Meadows’s The Virtues and the forthcoming Stephen Merchant thriller The Offenders, based on his parents’ work as community service officers, is navigating the changes from the other side. Twelve days into filming in March, she and her team had to stop production and Sault found herself locked down in vineyard accommodation in a village outside Bristol. Filming is now set to resume in November, but Sault is unsure whether the big US actor who has signed up will still be available. “The floodgates will open and we’ll all be vying for the same cast,” she says. The crew have taken a course on coronavirus from the industry body ScreenSkills, so they know what’s expected on set. “Stephen passed with flying colours,” says Sault. “I think he likes isolation, but film is all type-A personalities – we cannot wait to get back. To not work in this industry for months is terrifying.” In bubbles, cast and crew will only interact with members of their departments. “If we have a regional lockdown we’re in trouble because this is very Bristol-centric – it’s not something we could just shoot in Birmingham”, she adds. “We’ll learn from what’s happening around us and compromise, but not to the show’s detriment, for example using visual effects for crowd replication”. How much can producers ask of actors? Working with masked crew 2 metres away is strange enough. “They’ve got to act through that awkwardness,” says Francombe. “They want to throw caution to the wind but the advice is to be careful. It’s an internal tussle.” Abandoning ship on The Offenders hit hard financially. “[When you] restart you have to go into prep again because you’ll have lost cast, locations – you’re paying for time already paid for,” says Sault. “There are endless calls about how we can take from Peter to pay Paul. Our accountant has miracles to work on the budget.” The cost implications for up-and-coming creatives without a bankable reputations like Merchant’s are prohibitive. “Imagine filming inside a council estate flat – it’s security, time to clean, double shooting time. But those costs are nominal alongside building that set in a studio.” And, she agrees, especially when shooting might have to stop halfway through. Aside from Covid-19 caution, Sault believes the new normal should reflect diversity, an issue that was already in need of action before Black Lives Matter made the news. As well as reaching out to the local community in a bid to diversify the crew, the show’s script has been rewritten to incorporate the toppling of the city’s Edward Colston statue. The future is uncertain – TV was already risk-averse, and productions will be halted at any sign of a resurgence in infection. However, Francombe believes creativity will out, in whatever guise. “The viewer won’t know a scene had to be relocated from a beautiful mansion; the main thing is the storytelling is as rich as it’s always been,” she says. “This could really push visual effects on.” Sault takes a similar view. “As long as you have an amazing script, two actors in one room can transport you. Some people will do something special within this new framework.” Could she mean a certain Shane Meadows? They are speaking daily. “We’ve discussed doing something outside the box ... It boils down to performance. If you believe the people in front of you, you forgive almost anything else.”