The West Indies squad are already home. It is not so hard to understand their eagerness to get back there to breathe some warm fresh air, to walk where they want, to reunite with friends and to experience some sort of normality again. They return defeated but with heads held high and heartfelt words of gratitude ringing in their ears – from the ECB, the England players and the incredibly small group of others that crossed their path during their seven weeks bubbled-up in Manchester and Botley. Not many captains or coaches have their reputations enhanced after losing a series 2-1 but this is this case with Jason Holder and Phil Simmons. West Indies have a poor recent record against the major nations and a surprisingly bad one in this country since they have not won a series here since 1988. They are ranked eighth in the ICC’s Test table, so it was no surprise that England should beat them. Yet we had to wait until the last day of the series for confirmation of the result. West Indies’ victory in the first Test at the Ageas Bowl ensured that the cricket thereafter was intriguing and relevant as well as being a welcome distraction from the virus. I have been told that listening to it on the radio was the best form of escapism, since all those empty stands were never visible. Meanwhile, the excellent TV coverage has brought joy to subscribers and to many more who have glimpsed the highlights. Which is just as well given the peculiar restraints of this surreal project. It is now easier to understand the weird demands of the bubble after experiencing it for the first time in the third Test. Initially the heart sank after all the checks on arrival at a damp and deserted Old Trafford, the temperature tents, the requests to wear masks and rubber gloves at the buffet table, the socially distanced dining as well as the polite instruction that it was not possible to leave the ground until the match was over. The little white rectangle attached to my accreditation was a tag which monitored my every movement throughout the stay. Of course within half a day all this became the new normal and if this felt like an open prison it was at least a luxurious one. And it was only for six days. But the players have had this for week after week. Ollie Pope mentioned how there is no chance to get away from the cricket; for those struggling, whether individually or as a team, there is too much time to agonise over the latest failure. . It must have been even worse for those players who never played a game. They had to stay cheerful amid the futility and the ferrying of drinks to the lucky men out on the field. In such circumstances it is so much easier when you’re winning. So in the last two Tests it was so much easier for England. They had the stronger squad and they used this to their advantage. All of the six genuine contenders among the pace bowlers had a game, which means all of them should be ready to play in the first Test against Pakistan – if selected. The solitary exception among the bowlers is Jack Leach, a proven Test cricketer, who has not even made the squads announced before every Test. Among the quicks there is rotation; among the spinners there is a pecking order. I’m not sure about the logic of that. This pattern was maintained when the squad for the first Test against Pakistan was announced on Wednesday afternoon. Once again there are six fast bowlers – excluding Ben Stokes – and one spinner. On a cricketing level it is another imbalanced squad without an alternative in the spin department or indeed the option to play two spinners. Joe Root (c), James Anderson, Jofra Archer, Dominic Bess, Stuart Broad, Rory Burns, Jos Buttler, Zak Crawley, Sam Curran, Ollie Pope, Dom Sibley, Ben Stokes, Chris Woakes, Mark Wood.Reserves: James Bracey, Ben Foakes, Jack Leach, Dan Lawrence. The presumption is that this must be to do with the payments to the players; there are bonuses for being in the squad and there is the onus to keep all the unlucky fast bowlers as happy as possible. As in most spheres of the game, commerce trumps cricketing common sense. However, the rotation policy, so often discussed but not implemented, has been used to very good effect so far. Come the third Test England had a set of bowlers brimming with energy plus a determination to make themselves seem indispensable. By contrast West Indies, having understandably stuck to their best combination since they lacked England’s depth, were creaking badly. For the rest of this Test summer England will surely keep rotating, stay flexible and stay fresh. The never change a winning team truism is now for neanderthals.