Amber Heard described Johnny Depp as “nuts”, “violent” and a “madman” in private texts sent to her mother early on in their relationship, but hid the extent of the violence from her, the high court has been told. The messages were sent, Heard said, after the Pirates of the Caribbean star went on a 36-hour cocaine and whisky binge in his LA home, during which he accused her of having affairs. Depp, 57, is suing the Sun’s publisher, News Group Newspapers, and its executive editor, Dan Wootton, over an article that called him a “wife beater” and referred to “overwhelming evidence” that he had attacked Heard. Depp denies ever hitting Heard, 34, who has submitted details of 14 occasions during their relationship when she claims he assaulted her. At the start of Heard’s fourth day in the witness box, texts sent by Heard to her mother, Paige, were read out to the court. Heard said they had been sent after Depp “refused to leave the breakfast room. He was snorting cocaine and drinking whisky. He wanted me to admit that I was having an affair with my ex-partner [Tasya van Ree] and another gentleman I barely knew. “He had done cocaine and drink for well over a day, for about 36 hours, and at the time I was unfamiliar with his patterns.” Heard sent a text to her mother: “It’s terrible, Mum, I don’t know what to do. He’s nuts, Mum, violent and crazy. I’m heartbroken that this is who I love.” Later she sent another text: “It’s OK. He’s not being violent to me. The crazy mood swings and hard to handle.” Asked by Sasha Wass, QC, representing News Group, whether she had been telling the truth, Heard said she had not told her about all the attacks. “I was trying to talk to someone who might know how it felt,” she added. Heard explained: “My father was violent to my mother … and they really loved each other.” In a subsequent text, Heard told her mother: “I feel really lost and lonely. He’s a madman. I feel I’m on a fastening train but I don’t want to jump off. I stay on the train even though I know it’s about to explode.” Later she sent another message to her mother, Paige, saying: “My heart is broken. [Johnny Depp] didn’t hit me last night. I told him that would be it if he did. It’s Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde.” Asked by Wass whether that was true, Heard said it was not, because she did not want her mother to tell her father what had really happened. She texted her mother later: “He makes Dad look like a saint when he falls off the wagon.” Heard explained to the court: “My Dad struggled with alcohol and abuse issues his whole life. He’s an addict and he was very violent, but I love him very much.” The hearing continues.