Tomatoes are coming into their own now – and they want you to know about it. Walk past a tomato plant and be seduced by their green vine scent and glistening, plump, scarlet flesh. Roast them with oil and garlic – their bosom buddies – and their acidity will mellow into sticky-sweet, heady flavours. Pair them with a golden, parmesan-crusted cornbread and you are in for a particularly special treat. If you don’t have an ovenproof frying pan, make the cornbread in a casserole or baking dish instead. Prep 10 minCook 40 minRest 10 minServes 6 300g sweetcorn kernels, fresh, frozen or tinned100g grated parmesan100ml whole milk240ml yoghurt3 eggs100g plain flour180g quick-cook polenta1½ tsp fine salt1 tbsp baking powder80g melted butter, plus an extra knob For the tomatoes600g baby tomatoes1 large sprig rosemary8 garlic cloves, peeled and left whole4-5 tbsp extra virgin olive oilSalt and pepper Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/gas 7. Arrange the tomatoes in a small baking dish and pierce each one with the tip of a knife. Add the rosemary and garlic, then pour over the oil and season generously, mixing with your hands so that the oil coats the tomatoes. Roast in the bottom of the oven for 35-40 minutes, checking every so often and to push the tomatoes gently into the oil, until golden and fragrant. Meanwhile, put the sweetcorn and 75g of the parmesan in a food processor and blitz until coarsely chopped. Transfer to a bowl and stir in the milk, yoghurt and eggs. In a separate bowl, combine the dry ingredients, then stir this mixture into the sweetcorn with the melted butter and plenty of pepper. Heat the pan until smoking hot, then add the extra knob of butter, swirling it around the pan until it sizzles. Pour in the cornbread batter, smooth the top and scatter over the remaining parmesan. Bake above the tomatoes for 25-30 minutes. Once a skewer inserted into the cornbread comes out clean, remove from the oven and leave to rest for five to 10 minutes. Take the tomatoes out of the oven, mash the garlic into the tomato juices with a fork and stir gently. Turn out the cornbread, cut it into wedges and serve with the warm garlicky tomatoes on top. You can make a savoury French toast with leftover cornbread for a pretty sensational brunch. Season an egg mix with a little more cheese, salt, pepper and herbs. This is delicious with mascarpone and chilli jam.