When Bryson DeChambeau exploded through his tight‑fitting shirt all over Muirfield Village in Dublin, Ohio, he went from Bruce Banner to the Incredible Hulk in 10 card-wrecking shots. The 17-stone Californian was crushing the course underfoot when he tumbled to five over, and out of Jack Nicklaus’s Memorial tournament. It took DeChambeau months to pack on 40 pounds of gym-bought muscle and moments for those pumped levers to disconnect from his brain on Friday as his helicopter swing hooked the ball at nearly 200mph into a creek on the 15th. His quintuple-bogey 10 was the worst score of his career. Jack said: “Cut!” and the kid was out of the movie. The 26-year-old physics major had turned into Dr DeShambles, the mad professor of golf, his reddened head threatening to spin off his shoulders and disappear into orbit. Two weeks ago in Detroit he had a similar blow-up when he argued at length with a TV cameraman for … being a TV cameraman. On Friday his caddie tried to move the intrusive cameras away from his boss but the meltdown was there for all to see. On day one, DeChambeau hit drives of 407 and 423 yards, a phenomenal double. There are 63 players on the PGA Tour who average 300 yards off the tee on designated holes and even Phil Mickelson, who just turned 50 and plays in corporate, pin-striped slacks, has bulked up for distance, and sneaks into the Hit List at No 44 with 302.9. But DeChambeau is the longest in the game (averaging 323 yards) and getting longer. There’s no denying it is mesmeric watching a man smash his tee shot to within a pitching wedge of the hole on a 470-yard par-four but, when he swings his driver violently into the back of a 1.6oz ball, we are watching atomic golf without a disarmament clause. Golf fans now ask two questions when DeChambeau plays: how long can he hit it, and how long can he last? Survivors in any sport get smart, or self-destruct. Few are smarter than Andy Murray, who plays off 10 and whose commitment to tennis is every bit as intense as DeChambeau’s to golf – but not as boneheaded. It is four years since the Scot won 65 of 70 matches in an astonishing sequence that included 24 victories in a row to reach 12 of 13 finals. He had just won his third major, his second at Wimbledon, as well as a second Olympic gold medal. By November he was the No 1 player in the world but he barely had time to enjoy the reign before his body screamed for mercy. That June Novak Djokovic led Murray by more than 9,000 points at the top of the rankings after he beat him in the Madrid Open final and went on to win his first French Open. He looked unstoppable. As he nursed a sore elbow on his way home to Monte Carlo just before Christmas in 2016, the Serb was shattered. So was Murray. The sacrifices the 29-year-old Scot made that summer took such a toll on him that his slam run stopped at three, he had two hip surgeries and he seriously contemplated retiring. Remarkably, he now looks to Flushing Meadows at the end of August to see if he might squeeze in one more grand slam with his rebuilt hip, or maybe at Roland Garros in September. How did this happen? Matt Little, who has been his strength and conditioning coach for 13 years and has witnessed all his struggles and comebacks close-up, was delighted when the 33-year-old Murray outperformed his younger rivals Kyle Edmund and Dan Evans in some of the speed and movement statistics compiled by Catapult Sports during the recent Battle of the Brits at Roehampton. “Andy topped the charts for high-intensity movement,” Little said. “While he didn’t hit the very top speed of the week, he was certainly competitive with regards to intensity and explosive efforts. His loading stats were also high in comparison to many of the other players, showing that he was involved in many physical battles, especially in his matches against Kyle and James Ward.” It is testimony to Murray’s doggedness and love of tennis that he keeps going. He acknowledges there have been times in his career where he might have red-lined to the point of self-destruction – like DeChambeau – but experience is the ultimate teacher. “The first five years of working with Andy, with Jez Green at the helm, were about building his base of strength and endurance,” Little says. “This improved dramatically, which showed when he beat [Richard] Gasquet [in five sets] at Wimbledon in 2008. We focused on speed and sharpness in the middle part of his career, and the last few years have been focused on keeping his body balanced and loose, making sure he has the right level of strength in the right muscle groups to cope with the demands of the game which, at the level he operates, is brutally physical. “Of course his achievements on the court have been incredible but the journey he has been on these past few years has been impressive in a completely different way.” There are many ways to skin a cat, of course. When Rory McIlroy, a good friend of Murray, was looking for comforting words during a tough run, he came upon a book called Digital Minimalism, a tome by Cal Newport dedicated to decluttering our lives from gadgetry. Most relevantly for DeChambeau and other sporting Rambos, the author quotes Henry David Thoreau, the 19th-century American thinker who probably knew nothing about golf, or its existence, even. “I think that I cannot preserve my health and spirits, unless I spend four hours a day at least – and it is commonly more than that – sauntering through the woods and over the hills and fields, absolutely free from all worldly engagements.” If that isn’t what golf is all about, professor, maybe you’re in the wrong game.