As soon as we get into the summer months, there’s nothing I want to do more than tuck into some delicious, nourishing food in good company alongside a summer playlist full of classics. I’d probably start with Lucy Pearl’s Dance Tonight, my go-to summer tune, and also fit in some Tom Misch vibes. When it comes to grazing platters, there are no hard-and-fast rules, other than a beautiful array of fresh fruit, vegetables and nibbles to satisfy both the eyes and the tastebuds. Cook up a little plant-based magic, sit back with good tunes, and enjoy the moment. Picnic crackers need a dip, and this thick, creamy cashew spread seasoned with fragrant herbs is the perfect quick and easy alternative for whenever ricotta is usually called for. Prep 10 min, plus 2 hr soaking Cook 10 minServes 4 260g cashew nuts, soaked in cold water for at least 2 hours, then drainedJuice of ½ lemon2 garlic cloves, peeled and minced3 tbsp nutritional yeast (optional)Salt and black pepper1 handful fresh parsley, finely chopped1 handful fresh chives, finely chopped1 handful fresh dill, finely chopped Put the nuts, lemon juice, garlic, nutritional yeast (if using), a generous pinch of salt and a good grind of pepper in a food processor, and pulse on a high speed to a coarse paste. With the motor still running, drizzle in 120ml water, until the mixture is thick and smooth, then transfer to a large bowl and mix in the herbs. Taste, adjust the salt, pepper and lemon if need be and serve. These little bites look pretty fancy, but they’re actually really easy because they use ready-made filo pastry sheets. You can find them almost all large supermarkets – they’re usually vegan-friendly (just check the ingredients list), which means you can get creative with your at-home baking; ; you can even tell your friends you made the pastry yourself, if you’re feeling cheeky. Prep 10 min, plus 2 hr soakingCook 40 minMakes: 6-8 pastries 130g cashew nuts, soaked in cold water for at least 2 hours, then drained1 x 280g jar artichoke hearts, drained (190g net weight)2 garlic cloves, peeled and mincedJuice of ½ lemon, plus 1 tsp lemon zest Salt and black pepper1 packet ready-rolled filo pastry sheetsOlive oil, for brushing1 tbsp miso paste (optional)1 handful fresh spinach, finely chopped1 handful fresh parsley, finely chopped2 tbsp black sesame seeds Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. In a food processor, blitz the nuts, artichoke hearts, garlic, lemon juice and zest, miso, and a good grind of black pepper to a thick paste; if the mixture is too thick to blend, slowly add one to three tablespoons of water, to loosen. Transfer to a bowl, mix in the spinach and parsley, and add salt to taste. Unroll the pastry, peel off a sheet and lay it on a clean, flat surface. Brush all over with olive oil and fold in half lengthways, so you have one, long strip. Put a large tablespoon of the artichoke filling at the top right corner of the strip, leaving a 3cm border. Take the top right corner and fold it diagonally over to the lefthand side of the pastry strip, to enclose the filling in a triangle shape. Brush with more oil, then fold in again to the righthand side, to enclose the filling further and double the layers of the triangle. Brush with more oil and repeat until you reach the end of the filo strip, then sprinkle on a few sesame seeds. Repeat with the remaining filling and pastry until you run out of filling. Put the pastry triangles on a lined oven tray and bake for 10-12 minutes, until lightly golden brown, then leave to cool before serving. I’m personally deeply invested in the simplicity of red peppers roasted until lightly charred, naturally sweet and silky in texture. They’re delicious just as they are, and make a wonderful addition to salads and sandwiches; here, I’ve topped them with salty capers, fresh basil oil and juicy cherry tomatoes. Prep 10 minCook 45 minServes 4 4 red bell peppers, cut in half, seeds and pith removed and discarded2 garlic cloves, peeled and very thinly sliced110ml olive oil1 tbsp balsamic vinegarSalt and black pepper200g cherry tomatoes, halved2 tsp capers, drained60g fresh basil (about 12 tbsp), finely choppedJuice of ½ lemon Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Lay the peppers skin side down in a shallow baking dish. Top with the garlic, drizzle over two tablespoons of the olive oil, sprinkle with the balsamic vinegar and season generously. Bake for 30 minutes, then take out of the oven, scatter the tomatoes and capers inside the peppers, and bake for five to 10 minutes more, until the peppers are tender and slightly charred. Remove from the oven and leave to cool. Meanwhile, mix the basil with 80ml olive oil and the lemon juice, and season. Drizzle the basil oil over the peppers, top with a few small spoonfuls of the herby cashew nut dip above, and serve. This smooth, creamy dip is vibrant, beautiful in colour and sweetened naturally by the mellow flavours of roast beetroot. Add a few light spice tones, and it’s the perfect accompaniment to salads, crackers, sandwiches and pitta bread. Prep 10 minCook 1 hr 20 minMakes 800g, to serve 4 250g raw beetroot, washed and cut into 3cm chunksOlive oil1 x 400g tin cooked chickpeas, drained1 tbsp bicarbonate of soda2 garlic cloves, peeled and mincedJuice of ½ lemon70g tahini1 tsp coriander1 tsp cumin¼ tsp cinnamonSalt and black pepper Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Put the beetroot in a shallow, ovenproof baking dish for which you have a lid, lightly coat in olive oil, cover and roast for 50-60 minutes, until tender. Put the drained chickpeas in a shallow saucepan on a low heat, add the bicarb and stir for a minute. Add water to cover and cook on a low heat for about five minutes, until the chickpea skins begin to fall off. Pour into a sieve to drain, transfer to a large bowl and wash in cold water, rubbing the chickpeas between your hands to loosen the skins. Fish out the floating skins, and wash again in fresh cold water – it may take up to three washes until most of the chickpeas are peeled. You don’t have to remove them all, but the more you remove, the smoother the hummus will be. In a bowl, mix the garlic, lemon, tahini and spices into a paste, and season with salt to taste; if the mixture seems too thick, stir in a tablespoon of water at a time to loosen it. Put the chickpeas and roast beetroot in a food processor, blend to a coarse paste and, with the motor still running, pour in the tahini mix and blend again until smooth and fully combined. Serve with pitta (or other flatbread) and/or crudités for dipping. • Rachel Ama is a plant-based cook and food writer.