The Tate is facing protests against job cuts that trade unions and others say will disproportionately affect black and minority ethnic staff as it reopens its doors for the first time in four months. A socially distanced demonstration will take place outside Tate Modern in London on Monday as the institution welcomes back the public. As many as 200 jobs are at risk in its commercial arm – which operates retail, publishing and catering – where a higher proportion of staff are BAME, according to the PCS union. “Many of these colleagues will be amongst the lowest-paid staff on the Tate estate, with some at risk earning little more than the national minimum wage, and in some of the most diverse teams across Tate,” said the union. It comes after attempts by the Tate to express support for Black Lives Matter on social media sparked a backlash, with critics circulating a selfie by the Tate’s controversial benefactor, Anthony d’Offay, in which he is holding a golliwog. The Tate responded on Thursday to an Instagram post containing the image and highly critical comments of it from two artists known as the White Pube. The organisation replied: “Tate immediately suspended its contact with Anthony d’Offay in December 2017 as soon as it was made aware of this image on social media. We do not condone racist imagery, abuse or discrimination inside Tate, our galleries or digital platforms.” In an announcement in which it specifically referred to Black Lives Matter, the Tate said last month: “We have a platform, a voice, and a duty to our black members, employees, artists, visitors and followers to speak up and stand for human rights and anti-racism. Nobody should have to live in fear because of the colour of their skin.” However, a central demand by art workers and others who are now criticising the institution is for d’Offay’s name to be removed from the wall of Tate Modern’s Turbine Hall, where it was put in recognition of his role in creating the Artist Rooms after selling much of his multimillion-pound collection to the Tate and National Galleries of Scotland (NGS). A statement posted by other art workers through a collective known as Industria said the existence of this selfie taken by d’Offay, who they described as “a rich and powerful white man”, had been known to Tate for some time and read as “a shocking declaration of power”. They added: “When Tate reopens, d’Offay’s name will still be on the wall of the Turbine Hall. “If Tate are in any way serious about using the ‘platform’ and voice they must step up and remove Anthony d’Offay’s name from the institution’s walls.” Both the Tate and the NGS last year resumed links with the art collector after they suspended contact in January 2018 when it was revealed he faced allegations of sexual harassment and inappropriate behaviour from three women with whom he had worked. D’Offay denies the allegations. A Tate spokesperson said: “Tate’s current statement about race equality focuses on actions in the present. It was developed in collaboration with our own BAME network members, who set out a number of current actions they wish to see and which Tate’s leadership also endorses. These actions are important to Tate and we are focusing our efforts on making these changes rapidly.” The institution said it was made aware of the d’Offay image on social media and a number of allegations about him in December 2017. It added that Tate immediately suspended its contact with him and undertook an investigation. On the job cuts, Tate Enterprises, the institution’s commercial arm, has said restructuring is a result of ongoing social distancing regulations and “an inevitable drop in visitors in the coming months”. An ongoing consultation is aiming to “retain as many staff as possible” while “ensuring the long-term future of the business”.