Paulette Wilson, the Windrush campaigner who died last week aged just 64, played an essential role in exposing one of the worst injustices inflicted by the British state in recent years. Wilson was the first member of the Windrush generation who bravely went public with her plight to the Guardian in 2017. Her story shocked the country – as someone who had moved to Britain from Jamaica aged 10, she had lived and worked legally here for decades. Despite that, she had her benefits withdrawn and was wrongfully arrested, detained at Yarl’s Wood and almost deported to a country she had not lived in for 50 years. Her story paved the way for others to come forward with equally dreadful accounts. Wilson has since campaigned tirelessly for justice; just last month, she and other campaigners presented a petition with more than 130,000 signatures to Downing Street calling for the full implementation of the independent Windrush review. What happened to the Windrush generation is an indelible and ugly stain on this country; one of the most dreadful examples of the institutional racism we like to think of as long banished but that still lingers everywhere from police stop and search, to the over-representation of black young people in young offender institutions, to the high unemployment rates among young black men. As a direct result of Theresa May’s hostile environment policy, members of the Windrush generation, who had been actively encouraged to come to the UK from the Caribbean Commonwealth to take up public service jobs, including in the NHS, have wrongfully lost jobs they had had for decades, been denied NHS treatment for life-threatening conditions and been detained then deported to countries they had not visited for decades. It is in no small part down to Wilson’s campaigning, along with the Guardian’s reporting, that the government has started to shift its approach. For years, ministers have dragged their feet: May refused initially to even meet the Windrush victims. The architects of the hostile environment, including May’s former adviser Nick Timothy, still maintain that the approach is entirely justified; that, despite all the warnings ministers simply ignored, it was just unfortunate that people living in Britain legally were caught up in an absurdly disproportionate policy that required people without a passport to provide four pieces of documentary evidence for each year they had been resident in the UK. Three full months after Wendy Williams’s independent Windrush review rubbished this claim – and just a few days after Wilson delivered her petition to Downing Street – the home secretary, Priti Patel, finally committed to implementing all 30 of its recommendations, including a full review of the hostile environment. Even as Boris Johnson launches another racism review, his government pursues policies that are racially discriminatory Williams’s review is clear that it was the responsibility of ministers and senior civil servants to understand the history of Commonwealth immigrants – the fact that their legal status had been granted under a document-light system – and that they would inevitably get caught up in the tentacles of the hostile environment. And the terrible injustices faced by this generation of migrants are far from over. There have been huge delays in administering the compensation fund – just 60 people received £360,000 between them in compensation out of an expected fund of up to £5m in its first year, perhaps little wonder given the claims form is 18 pages long, with 44 pages of accompanying guidance. The Williams review concluded that there are members of the Windrush generation who remain vulnerable to the hostile environment and that, while the government has admitted that more than 160 people from the Caribbean Commonwealth were wrongfully detained and deported, it has never investigated the numbers affected from other parts of the Commonwealth. That we do not know the true scale of the injustice years after these stories first came to light is appalling. It is not enough for Patel to commit to a review of the hostile environment, which the government has since tried to rebrand as the “compliant environment”: it must be dismantled immediately. As well as subjecting people living legally in the UK to the most terrible injustices, it has three further disastrous impacts. First, the policy has not achieved its stated aims of encouraging people in the UK illegally to leave voluntarily; instead, it drives them underground into exploitative situations in the labour market and – in the case of migrant women – in the home. Second, by forcing ordinary citizens such as doctors, landlords and bank clerks to perform immigration checks on their neighbours on pain of being fined, it creates institutionalised discrimination; for example, the government’s right to rent policy, ruled racially discriminatory by the high court, means that landlords are less likely to rent to people with “foreign accents or names”. (The court of appeal later overturned the ruling while conceding that the policy resulted in discrimination.) Last, the extortionate fees and Kafkaesque bureaucracy involved in immigration applications – it can cost a young person who has grown up in the UK tens of thousands of pounds in fees and years of applications to secure permanent status when they turn 18– are creating a whole new generation who through no fault of their own are falling foul of the hostile environment as adults, despite having lived here since they were young children. The hostile environment is the direct consequence of a government that views migrants not as people who have much to contribute to the fabric and culture of the UK, but dehumanises them as convenient fodder for prejudice; as numbers that get in the way of unachievable and arbitrary immigration targets. Even as Boris Johnson launches yet another racism review, his government continues to pursue policies that are racially discriminatory. The only way to honour Paulette Wilson’s legacy is to immediately scrap the hostile environment and for us all to embark on a period of self-reflection as to how and why the terrible injustices inflicted on the Windrush generation were ever allowed to happen.