Day after day, the Boris Johnson regime reveals its unexpectedly eye-popping political incompetence. Dominic Cummings proves to be no political genius, but a deviser of daily political car crashes, none more absurdly comical than the failed attempt to impose Chris Grayling as chair of the intelligence and security committee, made 10 times more explosive by expelling a senior Tory MP. But these Westminster bubble entertainments pale into insignificance when far more serious dangers press in on No 10. They should be alarmed by the articulate voices of the Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice, their numbers growing weekly. On Thursday’s BBC Today programme they were demanding an immediate public inquiry into their relatives’ deaths. They say the “intense preparations” for a future Covid-19 spike called for in this week’s report from the Academy of Medical Sciences requires a rapid inquiry into what went wrong and why, to stop a repetition of those 20,000 care home deaths. In the Commons, Johnson said there would be an “independent inquiry”, but with no date or definition. He has refused to meet the families so far, rightly afraid of the power of their critique of serial failings in coping with the pandemic. Here’s the extra problem: any inquiry would not only expose the lethal blunders that left Britain “world-beating” in Covid-19 mistakes, but it would open up the great social care dilemma. Every wicked political issue congregates here: the passionate feelings about inheritances lost to care costs, the anti-immigration sentiment Priti Patel panders to in denying visas to “low-skilled” care workers, the injustice between those with Alzheimer’s (who pay) and those with cancer (who don’t). It would expose the catastrophic neglect of Britain’s older people, 1.5 million of whom lack the care they need, despite a 25% increase in the number of over-65s in the last decade. The Treasury will have noted the £8bn the Health Foundation reports it would take just to restore care to the (far from ideal) 2010 standards. In his first speech as prime minister, Johnson promised to “fix the crisis in social care once and for all”. No sign of that. Now he claims to be “finalising” their plans. But his manifesto only promised that no one should have to sell their home to pay for care. With 20,000 dead and social care near collapse, that is by far the least pressing issue, but it threatens to be the only one to engage the Tory party and their press. The Commons health and social care committee this week, and the Lords economic affairs committee this month, returned to this least urgent question: how to cap the costs any family need pay (anyone with savings over £23,250 starts paying). Sir Andrew Dilnot, who wrote the coalition government’s report, recommended to the committee a £45,000 cap, after which the state would pay the rest. That fulfils the manifesto pledge, but costs £3.1bn when every spare penny is needed to pay for good care by better paid staff before protecting families from eroded inheritances. In 2011, the Dilnot commission, looking at some families losing everything in the current means-tested system, found a 50/50 chance than an old person with means would pay £20,000 towards their care and a 1:10 chance of paying out £100,000. There is no insurance available for anyone trying to avoid this risk. This market failure, according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies, is because only those most at risk, such as those with bad family health histories, would buy insurance. It only works in other countries because it’s compulsory, pooling the risk – in other words, as a disguised general tax with added administrative costs. Johnson frequently returns to his forlorn manifesto condition, requiring a cross-party agreement on care, hoping to share the political burden of all the unpalatable options ahead. Labour always politely says it would join talks, despite David Cameron pulling out of a joint care plan in the run-up to the 2010 election. Instead he ran a Labour’s “death tax” campaign against Andy Burnham’s imaginative plan for everyone with savings to pay in a lump sum on retirement in exchange for universal free care. The chances of cross-party agreement are near zero, unless the government is ready to reform the whole chaotic privatised care structure, pay and train care staff on NHS scales, and greatly increase funding without enriching the least desirable private equity care home owners. No sign yet that the government is inclined for radical reform, beyond saving the inheritances of the better off. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist