Job done for Graham Potter, although the Brighton manager was the first to accept this wasn’t exactly a classic. A point from a fixture that resembled a pre-season match in terms of intensity means his side can officially start planning for a fourth season in the top flight, having somewhat limped over the line in recent weeks. Yet having seen his side concede 11 goals in losing their last three matches here, Potter will at least be grateful that his defence stood firm against an improved performance from Newcastle after the break as Steve Bruce’s side pushed for a victory that neither team really deserved. “It’s massive,” Potter said. “It’s been a unique season in what we’ve had to deal with. Post-lockdown we haven’t played as well but we’ve got the points we needed.” The draw means Newcastle have failed to beat Brighton in all six Premier League matches they have contested, though it did end a three‑match losing run. But having yet to confirm their survival mathematically, even if it would have taken the unlikely scenario of Aston Villa making up a whopping goal difference of 11 from their final two matches, in theory Brighton were the side most in need of a result. Newcastle’s last trip to the south coast at the beginning of the month ended in a 4-1 victory at Bournemouth thanks to three assists from the glittering boots of Allan Saint-Maximin. The Frenchman was characteristically to the fore during the opening exchanges after Bruce had opted to make only two changes from the team who lost at home against Tottenham last week, with the full-backs Javier Manquillo and Danny Rose coming in. Despite the promptings of Saint-Maximin, however, a lack of cutting edge has been Newcastle’s weakness and it was the hosts who created the only real chances of the first half. Neal Maupay’s shot from a tight angle struck a post inside the opening three minutes, although it would not have counted given the linesman had already flagged him offside. Maupay and Leandro Trossard later combined to call Martin Dubravka into action for the first time just after the half-hour. An announcement earlier that Newcastle have agreed a “long-term commercial agreement” with the betting company Fun88 to continue sponsoring their shirts was not exactly the news fans wanted to hear from the boardroom. The Premier League has been considering the proposed takeover by Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund for more than 100 days but, with no resolution seemingly in sight, Bruce’s side struggled to lift their spirits on the pitch as they failed to register a shot on target in the first half. “We need a bit of clarity,” the Newcastle manager said afterwards. “Until then I’ll go to work and see the CEO and plan for the summer. That’s all we can do. It’s frustrating.” Things had to improve after the break and Newcastle finally managed to force Mat Ryan into making a save five minutes in following an instinctive effort from Miguel Almirón. The Argentina midfielder Alexis Mac Allister was introduced early in the second half as Potter attempted to add some creativity to all the possession his side had enjoyed. Even with his lack of experience in the Premier League, the former Stoke midfielder who made his name as a coach in Sweden is second favourite with the bookmakers behind Sean Dyche to succeed Gareth Southgate whenever the England manager leaves his post. Before that becomes a serious prospect, Potter faces a real test of his recruitment skills this summer if Brighton are to build on the progress they have made this season, although they could have won this match late on had Trossard made the most of Lewis Dunk’s clever knockdown after Dubravka had earlier tipped Adam Webster’s swerving shot over the bar. Andy Carroll almost made them pay for their profligacy in the final moments but, after the substitute rose to meet a corner at the far post, the ball cannoned off the former England striker’s face and went wide. “He’s beating himself up in there about that,” Bruce said. It was definitely one of those games.