The Downing Street press release previewing Boris Johnson’s visit to Scotland says the prime minister would be sending the message that the union was “stronger than ever”. This is, however, largely wishful thinking from No 10, with pressures being felt not just over Scottish independence but also in relations between the other UK nations. He could not be more supportive. He entered No 10 a year ago with a pledge to be “prime minister of the whole United Kingdom”, and awarded himself the largely symbolic new title of “minister for the union”. Barely a Johnson speech goes by without him reiterating this view. But some devolved leaders argue his actual policies tell a very different story, and that areas including Brexit and coronavirus have shown a desire by No 10 to centralise power and marginalise the non-English UK nations. For all his public support for the union, there are signs the PM is a “net negative” for its preservation. After he entered Downing Street last year, Johnson set off on a whistlestop tour of what he called the “awesome foursome” UK nations, taking in the north of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. But the trips were far from successful, and in Scotland and Wales often involved keeping him away from booing protesters. Not very well. If there is one issue likely to bring about a breakup of the UK, it is departure from the EU. Brexit remains notably unpopular in Scotland, especially as its terms have hardened since the 2016 EU referendum, and it is seen by Nicola Sturgeon, the Scottish National party leader and Scotland’s first minister, as perhaps her most effective tool in seeking another referendum on Scottish independence. As an example of the tensions, the devolved governments in both Scotland and Wales are concerned that London’s plans for retaking powers from the EU over a UK internal market could hugely undermine devolution, something No 10 denies. The Covid-19 pandemic has arguably weakened the union for two reasons: the perception that Johnson and his ministers have badly mishandled the crisis; and the devolved nature of public health, which has allowed leaders in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland to set local rules in areas such as physical distancing and masks, thus emphasising their separation from London. There have been periods when, for example, it was legal for people in England to drive as far as they wanted for a leisure trip, as long as they did not end up in Wales. Sturgeon’s clear communication at daily press briefings has helped leave many Scottish voters satisfied with how she has handled the crisis, even if the statistics indicate Scotland has performed only marginally better. Scotland. When the Conservatives were selecting a new leader to replace Theresa May, some senior Scottish Conservative expressed private despair at Johnson’s probable succession, saying he would be a “catastrophe” for the UK, especially given the prospects of a particularly hard Brexit. Support for Scottish independence is now polling at above 50%. Sturgeon ordered all SNP talks of a second referendum to be halted amid coronavirus, and some in the wider independence movement have expressed concerns that this caution could continue into next May’s Scottish parliament elections. But polling experts are starting to wonder if the move towards pro-independence sentiment could prove decisive. While support for independence in Wales is nowhere near Scottish levels, polls have shown it rising to 25%. The Labour first minister, Mark Drakeford, has charted a highly devolved course over coronavirus, and complained several times about a lack of contact from Johnson over the crisis. While independence is a long way off, complaints about Brexit being used to pull Wales under closer London control could resonate politically. Northern Ireland has actually seen one of the few devolution-based successes under Johnson, with the Stormont assembly and government resuming business in January after a three-year suspension over bitter political wrangling. However, there are signs that a united Ireland could be a more realistic prospect than in recent years, not least because Brexit, enthusiastically supported by unionists, has seemingly helped squeeze the middle ground in Northern Irish politics. Nationalist sentiment has also been buoyed by the success of Sinn Féin in Ireland’s election.