In the sample clues below, the links take you to little explainers from our For Beginners series. First, the non-virus clues, for those who wish to avoid what we’re calling This. The annotated solution is available for Philistine’s fragrant prize (and themed) puzzle. So many of the answers are aromatic plants that the solvers are left to discover that for themselves; in other words, the corresponding clues don’t have definitions, allowing for some extraordinary wordplay like this … 17/20ac Would have been a great pianist, if it weren’t for the Yankees (5-5)[ wordplay: name of a great pianist with two Ys (‘Yankee’ in Nato alphabet) ][ LANG LANG with two Ys added ] … for YLANG-YLANG. And continuing our thread of healing music to accompany a solve (or even to pay attention to), here’s Lang performing from home for National Public Radio. Now, the more grisly clues. Here’s Velia in the FT with an ornate construction … 8d Onset of virus detectable in pulse first, said close NHS source (3,5)[ wordplay: initial letter (‘onset of’) VIRUS contained by (‘detectable in’) a kind of pulse, preceded by (‘first, …’) soundalike (‘said’) of synonym for ‘close’ ][ V in BEAN after soundalike of NIGH ][ definition: NHS source ] … delivering NYE BEVAN, without whom, well, you dread to think. And a more cheering image is offered by Alchemi in the Independent … 11ac A homeless virus possibly the ideal (10)[ wordplay: synonym for ‘a’ (as in ‘five a day’) + what virus is an example of (‘virus possibly’) without synonym for home (‘homeless’) ][ PER + INFECTION – IN (as in ‘she’s not in’) ][ definition: the ideal ] … in a clue for PERFECTION. Here’s a generous clue that kicks off a puzzle from Pasquale in the quiptic, the Guardian’s stepping-stone series for beginners and those in a hurry: 9ac Ruin peace, being terrible person living for good food and drink? (9)[ wordplay: anagram of (‘being terrible’) RUIN PEACE ][ definition: person living for good food and drink ] So, that’s EPICUREAN. For a while, this word would probably have had a more derogatory definition, if crosswords had existed before the 20th century … … even though Epicurus himself was given to such wholesome pronouncements as: “To whom a little is not sufficient, nothing is sufficient”, and: “Of all the means which wisdom acquires to ensure happiness throughout the whole of life, by far the most important is friendship,” making him seem like the kind of person who wouldn’t get through lockdown by getting through a loaf of sourdough and a foil bag of rioja every day. On the subject of food, it struck me that this might be a good place for us to recommend to each other a certain kind of nonfiction book: our reference preferences, I suppose. Mine is by John Ayto, who revised Brewer’s Dictionary of Phrase & Fable; it’s called The Diner’s Dictionary, and I find it relentlessly fascinating especially in its most recent edition. It was from The Diner’s Dictionary that I learned something about the subject of our next challenge. It’s a cheese whose protected status means that it can only be produced in Derbyshire, Leicestershire or Nottinghamshire. This means that if you make a lovely blue cheese in the Cambridgeshire village of Stilton, you cannot sell it as this cheese. Reader, how would you clue STILTON? Many thanks for your clues for LIZARD. This is surely one of the few spots in the online news landscape where a comments section involving Lizard is immune from discussion of whether various powerful people are actually reptilian, and, since a distinguished member of the gang is called Lizard, you would normally expect accusations that Don Manley himself is also a lizard. But, no, just lovely cluing and amiable chat. It’s a source of comfort in troubled times. So we did get some inside-baseball clues, like Porcia’s amusing “Maybe Chameleon’s one of Don Manley’s soubriquets?” and, well, Lizard’s irresistible “Number one as clue-writer”. I enjoyed such unexpected surfaces as Schroduck’s “Monitor not starting – troubleshooting program on-line” and the audacity award is Jamesecook’s for “Camo Chameleon”. The runners-up are Tomrollock’s sly “Head or tail may fall from this” and Phitonelly’s rococo “Having moved away from hazard, living precariously in one corner of England”; the winner is Thepoisonedgift’s dream-of-the-outdoors “What’s the point of Cornwall? Local independent zoos and rolling dunes, for starters.”. Kludos to Thepoisoned; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition – and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics – below. We return to perhaps epicurean behaviour in this Independent clue from Raich … 21ac Ordered ninth? AM of regret! (3,7,5)[ wordplay: anagram (‘ordered’) of NINTH AM OF REGRET ] … where the whole clue contributes to the imagery. What a banger.