It’s 2015 in suburban Melbourne. Siblings Joan (Megan Washington) and Josh Burns (Chris Ryan) are on struggle street. Joan has just lost her job playing a kangaroo in a children’s safety video and Josh is pumping out doughnuts at his local mall and dreaming of a hip-hop career. They appear doomed for suburban obscurity until the pair find unlikely success on the Christian rock circuit – and have to pretend to have found Jesus in order to maintain their status as the hottest hip-hop act in the parish. Narrated by the character Ken Lim (the band’s ultimate fanboy and social media manager, played by Aaron Chen), CrossBread is a six-part ABC mockumentary podcast that charts the fortunes of a non-Christian Christian hip-hop group who “shone brighter than the Star of David and was destroyed faster than Sodom and Gomorrah”. The deception begins when Josh matches with Christian woman Amanda (Kate McLennan) on a dating app, after she mistook the Wu-Tang Clan reference on his profile for a Bible verse. Eager to impress over dinner, he pretends to be a Christian rapper and comes up with the name for the band on the fly. “I’m used to thinking on my feet,” he says. “I see the crucifix around her neck and she’s buttering one of those bread rolls … ” CrossBread is born. Motivated by the chance to win $1,000 in the Prize for Battle of Believers, his sister reluctantly joins. The pair goes up against Stone Temple Pontius Pilots and boy band Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, and perform an actually half-decent version of the Lord is My Shepherd – Washington in sublime voice singing the hymn bit, while Ryan raps over the top: “The Lord is my shepherd, my master protector / The Lord is like the glass between me and Hannibal Lecter.” Reverend Philip Brock – an archetypal “groovy priest” figure, played by veteran musician John Waters – sees potential (“they were the only Christian band that didn’t make me want to crucify myself”), so long as he can smooth out their rough edges. But will he uncover their dark secret? Dappled with music, this very listenable and polished podcast – written by Ryan, Washington and Declan Fay – makes you feel like you’re actually in a megachurch circa 2015, fists pumping to Christian rock. CrossBread is affectionate rather than mocking, but unafraid to send up some of the sillier aspects and excesses of Christian megachurches – and every opportunity for a Christian pun is taken. Despite this, and the blasphemy (it’s quite sweary), the series has been getting good reviews on Christian websites – perhaps because the writers clearly know the milieu. Their fictional megachurch rings true, and the characters have enough heart and nuance to bring them back from the brink of stereotypes. And then there’s the absolute joy of the music. Washington’s voice and Ryan’s rhymes (“The only dough I save, I scrape from the deep fryer / Because the only dreams I own have been set on fire”) make for – perhaps inadvertently – some absolute bangers. I was humming Just Jesus for a week. With episodes ranging from 14 to 35 minutes, this podcast is clever, funny and – most importantly right now – very escapist. Amen. • Subscribe to Crossbread via your podcast app, or listen via the ABC