Leading owner Sheikh Fahad al-Thani has deleted a tweet which appeared to suggest that Aidan O’Brien’s colt Vatican City was “not right” before the Group One Sussex Stakes at the track on Wednesday. Vatican City dropped away quickly from two out and finished lame, while Kameko, Sheikh Fahad’s runner in the race, finished fourth behind Mohaather after being repeatedly denied a run in the closing stages. William Buick, Vatican City’s jockey, reported to the stewards after the race that his mount had been struck into during the race and had also lost a shoe. The colt was also found to have an irregular heartbeat during a post-race veterinary examination. Sheikh Fahad, whose Twitter bio is headed by a picture of the Qatari royal wearing his claret racing silks, then tweeted on Thursday morning: “Thankfully our horse is in one condition and fit and healthy to fight another day. Tough game. Sorry for Vatican City to go wrong in the race. Last thing anyone wants is to run a horse that’s not right in a G1 race. We would never do that or hopefully anyone in this position.” The tweet was then deleted about four hours later. “His wording was not correct and it was basically misconstrued and misunderstood and he certainly didn’t want to insinuate that the horse had been run lame,” Johnno Spence, a spokesperson for the Sheikh, said on Thursday. “He’s obviously realised that he needs to be a bit more careful, but that certainly wasn’t his intention and the reason that he’s taken it down is that people have misinterpreted what he meant.” The British Horseracing Authority declined to comment on Sheikh Fahad’s tweet, but confirmed that there had been no concerns about Vatican City’s soundness before the Sussex Stakes. Thursday’s tweet was not the first time that Sheikh Fahad has used social media to make what appear to be veiled criticisms of O’Brien’s Ballydoyle operation. After last month’s St James’s Palace Stakes at Royal Ascot, in which O’Brien saddled three of the seven runners, he tweeted: “There’s no place for team tactics in racing such a shame to watch the St James run like that”. O’Brien has vigorously denied ever using team tactics in races, telling the Guardian last month that it was something his stable would “never ever” do. Donnacha O’Brien’s maintained his extraordinary start to his training career here on Thursday when Fancy Blue, his first runner in Britain, took the Group One Nassau Stakes, holding off a strong challenge from One Voice in the closing stages. The same filly was O’Brien’s first starter in France when she took the French Oaks earlier this month and will now attempt to complete a Group One treble back home in Ireland, in either the Matron Stakes or Irish Champion Stakes. Fancy Blue is also a 16-1 chance to give O’Brien, who was 22 last week, a win in the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe in his first season with a licence. Aidan O’Brien, who supplied his son with eight Group One victories during his brief career as a jockey, was also among the winners on Thursday as Mogul stayed on well to win the Gordon Stakes. The full-brother to Japan, last year’s International Stakes winner, is now top-priced at around 10-1 for the St Leger at Doncaster next month. Pontefract12.25 Polastri 12.55 Humid 1.25 Iva Reflection 1.55 Little Ted (nb) 2.25 Sudona 2.55 Frankenstella 3.25 Squelch 3.55 Petitioner Goodwood1.10 Al Qaqaa 1.45 Invitational 2.15 My Oberon 2.45 Urban Icon 3.15 Battaash 3.45 Desert Encounter 4.20 Perotto 4.55 Ventura Diamond (nap) Lingfield4.15 Wrath Of Hector 4.50 Ayo Patsy 5.25 Watch Me 5.55 Equisential 6.25 City Escape 6.55 Billie Beane 7.25 Amor Fati 7.55 Prince Llyr 8.25 Capricorn Prince Wolverhampton4.30 Black Sparrow 5.05 Susucaru 5.35 Our Man In Havana 6.05 Inexplicable 6.35 Fresh Snow 7.05 Red Bravo 7.35 Elhafei 8.05 Crystal Pegasus 8.35 Recuerdame Richard Hannon is having a productive Glorious Goodwood, notching his second handicap success of the week on Thursday, and his Urban Icon (2.45) is the interesting one at 14-1 for Friday’s Golden Mile, a race his trainer won last year. The colt is battle-hardened after 11 runs but perhaps not entirely exposed as he makes his handicap debut under top weight. A Listed winner on the all-weather just before lockdown, he was set an ambitious target when turned out for the Summer Mile, won by Mohaather three weeks ago. He ran above his rating that day, being squeezed out of the lead at the furlong pole. A prominent racer with a turn of foot, he might be well suited by the particular demands of this big-field contest. Things may pan out better for him than a hold-up type like Sir Busker.