“History maketh the man,” says Idris Elba. The actor is quoting his late father, a man who he has spent the past two years playing a version of in his 1980s-set Sky sitcom, In the Long Run. “The 80s saw massive explosions in politics and culture – from Mandela and apartheid to Thatcher – and it was also when I grew into a teenager and experienced the beginnings of independence,” he says. “It was a sad and revolutionary time, and it felt important to show the younger generations especially where we came from so they can understand what has led to their realities today.” Elba plays Walter, patriarch of the Sierra Leonean Easmon family, who together navigate the prejudices of their largely white community on a council estate in Leyton, east London. In addition, he must deal with the politics of his workplace at a local factory. For Elba, having grown up on an estate in Hackney with his father working in the nearby Ford factory, it is a story that runs closely to his own. And filming in an afro wig, turtlenecks and flares, representing this period feels particularly relevant at the moment. We are speaking in the midst of worldwide Black Lives Matter protests that were sparked by the killing of George Floyd by US police in Minnesota in May. And Elba has witnessed similar events play out time and time again throughout his life. “Over my four decades, I’ve seen how movement and uprising has come from pain: the Brixton riots was one, the Tottenham riots was one, and In the Long Run sits in a decade where there was a lot of movement,” he says. The current protests have not only demanded police reform but have also led to a reconsideration of the depiction of and representation of black people in the media. They have prompted the widespread removal of white actors voicing animated black characters and episodes of TV shows that have used blackface. In contrast, In the Long Run is something of a rarity, since its cast is mostly made up of black actors. “When we started in 2018, the show was a departure from the Afro Caribbean families we had seen depicted in various programs over the years,” says Elba. “Now having an African family at the centre, I hope, means more people can see themselves represented.” The actor also stresses the diversity of his writers’ room, which includes “a lot of diverse talent who were born in the 80s or earlier”, as well as himself recounting anecdotes from his childhood. This emphasis on representation is one that has been picked up by others, most notably the director Steve McQueen, who, in a powerful Guardian opinion piece, called out the British TV and film industry as racist and named Elba’s earlier detective show Luther as one of the few examples of positive diversity on TV. “I agree with Steve’s perspective on diversity,” Elba says. “His opinion is very important and should be heard. It has been great how much Sky has stepped up to the plate with my show, though. The development of it came quite soon after I spoke to parliament about diversity in 2016 and how we need to provide opportunity and diversity of thought to create compelling storytelling. Sky approached me to say they wanted to make stories that echoed that sentiment. They didn’t hesitate to create a show with black leads.” In the Long Run is no gritty slice of drama, though. Instead, it is a family sitcom with gentle storylines, including Walter’s campaign to become factory foreman, his friendship with his estate neighbour Bagpipes (Bill Bailey) and the acclimatisation of his newly arrived relatives to British life; first his brother Valentine (Jimmy Akingbola) in season one and now his mother in the forthcoming third season. The prejudice of Britain 40 years ago is present throughout – with Valentine’s arrival on the estate greeted by a “fuck off” from a neighbour – yet the show’s tenor is still largely one of overwhelming optimism and PG-rated humour. For Bailey, the light touch of comedy is often the best means of communicating difficult ideas and experiences. “If you’re making someone laugh, then you can get things under the radar,” he says. “People’s guards go down and then you can plant a seed of an idea or something difficult in their heads. That’s where comedy has a mercurial quality to it – it gets into places where perhaps a straight debate can’t.” The gentle comedy of the show also lends itself to family viewing. “I remember watching shows like [70s interracial sitcom] Love Thy Neighbour with my dad, and while it had some horrendous writing and stereotyping you would never get away with now, it was representative of an earlier time for me watching it in the 80s,” Elba says. “Those shows open a dialogue between generations and that’s what we want to create with In the Long Run – for it to bring those old family photos to life.” “This show really feels like an authentic depiction of family life at the time and that’s what first grabbed my attention,” Bailey adds. “It’s been a joy to be let into Idris’s life and to see his own incredible aptitude for comedy. It’s been amazing to see people like my 16-year-old son, who has grown up in the digital age, really get an insight into another era too.” For all his show’s gazing into the past, Elba believes that culture in all its forms is essential to the identity of Britain today. “One thing the lockdown has shown is that it’d be a real shame if our country loses the venues that people congregate in, as at this juncture of society now where everyone’s looking towards each other to answer some really difficult questions, culture is the lifeline,” he says. “The metropolises of the UK are real melting pots of communities and those are fuelled by gatherings. So we need to keep that alive. That’s how we ultimately understand each other.” The third series of In the Long Run starts on Sky One on 23 July