Mikel Arteta believes Liverpool’s regeneration under Jürgen Klopp is a model for how to build a club but has warned that Arsenal face a less favourable context as they seek a revival of their own. Realistically Arsenal require a win against Klopp’s champions, who are 21 points clear at the top, at the Emirates Stadium on Wednesday night if they are to sustain hope of a Europa League spot via the Premier League. The turnaround Klopp has wrought since arriving two months into 2015-16, a season in which Liverpool finished eighth, offers hope that Arteta can achieve something similar and he admitted their example is one to pursue. “What they have done is phenomenal,” Arteta said. “Obviously the first two years it took them some time to rebuild the squad and to create a new culture, a new philosophy and a game model that suited the coach. “Then they started to recruit every single player in relation to what they needed and that’s where I think they were really smart. They bought with specificity for every position that was required. Financially they had a big backing and made some big signings which completely changed the club in my opinion.” Arsenal may find themselves more restricted in the transfer market this summer, though, than Liverpool did in Klopp’s first season. Back then, Klopp brought in Sadio Mané and Georginio Wijnaldum for around £50m but was also able to raise £70m from player sales. Arteta thinks he is operating in more difficult conditions and accepts Arsenal must find their own route back to the top. “If you ask me that question in four years and I can tell you ‘yes, we’ve done it’, I will be so happy,” he said when asked if his challenge was similar to Klopp’s. “But I know how many decisions have to be right and how much support you need from the club and the people around, and how much connection you have to generate from your fans to have the full package, and afterwards it’s football. “The context right now is different to what it was four years ago and the ability for a club to rebuild something is more limited, but it’s certainly something we have to look at because it’s a great example. We have to do it our way, with our resources, and have in mind that the context right now is different, but we are heading to be the best and this is my only objective with this club. We have to find a way to do it.” Arteta suggested he may have to rotate the side that lost at Spurs on Sunday. It will be Arsenal’s ninth game in four weeks and Liverpool will have had an extra day’s recovery time, a state of affairs he observed was not unusual. “We only had the advantage in one [game], which was against Spurs. In the rest, the other teams had at least 24/36/48 hours more than us. But look at the boys, they keep going, they go full gas. It doesn’t matter and we will do it again.”