Ben Foster has described Watford’s confidence as “crazy low” after they were beaten 4-0 at home by Manchester City on an evening when they slipped to third from bottom in the Premier League table. The only consolation for them during the game was that the scoreline was not heavier. City hogged 76% of possession and had 25 shots to Watford’s two. But Watford, who sacked Nigel Pearson on Sunday and are now under the caretaker charge of Hayden Mullins, entered full panic mode later on Tuesday when Aston Villa secured a vital 1-0 home win against Arsenal. That result means Watford have fallen below their relegation rivals by a goal difference of one (-26 to Villa’s -27) ahead of the final round of fixtures on Sunday. Watford travel to Arsenal while Aston Villa go to West Ham, who visit Old Trafford on Wednesday. Bournemouth, in 19th place but three points worse off, remain alive. Their last game is at Everton, where they must win and hope other results go their way. Mullins set up in a defensive 4-5-1 system and limiting the damage to his club’s goal difference felt like the order of the occasion throughout. To illustrate the point, Mullins replaced the winger Roberto Pereyra, with the full-back Adam Masina, in the 87th minute with his team already 4-0 down. “I don’t think we helped ourselves,” said Foster, the only Watford player to emerge with credit. “I don’t think we did enough to do anything but what the result suggested. The confidence is so crazy – crazy low. I don’t know why it should be but you get into a state of trying to minimise as much damage as you can and it’s a dangerous way to do things. They’re Man City. They’re very, very good.” Watford have parted company with permanent managers 11 times in the last eight years and the goalkeeper was asked whether Pearson’s departure had affected the team. “Not necessarily,” he replied. “We’re well versed in what goes on at this club and it is what it is. You just get used to it. In football nowadays, nothing seems to shock and you roll with the punches. “You can’t ever blame it on anything but your own performances. We have to look at ourselves. We’ve got a massive game on Sunday and that’s all we’ve got to look at now.”