Name: Sexy Fish. Age: Four. Appearance: Very smart indeed. Now, when you say Sexy Fish … I mean the London restaurant Sexy Fish, not the abstract concept of fish that are sexy. Good, although can we agree that some fish are attractive? No, we cannot. What about The Little Mermaid? Mermaids aren’t fish. Why are we talking about Sexy Fish, then? Because it has been accused of having a discriminatory entrance policy. Oh God, what has it done? It won’t let you in if you are wearing a hoodie, according to the singer Jess Glynne. Why, what did she say? She didn’t say it so much as write a 120-word essay on it, which has since been updated. Under an Instagram post of her wearing a hoodie, Glynne originally wrote: “Dear @sexyfishlondon I turned up to your restaurant looking like this and you looked me and my friend up and down and said no you can’t come in and your restaurant was EMPTY … We were made to wait and 2 members of staff came to look at us and make a decision based on our appearance. I think the attitude of your staff needs to change as that was pure discrimination. Thanks and bye.” So, it has a dress code. OK, fine, the Sexy Fish website does state that: “We request that guests do not wear sportswear, beachwear, ripped jeans, flip-flops, sliders or workout trainers.” But it is the principle of the matter. Which is what? That we should expect more than starchy dress codes in 2020. Especially when the entire restaurant industry is struggling to survive as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. What about Big Mouth Billy Bass? Are you still trying to think of a sexy fish? I will never agree that fish are attractive. Sexy Fish is a posh Mayfair restaurant that sells £105 steak. What did Glynne expect? The policy is discriminatory against people who can’t afford nice clothes. Then they should take that £105 and spend it on something more sustainable than a sliver of meat. Also, Glynne is an international pop star. So, you think this is just a case of her own entitlement, rather than the restaurant’s discrimination? It could be. Maybe you’re right. My dad still digs out his smart jacket for Pizza Express, for crying out loud. What a mess. It’s fine. Glynne has apologised and said she was “wrong” for describing the experience as “discrimination”. What about Lola, the seductive lionfish played by Angelina Jolie in the 2004 film Shark Tale? Sure, fine, she is very sexy. You win. Do say: “Sexy Fish has a strict dress code.” Don’t say: “The same cannot be said for its rival restaurant, Erotic Manatee.”