As tributes to Paul Fusco appeared following his death last week, it was his humanity that, above all else, was cited. Olivia Arthur, president of Magnum Photos, the agency Fusco joined in 1973, praised “the deep sensitivity and humanity that he brought to his photography”. For Bruce Davidson, Fusco “defined the humanistic view” of photography, while Gilles Peress described him as “humane beyond what humane can be”. It is easy to see why he was so highly regarded as a photographer and a person. His way of seeing was an extension of his temperament: patient, attentive, alert to the deeper meaning of the still image. He photographed striking grape-pickers and their families in California in 1968, the victims of Aids and their carers in San Francisco in the 80s and the blighted lives of ordinary Ukrainians in the wake of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster. What is striking about his Chernobyl photographs is their particular kind of intimacy. This is seen even more so in the portraits he made of the sick and dying in San Francisco’s Ambassador Hotel, which became a refuge for the poor and marginalised when the Aids crisis began. For a photojournalist, Fusco was a singularly quiet presence, his gaze enquiring but never obtrusive. In the Ambassador, he documented the caring and the cared-for, the everyday rhythm of a sanctuary for a community under siege. His portraits of young men, ravaged by illness, are both tender and unflinching. As with the Chernobyl portraits, they tell a bigger story through small vignettes and telling gestures: the distant gaze of a stick-thin young man propped up on a bed; the stricken face of a mother stroking the head of her 17-year-old daughter in the intensive therapy ward of a Belarus hospital. His sensitivity to his subjects is evident throughout. Yet Fusco’s most resonant series happened spontaneously. RFK Funeral Train comprises photographs taken from a passing train of the ordinary Americans who, shocked and grief-stricken, lined the railway tracks to pay silent tribute to Robert Kennedy, whose body was being transported from New York to Washington. When Fusco boarded the train, on assignment for Look magazine, he was preoccupied by how he would cover the funeral in Arlington National Cemetery. “The doors closed,” he recalled later. “The train slowly moved through the dark tunnels under New York. Then suddenly it broke out of the tunnel into daylight and I was astonished.” The crowds of mourners would enthral everyone who encountered the images for the first time after they were discovered 30 years later in the archives of the Library of Congress by Magnum researcher Natasha Lunn. They had languished there, unseen, amid an archive of around 5m photographs donated to the library when Look magazine folded in 1971. It turned out that the editors, a fortnightly magazine, had decided not to publish them in the edition that appeared two weeks after Robert Kennedy’s death and a week after its biggest rival, LIFE. In 1998, Lunn passed the file on to George magazine, a political glossy co-founded by John F Kennedy Jr, which published a selection of them for the first time. The passing years gave an incredible poignancy to the photographs, which were shown at the Photographers Gallery in London the following year to rapt and attentive visitors. The same aura of silence has prevailed each time I have seen them exhibited since. Looking at the images now, in the context of the contemporary degradation of American politics, they seem even more resonant in their capturing of a moment of communal respect that crosses all boundaries of colour, creed, age and status. What Fusco caught from the train window was a spontaneous gesture of love and sorrow for a statesman whose assassination, just months after the murder of Martin Luther King, marked the death of the great surge of hope and optimism that the cultural protests of the 1960s had promised. The train journey took eight hours – twice the normal time – during which Fusco shot around 2,000 photographs. He used Kodachrome film, which accounts for the richness of the colour tones and the sense of another long-lost, but achingly familiar, America. The backdrop changes from urban to rural and back again. Throughout the images, a sense of time stilled and routine abandoned emerges out of this spontaneous expression of great loss unfolding before Fusco’s steady, formal gaze. Everyone is dressed in summer clothes: shorts, T-shirts, sandals, sneakers. Barefoot children stand with their parents. A black woman kneels in prayer, while around her others gaze in reverent silence. A father and son stand at attention on a wooden bridge, saluting as the train rolls by, while the mother looks on. “That’s the one that really gets me,” Fusco said later. “They’re poor and have had hard lives, but are proud of what they have accomplished and grateful for the commitment and hope Bobby nurtured in the legions of the poor, the black and countless other forgotten Americans.” Each image, though compositionally similar, is a small, revealing scene of American life and community. Cumulatively, they amount to a portrait of a nation at a time of great uncertainty, the silent, staring faces a testimony to a dream not so much deferred as destroyed. In their great humanity, Paul Fusco’s expressive images haunt us still, their symbolism more palpable, yet more distant, than ever.