The United States again reported a record one-day increase in coronavirus cases on Tuesday, with 44,358 new coronavirus cases confirmed in the country, according to coronavirus database the Covid Tracking Project, as infections surge across the country, which is the worst-affected worldwide in terms of cases and deaths. The US has more than 2.6m cases and accounts for approximately one in four known deaths worldwide, with the country’s toll currently at 127,410. There are close to 10.5m cases globally, with infections rising by around 150,000 in the last 24 hours alone to 10,450,628. The global death toll stand at 510,632. Brazil, with the highest cases and deaths outside of the US, recorded 1,280 more fatalities on Tuesday, bringing the country’s confirmed death toll to nearly 60,000, with the total currently at 59,594, according to health ministry data. The total number of confirmed cases stands at 1,402,041. On Twitter, the Covid Tracking Project said that the US’s 7-day average for new daily cases has doubled since 13 June and that hospitalisations in the country jumped by the highest number since 21 April. It marks the fourth time in a week that the country posted a one-day case record, according to the New York Times, which said new cases in the US had increased by 80% in two weeks. On Sunday CNN reported that cases were rising in 36 US states, with just two – Connecticut and Rhode Island – reporting declines in their daily infections. The surge in cases came as Dr Anthony Fauci, the leading US expert on infectious diseases, delivered a stark warning to senators on the health, education, labor and pensions committee on Tuesday. Fauci said the country could see 100,000 new coronavirus cases daily unless action is taken to reverse the epidemic. The US has bought up virtually all the stocks of remdesivir for the next three months, leaving none for the UK, Europe or most of the rest of the world. The experimental treatment is one of two proven to work against Covid-19. South Korea’s Yonhap news agency reported meanwhile that the drug has just started being used in the most severe coronavirus cases by doctors there. Other key developments in the pandemic include: The UN warned that the pandemic has taken a much heavier toll on jobs than previously feared, and that the situation in the Americas is particularly dire. In a fresh study, the International Labour Organization estimates that by the mid-year point, global working hours were down 14% compared to last December - equivalent to some 400 million full-time jobs. New Zealand reported a second consecutive day of no new cases of Covid-19, according to health officials. There are 22 active cases, all of them travellers returning to the country. There is no known community transmission of the virus in New Zealand. The state of Victoria, Australia, which has been struggling to control a recent coronavirus outbreak, recorded another 73 Covid-19 cases on Wednesday. It is the fifth-highest day for Covid cases recorded in one day since the pandemic began. In Japan, Disneyland Tokyo reopened today with limited entertainment and shorter hours, after four months of being closed due to the coronavirus pandemic. Measures including temperature checks, masks and distancing are in place. 