Imagine for a moment what it must feel like to be a social care worker on the frontline of the coronavirus pandemic. On a minimum wage and working without the safety net of meaningful sick pay, you’ve left your home to protect the people you care for, in the fullest sense of the word. Working long hours to cover the additional pressures of the crisis, you’ve never complained. When the heatwave hit in June, you still wore layers of plastic to keep the people you support safe. Maybe you’ve lift-shared to avoid transmission, or even moved out of your family home altogether, providing care while your loved ones shield. You’ve found creative ways to connect with people, ensuring your face mask isn’t a barrier to conveying empathy and affection. There have been sleepless nights. You’ve often worried about whether you might be carrying the virus into work, or even taking it home. There’s been a barrage of information that you’ve strived to follow to the letter. Perhaps Covid-19 has reached your care home and you’ve had to meet the greatest health challenge of a generation. Promises of a “protective ring” turned out to be hollow; there wasn’t enough clinical or public health input to support care workers from the start. Now imagine that you turn on your TV at the end of another long shift and hear the prime minister say that maybe the outbreak occurred because you and your team failed to follow government guidance. How would you feel? When I heard Boris Johnson claim that “too many care homes didn’t really follow the procedures in the way that they could”, my heart sank. I had to speak out for my 6,500 charity staff – and the millions like them across the wider sector – who have been working day and night to keep many of society’s most vulnerable people safe, happy and well during the crisis. I told Nick Robinson on Radio 4’s Today programme that Johnson had “at best, been clumsy and cowardly”. But the care sector has occupied a Kafkaesque reality throughout this crisis. The government has regularly spoken about the support available to this sector, making claims that have no basis in reality. Johnson’s words suggested that guidance and support for the care sector have been easy to find, accessible, comprehensive and well planned. Let me share the truth. From the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic, the government was focused on maintaining capacity within the NHS. As we watched Covid-19 run through the care systems of Spain and Italy, it was blindingly obvious where the impact would be felt. At the same time that Britain was welcoming football fans from Madrid, then a coronavirus hotspot, and almost 69,000 people were enjoying the Cheltenham Gold Cup, we locked our care homes down early. Many families couldn’t understand why we were acting so decisively when the government wasn’t. Now they thank us for our foresight. When coronavirus first arrived in the UK, social care was expected to help the NHS cope by taking on discharged patients. We resisted requests to admit people who had not been tested into our care homes, knowing the obvious consequences that could arise from doing so. The supply of personal protective equipment (PPE) was disastrous. As the government’s limited stock was directed to the NHS, early guidance stated that homes simply needed to use PPE as they always had done. Today, Community Integrated Care, the charity of which I am CEO, has consumed almost 450,000 items of PPE every week during the pandemic. To date, we’ve had to independently purchase around 90% of our PPE stock, at enormous difficulty. In our charity alone, this has contributed to a £2.2m overspend that is yet to be repaid. And the guidance? Let’s be real. We’ve had to establish a full-time team to help find, assess and communicate national guidance to the rest of the charity. To put this into context, we have reviewed almost 100 iterations of instructions around PPE usage. Much of this advice has been contradictory or inadequate. As a large, skilled charity we can do this. But many others cannot. One of the most effective ways to prevent and mitigate the impact of coronavirus in care homes is through regular and routine testing. The head of the World Health Organisation stressed in March that countries must “test, test, test”. Sadly, Britain’s experience has been one of “wait, wait, wait”. Routine testing in care homes for people aged over 65 only began this week. There remain around 850,000 people living in other social care settings, like domestic supported living services and extra care flat complexes, who are still overlooked by these plans. When we reckon with this crisis in the future, we will find that coronavirus was not a story of guidance not being implemented, but one of complacency and disregard for a sector that was overstretched and under-resourced after a decade of brutal austerity. Instead of blaming providers, I would implore the prime minister to work with them to build a better future for social care and the people it serves. We need central government to take accountability for social care, to fund it sustainably, to enable us to pay people a fair wage, and to give the sector the leadership and support that it desperately needs. Around 20,000 people have died of coronavirus in care homes since this crisis began in the UK. The time for soundbites and shifting the blame has passed. What’s needed is meaningful action to make the care sector fit for the future. Mark Adams is CEO of Community Integrated Care, one of the UK’s largest social care charities