Britain is the sixth fattest countrywithin the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. For more than a decade, successive Conservative prime ministers have declared obesity a national emergency and pledged to take radical action, only to produce watered-down plans that fall far shy of what is required. It should not have taken a pandemic to ram home the awful consequences of the UK’s obesity epidemic: obesity, and its associated conditions of diabetes and high blood pressure, is strongly associated with a higher risk of death from Covid-19 and will have undoubtedly been a factor in the UK having the highest Covid death rate in Europe. Boris Johnson’s experience of catching the virus and being admitted to intensive care has reportedly resulted in a damascene conversion in a prime minister who has previously prided himself on his aversion to nanny statism. The government is expected to set out a new strategy this week, aimed at reducing obesity levels both in the next few months – ahead of a possible second wave of infections – and the longer term. This apparent conversion is welcome, but only if it results in a radical shift in the government’s approach, away fromreliance on an ill-conceived notion of personal responsibility and towards recognition that much tougher regulation is required, as with tobacco and alcohol. There is robust evidence about what is needed to cut obesity and in recent years report after report, including from Public Health England and the former chief medical officer, have called for urgent action. Yet these calls were ignored by Conservative ministers who have seemingly prioritised the food and drink industry’s financial interests over the health of the nation. The continuing failure to act is consigning a generation of children to a lifetime of health problems. One in three leaves primary school overweight or obese, putting them at significantly greater risk of cardiovascular disease, cancer and type 2 diabetes later in life. Public health experts fear that the impact of the lockdown on eating and exercise habits will have made the situation worse. Poor diet has overtaken smoking and drinking to become the nation’s biggest premature killerand it brings a huge cost of around £6bn a year for the NHS as obesity-related hospital admissions continue to rise. It is an industry that deploys friendly cartoons and games to market fatty and sugary foods to children Increasing obesity levels are not the result of the nation becoming more wilfully irresponsible about its nutrition choices or parents deliberately choosing to load their children’s diets with unhealthy foods. They are primarily the result of an industry that stands to gain from packing processed foods with increasing amounts of cheap and addictive fat, sugar and salt, in a way that has reduced consumer choice by conditioning our palates to crave more over time. It is an industry that deploys friendly cartoon characters and online games to market directly to children, encouraging them to pressure their parents to buy fatty and sugary foods and knowingly loads up products such as breakfast drinks with more sugar than a can of cola then markets them as “healthy”. Its efforts are working: children are consuming, on average, more than twice the recommended amount of sugar each year and tooth decay is the most common reason for those aged five to nine to be admitted to hospital. The one area where the government has taken proper action has been the introduction of a sugar levy on fizzy drinks, eventually brought in in 2018 after years of delay. This has been highly successful on its own terms – the amount of sugar in fizzy drinks has fallen by almost 30% without a corresponding fall in soft drink sales – but it is far too limited in scope to make a big enough difference on obesity. Apart from this, the government has relied on asking for voluntary action from the food industry, which has completely failed to deliver. A more interventionist approach is required. Before 2010, the UK was a leader in nutrition policy and was the first country to successfully reduce population-level salt intakes by forcing manufacturers to gradually reduce salt levels in food, an approach that has been copied around the world with other countries applying it to sugar and fat as well as salt with great success. However, Conservative governments have ripped up this approach. We need to see the compulsory reformulation of processed and convenience foods to reduce sugar and fat as well as salt levels, and, as the King’s Fund argues in today’s Observer, we need a comprehensive ban on junk food advertising, regulation to eliminate unhealthy food being sold as a loss leader by supermarkets and beefed-up powers to enable local authorities to maintain the area around schools as fast food-free zones. There is evidence of broad-based public support for tougher regulatory measures: the sugar tax is supported by more than six in 10 people and the vast majority of voters think government has at least a fair amount of responsibility for ensuring people stay healthy. But the food and drinks industry spends vast sums lobbying against changes that it fears will hit its bottom line – in the same way the tobacco industry once did. So far, government briefings suggest that the new strategy, like the ones that went before, will be focused on weak measures such as public education campaigns and “nudges” such as the repositioning of unhealthy food in different parts of supermarket aisles. However, nudges and information campaigns will never be enough. The real test for an overweight prime minister said to be shaken by his own experience of Covid is whether he is prepared to take on an industry seemingly determined to extract as much profit as it can, regardless of the cost in premature deaths.