The first book by Munroe Bergdorf, a manifesto on gender by the black transgender activist and model, has been bought for a six-figure sum after a bidding war between 11 publishers. Bergdorf’s Transitional will be published by Bloomsbury in 2021. Exploring six different facets of human experience – adolescence, sexuality, gender, relationships, identity and race – the book will draw on Bergdorf’s own experiences, including growing up in a mixed-race family, going to an all-boys school and starting her transition at the age of 24. In it, she will argue that transition is an experience every person faces in every phase in life, “and that only by recognising this can we understand times of change”. Bergdorf told the Guardian that she envisaged the book as “a manifesto for how I see society changing for the better, bringing us all closer”. The trans experience, she said, is “thought of by a lot of people as this far-off idea that isn’t that relatable. I wanted to drive home the fact that we all transition in one way or another. None of us stays the same. We’re all on a journey, and a transition with regards to gender is just one of many we all experience as human beings.” The book will explore the history of gender throughout the world, including Polynesian, Indian and Native American cultures that recognised more than two genders before the colonial era. “I’ve gone into the depths of where gender came from, because it hasn’t always existed in [the way] we think about gender today,” said Bergdorf. “What it’s like to be a cisgender woman today is not what it was in the middle ages, or the 1950s, or even the 1980s.” The book will also take in current discussions around gender and sexuality, “because even though it looks like we’re living in a progressive society, how progressive is it when we’re still fighting against conversion therapy, and Boris Johnson is trying to wind back trans rights?” she said. The deal’s announcement comes after Black Lives Matter protests have forced a global reckoning on race, with the newly formed Black Writers’ Guild renewing calls for sweeping change in the overwhelmingly white UK publishing industry. But Bergdorf’s deal was actually struck last year, when she presented an 80,000-word proposal for the first time. It was an “incredible” feeling, she said, to have 11 publishers bidding to publish it, and she was “blown away” by Bloomsbury’s associate publisher Alexis Kirschbaum, who eventually acquired it in what the publisher said was likely to be the biggest book deal for a black, trans woman. Kirschbaum praised Bergdorf for having “a point of view that is exceptionally wise and humane, and the life experience to back it up”. As a model and an outspoken activist, who was hired and fired by L’Oréal in the space of a week in 2017 over comments she made in response to violence in Charlottesville, Virginia, Bergdorf said she felt that, until now, “my intelligence has been undermined, and I’ve been underestimated a lot in a lot of different instances”. “I’m looking forward to sharing a piece of work where people can actually read what I’m about firsthand, instead of seeing me when I pop up in the papers every now and again,” she said. “If I can change people’s minds about how they view people who aren’t like them, and how they view human difference, than that is a job done.” Gen Z, she said, “take a much more fluid approach to gender and sexuality … and I think that that’s where we need to go. We need to stop labeling ourselves with archaic definitions of humanity because we’re not simple. Humans are complex and you can’t label everything and you can’t label everybody else either. I feel like we need to widen how we see ourselves, and widen how we see each other, because then you realise that we all want the same thing.” Bergdorf has spoken out recently about fellow Bloomsbury author JK Rowling, whose recent comments about transgender rights Bergdorf described as transphobic. She also referred the UK peer Emma Nicholson to the Parliamentary Standards Conduct Commissioner, for her posts on social media about the trans community. “It’s such a shame, especially with these gender critical feminists like JK Rowling and Baroness Nicholson,” she said. “I think if they actually sat down with me and communicated in a respectful way instead of posting things about our community that are detrimental to the mental health, physical wellbeing and emotional wellbeing of trans people, they would see that trans people want what’s best for cisgender women, too. One group of society’s rights isn’t to the detriment of anybody else’s – equal rights are equal rights. It means equality, it doesn’t mean less for some, and more for others.”