This was not exactly the kind of steamrollering performance we have become so used to seeing from Jürgen Klopp’s red machine throughout this season. But when you possess a goalscorer of Mohamed Salah’s pedigree, it is not always necessary to play well. Liverpool moved a step closer in their quest to overhaul Manchester City’s record Premier League points total of 100 after the Egyptian took his season’s tally in the competition to 19 goals with two, either side of a sumptuous strike from Jordan Henderson. It means Salah has dramatically revived his chances of becoming the first player to win three successive Golden Boots since Arsenal’s Thierry Henry from 2004-06, while his team also racked up a 30th victory of this most remarkable campaign. Klopp had insisted in the buildup to this match that his players were not even thinking about breaking City’s points record, although in the same breath he also admitted they needed no reminding of the challenge facing them. With the defence of their Champions League crown already over, they are free to concentrate on attempting to surpass the total amassed by Pep Guardiola’s side during the 2017-18 season – with 92, they need nine more – not to mention the highest number of victories (32) and the biggest title-winning margin (15 points). That had been cut to 20 by City’s 5-0 thrashing of Newcastle earlier yet – no matter what Klopp says – the opportunity to erase their major rivals’ names from the record books must be a motivating factor to finish the season strongly. The manager’s team selection here was recognition of that but also perhaps contained a nod to the future with the inclusion of the 19-year-old Neco Williams at left-back for his first Premier League start. Sadio Mané was rested as Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain was pushed forward and Henderson, the captain, was restored in midfield. The victory over Norwich on Saturday meant Brighton have already matched their points total from last season, even if Graham Potter is refusing to take anything for granted yet in terms of their survival. The Wrexham-born Williams joined Liverpool at the age of six and has mainly been used as a right-back so far in his career. But he showed few signs of nerves in the opening exchanges despite his unfamiliar role and it was from the left flank that Brighton’s first mistake emanated in the fifth minute. Naby Keïta intercepted a sloppy pass from Davy Pröpper and was able to pick out Salah at the far post for a simple finish. Adam Webster was the next to succumb to Liverpool’s high press within 60 seconds of the restart as his pass failed to find Alexis Mac Allister, Henderson taking advantage with a brilliant curling shot from the edge of the penalty area. Understandably, Brighton looked shellshocked. To their credit, however, they strived hard to find a way back into the game and it took an excellent block from Williams to deny a goal-bound shot from Leandro Trossard. Neal Maupay then came close after Trossard had instigated a quick break but Alisson did well to deny him from close range. The deserved breakthrough came on the stroke of half-time as the impressive Tariq Lamptey got the better of Williams and his cross was half-volleyed home by the Belgian Trossard. Booked for tripping Lamptey and having been fortunate to escape a yellow card after another earlier challenge on the graduate of Chelsea’s academy, Williams was withdrawn at the break for Andrew Robertson. Liverpool attempted to begin the second half in the same vein as they had started the first but found Brighton a much tougher nut to crack this time. Salah came close to restoring their two-goal advantage after another precise pass from Keïta, only for Mat Ryan to come to his side’s rescue. Dan Burn then somehow contrived to miss an open goal from just six yards out as Brighton wasted their best chance to equalise before Salah’s pinpoint header from Robertson’s corner finally settled the encounter 15 minutes from time. Now just three behind Leicester’s Jamie Vardy in the Golden Boot standings with four games remaining, you certainly wouldn’t put it past him.