The England and Wales Cricket Board has finalised its plans for the domestic season by releasing the fixtures and groups for the Bob Willis Trophy and confirming that the Vitality Blast will be joined by a 50-over women’s competition. All 18 first-class counties will take part in the Bob Willis Trophy, split into three regional groups, north, central and south, with fixtures to begin on 1 August. There will be five group matches with the two group winners with the most points contesting a five-day final, which the Guardian understands is likely to be at Lord’s. Last season’s Division One champions, Essex, will begin their campaign against Kent at home, while the runners-up Somerset host Glamorgan. Middlesex will play their matches at Radlett and not Lord’s, so there is the potential for the home of cricket to have no first-class cricket this year – unless the ECB manage to stage the final there. Meanwhile, the Roses match between Yorkshire and Lancashire is scheduled for Headingley on 22 August, with Lancashire also playing on their out-grounds – as are Hampshire – due to their main stadiums being used for England fixtures. The women’s 50-over competition will see two regional groups of four teams with the group winners meeting in the final. Fixtures will be announced next month alongside those of the Vitality Blast, which will begin on 27 August. As reported by the Guardian, the competition will involve reduced workloads on bowlers by capping the number of overs they can bowl and delaying the new ball. The ECB’s chief executive, Tom Harrison, said: “I am pleased that we have been able to schedule women’s domestic cricket and ensure competitive cricket following last month’s confirmation of the first cohort of players on Regional Retainer contracts. “We will need to remain agile to the challenges that will await us during the shortened domestic season with the health and wellbeing of our players, staff, officials and fans continuing to be our first priority.” Bob Willis Trophy groups: North Group - Derbyshire, Durham, Lancashire, Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, Yorkshire. Central Group – Glamorgan, Gloucestershire, Northamptonshire, Somerset, Warwickshire, Worcestershire. South group – Essex, Kent, Hampshire, Middlesex, Surrey, Sussex.