I disappointed myself the other day, and I want to purge myself by declaring my sins in this column. Last weekend, I was at a (socially distanced – don’t @ me) garden birthday affair, which made it extremely clear that an additional legacy of coronavirus will be the effects on conversation, which could take years to run their course. I am not sure I have ever heard or said the phrase “You just don’t know when it’s going to end, do you?” so many times, yet it is as inevitable as asking a taxi driver if they have been busy today. At the party, I wanted to order some food for the kids, because according to them the food at the party was “weird”. I agreed with them but it would have been a bit much for me to get myself something, too. For some unknown reason, this order triggered a security alert at my bank, and it declined the transaction. I used my wife’s card instead, and thought nothing of it. It was when I went to make the next of my twice-daily online shopping purchases (I have to accept it is now an addiction) that it became clear that my bank was so freaked out by my decision to buy food at a different address that it had blocked my card. I received a text asking me to contact the bank immediately. I will admit I was annoyed – unreasonably so, considering the bank was trying to protect me from fraud – but I knew I was going to have to undergo a Guantánamo-style interrogation about whether it was really me who paid £2.35 for something in West Sussex three weeks ago. Regardless, I needed to make this call or I would not be able to buy the box of novelty toothpicks I desperately needed. I ended up speaking to a very pleasant Indian woman who seemed keen to help me. My frustration began when it became clear that my answers were not delivering the information in exactly the sequence that appeared on her screen. This wasn’t a language thing – her English was immaculate, it was just she hated her job and so was not prepared to say anything at all that wasn’t on her screen. During the call, I told her three times what my problem was, then she asked me to verify the last 17 transactions I had made. When she was eventually satisfied it was me, she asked me what the problem was once again. That wound me up, but it was when she told me I was not being very clear that I lost my rag. For me, in a customer service situation, this means being very sarcastic and sounding a bit like an affronted Hugh Grant, as well as using the word “outrageous”, a word I use exclusively when annoyed by poor customer service. When the matter was eventually sorted, I put the phone down and looked up to see my wife in fits of hysterics at my “little episode”. She said that she was enjoying it so much that she nearly woke up the children to ask if they wanted to watch the show, too. I felt ashamed – this woman was probably having a bad day, and I had phoned up and been a prick because I was desperate for my next purchase of frivolous crap to arrive when I wanted it to. I have always been super-judgmental of those who are rude to people in customer service, as it is one of the most accurate indicators of somebody’s true character. I once saw a mate ridicule a waiter so mercilessly because he had got his order slightly wrong, that I knew I could not continue to be friends with him. He still does not know, which suggests that the feeling may have been mutual. I am hoping that my delivery of toothpicks will help me get over it.