A branch of the Metropolitan police has been criticised for a tweet saying that “kicking down doors” was one of its “favourite things” to do. The post, from the account of the Safer Neighbourhoods Team in Homerton, Hackney, London, was deleted about an hour after its publication Wednesday morning following criticism from other Twitter users. The post said: “Kicking down doors is probably one of our favourite things. Another warrant conducted on #Victoria ward with the assistance of @MPSHomerton @MPSKingsPark @MPSHackneyWick.” The officer responsible for the posting the comment, displayed alongside an image of officers using a battering ram on a front door, has been reprimanded by the force. A Met spokesperson said: “We are aware of an inappropriate tweet sent from the @MPSHomerton twitter account. The officer who tweeted this has been given words of advice and the professional standards unit have been made aware. The tweet has now been deleted.” The controversy comes at a time when tensions are high over the disproportionate use of police action against black and minority ethnic people amid global Black Lives Matter protests. Sian Berry, a member of the London Assembly police and crime committee, and the Green candidate for mayor of London, said the tweet risked worsening the reputation of the force. Berry said: “The Met says it wants to be the ‘most trusted police service in the world’ but if this tweet is from a serving officer it shows just how ingrained the wrong attitudes are. In my work I see so many worrying incidents that contradict reassurances about there only being ‘bad apples’. “Poor behaviour is evident in many experiences now being shared by black Londoners, as well as repeated data showing the Met disproportionately use their most aggressive tactics against non-white citizens. Our police want us to be proud of them, but gleefully boasting about bully tactics strays miles away from the idea of policing by consent, and will only worsen their reputation.” Hackney, in east London, is one of the most ethnically diverse boroughs in the country; just over 40% of its residents are non-white, while black people make up most of the minority groups. Homerton has fewer white residents than the Hackney average, and more black residents. Meg Hillier, the Labour MP for Hackney South and Shoreditch, said the post was unacceptable and it was “right” the professional standards unit had been made aware. “The Hackney police commander offered an immediate and fulsome apology when I raised concerns,” she added.