Prep 10 minCook 35 minServes 4 400g sweet potatoes2 corn cobs, husks removedSalt and freshly ground black pepper1 avocado10 cherry tomatoes, halved70g feta 1 bunch watercress, trimmed For the dressing1 shallot, peeled and finely chopped1 red chilli, finely chopped2 tbsp chopped piquillo peppers, from a jar (or peeled red peppers)½ lime, juiced1 tbsp rice vinegar1 tbsp maple syrup3 tbsp sunflower oil1 tbsp chopped fresh mint and coriander Peel and thinly slice the sweet potatoes, then steam for 10 minutes, until just cooked. Cook the corn in boiling salted water for 10 minutes, then remove and set aside to cool. When cool enough to handle, using a knife (serrated, ideally), to slice off the kernels, then put in a large bowl with the cooked sweet potato. Stone the avocado, then peel and cut the flesh into 2cm chunks. Add these and the halved cherry tomatoes to the corn bowl, then crumble in the feta and add the watercress, and season generously. The salad can now be boxed up for transportation, if need be. Whisk together all the dressing ingredients, taste for seasoning and adjust as necessary. Just before you want to serve up, drizzle the dressing over the salad, fold through gently to coat, then plate up. Prep 10 minCook 20 minServes 4 For the ajo blanco250g charentais melon flesh50g white bread100g flaked almonds1 garlic clove, peeled and crushed50ml olive oilSalt and pepper For the dressing1 tbsp chopped tarragon leaves1 shallot, peeled and finely chopped1 tbsp moscatel vinegar1 tbsp maple syrup2 tbsp grapeseed oil For the salad100g halloumi1 tbsp olive oil300g watermelon flesh1 nectarine10 cherry tomatoes75g toasted pumpkin seeds10 black olives, stoned and chopped Put all the ingredients for the ajo blanco in a blender and blitz smooth. Add a little water until the mix is the consistency of double cream and season to taste. Whisk together all the dressing ingredients and set aside. Cut the halloumi into 0.5cm chunks, toss in the olive oil on a small baking tray and roast in a 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6 oven for five minutes, until golden brown and crisp. Cut the watermelon into 2-3cm pieces – diamonds, triangles, whatever takes your fancy. Cut the nectarine flesh into 1cm dice and slice the tomatoes. To serve, spread some of the ajo blanco on the base of a plate, arrange the fruit on top, sprinkle with halloumi crumbs, pumpkin seeds and olives, and drizzle over the dressing. Prep 10 minCook 25 minServes 4 ½ ciabatta, ripped into 2cm chunks100g peas100g french beans100g runner beans100g sugar snap peas1 tbsp olive oil1 fennel bulb, trimmed and cut into fine shavings (ideally on a mandoline)150g juicy tomatoes50ml extra-virgin olive oil2 tbsp red-wine vinegar3 anchovy fillets1 tbsp capers1 garlic clove, peeled and crushed1 small bunch basil2 tbsp mayonnaise100g tinned tuna 200g cherry tomatoes, halvedSalt and pepper Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6, then lay the bread on an oven tray and roast for 10 minutes, until golden brown at the edges. Meanwhile, trim the beans and sugar snaps, then cut the runners on the diagonal into thin strips and the sugar snaps in half lengthways. Bring a pot of salted water to a boil, then blanch the beans for five or six minutes, until just cooked; add the sugar snaps and peas for the last minute. Drain, refresh under running cold water to stop the veg cooking further, then put in a bowl with the shaved fennel, toss in a little olive oil and season to taste. For the dressing, squeeze the juice from the 150g tomatoes into a food processor, add the vinegar, anchovies, capers, garlic and half the basil, then blitz smooth, adding enough olive oil to make a thin dressing. Add the mayo and half the tuna, along with a little oil from its tin. Pulse until emulsified, then let down with a little water to a pouring consistency and season to taste. (To make this vegetarian, just omit the fish.) To serve, toss the veg with the halved cherry tomatoes, the rest of the tuna and the toasted bread. Drizzle over the dressing, toss again, and finish with the remaining basil leaves shredded over the top. Prep 10 minCook 30 minServes 4 For the peanut sauce1 shallot, peeled and chopped1 tbsp chopped lemongrass½ tsp shrimp paste1 big pinch each cayenne pepper, ground cumin and ground coriander2 tbsp chopped coriander leaves2 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed1 tbsp vegetable oil250ml coconut milk150g roasted peanuts, roughly ground (or crunchy peanut butter)2 tbsp soft brown sugar1 tbsp fish sauceSalt For the slaw½ hispi cabbage, cored½ red pepper, seeds and pith removed1 shallot, peeled2 carrots1 apple50g french beans1 red chilli200g cooked chicken, roast or poached, shredded2 tbsp chopped coriander leaves1 lime, juiced1 tbsp fish sauce1 tbsp brown sugar1 iceberg lettuce Put the shallot, lemongrass, shrimp paste, spice, fresh coriander and garlic in a blender, add a dash of coconut milk to loosen, and blitz to a paste. Gently heat the oil in a pan, then gently cook the paste for five minutes, until fragrant. Stir in the rest of the coconut milk, simmer for five minutes, then add the peanuts, sugar and fish sauce, and simmer gently for another five minutes. Add salt to taste; if the sauce seems too thick, let it down with a little water. Finely shred the cabbage, red pepper and shallot, peel and grate the carrots and apple, and finely slice the beans and chilli. Put them all in a large bowl and add the chicken and coriander. In a cup or small jug, whisk the lime juice, sugar and fish sauce, pour into the the slaw bowl and toss to coat. Cut the lettuce in half, then carefully separate the leaves. To serve, spoon some slaw into a lettuce “cup” and drizzle over a little peanut sauce. (Save any excess sauce to serve with grilled chicken, pork or beef.) • Recipes by Jane Baxter, chef and co-owner of Wild Artichokes in Kingsbridge, Devon