Confrontations between protesters and police and federal agents in Portland, Oregon, have become a national flashpoint as Donald Trump’s law-and-order campaign has run up against ongoing anti-racism protests. Here’s what’s going on and why: Since the killing of George Floyd by police officers in Minneapolis on 25 May, protesters have been out on the streets of the largest city in Oregon, a progressive bastion, more than 50 nights in a row, demanding reforms to policing practices and to address systemic racism in US society. On Tuesday, the White House press secretary, Kayleigh McEnany, repeated the justification that the agents are protecting federal property. Seeking to focus his re-election campaign on law and order – and, many would argue, to exploit racial tension and division – Trump has sent in officers from agencies under the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), to reinforce and in some cases replace local police. The president has been accused of indulging in “performative authoritarianism” and “made-for-TV fascism”, but as he trails Joe Biden in national and battleground state polls, he is hoping to rev up his base. Trump has painted the protests as being fueled by “anarchists” whom Democrats are afraid to take on. News outlets have confirmed that 150 agents are to be sent to Chicago, where gun violence has spiked, and could be sent to other cities. As in Portland, the Chicago move has sparked confrontation with a Democratic mayor. Many have operated without identification and in full camouflage gear, using tactics denied to police by the courts: firing teargas or, according to witness accounts provided to the Guardian, seizing protesters and holding them without due process. Like police officers, agents have been accused of using undue violence. According to McEnany, the White House “always encourage[s] the appropriate use of force”. Some protests have involved fires being lit, windows being smashed and fights. Agents from the Federal Protective Service, the DHS security police division, claim to have had lasers shone in their eyes. Local leaders have said crowds were dwindling before Trump sent agents in, only to grow again in the wake of the deployment. Peaceful events attract bigger crowds and local media report that for most residents in Portland, life goes on as usual – though under pandemic restrictions. Portland’s mayor, Ted Wheeler, said the agents were making the situation worse. Governor Kate Brown filed a lawsuit, seeking a restraining order. Constitutional law experts have said the administration risks precipitating a constitutional crisis by circumventing state and city governments and denying basic rights of assembly, free speech and lawful arrest. Recent polling suggests not, putting Biden as the candidate Americans trust more to handle law and order. But it’s going to be a long, hot summer. Protesters show no sign of backing down. Nor does Trump.