Fans of 2018’s farcical Bros: After the Screaming Stops documentary will be heartened by this mockumentary on another set of 80s fraternal heartthrobs: Spandau Ballet’s Kemp brothers. Film-maker Rhys Thomas charts the songwriting pair’s rise to fame from their working-class upbringing to new romantic success, Hollywood roles and current ventures including Martin’s new film franchise and Gary’s dodgy vegan meat substitute Wonge. The gags are breezy and the Kemps are admirably open to being ridiculed. Ammar Kalia The so-dark-you-need-a-torch adaptation of Eleanor Catton’s epic novel continues with a face-off between Anna and Lydia, but will the woman with the biggest hat win? And there is even less to smile about when Emery makes a comeback, with a not-so-romantic reunion for the star-crossed lovers. Hannah Verdier Comic and The Last Leg presenter Alex Brooker fronts this brave and intimate documentary confronting his identity as a disabled person. Having made a career from joking about his physical difficulties, Brooker asks whether humour could be exacerbating his insecurities. AK Christopher Luscombe directs this 2014 production of the Shakespeare comedy, part of a second world war-staged double bill with Love’s Labour Lost. The playful tale of matchmaking is fronted by lovers Michelle Terry and Edward Bennett. AK The Grammy-sweeping singer-songwriter bounces into a live show that’s not afraid to foreground the audience: Eilish is occasionally drowned out by her fans, who shout along joyously to Bad Guy, You Should See Me in a Crown and the rest. Some of them seem to have brought their bemused dads. Jack Seale As horrific as they were, the bushfires that swept Australia in early 2020 did produce the odd hero. One of them was a dog called Bear. Bear has the knack of finding injured koalas, which can then be rehabilitated. Tyson Mayr tells the story of this heroic hound and meets some of the animals he saved. Phil Harrison Marshland, 1.45am, Film4 Alberto Rodríguez’s bitter, twisty Spanish thriller is set indelibly both in time – 1980, as the country wrestles with transition after Franco’s death – and in place: Andalucía’s haunting fenland marshes. Old-school cop Juan (Javier Guttiérez) and idealist partner Pedro (Raúl Arévalo) search for a serial killer. Paul Howlett Premier League Football: Burnley v Sheffield United, 11.30am, Sky Sports Main Event/Pick. Free-to-air fixture. F1: Austrian Grand Prix, 2.05pm, Sky Sports F1. Opening round of the season coverage at the Red Bull Ring. Premier League Football: Southampton v Manchester City, 6.35pm, BBC One. Underdogs the Saints play the former champions.