Dogs are, famously, good for cheering you up. Programmes about them, however, are very, very good at making you cry. But because of the innate goodness of dogs, it is the kind of cry that cheers you up. When you need a good cry, but nothing is quite tipping you over the edge, purge yourself with a lovely dog programme (nothing with vets, though. Don’t be ridiculous). So, then, to the special instalment of Paul O’Grady’s For the Love of Dogs, subtitled Back in Business (ITV) and covering Battersea Dogs & Cats Home’s response to the coronavirus crisis. One moment, as O’Grady notes, its main problem is George the Staffie’s third return to the home after a failed placement (houseboat, cat). The next, plague times are on us and the heat is on to get hundreds of animals rehoused or out to foster carers for as long as lockdown lasts. Not that the pressure of the frantic rush is passed on to the viewer. For the Love of Dogs is not about to let some upstart virus upset the equilibrium on which its viewers – now more than ever – depend. It remains an oasis of tranquillity, a haven of kindness, with good people doing good things for good dogs. Thus it was when it first began in 2012, thus it is and thus it ever more shall be, even when O’Grady finally passes on the torch. Ideally, it will be to a presenter who can match his rare combination of genuine wit and warmth, although no natural successor springs to mind. Maybe Ant or Dec will age into the role, but at the moment they are mere excitable pups. O’Grady brings a weary contentment that sits just right. O’Grady agrees to foster a dog in this time of emergency. “I’m a very selfless man,” he says. But it must be one that can cope with, while not intimidating, the five small dogs he and his husband, Andre, have at their smallholding in Kent. And Andre must agree. “Yes,” O’Grady assures him when he calls, “It’ll go back.” It won’t, he mouths to us. You can imagine Andre sighing and laying another place at table. A shot of a staff member carrying literally (litter-ally? Somebody stop me) an armful of puppies into the reception room has O’Grady lifting his head, all senses alerted. “Puppies,” he cries like a benevolent Cruella de Vil, stalking down the corridor towards them. “I could smell ’em as soon as I left the house!” He opens the door. Five jack russell-cross scraps tumble towards him. It’s all over for him and us, even before one of them dives under his coat and instantly falls asleep. This is the one, he says. The staffer says she will check that Dinky has not yet been reserved. “She won’t have been,” O’Grady assures her. “Look at her. So ugly. Violent.” Dinky sighs in her sleep and burrows further under his arm. It’s. All. Over. Rare times require rare responses, so later in the show O’Grady visits “the dark side” – the cats. He believes shots of cats should always be subtitled, and so they are. I must state for the record that I would watch an entire show comprising only cats in closed caption, or with Andrew-Cotteresque commentary, as they stare unblinkingly into the camera, disdainfully walk away or contemptuously resettle themselves on the handknitted blankets with which each cage is lined. New arrival Nala gives birth to five kittens on hers. They all find homes, probably because they are the most gorgeous little things you have ever seen. Anyone who clapped eyes on them would surely take them home to love forever. Anyway, back in the dog house, as it were, O’Grady furnishes his agent with a bichon frise called Bobby, sends Dinky’s brother and sisters to new homes and … yes, takes Dinky home himself. There, due to underlying health issues, he will self-isolate until … Well, until. “Wash your hands,” he tells us. “And I’ll see you when I see you.” There was a bit after that, when lockdown lifted and the business of the rescue home started up again, I think, but I was crying too hard to tell.