Doctors, police, teachers and some other public sector workers in England are to receive above-inflation pay rises, the Treasury has announced, with the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, saying this reflected the “vital contribution” they make to the UK. Labour and unions said pay increases, ranging from 2% to 3.1%, were good news but did not make up for lost incomes under the previous public sector pay freeze. Labour also said the settlement would not help staff such as care workers, who are paid via cash-strapped local authorities. The Treasury announcement affects nearly 900,000 workers in England, with doctors and dentists getting an increase of 2.8% and police and prison officers of 2.5%. Teachers will receive a 3.1% increase, and the armed forces 2%. Nurses, midwives, hospital porters and other NHS staff are not covered by this pay round. Their pay will rise by at least 6.5% over three years from 2018, under the terms of a deal reached with unions representing NHS England staff in 2018. Other sectors covered by this increase include senior civil servants and the judiciary, whose pay will go up by 2%, and staff at the National Crime Agency, who get a 2.5% increase. The pay awards for doctors and dentists, prison officers, the armed forces, civil servants and judiciary will be backdated to April this year. Police and teachers operate on a different pay year, so their increase will start in September. In a statement released by the Treasury, Sunak said: “These past months have underlined what we always knew – that our public sector workers make a vital contribution to our country and that we can rely on them when we need them. “It’s right therefore that we follow the recommendations of the independent pay bodies with this set of real-terms pay rises.” Anneliese Dodds. the shadow chancellor, said: “A pay rise for our police, nurses and teachers now is good news, but for many frontline workers it still won’t make up for a decade of real-terms pay cuts. “And many other public sector workers – including those working on the frontline in social care – won’t get a pay rise out of this at all because the Tories haven’t made good on their promises to boost local authority funding.” The TUC general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said: “Many public sector workers, like job centre staff and local government workers, aren’t getting these rises. They deserve a decent pay settlement too. “And the government should urgently announce a pay rise for social care workers, who put their lives on the line to care for others during this pandemic.” The Unison assistant general secretary, Christina McAnea, called for more resources for local authorities so council staff and social care workers would also be entitled to a “decent wage increase”. The pay rise came as government borrowing rose to a record £127.9bn in the first quarter of the financial year due to soaring spending at the height of the coronavirus crisis, according to official figures. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) estimated that borrowing in the first three months of the financial year was more than double the £55.4bn for the whole of 2019-20 as the UK spent heavily on emergency support measures during the lockdown. It came after June’s public sector net borrowing, excluding state-owned banks, rose five-fold year-on-year to £35.5bn – £28.3bn higher than a year earlier and the third highest for any month on record. Borrowing last month, however, was lower than expected by most economists and less than the downward revised £45.5bn recorded for May. • This article was amended on 21 July 2020 to add clarifying text stating that the Treasury announcement applies to public sector workers in England only.