Jacinda Ardern has been handed a 40th birthday present in a new poll showing Labour is on track to cruise to victory in this year’s New Zealand election. Her party charted 61% in a Newshub-Reid Research poll announced on Sunday, the same day the prime minister turned 40. The result is the strongest result on record for Labour. “When it comes to the trends, we’ve seen a strong indication of support for what I would say is most likely to be the government’s response to Covid and the recovery plan,” Ardern told Radio NZ on Monday. If replicated at the ballot box on 19 September, Labour would be able to govern alone with a sizeable majority in the next parliament. If the poll numbers hold, Ardern would be the first leader to be able to govern with a clear majority since Jim Bolger’s booming win in 1990. Ardern said Labour’s internal polling showed a “a reasonably significant gap between (Labour) and the opposition” but they weren’t home and hosed. “I’m never complacent. I’m equally sceptical about the (polls) that are high as the ones that are low,” she said. “We have seen high support for the government ... but these are pretty extraordinary times. We’ll be working very, very hard to earn the trust of New Zealanders.” Conversely, the opposition National party is set to be torched on 19 September, recording just 25% support – well down from its 44% result at the 2017 election. The result is a nightmare for Judith Collins, who was elevated to the opposition leadership a fortnight ago after Todd Muller stepped down less than two months after taking the job. Collins dismissed the result as a “rogue poll”. “I think we’ve done very, very well when you consider what we’ve dealt with in a week and a half,” she said. Campaign chief and deputy leader Gerry Brownlee agreed. “These numbers aren’t even in the same ballpark as our internal polls, other public polls and the hugely positive public response to our Leader Judith Collins,” he said. “Even with the most rigorous methodology, one in 20 polls will always be a rogue and this is clearly one of them.” Ardern said she would not be complacent and Labour would remain focused on what matters to voters. To ensure parliamentary representation under New Zealand’s mixed-member proportional system, parties need to win an electorate seat or poll at 5%. The prime minister now leads a coalition government with two minority parties – the populist New Zealand First on the right, and the Greens on the left. On the basis of the Newshub poll, the Greens would scrape in with 5.7% but New Zealand First, the party of the deputy prime minister, Winston Peters, would be out, polling at just 2.0%. Libertarians Act are polling at 3.3%. With AAP