The popular and amiable Cork-based comedy The Young Offenders (BBC Three) is back for a third series and, as always, is both sweet and subversive. Friends Jock and Conor continue to be inseparable, as they cavort around the city scamming and scheming – but, now, there is the added responsibility of fatherhood and boyfriendhood. Will they step up to the emotional demands of adult life? There would not be much of a series if they did. In the same vein as Joe Gilgun’s hit Brassic, this is a show about scallywags, scallywagging in increasingly ridiculous scenarios. Jock is now the proud father of Star, but he cannot be trusted to look after his daughter because, when he and Conor get together, you would not trust them with a pet snail. So, The Young Offenders being what it is, the friends are left holding the baby when grandfather and local headteacher Barry is called away to Dublin for a last-minute awards ceremony. That same day, local hardman and character Billy entices the duo to help him steal a load of televisions. “Doing a heist with a baby is like walking on the moon, not many people can say they’ve done it,” Conor explains, as they take Star along for the ride. The plot to walk away with some nice big plasma screens is thus put in place, and plays out via catfishing, a conspicuous pair of plastic binoculars and the pressures of being a first-time parent. As Jock changes Star on the bonnet of a car, surrounded by strangers, to give her some “privacy”, one of them asks if she is his baby. “Do you think anybody would trust me with a baby that wasn’t mine?” he replies. The heist set-up clears the way for a spot of genre-based fun, complete with a heist-y soundtrack, and by the end, you are rooting for them, and willing the robbery to go well, which is a very Young Offenders position to end up in. But with the sheer force of the stupidity it takes them to get there, they really do earn it. There is a lot of physical comedy – the sight of Conor and Billy wrestling with a papoose is hilarious and criminally short, as are Billy’s attempts to wrestle a pushchair into some sort of flat, vehicle-friendly shape. It is an easy gag, but I also hooted at Billy starting at the closeness of Sergeant Healy, only to realise that he is actually far across the road, and the binoculars are just really good. I don’t want to spoil the outcome of the robbery, either, but the brief vision of a 50in TV sandwiched into a bedsit that can’t quite accommodate it was a quick, brilliant punchline. I apologise for mentioning Normal People, given that their only similarities are a) being set in Ireland and b) featuring young men with neck chains and mums in their 30s, but Chris Walley, who plays Jock, gave a funny interview to the Radio Times recently, where he pointed out that Normal People’s male lead, Connell, had “mugged us off” with his now-infamous jewellery, given that they have been wearing them for years. Any newcomers expecting a sensual romantic drama, though, will be in for a shock, as Conor admits that he is quite looking forward to a break from his girlfriend, Linda. “Me knob is red raw” is not exactly a line one can imagine hearing in the other show. Still, its crudeness is effective. As Conor’s mother, Mairéad, Hilary Rose slyly pinches every scene she is in, and the breakdown of her relationship with Healy is told through a series of phone calls in which she simply barks: “Fuck off.” This is not always the most sophisticated comedy, but it doesn’t need to be. It doesn’t reinvent the wheel so much as give it a confident shove down the road. It rarely drops the pace and is a solid, reliable, guaranteed laugh. For all its slapstick, though, it is oddly touching. When Jock loses the baby, which he inevitably does, a whole army of shoppers comes to his rescue. “So I’m not a shit parent?” he asks, in a ball on the floor, as a woman reassures him that everyone has done it. This leads to an “I’m Spartacus” moment in the homeware department of a shop in Cork, which is surprisingly moving and tender. Yes, it is about two unapologetic criminals giving a copper the eternal runaround, but it has plenty of heart.