Ole Gunnar Solskjær has said Manchester United should not be carried away by the heightened expectations generated by their 17-game unbeaten run, stating every day is a chance “to make or break the culture” he is building. If United avoid defeat to Southampton on Monday they will equal their sequence of seven years ago, when, under Alex Ferguson, they went 18 matches unbeaten between December 2012 and March 2013. Yet Solskjær is adamant United should focus on becoming title contenders again, with his side in fifth place with five matches left, 34 points behind the champions, Liverpool. “It’s [about] developing the culture, keep doing the right things, taking one game at a time, one day at a time in the training ground environment and hopefully keep on pushing,” said the manager. “Every day is a chance to make or break that culture.” Solskjær added: “It’s about winning, of course it is – but it’s also about our fans and the way we approach the game. Manchester United [like to] play with pace, power, with no fear, take risks. I have players who have got quality. That’s just the DNA of the club. “I’m happy when you don’t concede [and] it’s always been built on a strong foundation. Stam and Johnsen, Pallister and Bruce, Keane and Robson laid down foundations for forwards to show their skills. “We [have] had an up and down season, great win against Chelsea [4-0, on the opening day] then we got a setback [of poor form] and the players have stuck to the task in hard times. They believed in coaches and what we’re trying to do and trusted us when results haven’t gone great. Now it’s time for them to keep their feet on the ground, keep working, don’t believe in all the hype and praise. It is the same as you don’t believe all the criticism when you don’t do well.” Solskjær singled out Marcus Rashford’s all-round game for praise. “Physically he’s coping well, mixing up his game, making defenders think, he makes runs in behind, comes short and has individual skills,” he said. “Marcus has got all the attributes to be a top forward.”