My first proper food job was managing a French delicatessen called Villandry in central London. I immediately befriended the shop’s resident baker, Angus, who each day made croissants from scratch, as well as these delectable little cakes. I would wait with bated breath to see if there were any leftover at the end of the day, such was my love for them. The recipe turned out to be brilliantly easy – here it is for you. My children love these with Nutella, but I like the contrast of the dark chocolate against the sweet, nutty cake. Prep 10 minCook 40 minMakes 12-16 (in mini financier moulds) 180g butter, plus extra for greasing110g blanched whole or ground almonds (whichever you have)100g blanched hazelnuts200g caster sugar70g plain flour¼ tsp fine sea salt6 large egg whites½ tsp vanilla extract60g dark chocolate buttons, or Nutella Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Generously grease any small mould or mini-muffin tin you can find with softened butter, going all the way up the sides (these cakes rise a lot). Warm the hazelnuts and, if you are using them, the whole almonds in the oven for five to 10 minutes, until a very pale golden. (If you are using ground almonds, do not toast them as they will burn). Pour the toasted whole nuts into a food processor and blitz for about a minute, until they are fairly finely ground, but not yet releasing their oils. Empty into a bowl (with the ground almonds if you are using them instead of the whole almonds) and the sugar, flour and salt. Melt the butter over a medium heat. When melted, turn the heat up to medium-high and cook, swirling the pan, until the bubbles start shrinking and the butter smells nutty. You will see that the butter solids at the bottom of the pan have turned a golden brown. Remove from the heat and pour out 110g of this browned butter into the bowl with the nuts and flour mixture. Now, in a separate bowl, gently whisk the whites for 15-20 seconds, then whisk them into the batter, along with the vanilla extract. Roughly chop the chocolate buttons to the size of a small fingernail (these are exceedingly small cakes) and fold into the batter, reserving a few teaspoons to scatter on the top. Pour the batter into the buttered moulds so that it comes up to no more than two-thirds of the height, then scatter with the remaining chocolate chips. At this stage, if you are making the Nutella version, dollop a teaspoon of the spread on top, in place of the chocolate chips. Bake in the middle of the oven for 14-16 minutes, until a pale golden brown, depending on the size of your moulds. These are delicious on their own, but even better with a slick of double cream or a scoop of vanilla ice-cream, and a small glass of aged tequila, rum or pudding wine. Make a praline with leftover nuts, then make a custard with the leftover egg yolks and rustle up some homemade praline ice-cream, a delicious treat you can make with or without an ice-cream maker. Leftover butter solids make a great addition to baked potatoes.