Buckingham Palace has released new photographs of the wedding of Princess Beatrice and property tycoon Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi. While the new photographs show the couple with the Queen and Prince Philip at a distance, no picture was released of the pair with Beatrice’s father, Prince Andrew. The pictures, released on Saturday, also show the couple leaving the church after the service. They were married in a small family ceremony on Friday at the Royal Chapel of All Saints at Royal Lodge, Windsor, Buckingham Palace said. Beatrice wore a vintage taffeta dress by Norman Hartnell, on loan from the Queen, and the Queen Mary diamond fringe tiara, also on loan from the Queen, who wore it on her own wedding day. She was walked down the aisle by Andrew, Buckingham Palace said. The Duke of York had stepped back from royal duties after a disastrous Newsnight interview about his friendship with disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein, and is now in the spotlight again after the arrest on 2 July of his longtime associate Ghislaine Maxwell. The Queen described the family occasion, attended by the Duke of Edinburgh, the couple’s parents and their siblings, as “very nice”, while she was speaking to Captain Sir Tom Moore and his family, after she had knighted him at Windsor Castle on Friday for raising millions for the NHS. In an unusual move, the wedding was not announced in advance, the ceremony was held in private, and pictures of the event were not immediately released. In a statement, Buckingham Palace said: “The couple decided to hold a small private ceremony with their parents and siblings following the postponement of their wedding in May. “Working within government guidelines, the service was in keeping with the unique circumstances while enabling them to celebrate their wedding with their closest family.” Beatrice and Mapelli Mozzi had planned to wed on 29 May in the Chapel Royal at St James’s Palace but the ceremony was postponed due to the Covid-19 outbreak. Mapelli Mozzi, a millionaire property tycoon, known as Edo, and Beatrice began dating in autumn 2018 and got engaged during a weekend trip to Italy. The ceremony is believed to be the first time the Queen and Philip have attended a family gathering since the lockdown. Beatrice’s sister Princess Eugenie and her husband, Jack Brooksbank, are also thought to have been among the guests.