When Manchester United signed Bruno Fernandes at the end of January, they were fifth in the Premier League and trailed Leicester in third by 14 points. Nobody could possibly have foreseen the turnaround. Yet on a fraught final day of the league season, United completed it, getting the result they needed to secure a third-place finish and, in the process, condemn Leicester to fifth and heartbreak. Fernandes’s impact has been little short of sensational. He is still to lose a league game in United’s colours and, fittingly, it was he who got the goal that put them en route to victory. It was Fernandes’s 10th in all competitions on his 20th appearance and it came from the penalty spot after Jonny Evans, the former United defender, was adjudged to have fouled Anthony Martial. Another Leicester player, Wes Morgan, looked to have got a piece of Martial, too, but it was Evans who was booked for the challenge. The move had stemmed from a through-ball from, you guessed it, Fernandes and when he addressed the kick, with a saunter and a hop, he never looked like missing. This was not one of Fernandes’s better performances but he has the priceless knack of being able to make the difference and the frustration was too much for Leicester to bear. They had known victory would have given them a Champions League finish – most likely at United’s expense – and Evans felt the red mist come down late on when he lunged dangerously at Scott McTominay. He received a straight red card. There would be further pain for Leicester when the goalkeeper, Kasper Schmeichel, tried and failed to dribble around Jesse Lingard and the United substitute took great joy in rolling the ball into the empty net. It was Lingard’s first league goal since the win at Cardiff in December 2018 – which was Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s first game in charge – and United could celebrate loudly upon the full-time whistle. Once again, they are a Champions League club and, after the morale-sapping losses in the semi-finals of the Carabao Cup and FA Cup this season, they have got a job done. As Solskjær would acknowledge, it represented a psychological hurdle cleared. They have rather staggered over the finishing line, failing to play with any real fluency over the last handful of games, but they will not care. In time, Leicester will reflect upon an excellent season and Europa League qualification. They have punched significantly above their budget. But this was not that time. Having looked well set for so long to reach the Champions League for only the second time, it has been difficult to feel it slip away. Since the restart of the league, they have won just two of nine games. What made it worse here was that Leicester were the better team for long spells – certainly in the first half when United were passive and sloppy. Leicester pressed United into errors and it was unfortunate for them that they were not in front at the interval. Wilfred Ndidi shot high after Nemanja Matic had played a loose pass on the edge of his own area while Kelechi Iheanacho worked David de Gea on a quick counter. It had been sparked by a short Paul Pogba ball and an interception by the excellent James Justin and was symptomatic of Leicester’s greater urgency in the one-on-ones. Youri Tielemans also placed a shot wide while Harry Maguire did enough to put off Jamie Vardy following a cross from Luke Thomas. Where was United’s cohesion? Pogba had hung out a risky leg at Iheanacho inside the area early on and Matic bailed out Maguire after the captain lost the ball under his studs, with Iheanacho lurking. Evans stopped Martial with a good challenge on 21 minutes but it was only briefly at the end of the first half that United enjoyed a period of pressure. Justin misread the bounce of a spinning ball over the top from Pogba, allowing Marcus Rashford a glimpse at goal – he curled high – while the forward drove at the near post following a corner. Schmeichel stood tall. Leicester made light of the absence of four key players – Ricardo Pereira, Ben Chilwell, Caglar Soyuncu and James Maddison – and Vardy almost put them in front in the second half only for his looping header from a Tielemans free-kick to kiss the angle of post and crossbar. Vardy would finish with the Golden Boot but he could not add to his 23 goals. Matic had got Martial in with a slide-rule pass only for Justin to tackle back before Fernandes set Martial through and United had what they wanted. The move was started by Mason Greenwood, who robbed Hamza Choudhury, and the penalty award was United’s 14th of the league season – a competition high. Two Leicester substitutes, Harvey Barnes and Demarai Gray, would blow chances – the former a gilt-edged one – but, in truth, they had been broken by Fernandes.