The UK’s largest arts complex, the Southbank Centre, has confirmed 400 jobs are at risk as it enters into talks with staff in an attempt to reduce losses caused by the Covid-19 crisis. A spokesperson confirmed the news after workers were told about the cuts on Wednesday, which could lead to two-thirds of its staff being made redundant. The spokesperson said: “It is with great sadness that the Southbank Centre announced that up to 400 roles have been put at risk of redundancy as part of a comprehensive management action plan designed to stem the financial losses being incurred as a result of Covid-19, and to help safeguard the future of the UK’s largest arts centre.” The job losses are expected to affect all areas of the organisation, which comprises venues including the Hayward Gallery and Royal Festival Hall, as well as being home to eight orchestras, the National Poetry Library and the Arts Council Collection. The organisation has furloughed the majority of its 600 employees, and in May predicted it could face a £5.1m deficit for the 2020-21 financial year. It joins several other British arts institutions in confirming job losses, including the National Theatre, which announced it would shed 400 casual staff, including its entire front-of-house team. The Southbank spokesperson said because the centre was likely to remain closed until at least April 2021, and due to social distancing, many staff would have no work. “The Southbank Centre must implement measures to reduce its cost base and develop new ways of operating and delivering its artistic programme when it is finally able to reopen,” the spokesperson said. The centre confirmed that roles at all levels of the organisation would be affected and a 45-day consultation period would begin this week. In May, the Southbank Centre’s chief executive, Elaine Bedell, said venues were “sounding the alarm about the long-term health of UK arts and culture”, as it called for more government assistance and predicted it may remain closed until spring 2021. The recently announced £1.57bn arts recovery package has not stemmed the tide of redundancies affecting many venues. Last week the Birmingham Rep said it may make 40% of roles redundant, and on Wednesday, the union Bectu said there was an urgent need for a timeframe for how the cultural recovery package would be distributed.