The US has reported its highest one-day total for coronavirus cases for the pandemic so far, with a new poll released on Friday indicating that Donald Trump is continuing to lose support as a result of the alarming trend. According to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University, 77,255 new cases were reported in the US on Thursday, marking the first time the country’s daily caseload has surpassed 70,000. The record is the highest one-day total for any country during the pandemic so far. The US is by far the worst-affected country worldwide in terms of the number of cases and deaths, with more than 3.5m confirmed infections and more than 138,000 fatalities. States across the south and west in the country’s “sun belt” have been particularly hard hit, with teams of military medics deployed this week in Texas and California to help hospitals deluged by coronavirus patients. In California, military doctors, nurses and other healthcare specialists were being deployed to eight hospitals facing staffing shortages amid a record-breaking case numbers. In Houston, an 86-person army medical team worked to take over a wing of United Memorial medical center. Texas reported 10,000 new cases for the third straight day on Thursday, and 129 additional deaths. California, meanwhile, reported its largest two-day total of confirmed cases, nearly 20,000, along with 258 deaths over 48 hours. There are more than 8,000 people in hospitals who have either tested positive for the coronavirus or are suspected to have it. The medical examiner’s office in Phoenix has received portable storage coolers and ordered more to handle an influx of bodies reminiscent of New York City at the height of the pandemic there earlier this year. Meanwhile, the president’s handling of the crisis continues to draw widespread scrutiny. A Washington Post-ABC News poll found that 38% of Americans approve of Trump’s handling of the pandemic, down from 46% in May and 51% in March. Disapproval has simultaneously climbed to 60%, up from 53% in May and 45% in March. Critics have accused the president of politicizing the pandemic, repeatedly undermining the advice of public health experts, and pressuring Republican governors to follow his lead as he focuses on the November election. Most recently the Trump administration has pushed the reopening of schools as soon as possible as part of its efforts to jump start the economy, despite safety concerns. Randi Weingarten, the president of the American Federation of Teachers, which has more than 1.7 million members, told the Guardian she regards the effort as “reckless”, and could lead to an exodus of people out of the teaching profession. Dr Anthony Fauci, one of the country’s top public health experts, conducted a media campaign this week to deliver his assessments on the pandemic after the White House began briefing against him, accusing him of getting things wrong in the early days of the pandemic. “I believe for the most part you can trust respected medical authorities,” Fauci told a virtual forum at Georgetown University in Washington this week, responding to a question that referenced the White House providing reporters with a list of what it described as his past mistakes. “I believe I’m one of them, so I think you can trust me. But I would stick with respected medical authorities who have a track record of telling the truth, who have a track record of giving information and policy and recommendations based on scientific evidence and good data.” At least half of the 50 states have adopted requirements for wearing masks or other facial coverings. But the wearing of masks continues to be part of political debate, despite calls from health experts for Americans to wear them. Atlanta’s Democratic mayor, Keisha Lance Bottoms, said a lawsuit brought this week by Georgia’s Republican governor, Brian Kemp, showed he was “putting politics over people”. Speaking to the Today show, Bottoms said: “This filing of a lawsuit is simply bizarre, quite frankly.” Jessica Glenza contributed to this report