A volunteer church assistant has confessed to starting a fire that severely damaged a gothic cathedral in Nantes, his lawyer has said. The 39-year-old, an asylum seeker from Rwanda who has lived in France for several years, was arrested on Saturday after laboratory analysis determined that arson was the likely cause of the blaze, the local prosecutor’s office said. “My client has cooperated,” the man’s lawyer, Quentin Chabert, told the Presse-Ocean newspaper on Sunday, without elaborating on motives for attempting to burn down the Cathedral of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. “He bitterly regrets his actions … My client is consumed with remorse,” Chabert said. Prosecutors opened an arson inquiry following the early morning fire on 18 July, after finding that it broke out in three different places in the church, which the volunteer had locked up the night before. He was taken in for questioning the next day but later released without charge, with the cathedral’s rector saying: “I trust him like I trust all the helpers.” But the Nantes prosecutor, Pierre Sennes, said in a statement on Saturday the man had been charged with “destruction and damage by fire”, and faced up to 10 years in prison and €150,000 (£136,000) in fines. “He admitted during his first appearance for questioning before the investigating judge that he set three fires in the cathedral: at the main organ, the smaller organ and the electrical panel,” Sennes said. The blaze came 15 months after a devastating fire at the Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris, which raised questions about the security risks for other historic churches across France. While firefighters were able to contain the Nantes fire after just two hours and save its main structure, the organ, which dated from 1621 and had survived the French revolution and second world war, was destroyed. Also lost were priceless artefacts and paintings, including a work by the 19th-century artist Jean-Hippolyte Flandrin and stained glass windows that contained remnants of 16th-century glass. Work on the cathedral began in 1434 and continued until 1891. It was damaged by a fire in 1972, after which concrete reinforcements were added while redoing the roof. The French government has said it will ensure the cathedral’s restoration. Philippe Charron, the head of the regional DRAC state heritage agency, said very few, if any, elements of the main organ were likely to be saved. “It will take several weeks to secure the site … and several months of inspections that will be carried out stone by stone,” he said. He added that reconstruction would take several years.