When the final whistle went, an eerie silence fell, a foreign hush as West Bromwich Albion sweated on whether they had done enough. Charlie Austin was balanced on the advertising hoardings, checking results on his phone, while supporters began to congregate outside but then, as confirmation of events elsewhere filtered through, it was time to start the party. Substitutes and coaching staff poured on to the pitch as players hurtled towards one another as if on dodgems, bear-hugging, rolling around on the floor before cornering Slaven Bilic, showering their manager with so much champagne he had to change his clothes. Ultimately, West Brom could not be budged from second spot and returned to the Premier League after somehow managing to fend off competition from Brentford and Fulham despite failing to win any of their final four matches of a marathon season. Not that they or, indeed the hordes of supporters basking in the celebrations outside the stadium gates or beeping their way down the Birmingham Road are too fussed about limping over the line as goals by Grady Diangana and Callum Robinson, the latter scoring after an exquisite piece of trickery by the former, helped West Brom to a point that in the end proved immaterial. It did not always feel that way and, when news filtered through of Barnsley’s stoppage-time winner at Griffin Park Bilic, box-office entertainment from start to finish, and his staff rushed his players back to the halfway line, ordering them to shut up shop. If there was an image that defined the fraught nature of the final day of Championship antics, it was a fidgeting Bilic frenetically pacing the touchline. By the end, his players were fiddling around with bottles of bubbly. Jake Livermore, the West Brom captain, was close to tears. Diangana, after another delightful performance, did a lap of the pitch while video-calling his loved ones. By the time the first drinks break arrived it was fitting that the only goalless games in the division were those involving West Brom and their rivals for automatic promotion. But after squandering a hatful of chances it, inevitably, was advantage QPR with 34 minutes on the clock, Ryan Manning planting a strike into the far corner after his initial effort was blocked by the diving Kyle Bartley. When West Brom levelled, it came at the end of a patient move, Diangana drilling home between the legs of Joe Lumley, the QPR goalkeeper. Until the equaliser, perhaps West Brom were guilty of forcing things, overthinking and trying too hard. Bilic gave his players Sunday off, declaring they needed a rest – mentally and physically – and his players were on the front foot from the off here but visibly jittery, with the defender Semi Ajayi’s pass across goal doing little to ease Bilic’s heartrate with Eberechi Eze lurking. But it was far from comfortable for West Brom, despite Robinson providing the finishing touch to an incisive break to prod them in front. It was built on a moment of brilliance by Diangana, who wriggled between Osman Kakay and Luke Amos, humiliating two defenders in one breath, leading the latter to look to the skies in exasperation. Bilic galloped down the touchline as if at a rodeo but the joy was shortlived, with the ebullient Eze showing why he has a list of admirers, sumptuously finishing after latching on to a floated diagonal cross that eluded the West Brom left-back Dara O’Shea. “Let’s enjoy this last 15 [minutes],” urged Bartley. Who was he kidding?