These are a cute twist on steamed custard buns, a dim sum favourite. If you haven’t steamed buns before, you need a pan filled with water, plus a bamboo steamer and lid that will fit neatly on top. Don’t try to bake these in the oven – the steaming is what makes these so soft, fluffy and irresistible. To reheat, just steam again before serving. Makes 10 For the bao dough300g plain flour3g fast-action instant yeast3g salt60g sugar90g milk (or plant-based milk alternative)80g water1 tbsp vegetable oil For the filling75g milk (or plant-based milk alternative)2 medium eggs20g melted butter60g icing sugar or caster sugar15g plain flour20g cornflour20g milk powder PlusGreen and black food dye Add the flour, yeast, salt and sugar to a stand mixer bowl. Pour in the milk, water and vegetable oil. Let the machine knead until the dough is smooth and elastic, or mix and then knead by hand. Turn the dough out on to a lightly floured surface. Knead green food dye into about three-quarters of the dough, leaving the rest white. Place the dough into two separate oiled bowls and cover with cling film. Leave for about an hour, or until it has doubled in size. Meanwhile, make the custard filling. Whisk together the milk, eggs and butter, then sieve in all the dry ingredients. Whisk until smooth. Continue whisking over a bain-marie (or place a heatproof bowl over a saucepan filled with simmering water), until the mixture is very stiff. Cover with cling film and place in the fridge. When chilled, shape the custard into round balls weighing 25g to 30g. When the dough has risen, divide the green dough into 10 equal pieces. They will be a bit sticky, so make sure to coat your hands and the dough with flour when handling. To shape the bao, use your fingers to stretch the dough into a small circle. Add the ball of custard to the centre. Gather the edges upwards and press together to seal in the filling. Turn the bao smooth side up. Try to make sure the surface is as smooth as possible – it helps to rotate the bao in between the palms of your hands. Place on a small square of baking paper. Using the plain dough, add a head and four legs (apply a little water to help them stick). Place in a bamboo steamer. Cover lightly with cling film or the steamer lid. Repeat, but don’t overcrowd the bao in the steamer. Leave the bao to rise for 30 to 45 minutes. When they have risen, paint the turtle shell markings using green food dye mixed with a little water. Paint the face in the same way with black food dye. Steam for 10 minutes on low, then turn off the heat and leave in the steamer for five minutes before removing the lid. Serve immediately.