Marks & Spencer is reportedly planning to cut hundreds of jobs this week in the latest blow to UK high street retailers hit hard by the coronavirus pandemic. An announcement about job losses could come within days, Sky News reported, with total redundancies potentially reaching several thousand when existing restructuring plans are taken into account. It comes at a torrid time for the British high street, with thousands of job losses announced this month. John Lewis and Boots reported 1,300 and 4,000 job losses respectively, including store closures, while companies including the Topshop owner Arcadia, furniture chain Harveys and menswear retailer TM Lewin have confirmed plans for thousands of redundancies. The fashion retailer Ted Baker is preparing to axe at least 500 jobs – more than a quarter of its UK workforce. This is in addition to the 160 job cuts announced in February. While shoppers are returning to the high street, the number of people out and about is still 40% below last year, according to figures from analysts Springboard on Monday. London is suffering even more, with shopper numbers down 71%. Diane Wehrle, insights director at Springboard, said more people were on the high street week on week but the pace of growth had halved to a 4.5% increase. “Last week demonstrated that the longed for flood of shoppers returning to bricks and mortar destinations and retail stores once again became a trickle,” she said. M&S’s food shops remained open throughout the lockdown but trading in other parts of the business was severely reduced, with clothing sales down by 84% year on year at the lowest point, the company said in May. The retailer furloughed approximately 27,000 of its 78,000 employees during the lockdown. Many have returned to work, but the chief executive warned of permanent changes to shopping habits. Steve Rowe said: “While some customer habits will return to normal, others have changed for ever. The trend towards digital has been accelerated and changes to the shape of the high street brought forward. Most importantly, working habits have been transformed and we have discovered we can work in a faster, leaner and more effective way.” The retailer was already looking at ways to adjust to increased online sales and the decline of the high street. At the onset of the coronavirus crisis it said it was considering other cost savings including a “more streamlined support centre, changes to leadership structure and negotiations with landlords on commercial terms on lease contracts”. Under the title “Never the same again”, M&S said it was also reviewing central support costs and the number of employees at all levels, as well as giving in-store staff more responsibilities. To ease cashflow pressures, M&S secured an agreement with its banks to relax the conditions on a £1.1bn line of credit, as well as cancelling its dividend to investors. It also borrowed £300m under the government’s Covid-19 corporate finance facility. On the potential job losses, an M&S spokesman said: “We don’t comment on speculation. If and when we have an announcement to make, our colleagues will be the first to know.”