On a promising July morning, Bournemouth’s East Cliff limbers up for the day: dog walkers, power walkers, an outdoor gym class on a patch of grass. Four people in hi-vis vests beetle about purposefully, looking at the ground. They carry buckets and bags, and each has a tool – a stick with a handle at one end and a grabber at the other. One of them, Lea Baker, 62, nimbly scales the clifftop fence to grab a Coke can. “Sometimes, when there is a really difficult one and I get it, I’m like: ‘Yes, I win!’” she says, giving it a little fist pump. Baker is a retired teacher, originally from Holland. “I love England, but this is one aspect I hate,” she says, nodding at her bucket, now nearly full of cans and bottles, plastic, fag ends, wipes and other horrors. Cigarette butts are her bugbear. “There are so many of them, and they take so long to pick up.” She’s not a fan of dog poo either, tied up in plastic bags and then discarded or hung on the fence. “It’s actually better to leave the poo.” Baker and her husband, Keith, are members of the Dorset Devils, a community litter-picking group operating on this part of the coast. Members volunteer to do their bit alongside the council to make their lovely part of the country less of a dump, as well as to get a bit of fresh air and exercise, generate community spirit and pride, and have a bit of a laugh. They’ve been busier than ever since lockdown eased and people began to socialise outside. Not only is the volume of litter out of control, but the type of rubbish has brought a whole lot of new challenges, with personal protective equipment (PPE), nappies, wipes, tissues and human excrement just some of the horrid and hazardous things being left. All the Dorset Devils I meet refer to the two days during the heatwave last month when 500,000 people descended on this part of the south coast as “the Invasion”. As front pages and TV news flashed images of Bournemouth beach full to bursting, the council was forced to declare a “major incident”, with traffic gridlocked, violent behaviour from visitors and emergency services stretched. The health secretary threatened to shut down the beaches if it continued. Eight tonnes of rubbish was collected from the beach in the mile or so between Bournemouth pier and Boscombe pier on just one day. “It was so gross, I nearly cried,” says Baker. “Why can’t they take it home?” What you didn’t get from the news was the smell, says Peter Ryan. Barbecues, burnt food, sun cream, alcohol, drugs and urine. Ryan, 61, is the founder of the Dorset Devils. He carries a sharps container as well as a bucket. You find a lot of used needles under Bournemouth pier. He has a top-of-the-range litter-picker, light and perfectly balanced; the Firebolt of litter-pickers. He emerges from a bush with a pair of men’s underpants dangling from the end of it. “There you go, Sam … your size, I think.” Why do they do it? “Because we love where we live, we care and we want to make a difference out there,” he says. “The litter-picking community is annoyed, disappointed and disillusioned that a minority of people have simply reverted to their poor manners and behaviours. It’s never acceptable to trash any environment – bin it or take it home.” The reopening of the fast food outlets: that’s the moment it got really bad Still, the Invasion has been good for recruitment: 60 new devils signed up in its aftermath. There are now 584 volunteers, ranging in age from four to 84. And it’s not just in Dorset. Andrew Wood, who started a Facebook group, UK Litterpicking Groups, estimates there are about 2,000 groups between Land’s End and John o’Groats, taking in beaches, city parks, canals in the Midlands and mountains in Wales and Scotland. “I reckon you’ve probably got 100,000 people litter-picking across the UK in the course of a week, and that is an army,” he says, on the phone from Hereford. “Because we hate to see it, we are disgusted with the mess.” He pinpoints the moment when the litter increased dramatically after the easing of lockdown. “The reopening of the fast food outlets: that’s the moment it got really bad.” Richard McIlwain, the deputy chief executive of Keep Britain Tidy says all the park managers he has spoken to say this summer is the worst they have ever known for litter. He thinks it may have something to do with festival culture. “There are always photographs after festivals showing a sea of discarded tents, barbecues, rubbish. Single-use culture has just transferred into parks because, obviously, none of those festivals are on,” he says. “I think there is also some psychology in the way people behave post-lockdown. The sense of freedom means some of the social norms go out of the window.” A litter-pick in my local park in north-west London, with my two boys, using equipment borrowed from the Friends of Gladstone Park group, produces sacks full of nitrous oxide canisters and other drug-taking paraphernalia, as well as bottles and cans, takeaway packaging, another pair of men’s underpants, bagged dog poo and unbagged human poo (which we felt neither qualified nor inclined to deal with). Plus a ton of disposable gloves and masks. Why, when you wear a mask to protect others as well as yourself, do you then drop it on the ground, potentially endangering people? Why, when we city-dwellers have come to appreciate our parks like never before, do we then thoroughly trash them? Covid-19 has been a major contributor. Not just PPE, but more things in supermarkets, such as baked goods, getting individually wrapped; coffee shops no longer accepting reusable cups; and pubs serving takeaway beers in plastic cups. It’s all been a step backwards in the journey towards reuse. Then you’ve g got public toilets being closed, and the small matter of local authorities being stretched to breaking point. And staycationing will mean UK beauty spots are going to take even more of a hammering. The rubbish epidemic has spread beyond beaches and urban parks. The National Trust this weekend warned of an increase in “fly camping”, where visitors pitch a tent illegally and leave all their rubbish, and sometimes even their tents, behind. Remember the wheelie suitcase complete with tent, clothes, towels, tissues and other rubbish left by a tarn in the Lake District a few weeks ago? Andrea Hall is an artist and open water swimmer in her native Yorkshire. She has noticed “shedloads” more litter recently by the banks of the lakes and rivers she swims in, in the water, lurking in the riverbeds below her. As lockdown eases and the weather’s good, there’s “a deluge of people who just come into these places and leave them a tip. It’s us who go around afterwards and pick it up.” Hall was so incensed she made a poster, free to download, of a swimmer getting hit on the head by a discarded drinks can, with the line: “Don’t Be a Tosser”. York city council used the same line on one of its campaigns; they tell it like it is in Yorkshire. So what can be done? Wood would like to see more enforcement. “A nice, hefty fine of 100 quid helps deter someone from chucking their McDonald’s wrappers out of the window,” he says. McIlwain says local authorities need more money. And they need to put some temporary toilets into parks – some of the portable ones that aren’t going to festivals, perhaps. He talks of extending producer responsibility, making manufacturers responsible for the costs of waste management, which would encourage them to use more reusable packaging. He also salutes the 100,000-strong army of litter-pickers. “If the litterers are a visible expression of the people who don’t care, then the pickers are a visible expression of the people who do.” Imagine what the country would look like without them. Back in Bournemouth, we have come down on to the beach, the scene of the Invasion a couple of weeks ago. We hook up with some more Dorset Devils, including brothers Sam and Ollie Gell, aged 11 and 10. “It’s something to do, and it’s good for the environment,” says Sam. Olly says it’s a bit like playing hide-and-seek. Both would rather be picking up litter on the beach than at school. Plus, they get a bubble-gum-flavoured ice-cream from their nan for their efforts. The beach isn’t too bad today, for a Monday after a sunny weekend. The council have already been through, with their machines that sift through the sand. Just a few fag ends for Baker to pick up. She goes missing for a while, and we wonder where she has gone. Then, we hear a cry of dismay from behind a beach hut. It’s something horrible … And, oh dear lord! It’s huge, and covered in flies, and there is no excuse for it; the toilet just up the path on the clifftop is now open. This one is going nowhere, I’m afraid. No winners, no fist pump from Baker. Just a look of despair and revulsion. “We have our limits,” she says.