The race to qualify for the Champions League has become a lot more intense in the last few days. Now that the court of arbitration for sport has overturned Manchester City’s ban from Europe, the clubs below them in the Premier League will have to finish in the top four to reach the Champions League next season. The results over the weekend ensured that this fight will go right to the wire, with Chelsea, Leicester and Manchester United all failing to win. Those slip-ups allowed Wolves and Sheffield United to re-enter the picture. With three rounds of games to play, there are five clubs vying for just two Champions League places. Game on. Despite losing two of their last four games, Chelsea remain third in the league, a point above Leicester and Manchester United, the other two clubs in this race whose destiny is still in their own hands. Frank Lampard was fuming after his side’s capitulation at Sheffield United on Saturday and will be demanding a response against Norwich on Tuesday night. While the bottom club may play with some freedom as a result of their relegation, the fixture looks like a free hit for Chelsea. Norwich have failed to live up to encouraging signs from early in the season, including their performance in a 3-2 defeat to Chelsea in the reverse fixture at Carrow Road in August. They have scored just five goals in their 15 league matches since the turn of the year, which is inescapably woeful. To say things become more difficult for Chelsea in their final two games is an understatement. Their penultimate fixture is a trip to Anfield, where Liverpool will be handed the Premier League trophy and may be in pursuit of a record points haul. It should be said, however, that Chelsea have fared well against strong opposition lately. They have beaten Tottenham, Leicester, Manchester City and indeed Liverpool since the turn of the year, though their last league victory at Anfield was in 2014. Chelsea’s game against Wolves on the last day of the season is tough, but Lampard will take solace from the fact that Leicester and Manchester United also lock horns that afternoon. Chelsea will be praying their visitors are out of the picture by that point. If not, we could see two straight shootouts for a top-four finish on an action-packed afternoon on Sunday 26 July! Prediction: Chelsea will finish fourth. Fixtures: Norwich (H), Liverpool (A), Wolves (H). Leicester’s run-in is a stinker and it looks even tougher after their 4-1 defeat to Bournemouth at the weekend. They seemed to be in cruise control in the first half against a Bournemouth side that looked as if they had thrown in the towel, yet their subsequent collapse has left their hopes of a top-four finish – which seemed a certainty pre-lockdown – dramatically dashed. On Thursday night, Leicester host a Sheffield United team that have just dispatched Chelsea and Wolves and will be keen to make it a hat-trick of scalps. Brendan Rodgers will be without key defender Caglar Soyuncu too, following his red card at the weekend. Their abject form stretches back before the coronavirus pandemic. If the league table only included games played in 2020, Leicester would be in 14th, having won just four of their 15 matches. Things will not get easier after their game against Sheffield United. On Sunday, they are off to Tottenham – who will be feeling confident after their victory in the north London derby and will be desperate for a European finish of their own. Leicester have not won at Tottenham in their last three attempts and their wretched away form – without a league win on the road since New Year’s Day – is the reason why they have slumped. Their meeting with Manchester United on the final day of the season means their fate is in their own hands, but they look very low on confidence. Prediction: Leicester will finish fifth. Fixtures: Sheffield United (H), Tottenham (A), Manchester United (H) It remains to be seen just how important Michael Obafemi’s late leveller for Southampton at Old Trafford will prove to be, but it could prove a big psychological blow. Ole Gunnar Solskjær will be glad that his team’s next game is against a Crystal Palace side that is play with no real purpose right now. He knows the threat Roy Hodgson’s side can carry – Palace won at Old Trafford earlier in the season – but the Eagles are sleepwalking their way to next season and probably carry a greater threat on the road anyway. The difficulty of United’s second game at West Ham is almost entirely dependent on the Hammers’ own clash against relegation rivals Watford this week. If West Ham win that game they should be safe. If they fail to win, all of a sudden Solskjær’s team will be facing a side with as strong an incentive to get a positive result as their own. West Ham have a good record against Manchester United too; in the last 10 games between the clubs, West Ham have won three and Manchester United have only won two. Despite all that, the message from Solskjær will be a clear one. They only trail Leicester on goal difference, so their hopes are in their own hands. They have not lost to Leicester since 2014 so will be feeling confident about that fixture on the last day. If United win their last three matches, they are guaranteed a spot in the Champions League. Prediction: Manchester United will finish third. Fixtures: Crystal Palace (A), West Ham (H), Leicester (A). Wolves finish the season with a trip to Chelsea on the final dat but, to have any chance of finishing in the top four, they must pick up six points from their upcoming fixtures against Burnley and Palace. Burnley are still in the hunt for a European finish themselves, having bounced back from a hammering at Manchester City in fine fashion. Despite scoring just five goals in their last five games, Sean Dyche’s side have gone unbeaten in that time and could still earn a Europa League spot. Wolves have only won one of their last seven meetings with Burnley, so will not be looking past this game. If they can improve that disappointing record, a match against Crystal Palace looks about as favourable as you’ll get following a fifth successive defeat for the Eagles at lowly Aston Villa in midweek. The clash with Chelsea on the final day has the potential to be the decisive game in the battle the top four. The Blues ran out 5-2 winners when they met earlier in the season, but Chelsea have been all at sea defensively of late compared to Nuno’s well drilled side. Prediction: Wolves will finish sixth. Fixtures: Burnley (A), Crystal Palace (H), Chelsea (A) Sheffield United’s remarkable pursuit for a top-four finish was given a huge boost when they beat Chelsea 3-0 at the weekend. Chris Wilder’s men will be hoping for another scalp against another direct rival when they travel to Leicester on Thursday. The newly promoted side will definitely be the form team in that game, having picked up 10 points from the last 12. Sheffield United look a good bet to beat Leicester for the first time since 2008, when James Beattie scored a hat-trick in a 3-0 win in the Championship. If they beat Leicester, they will close the gap to Brendan Rodgers’ side to just two points ahead of two fixtures against midtable opposition. A home game against a listless Everton side right now certainly looks favourable, and while Southampton showed Manchester United they are not to be underestimated, Saints’ record on home soil is poor – only Norwich (15) have picked up fewer points at home this season than Sheffield United (17). Prediction: Sheffield United will finish seventh. Fixtures: Leicester (A), Everton (H), Southampton (A). • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and analysis• Follow WhoScored and Martin Laurence on Twitter