Were you still up for Portillo, a hundred years ago in 1997? For the younglings among you, this was the question that burst exuberantly from leftist lips in the days and weeks after Labour’s landslide electoral victory. The point of no return came at 3.10am with a return no one had been expecting. Michael Portillo, the treasury secretary with the curiously collapsed yet labile face and shoo-in for next Tory leader, lost the seat he had held comfortably five years before, to a Labour unknown, Stephen Twigg. I was at university and in bed, but heard the cheers going up from streets around. Without access to a smartphone, though, I had to wait until the morning to find out precisely why. The night soil man told me as I emptied my chamberpot, I seem to recall. To think that there is now a generation to whom such a question means nothing more than whether you stayed up to watch that television presenter with the terrible wardrobe take another of his train trips across a miscellany of countries is … quite a thing. But that is what Portillo now is (and wears and does). There have been 10 series of Great British Railway Journeys, in which he used George Bradshaw’s 1863 tourist handbook to investigate the sociopolitical impact of the age of steam on Britain, and several spin-offs (including journeys through Asia, Australia and Alaska) since. Now he embarks on the sixth series of Great Continental Railway Journeys (BBC Two), beginning in Spain and this time guided by the 1936 edition of Bradshaw’s Continental Railway Guide, which was a big year in that particular pais and for Portillo’s pa, a don and leftwing activist at the University of Salamanca, who was three years away from needing to flee Franco. This first instalment (of six) took us from Salamanca to Canfranc, via Ávila, Madrid and Zaragoza, and provided its usual mix of travelogue, history and – this time especially – Who Do You Think You Are? as the hour and the miles unfolded. The scenery was unrelentingly, heart-swellingly beautiful – the golden sandstone of Salamanca; the best of Roman, Christian and Islamic art and architecture poured into Zaragoza; the enclosed medieval citadel of Ávila seemingly glowing with centuries of stored sunlight. They just have to make sure Portillo and the sartorial choices I suspect someone must once have assured him add a cheery charm to his overwhelming urbanity stand well enough to the side. Honestly – yellow jacket, purple shirt and tomato trousers comprised his opening outfit. That gave way to a red jacket, orange shirt and yellow trousers. Michael, mate – you’re a Tory on a jolly. We get it. Relax. Put some tweed and some Church’s brogues on and relax. Unless Big Primary Colour has got something on you? At least they don’t make him do too much in the way of Activities. He had a go at slicing an ibérico ham, while the seller hovered anxiously in the background watching his livelihood literally being shredded. And there was a mercifully brief attempt at learning a few steps from the Aragonese folk dance la jota, but, for the most part, he stuck to limning Spain’s history and detailing the horrors of the civil war. He is at his best and most comfortable with the ex cathedra element of presenting. (“The smartest thing Spain ever did was stay out of the first world war.”) There is always the slight impression that the involvement of other people – even though they are usually archivists and experts there to unpack a historical moment or explain the significance of an artefact – feels like an intrusion on his time. In Salamanca, the millions of records kept by Franco on his potential enemies – a potent symbol of the scale of the nationalist movement and atrocities committed, and potentially a window into our own increasingly surveilled and right-moving state – were paid lip service before Portillo homed in on that of his father. Similarly, his main comment when standing before Picasso’s Guernica in Madrid was that without that event – the bombing of civilians by Nazi and fascist troops that drew worldwide outrage – Michael would never have existed. His father fled to Oxford and got to know his future wife, who was looking after refugee children. “Without Guernica,” said Portillo to the art historian who had talked him through what could legitimately be considered to be the greatest, most harrowing painting of the 20th century, “they would never have met.” There was a pause. “That’s … very nice,” she replied. “And I like your trousers.” No, she didn’t say the last bit. No one would.