A government subsidy to offer people 50% off meals in fast food restaurants risks undermining a fledgling anti-obesity campaign, experts have warned, amid growing evidence overweight people would be among those most at risk if coronavirus resurges. The “Eat Out to Help Out” initiative, a Treasury policy, will operate every Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday throughout August. It is understood that chains including McDonald’s, Burger King and Pizza Hut have signed up to the scheme, as the government attempts to coax people back to the high street. Public Health England’s latest evidence review found that the risks of hospitalisation, intensive care treatment and death from Covid-19 “seem to increase progressively with increasing [body mass index] above the healthy weight range”. The UK has the highest death rate from coronavirus in Europe, it also has the third highest obesity rate. Prof Amelia Lake, professor in public health nutrition at Teesside University and an associate director of Fuse, the Centre for Translational Research in Public Health, said the government should be working with businesses to help shape their menus to become healthier as part of a holistic approach to tackling obesity. “Offering subsidies on food which is particularly associated with being less healthy completely contradicts the other message around reducing obesity” she said. “On one hand we are hearing that tackling obesity is an urgent public health challenge, but on the other we are seeing actions that we know do not help us reduce obesity. There needs to be clear messaging and joined up action.” Dr Duane Mellor, a dietitian and senior lecturer at Aston Medical School, said the scheme appeared to be operating independently of approaches to improve public health. “Instead of choosing to bring the British farming sector closer to the public, after a year where much fresh produce has been wasted, what we seem to have is something that supports half-price meals high in fat and sugar and low in nutrient density,” he said. “Worse still, through the inclusion of soft drinks, it appears to subsidise drinks whose consumption has been drastically cut through the highly successful sugar tax.” The celebrity chef Antony Worrall Thompson said discounts for fast food were “a bit crazy” and that the government keeps “putting its foot in it”. However, he recognised ministers were having to “think on their feet” as they attempt to reboot the economy and suggested departments could not foresee actions by other government agencies. “They do one thing one day and then the next day someone comes out with the obesity thing, which we all knew about anyway,” he said. “They are encouraging fast food Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday. They’ll probably get a huge uptake.” A government spokesperson said: “Our ‘Eat Out to Help Out’ scheme is designed to protect jobs in a sector that has been particularly affected by coronavirus, giving businesses the confidence to retain and hire staff. We remain determined to reverse obesity rates and help everyone live healthier lives.” The scheme invited restaurants to sign up to be able to claim back the price reduction on meals of up to £20 from the government. The full list has not yet been made public but it is likely to include a wide variety of food options. There is no limit to the number of times customers can use the offer during the period of the scheme. It comes as the government is expected to announce plans to ban junk food adverts from being shown prior to the 9pm television watershed, as Boris Johnson moves to take action following his coronavirus health scare. McDonald’s, Pizza Hut and Burger King did not respond to requests for comment. A McDonald’s spokesperson has previously told the Guardian that “customer choice is at the heart of everything we do” and highlighted the availability of salads, carrot bags and its range of wraps. They added: “Nutrition information is clearly displayed online, on our app, in restaurant and across our packaging and we continue to review, refine and reformulate our menu to reduce saturated fat, salt and sugar.”