“I said it’s going away – and it is going away,” a defiant Donald Trump claimed about Covid-19 on 3 April, when about 300,000 cases of the virus had been reported across the country. At the time, Trump was enjoying a brief surge in approval ratings. But the virus obviously did not go away – more than 3.8m cases have now been reported, and latest polls show that Trump may pay the price for his handling of the crisis in the November elections. A Guardian analysis of Covid-19 case counts shows that the majority of new infections are being reported in Republican states, with some of the worst hotspots located in key battleground states. In the first half of April, 67% of infections were recorded in states that had voted for Hillary Clinton in 2016. But by mid-July, 74% of all new cases were being reported in states that had gone for Trump. “It hit the metropolitan centers first and hardest, and they basically are Democratic strongholds. His voters and supporters located in the heartlands – rural areas, small towns and so on – didn’t feel it at first,” said Inderjeet Parmar, professor of international politics at City University, London. Trump has been widely criticized for failing to lead a successful federal response to the pandemic. “You could become the healer of the nation, if you like, and bring people together regardless of party and politics, and he didn’t do it,” Parmar said. Florida – the largest swing state in terms of population and electoral weight – currently has the highest rate of Covid-19 infections in the country, with a recent daily average of 53 cases per 100,000 people over the past week, according to the New York Times. Another hotspot is Arizona with 42 cases per 100,000. The south-western state voted Republican in the last five presidential elections, but recent polls are showing an extremely tight race between Trump and challenger Joe Biden. Among those states that voted for Clinton in 2016, Nevada and California had the highest case rates, with 37 and 23 cases per 100,000 people, respectively. Meanwhile, national polls show that approval of Trump’s handling of the crisis is declining across all blocs of voters, although the electorate remains highly polarised. In a YouGov poll from early April, 88% of self-identified Republican supporters said they approved of Trump’s handling of the coronavirus outbreak, compared with just 18% of Democrats. By July, approval had dropped to 79% among Republicans and 11% among Democrats. Approval of his crisis handling also dropped across the three largest demographic blocs – white, black and Hispanic – although 46% of white respondents in the July poll still approved. In an interview with Fox News’ Chris Wallace, aired last Sunday, Trump refused to say if he would accept the result if Biden won in November.