Tony Adams hands over the presidency of the Rugby Football League to Clare Balding on Wednesday. Adams took the honorary role to strengthen the relationship between rugby league and his Sporting Chance organisation, who provide mental, psychological and emotional support to professional sportspeople with addiction and mental health issues. How has your year as president been? “The last four months has been a real shame. I got to see a couple of cup finals, went to Warrington, did education seminars and prison visits, but I wanted to get to more games. But it’s not like I wasn’t involved before and I’m going to cease involvement now. Sporting Chance are still going to be around. The big difference from previous years was I got to go in the Royal Box [at Wembley] rather than the second box behind it!” What have you learned about rugby league? “They’re a very humble bunch, which really helps the treatment in the clinics. Eighteen-stone mountains come in, give you a hug and start talking about their problems with prescribed drugs, drinking, whatever. Emotionally they are advanced of football players, more literate emotionally, more open. I already knew how tight-knit the community and the industry is. We had two high-profile incidences – Rob [Burrow] with MND and then Mo [Mose Masoe] – where they kind of put a cloak around these people, and Sporting Chance gave mental and emotional support to their families.” What are you most proud of? “Having six players on the field in the Challenge Cup final who we’d helped was amazing. The nudge and a wink as they came past me to get the trophy, shaking Prince Harry’s hand and going ‘well done pal’ – that was lovely. An inside job. They’d benefited from the work of Sporting Chance.” Six players from one game? Is that a coincidence or are that many players really struggling? “Rugby league has the highest percentage of current players seeking support from us than any other sport, but they come to us earlier. They’re not going to crisis. So I’m not talking six full-blown addicts like me, putting a rope around their necks, about to jump. In our annual poll, 95% of league players said they knew who we were and how to access us. They come to us before the shit hits the fan and the lift goes down and down. They might say ‘we are having a problem with our relationship’ before she walks out the door.” Why is that happening with rugby league? “I’ve got to put it down to the clubs. They have been so open to us. They’ve just gone: ‘Yes, go and do your business.’ They’re a grown-up bunch of guys. There’s a boy’s culture in football – we’re growing up, slowly – but rugby league are brilliant at it. The [senior] players turn around to the 18-year-olds and tell them: ‘You’ve got a problem, that’s where to go.’ The awareness is there. In football, it’s not – yet.” Rugby league may actually benefit from remaining a working class sport … “Exactly. In many ways, rugby league reminds me of what football used to be like. I go to my local football league team – Forest Green – and it’s a working-class environment, which is what football was when I was growing up. You were either on the terrace or you were on the pitch! Football is a very different culture now. Rugby league players don’t have the problems some Premier League footballers have that come from being multi-millionaires.” Does each sport have different issues? “Yes. It’s all about changing the way you feel. In the Premier League, because of what’s at stake and the levels of drug testing, gambling is an epidemic now. With the jockeys it’s coke, because of weight loss. Sportspeople are competitive and want to be the best. That doesn’t make us special and different – but we are! If we mess up, there’s going to be somebody better come along and take our job.” Elite athletes are not normal people though, are they? “No, being a professional is extreme. You push your body to the limit. My first drug of choice was football. But any job – postman, fisherman, stacking shelves – all come with their own set of stuff. It doesn’t make us special, but it’s different. It takes a type of person. At AA meetings I sit next to actors, musicians, journalists, bankers – not people living on the street. There’s a lot of similarities in these industries. We’re talking about obsessed people, control freaks.” Are top athletes more prone to addiction than the general public? “Yes, two or three times more. We don’t have the balance to be able to handle those emotions and thoughts. So we need other sportspeople to tell sportspeople how to handle the pivotal moments: injuries, lack of form, the off-season when there’s no routine. We provide emotional and mental routines to prepare them for the end really.” What’s the next step for improving mental health? “The biggest thing is talking therapy. Whatever’s going on, I need them to talk about it. They need to dump it in a safe place with an appropriate person, whether it’s inside the club or outside. Sometimes it’s difficult when there’s so much competitiveness around the club and you don’t want to say you’ve got an issue. But the stigma is lifting. Prince William’s doing an unbelievable job – he’s pushing it and pushing it and we’re getting more and more people talking about mental health and depression. Addiction seems to be the last hurdle. It’s got to be classified as a mental illness, so we can start unravelling it. But I understand why people don’t understand!” Many folk have struggled during lockdown, but might it have helped some of those who had extreme behaviours? “In lockdown people were experiencing what I have for years: just getting up and thinking ‘what am I going to do today?’ I only plan the next week: just do the next loving thing. Hopefully people have had periods of reflection. I have to do a daily programme of meditation as part of my recovery, reflecting every morning and evening. Lockdown has given people time to reflect on their own wellbeing and consciousness. If they don’t continue that ritual though, my instinct is they will just go back to how they were.” What happened to players who were using Sporting Chance during lockdown? “They completed the residential course – that finished at the end of March, then we went online very quickly, with 200 therapists, and the eight education guys kept going with webinars. We used other clinics for people with real needs, and we are reopening in August. We’ve got a group ready to come in.” Will we look back on this era of saturation sponsorship and advertising by gambling companies, and wonder what we were thinking?’ “We will. In 10 years’ time there will be no gambling sponsorship. It’s a process. You can’t just pull the plug. It’s got to happen over the next three to five years. There’s an argument whether the advertising goes and you keep the sponsorship, as there’s still some alcohol sponsorship. Advertising works, when it’s in your face the whole time. Rugby League are so concerned about the (betting company) sponsors pulling so much money out. But I’m sure they used to say ‘If we don’t have cigarette sponsors, where’s the money going to come from?’ It will be filled by someone else.” What’s your advice for Clare Balding as she takes on the role of RFL president? “Have fun! She’s very humble and she’s going to enjoy the people, the camaraderie, the community, the close-knit family. And it is a family – I really get that. She’s got a World Cup to look forward to, which I’m very jealous of. I will see her at the semi-final at the Emirates!” Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook