Burnley remain on course to record their most successful Premier League season after beating Norwich at Carrow Road. It is an important fact, one that should be acknowledged before starting on the tragicomic failings of their opponents. Norwich had two players sent off in the opening 45 minutes, Emi Buendía then Josip Drmic. Both were deserved and both came as a result of ridiculous, pointless fouls. Burnley took the lead from the free-kick that followed the second and were easy on their opponents from then on. Apparently not ones to be pitied, Norwich then took matters into their own hands and scored a second themselves, a comical own goal from Ben Godfrey. “There was an oddness to the game,” said Sean Dyche, understating affairs. “It never really found its feet. We got on with it, we forged our way to win, we didn’t have amazing moments, but we had good chances.” Burnley are now on 54 points, the same total they recorded in 2018 and they may once again qualify for Europe. Nick Pope, meanwhile, completed another clean sheet, keeping him two clear in the race for the Golden Glove. Dyche described Europe as a “double-edged sword” but he was happy to extol the continuing virtues of his side and talked about rumours linking him with a departure from the club in the past tense. “We want to be competitive all the time,” he said. “We believe in what we do here. People sometimes questions us and sometimes praise us, but we just get on with it. We’ve got a strength about us, we’ve certainly got a mental strength.” That mental strength, or game intelligence, came into play with 10 minutes remaining of the first half, when Ashley Westwood slid through Buendía in the centre circle. So far, so standard. As he passed through, the Burnley midfielder also buffeted Buendía, blocking his ability to escape. This was naughty, but again, par for the course. It also did the job intended and wound the Argentinian up enough that he went on to do something stupid. As Westwood tried to stand up, Buendía bent over and pushed him away with his elbow. It was gentle, it certainly was not a swing of the arm, but it was definitively an elbow to the head. At first viewing referee Kevin Friend saw the whole affair as innocuous and it also took VAR a moment to intervene. But when it did, it stewed over the footage for a long time before Friend was invited to consult the monitor for only the third time in Premier League history. Friend watched one angle for five seconds, turned promptly around and sent Buendía off. There was performative outrage in the Norwich camp and Buendía trotted down the tunnel, doing his best to look bemused in what might well be his final appearance for Norwich. With the clock ticking into added time, however, there was still enough time for the hosts to make matters worse for themselves. In the fourth minute of added tine Drmic won an aerial duel but had no other option than to retain possession and stall. He evaded one challenge and had the ball knocked away from him on the second. The third saw him sliding uncontrollably into Erik Pieters. The roar on the Burnley bench was of the kind you get in a courtroom when a corrupt financier walks free on a technicality; within seconds Friend’s hand was in his pocket and Drmic became the second Canary to walk. “Burnley wanted to distract us and we walked open-eyed into this trick,” said a beleaguered Daniel Farke. “You can call the [red card] challenges naive, unprofessional, stupid, all the words apply. We have to speak about these cards internally.” Burnley took the lead following Drmic’s dismissal, Pieters crossing the free-kick in for Chris Wood who met the ball with a contained, almost dainty overhead kick that came off his shin and squeezed between Tim Krul and the near post. The second half ran at a slow pace as Norwich put all eight outfield players behind the ball. Krul and Pope both made saves but there was not much going on until the final few minutes when Godfrey wrapped things up. A deep cross, again from Pieters, had Godfrey under no particular pressure and the highly regarded defender sought to get the ball under control on his instep. The fates then duly intervened and a controlling touch became a sidefoot pass into the net. One more game for Norwich now: Manchester City away.