Johnny Depp thanked his then fiancee Amber Heard for trying to get him “clean” during an attempt at drug detoxification on his private island and praised her “heroism”, a court has heard. Details of the episode in August 2014 and his apparent gratitude to her at the time were discussed on the third day of cross-examination of the Pirates of the Caribbean star at the high court in London. Depp, 57, is suing the Sun’s publisher, News Group Newspapers (NGN), and its executive editor, Dan Wootton, over an article that called him a “wife beater” and referred to “overwhelming evidence” that he had attacked Heard. The libel case is expected to last three weeks. Heard, 34, has submitted details of 14 occasions during their relationship when she claims she was assaulted by Depp. He denies ever hitting her. In August 2014, when the couple were engaged, they flew to Depp’s private island. They stayed on one side of it, and a registered nurse, Debbie Lloyd, was on the other. The aim was for Depp to withdraw from Roxicodone, a prescribed narcotic to which Depp was addicted, the court heard. Heard maintained contact with Lloyd by phone and followed instructions to deliver a strict regime of medicines to help Depp break his addiction. One day Heard texted the nurse seeking help, saying Depp was “all of a sudden flipping” and that he had “started pushing me and I don’t know what to do”, the court heard. Depp told the court that he remembered being in a “great deal of pain” and suffering “uncontrollable spasms”. Sasha Wass QC, representing the Sun, asked: “Did you hit and push Miss Heard when you were flipping?” Depp replied: “I did not push Miss Heard or attack her in any way. I was not in any condition to do so.” Shortly afterwards Depp sent an email to Heard’s mother saying he was “beyond thankful” for her daughter’s help on the island, the court heard. “Your daughter has risen far above taking care of this poor old junkie,” he wrote. Her efforts amounted to “heroism”, he added. Heard had the “strength of 1,000 men … I would have gone for a swim and swallowed a big drink of ocean without her … It was Amber and Amber only who got me through it.” Depp also sent Heard a text saying: “Thank you so much for getting me fucking clean, baby.” In court, Depp said he had sent it “to make her happy”. Wass said Heard had been following doctors’ instructions to the letter in giving Depp his medicines at the right time. That may have been why Depp, in his statements, had described her behaviour as “one of the cruellest things she has ever done”, Wass suggested, simply because coming off drugs was always a painful experience. Notes from Dr David Kipper, who oversaw Depp’s detoxification, were read out to the court, in which he said the actor “romanticised the drug culture” and referred to a “fight” on the island. Wass put it to Depp: “There were times when you don’t even remember the conduct you were responsible for. You blacked out.” Depp said: “There were blackouts for sure but in any blackouts there were snippets of memory. You don’t see the whole picture.” Aside from the Hollywood fascination of the case, the protracted trial is also highly unusual in being a rare example of a libel battle reaching court. The prohibitive cost of defamation cases, involving multiple lawyers’ fees, make little economic sense when compared with the relatively modest awards handed down by judges. The vast majority of libel cases these days are settled before they get to court. The hearing continues.