Manchester City will play Juventus or Lyon in the Champions League quarter-finals, should they progress against Real Madrid. Their path to the final would then be blocked by Napoli, Barcelona, Chelsea or Bayern Munich. City hold a 2-1 advantage over Real going into their last-16 second leg at the Etihad Stadium early next month. Juventus take on Lyon in Turin trailing 1-0. The draw opens up the possibility of Pep Guardiola facing one of his former clubs in the semi-final. City’s manager was a highly decorated player and coach at Barcelona, who drew 1-1 at Napoli in their opening leg, and also had a successful spell in charge of Bayern. Chelsea, the only other British club remaining in the competition, will face Barcelona or Napoli if they overturn a 3-0 deficit against Bayern in Germany in the last 16. Four teams reached the quarter-finals before the pandemic forced football to stop and they have been drawn to face each other in the quarter-finals, with RB Leipzig taking on Atlético Madrid and Paris Saint-Germain facing Atalanta. The winners will then meet in that semi-final. Last-16 second legsManchester City (2) v Real Madrid (1)Bayern Munich (3) v Chelsea (0)Juventus (0) v Lyon (1)Barcelona (1) v Napoli (1) Quarter-finals1. Real Madrid/Manchester City v Lyon/Juventus2. RB Leipzig v Atlético Madrid3. Napoli/Barcelona v Chelsea/Bayern Munich4. Atalanta v PSG Semi-finalsWinner quarter-final 1 v winner quarter-final 3Winner quarter-final 2 v winner quarter-final 4Final 23 August, Lisbon City have previously faced Juventus and Lyon in the Champions League. Two years ago they lost a home group game 2-1 to Lyon then drew the return 2-2. In 2015, again in the group stage, City lost 2-1 at home to Juventus, then 1-0 in Turin. The quarter-finals and semi-finals are to be played as straight knockouts in Lisbon, with the final also in the Portuguese capital. The mini-tournament starts there on 12 August and finishes 11 days later. In the Europa League, Manchester United stand to face Copenhagen or Istanbul Basaksehir in the quarter-finals and could then play Wolves in the semi-final. Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s side lead Lask 5-0 going into their last-16 second leg at Old Trafford – to be played on 5 or 6 August – and appear certain to progress. Last 16Copenhagen (0) v Istanbul Başakşehir (1)Wolves (1) v Olympiakos (1)Bayer Leverkusen (3) v Rangers (1)Shakhtar Donetsk (2) v Wolfsburg (1)Internazionale v Getafe - one-off game Sevilla v Roma - one-off gameBasel (3) v Eintracht Frankfurt (0)Manchester United (5) v Lask Linsk (0) Quarter-finals1. Wolfsburg/Shakhtar v Eintracht Frankfurt/Basel2. Lask/Manchester United v İstanbul Başakşehir/Copenhagen3. Internazionale/Getafe v Rangers/Leverkusen4. Olympiakos/Wolves v Sevilla/Roma Semi-finalsWinner quarter-final 1 v winner quarter-final 3Winner quarter-final 2 v winner quarter-final 4FinalCologne, 21 August Wolves will play Sevilla or Roma if they overcome Olympiakos, with whom they drew 1-1 in Greece. One of those teams will then face United, Copenhagen or Istanbul Basaksehir. Rangers face a tough task to overturn a 3-1 first-leg home defeat by Bayer Leverkusen but will face Internazionale or Getafe if they progress. In the other quarter-final Shakhtar Donetsk or Wolfsburg will play Eintracht Frankfurt or Basel. Sevilla, Roma, Inter and Getafe were not able to play their first legs so those ties will be one-off matches in Germany, where all games from the quarter-finals will be played from 10-21 August.