Steve Reed, the shadow communities secretary, proclaimed last week that “the public will not tolerate gerrymandering of public money for party political gain”. Won’t they, though? My feeling is they totally will. I’d say recent British history has demonstrated many times how surprisingly, one might almost say self-defeatingly, relaxed about it the public are. “Gerrymandering of public money” is a strange phrase because “to gerrymander” means to manipulate constituency boundaries so can’t, strictly speaking, be done to money. It’s one of those verbs that’s particular about what object it takes, like prorogue, slake or fellate. But it’s pretty clear what Reed is referring to: apportioning public money not in the national interest, but to help the political party that happens to be in power to stay there. I’m not saying the public always tolerates that, but politicians have certainly been known to get away with it. Putting morality aside (something else politicians have been known to do), it’s worth a try. Margaret Thatcher was tremendously good at it, not only privatising all those industries at a generous discount into the pockets of millions of likely Tory voters, but also flogging the country’s social housing stock. There is a malevolent beauty to the political strategy of selling off council houses at a discount. “No single piece of legislation has enabled the transfer of so much capital wealth from the state to the people,” was how Michael Heseltine described the 1980 Housing Act, but that’s putting an unduly egalitarian spin on it. This “state” wealth didn’t come from Westminster but from local councils, institutions much more likely to be controlled by leftwingers than central government is. And it didn’t go to “the people” in general, but specifically to those who aspired to get on the property ladder and, having succeeded in doing so, were likely to approve of Thatcher’s economic approach. It was using resources historically controlled by the left wing to turn people more rightwing. It’s clever and the public definitely tolerated it. To be fair, I don’t know that Steve Reed really believes his optimistic claim. Perhaps he was expressing it more as a hope, like saying: “Come on, everyone – you’re not going to let them get away with this as well are you?!” The “them” and the “this” he’d be referring to if he’d actually said that are “housing and communities secretary Robert Jenrick” and “giving out grants in a way that disproportionately favours marginal constituencies” respectively. It all sounds a bit dry, I know, but then that’s what puts so many of us on team “let them get away with it”. The background is this: a year ago Boris Johnson, back when he couldn’t win a vote in the Commons but hadn’t nearly died, announced £3.6bn of extra funding to, as he put it with his trademark pre-pandemic levity, “turbocharge” regional growth. As it turns out, that’s only happening in the sense that thousands of people’s cancers aren’t being treated. The cash was handed out in grants to 101 English towns and last week the National Audit Office produced a report on how those towns had been selected. Analysis of this report by, among others, the Labour party and the Times suggests that constituencies’ projected electoral standings had been a factor in deciding where the money went. In case you’re still reading, it gets even more boring. The first 40 selected towns were the “high priority” ones identified by civil servants on the basis of economic need – fair enough. But it seems that the other 61 were picked at the discretion of ministers. Jenrick’s department denies anything untoward, saying: “The selection criteria was [sic] set by officials and took into account factors including income deprivation, skills, productivity and investment opportunities.” On the other hand, the Times pointed out that, of the 61 towns, 60 “were either Conservative-held seats or Tory targets before the election”. Of the Tory seats “80% had majorities of less than 5,000. Only one Labour seat targeted for funding did not fall to the Conservatives. Only two towns chosen had Tory majorities of more than 10,000 before the election, one of which was Mr Jenrick’s seat, Newark.” So, is this dodgy? Is this buying votes? Is this another case of Robert the-prime-minister-considers-the-matter-closed Jenrick’s unique brand of artless amorality? Probably, but who cares? It’s too late to do anything about it now – like with all those votes Putin probably influenced. Boris Johnson, then the unelected leader of a government that didn’t command a parliamentary majority, slung a few billions of other people’s money around and now he’s an elected leader with a huge majority and that’s that. Gaming the system with a wodge of taxpayers’ cash has never been more straightforward I don’t know whether Johnson or Jenrick has done anything that, strictly speaking, broke whatever toothless rules of ministerial impartiality exist. But, whether within the rules or not, they will definitely have tried to use government policy and money to curry favour with floating voters in marginal constituencies because that’s what governments under our electoral system always do. The few thousand people who might change their political minds, who happen to live in the few dozen seats that might realistically change political hands, are hugely important under the current two-party first-past-the-post system. Like a sort of latter-day aristocracy, their opinions and concerns matter massively more than everyone else’s. Britain is still relatively rich and these people are relatively few, so there’s plenty of cash for purchasing their favour. And they’re going to get easier and easier to target. We live in the era of social media and the algorithm. Exactly who needs to be talked round and how to do it can be inferred from analysis of people’s online shopping and the tweets they’ve “liked”. Gaming the system with a wodge of taxpayers’ cash, which has long been key to both main parties’ electoral strategies, has never been more straightforward. It is absolutely bound to happen, and will continue to happen with increasing efficiency and ruthlessness. The details of Jenrick’s latest self-serving blunder don’t matter, and naive assertions of what the public won’t tolerate don’t help. This problem can only be addressed by electoral reform, which would make every vote cast as significant as every other. Then we’d all stand an equal chance of being bribed with our own money.