Juventus are slowly closing in on another Serie A title, but the league leaders were unconvincing again as they drew 3-3 at Sassuolo to go seven points clear. Danilo opened the scoring for Juventus in the sixth minute when a corner found him unmarked on the edge of the box, and the defender drilled a powerful shot through a cluster of bodies into the net. Juve appeared to be in control when Gonzalo Higuaín made it two six minutes later after latching on to a superb ball from Miralem Pjanic. The hosts have been in swashbuckling form, though, and a fine strike from Filip Djuricic on the half-hour started the comeback. Roberto De Zerbi’s side drew level early in the second half when Domenico Berardi curled a beautiful free kick inside the near post. Three minutes later the hosts were ahead, Francesco Caputo stealing in at the far post to steer in a wayward Berardi shot. Just after the hour mark, Juve were back level as defender Alex Sandro headed home from a corner. Maurizio Sarri’s side then pushed for a winner but Cristiano Ronaldo was kept quiet by the home defence. Instead, Sassuolo almost won it – but Wojciech Szczesny denied Mehdi Bourabia in stoppage time. The draw means Juventus have not won in their last three league games, conceding nine goals, but they are still seven points ahead of Atalanta. Lazio missed the chance to reclaim second spot and cut the gap to the top as they were held to a 0-0 draw by Udinese. Rodrigo De Paul struck the post late on for the hosts, but Lazio avoided a fourth straight defeat. Milan remain on course for a Europa League place after beating Parma 3-1, coming from behind to win for the fourth game in a row. Alberto Grassi set up Jasmin Kurtic to put the visitors in front at the San Siro, before Franck Kessié equalised after 55 minutes with a 25-yard rocket. Four minutes later, Hakan Calhanoglu floated a free-kick into the area and defender Alessio Romagnoli scored with a powerful downward header. Calhanoglu added Milan’s third in the 77th minute.Stefano Pioli’s side moved level on points with Napoli, who were held to a 1-1 draw at Bologna. Kostas Manolas headed in an early opener, but Musa Barrow’s fifth goal in six games earned the hosts a point.Jordan Veretout and Edin Dzeko were on target in the first half for Roma in their 2-1 win over Verona, while Federico Bonazzoli scored his second acrobatic volley this week as Sampdoria beat Cagliari 3-0. Patrick Cutrone was on target for Fiorentina as they won 3-1 at relegation-threatened Lecce. Porto have won their 29th Portuguese title after second-half goals from captain Danilo Pereira and striker Moussa Marega earned a 2-0 home win over Sporting. The hosts dominated the opening half, with Luis Díaz having his goal disallowed for handball and Sebastián Coates clearing the Colombian’s shot off the line. Jovane Cabral then headed over the bar from close range for the visitors with 34 minutes gone.Porto went ahead in the 64th minute as Danilo got ahead of his marker at the near post and headed home from Alex Telles’ corner. In stoppage time, Marega finished a fast counter-attack in style to kick-start the title celebrations. Sérgio Conceição’s side had expected a tight title battle with Benfica after they resumed the season just a point ahead at the top. But their fierce rivals have won just three of their eight games, allowing Porto to wrap up the title with two games to spare. They will face Benfica in the Cup final on 1 August.