The Old GuardNetflix delivers its stay-at-home answer to a summer blockbuster with this comic-book action fantasy from the always interesting Gina Prince-Bythewood (Beyond the Lights), starring Charlize Theron as an immortal mercenary leader. Streaming from Friday. Guy Lodge Les BlancsLorraine Hansberry’s far-reaching play about an unnamed African colony on the brink of violent change: a forceful demonstration of how the history of black nations has been scripted by whites. Yaël Farber directs this 2016 National Theatre production; the cast includes Siân Phillips, Danny Sapani and Sheila Atim. Streaming on YouTube until Thursday. Susannah Clapp RSC Playmaking festivalDuring lockdown, more than 100 young people from schools across the country have been working with RSC practitioners and local theatres to create original, digital responses to Shakespeare’s plays, focusing on family relationships, hope and redemption. This compilation of the resulting virtual performances premieres on the RSC’s YouTube channel on Wednesday, 10am. Clare Brennan Book now: Lianne La HavasOn the eve of her self-titled third album reset, soul siren Lianne La Havas hosts a pay-per-view livestream from London’s Roundhouse on Wednesday 15 July. Tickets via ticketmasterpartners.com Kitty Empire Margo PricePostponed from May due to her guitarist/partner’s bad bout of coronavirus, the Grammy-nominated Price’s third outing, That’s How Rumours Get Started, finally drops. Out on Friday. KE Spaceship EarthScience or eco-entertainment? This fascinating documentary meets the maverick experimental theatre company/visionary futurists behind a self-contained biosphere, in which eight scientists were sealed for two years. But every Garden of Eden needs a snake, and this one had Steve Bannon. Streaming from Friday. Wendy Ide Pelléas et MélisandeSome of the most exciting current opera productions come from the Komische Oper, Berlin, directed by Barrie Kosky. Catch his staging of Debussy’s masterpiece, Pelléas et Mélisande, at operavision.eu until Wednesday. Fiona Maddocks New York City Ballet: Tribute to BalanchineYou’ve still time to catch this gala recorded in 1983, a month after George Balanchine’s death, in which the New York City Ballet paid tribute to their founder. There are three full ballets performed: Vienna Waltzes, Mozartiana and Who Cares?, with great performers including Suzanne Farrell, Patricia McBride and Heather Watts. Streaming until 14 July as part of the Lincoln Center at Home programme. Sarah Crompton Cranach: Artist and InnovatorWild, weird and wonderful – the Renaissance painter Lucas Cranach the Elder, one of the most successful German artists of all time, is celebrated in a show of portraits, myths and sensationally sumptuous paintings of Adam and Eve. Compton Verney, Warwickshire, from Tuesday to 21 January. Laura Cumming South Bank Show 40th Anniversary SpecialMelvyn’s mighty creation over 40 years, celebrated with highlights and interviews with, among many others, Tracey Emin, Francis Bacon and David Hockney. Wednesday, Sky Arts, 10pm. LC This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.