As we at the University and College Union (UCU) lobby the Westminster government for an urgently needed bailout, thousands of the most vulnerable university employees are already losing their jobs.They are vulnerable because the employment model which has developed in higher education in the past 30 years has seen rising levels of casualisation. One third of all academics working in academia are employed on fixed-term contracts, rising to almost half for teaching-only academics (49%) and more than two thirds (67%) for research-only staff. Black and minority ethnic (BAME) academic staff are more likely to be employed on a fixed-term contract, with more than two-fifths (42%) on a fixed-term contract compared to less than a third (31%) of white academic staff. This reserve army has always been seen as expendable by employers. Every couple of years thousands of researchers are forced to move institutions as their fixed-term contracts end. The summer is an anxious time for casually employed teaching staff as they wait to find out if they have any work in the autumn.But this year is different. At King’s College London, more than a thousand fixed-term staff have been told their contracts are under review. At the University of Liverpool more than 600 face the sack, while the number is around 400 at Goldsmiths and close to 300 at Essex. That’s almost 2,300 jobs going at just four institutions we know about. If this picture was repeated across the sector then almost 30,000 fixed-term contracts would be at risk. If the number of jobs being cut is a problem, so too is the way in which institutions are trying to keep it a secret. UCU has only received reliable figures from a handful of universities, despite repeatedly asking for more information.Such a lack of candour is hugely counterproductive. People talk. When cuts are made by stealth it leaves a reservoir of bad feeling not just for those forced out, but for those who remain and have to pick up the work.When the dust settles it will be the institutions which prioritised saving jobs that will emerge from the crisis with their reputations enhanced.Universities already have a huge amount of ground to make up with their staff. The widely supported strikes of early 2020 may seem like a lifetime ago to some observers, but casualisation was at the heart of the action – reflecting the strong desire of UCU members to fight for a different, fairer future.We will continue to press for better treatment for the most vulnerable staff. We do so because we recognise that the struggle against casualisation is important for everyone. Permanent staff face their own pressures, but they also know that attacks on the most vulnerable are just a precursor for a wider assault upon staff terms and conditions in the shadow of the pandemic.That is why we are today launching 10 practical steps that all staff can take to support their casualised colleagues. The steps range from writing to your MP to lift the lid on casualisation, to joining together with colleagues to raise the issue at department level. Every action is about creating solidarity between all staff. We believe that casualised staff make a vital contribution to our universities, delivering important research and being responsible for large swathes of teaching. Yet they do so under appalling conditions of insecurity. This summer many universities are failing to live up to even the most basic commitments to these staff. It’s time for us to fight back. Jo Grady is the general secretary at the University and College Union