Sheffield United’s quest for European football was boosted by a convincing win that may prove a telling body blow to Chelsea’s hopes of Champions League qualification. Chris Wilder’s side move up to sixth, while Frank Lampard’s remain in third on 60 points. Yet as Leicester – who have 59 – and Manchester United – 58 – have a game in hand, suddenly Chelsea’s destiny is beyond their control. Wilder was understandably pleased. “It was a really good performance - it had to be, we were pretty close to our maximum,” said the manager. “The players look like they’re enjoying their football - the attitude of the team is great.” Wilder brought in David McGoldrick as his sole change from the win against Wolves, and the striker’s was a day to remember as, at 32, he scored his maiden Premier League goal, then finished the match with another. “I have told the lads: ‘Don’t worry’,” he said.”When it comes I will get a brace. I hope there are many more to come. It means the world. Made my debut at 16 and I made the dream to play in the Premier League. Now I have [achieved] another dream of scoring.” Lampard’s side were insipid all evening. “They were better than us, physically, in the mind and with the ball,” said a discontented manager. “So you lose the game. We need to put that to bed quickly and fight for the top four.” Initially Chelsea had a pleasing rhythm. Ross Barkley, Mason Mount, Reece James, Jorginho and Cesar Azpilicueta pinged the ball between them, forcing the Blades to scurry. When the latter scuffed a ball in from the left this jarred with the smoothness of the buildup. Deeper dismay was about to occur for Chelsea. When Oli McBurnie shot it deflected off Barkley and James, wrongfooting Kepa Arrizabalaga, who made a sharp save. But there was McGoldrick to tap in. Chelsea reasserted themselves but lacked flair near Dean Henderson’s goal. The contest became compressed in the middle third of United’s half, which suited them fine. Barkley slipped on two separate occasions, miscontrolled on another: a telling microcosm of how he and teammates had lost their way. Again, United showed them how to deliver end-product with a second strike that teemed with incisiveness and simplicity. Enda Stevens fashioned a one-two along the left with Ben Osborn, crossed and there was McBurnie to head beyond Arrizabalaga at the near post for a sixth of the league campaign. Chelsea were rocked and though James forced a low save from Henderson close to the break, the chance Christian Pulisic had previously spurned to find Tammy Abraham with a cross – the ball sailed over the No 9’s head – signalled Lampard had work to do when the interval arrived. He made two changes: Marcos Alonso for Mount, Antonio Rüdiger for Andreas Christensen. The early signs hardly augured well, though, for Chelsea, when Azpilicueta hit a through ball directly into Henderson’s arms. The Blades were a sharper-tackling and quicker-attacking unit. One spinning McGoldrick layoff near the centre spot that launched his side at Chelsea was of high quality and continued the schooling the men in blue were being given. Next, Chris Basham stretched admirably well to keep a move going down the right, then fired in a curving delivery that had a hapless James spooning the ball over his bar for a Blades corner. Chelsea defended this with ease but when they later claimed one of their own Willian’s placement was awry. Then began a period of pressure from the visitors, Barkley the chief orchestrator. Yet, once more, when his probing won a free-kick disappointment followed as the midfielder hammered this straight into the wall. From here, United responded, and John Lundstram, a substitute, went close to releasing McGoldrick near Arrizabalaga. Now came a third goal that had Lampard visibly fuming. Lys Mousset was granted space to roll the ball over from the right and McGoldrick doubled his career top-flight tally. Chelsea pressed towards the end but to no avail. Leicester - at Bournemouth on Sunday - and Manchester United - at home to Southampton on Mondaytomorrow - will hope to take full advantage.