TUI, Europe’s biggest holiday company, said on Sunday it had decided to cancel all Britons’ holidays to mainland Spain up to and including Sunday 9 August following the UK’s decision to imposed a two-week quarantine on those returning from the country. “TUI UK have taken the decision to cancel all holidays to mainland Spain up to and including Sunday 9 August 2020,” the company said in a statement. “We know how much our customers look forward to their holiday abroad and some will be able to accommodate the new quarantine restrictions. Therefore all those that wish to travel to the Balearic Islands and Canary Islands will be able to travel as planned from Monday 27 July.” The UK government’s sudden decision on Saturday evening means that from midnight Sunday anyone returning into the UK from Spain will have to self-isolate for a fortnight. British Airways and easyJet have strongly criticised the UK government’s decision, but have said they will continue to operate flights despite the quarantine rules. BA said the decision had thrown thousands of Briton’s travel plans into chaos and described it as “yet another blow for British holidaymakers”. “While our flights continue to operate, we are disappointed that the government is now advising against all but essential travel to mainland Spain and reintroducing quarantine for holidaymakers returning from Spain with immediate effect, throwing thousands of Briton’s travel plans into chaos,” BA said. “This is sadly yet another blow for British holidaymakers and cannot fail to have an impact on an already troubled aviation industry.” EasyJet said: “We are disappointed that the government has decided to impose a quarantine requirement for those travelling from the whole of Spain since the increased occurrence of coronavirus is regional rather than nationwide. “We plan to operate our full schedule in the coming days. Customers who no longer wish to travel can transfer their flights without a change fee or receive a voucher for the value of the booking.” The Foreign and Commonwealth Office now advises against all but essential travel to the Spanish mainland.