Tottenham are understood to be tracking Roma’s Nicolò Zaniolo but view the 21-year-old midfielder as a potential signing for the future despite his impressive performances this season. Reports in Italy this week suggested Spurs were competing with Juventus and Internazionale to sign Zaniolo, who has scored six goals in 23 Serie A appearances in this campaign. But while Tottenham’s hierarchy are believed to regard the Italy international as a considerable prospect who would thrive in the Premier League in part because of his physical strength, he is not considered to be a priority for José Mourinho in this transfer window. Talks with Southampton over a move for Pierre-Emile Højbjerg are continuing despite Everton’s £25m bid for the midfielder being accepted and there is a confidence at Spurs that they can get the deal done. The club were ready to offer £30m for Zaniolo last summer but Roma’s asking price was higher. Juventus were made to wait for what should still be a ninth consecutive Serie A title as Seko Fofana's wonder goal in stoppage time condemned them to a 2-1 defeat at Udinese, who came from behind to claim a win that moves them a huge step closer to safety. Fofana raced from the halfway line to score in the second minute of time added on to lift Udinese seven points clear of the drop zone with three games to go. The Turin side remain odds-on favourites to claim the Scudetto, but are somewhat limping towards the title, having now won only one of their last five games in the league. Juve needed a victory to put the title out of reach of second-placed Atalanta with three games left to play, but must instead look to Sunday's game against Sampdoria after this setback. Elsewhere, Lazio came from behind to record a 2-1 victory over Cagliari, confirming their place in next season's Champions League. Ciro Immobile scored the winner to notch his 31st league goal of the season, moving one clear of Cristiano Ronaldo in the scoring charts with three games to go. PA Media Roma are expected to offer Zaniolo a year extension in the summer to 2025 with the manager, Paulo Fonseca, denying a rift between the pair after Zaniolo came off the bench to score in the 6-1 thrashing of Spal on Wednesday – the first time since 1935 that Roma had scored six times in an away Serie A fixture. “We don’t want to sell him,” said Fonseca. “He is key to our project.” Zaniolo, who came through Fiorentina’s youth system before joining Inter in 2017 and Roma a year later, also said he is fully committed to the club. “It’s like when you fall in love,” he wrote on Instagram. “You feel good together, she brings out the best in you and you want to be seen with her. It’s the same thing. Really, I love this shirt.”