The northern Spanish region of Catalonia has gone back into lockdown, with Barcelona suggesting it might also follow suit with restrictions in some districts, as authorities sought to control a resurgence of coronavirus cases emerging just weeks after a nationwide lockdown was lifted. As a judge overturned a previous court decision to approve the stay-at-home order for the Lleida area, west of Barcelona, friction was emerging over how to handle an increase in cases in a suburb of the Catalan capital. The new lockdown came as the Spanish island town of Magaluf on Mallorca closed two of its main party strips popular with British and German tourists after videos of crowded and drunken scenes involving Britons failing to social distance emerged earlier this week. The renewed restrictions are a double blow to Spain’s economy, which is heavily dependent on tourism, as the country struggles to emerge from one of Europe’s most serious outbreaks which caused more than 28,000 deaths. Although a national lockdown came to an end in late June, more than 170 clusters have sprung up. Barcelona may bring back some restrictions on daily life after the number of coronavirus cases tripled in a week, its mayor said on Wednesday. Some 63% of Spain’s new cases since restrictions eased have been detected in Barcelona and its surroundings, fuelling fears the regional capital and popular tourist destination might again become a hotbed of the virus. “What worries us the most would be to lose control of infections,” the mayor, Ada Colau, told Ser Catalunya radio. “We are not talking about total confinement as in previous months, but I think some measures have to be taken more widely,” Colau said. In Magaluf, a government statement referred to the scenes of drunken British holidaymakers and blamed them for the closures. “We cannot tolerate the sort of images we have been seeing over the last few days and we are not going to tolerate it. Our tourist and economic activity depends on our image. We urge the general population and the tourists to obey rules on social distancing and the other measures put in place by the Balearic Islands government.” The new restrictions and lockdowns follow similar measures around the globe as the virus has flared up again from California to India and Japan, prompting measures from bar and restaurant closures to wide-scale lockdowns involving tens of millions of people. Facing its own uptick in infections, Belgium on Wednesday postponed a further easing of rules on social gatherings as the country’s prime minister said she could not rule out the reintroduction of lockdowns in areas worst affected. Sophie Wilmès told a news conference that the reproduction rate of Covid-19 infections had risen above 1 once more, indicating that the virus was again spreading exponentially in the country. “This means that the epidemic is getting worse, gaining strength, even if it is still limited right now,” she told a news conference after a meeting to decide on next steps. “But it is not good and we are monitoring the situation very closely.” Her comments came just a day after Belgium had reported zero new Covid-related deaths over the previous 24 hours for the first time since 10 March. In Japan, Tokyo also raised its coronavirus alert to the highest “red” level on Wednesday, alarmed by a recent rise in daily cases to record highs, with governor Yuriko Koike describing the situation in the Japanese capital as “rather severe”. The resurgence of the virus in Tokyo could add to the growing pressure on policymakers to shore up the world’s third-largest economy, which analysts say is set to shrink at its fastest pace in decades this fiscal year due to the pandemic. “We are in a situation where we should issue warnings to citizens and businesses,” Koike told a press conference, urging residents to refrain from unnecessary travel. In South Africa, which was praised for its quick and effective response early in the pandemic, the difficulties of controlling the virus have also been sharply evident as infections reached 300,000, the most in Africa and in the top 10 in the world. It reimposed an alcohol ban and a night curfew on Sunday after recently loosening its own restrictions.