Pep Guardiola has claimed the quashing of Manchester City’s European ban was “a good day for football” and that Liverpool, Manchester United and Arsenal are uncomfortable at the club being in the elite. On Monday the court of arbitration for sport ruled that the two-year exclusion of City from European competition imposed by Uefa, after it found the club guilty of breaching financial fair play and seriously misleading the governing body, be expunged. City’s fine was reduced from €30m (£27m) and set at €10m, after they were found to have obstructed the Uefa investigation. Jürgen Klopp, the Liverpool manager, described Cas’s decision as bad for football and José Mourinho said it was a “disgrace”, querying why City were fined if not guilty. Guardiola was asked about the Tottenham manager’s comments. “José and other managers should know: we were damaged, we should be apologised to,” he said. “If we did something wrong, we will accept the decisions from Uefa and Cas. We don’t expect Liverpool, Tottenham, Arsenal, Chelsea, Wolves etc to defend us. But we can defend ourselves. We have the right to defend ourselves when we believe what we have done is correct. “Three independent [Cas] judges said this. It was a good day for football as we play with the same rules as all the clubs in Europe.” Guardiola admitted City’s reputation had been dented. “We were damaged,” he said. “The people say we cheated and were lying – and many times. The presumption of innocence wasn’t there. “It would be nice [for the innuendo to stop now] but I don’t think so. What happened in recent years, how many times people came to our club to whisper about us, I would love it to finish. “Liverpool, United and especially Arsenal are not comfortable [about us] being here [in the elite]. But we deserve to be here – we deserve to be stronger, year by year. There are incredible people working to make this club better, to make our fans proud. We don’t have to ask permission to be there. “If you do not agree, knock on the door and speak to our chairman and chief executive – don’t go whispering. We are going to do this – seven, eight clubs, doing this.” This last comment referred to a letter sent by Liverpool, Tottenham, Manchester United, Arsenal, Wolves, Leicester, Burnley and Chelsea in March to Cas, asking that the appeal be heard before next season. Guardiola is also unhappy with La Liga’s president, Javier Tebas, who questioned whether Cas was the appropriate court to continue hearing appeals of Uefa decisions. “He’s another one: this guy Señor Tebas must be so jealous of English football,” said Guardiola. “He’s an incredible legal expert from what I see; maybe next time I’ll ask them which court and judges we have to go to. “He has to be worried and concerned about La Liga and focus on there. But normally with these kind of people when the sentence is good for him it is perfect – as has happened many times in Spain – but when it is against the problem is for the other ones. We will be in the Champions League next season, Señor Tebas, because what we did we did it properly.” Guardiola refused to be drawn regarding whether Cas’s decision meant he was more likely to extend his contract beyond next summer. “Maybe I will be able to stay here longer – now is not the time. I was happy before and now. We have time to think about that.”