It is no great surprise to read that Sir Graham Wylie has decided to take a break from racehorse ownership. There was a time when his colours could be relied upon to show up on jump racing’s biggest day but the software millionaire had just one runner in Britain last season, when Yorkhill started at 25-1 in the Ladbrokes Trophy at Newbury in November and made little impact before falling at the fourth-last. It’s almost a year since the last winner in his black and beige silks, also Yorkhill at last summer’s Galway festival. He had a couple of other high-class animals running in Ireland, in Bellshill and Voix Du Reve, but has seemed to be winding down for some time. “I’m very busy with other businesses so it felt the right time to take a break from it all now,” Wylie is quoted as saying in the Racing Post. “We have our charity and we’re involved in some very big businesses that need our attention right now in the current pandemic. “I just don’t know right now when we might have horses again, as I’m focusing on so many other things, like the British Masters, which starts this week. We’ll just take our involvement in anything as it comes.” In his busiest season, Wylie owned 343 runners, but that was more than a decade ago, at the height of his association with the trainer Howard Johnson. When Johnson was banned under the sport’s welfare rules, it undoubtedly shook Wylie, who has not had anything like the same number of horses in training since then. But there have been some very big days just the same, initially through Tidal Bay, who flourished after a late-career switch to Paul Nicholls, winning the Bet365 Gold Cup and a dramatic Lexus Chase in 2012. Since then, Wylie has won many big races through a new alliance with Willie Mullins, but he was unlucky in the spring of 2019, losing Ballyward, Up For Review and Invitation Only to fatal injuries at Cheltenham and Aintree. “That was a very difficult time for myself and my wife,” he told the Post. It is a pity to see Wylie go. I remember his enthusiasm for the game was so great that he turned up on a freezing cold day at Newcastle in January, when the action on offer was far from exalted, just because it was the first day’s racing in the north for about a month that had beaten the weather. Perhaps absence will make the heart grow fonder. After Sunday’s heroics, our nap is a more sedate 2-1. I was hoping for a bit better about Iconic Hero (1.10), who didn’t manage to win a point to point in Ireland but nevertheless seems likely to improve on his hurdles form as he goes chasing. He travelled well past the turn for home at Southwell three weeks ago. Perhaps the step back in trip will help but he should in any case be a deal sharper for that first run since November. The Skelton team are hitting their stride, so I think Iconic Hero can be preferred to Tim Rocco, who had had a couple of runs on the Flat before his recent chasing debut, for which he now carries a penalty. Olly Murphy is on a low recent strike-rate but Craigmor (2.10) gives him a fair chance in a later handicap hurdle. It’s a year since we’ve seen him but he’s still young and has a fair record fresh. He gets in here just 1lb higher than the mark from which he won over fences at this track last year. Market Rasen 12.00 Sangha River 12.35 Lleyton 1.10 Iconic Hero (nap) 1.40 Coup De Pinceau 2.10 Craigmor 2.40 Meep Meep 3.10 Ever So Much 3.40 Ultimate GetawayAyr 12.45 Mecca's Hot Steps 1.20 Captain Magnum 1.50 Prissy Missy 2.20 Angels Faces 2.50 Chase The Dollar 3.20 Aliento 3.50 Dreamseller 4.20 Returnofthemac 4.50 NataleenaWindsor 4.30 Fairy Dust 5.00 Theotherside 5.30 Kodiellen 6.00 Grande Rumore (nb) 6.30 Kettle Hill 7.00 Grandfather Tom 7.30 Hold Fast 8.00 Jen's Fella 8.30 Caribeno In Ayr’s opener, the market is getting excited about the Mark Johnston runner, whose reappearance flop can certainly be ignored. But there’s plenty to like about Mecca’s Hot Steps (12.45) at 7-2, with the first-time blinkers and fast ground looking like a good combination. Grandfather Tom (7.00) has drifted to double figures at Windsor but he ran well in spite of the soft ground at the July meeting 10 days ago and is back to the same mark from which he won here last year.