I agree with two articles last week: “Why rewilding can restore Britain’s natural balance” (Focus) and “Making a beeline: new wildflower paths could save threatened species” (News). Yes, we do need better management of wild places but both articles ignore the elephant in the room: farming. We all need to eat and Britain only produces 60% of its food; the majority of our land is devoted to farming and the unique wildlife is more the result of the way land is farmed than the way in which the non-farmed margins are managed. The decline in farmland birds, catastrophic decline in insects and deteriorating soil health are a consequence of poor crop rotations, excessive pesticide use and lack of mixed farming. This needs a fundamental change in farming, away from the reliance on finite reserves of oil and phosphate fertilisers, routine use of pesticides and poor crop rotations. Organic and agro-ecological farming addresses these issues through legumes, diverse crop rotations and a focus on soil management. Recent results from organic conversion of the National Trust’s Wimpole Hall farm show a doubling of skylarks, 38% increase in invertebrates and 2,260 tonnes of CO2 locked up in the soil each year. The EU has a new policy of 25% organic land by 2030; the UK now has the chance of setting an even more ambitious target for the environment. Wildlife areas and corridors will only be effective if integrated into a sustainably farmed environment; there, the farming can support wildlife and the wildlife, such as beneficial pollinators and predatory insects, can support the farming.Mark MeasuresCraven Arms, Shropshire “A promised revolution in further education and apprenticeships is an admirable goal.” So, quite rightly, says Will Hutton (“For years, we have failed those going to university. We have to get it right this time”, Comment). Unfortunately, UK governments seem only to become interested when youth unemployment threatens to destabilise the state. The Youth Training Scheme was the most recent initiative, conceived in the fire of the Thatcherite revolution and abandoned as youth unemployment faded as a salient issue in the late 1980s. YTS attempted to do something never before tried in the UK, namely provide proper training and work experience for all school leavers. Its components included planned work experience, training and education, developing core skills to facilitate adaptability in a rapidly changing labour market, and providing a record of achievement. Let us hope that the current response is as well thought through. The cynic in me has its doubts.Roy BoffySutton Coldfield, West Midlands Jon Reeds seems not to understand the principles of garden city design (“Garden cities’ malign legacy”, Letters). When Ebenezer Howard planned the layout for Letchworth, the first garden city, there was provision for an industrial area not far from the town centre. The way through it was even called Works Road. My parents lived in the town for more than 30 years and both cycled or walked to work. Travel by bus was also possible. My father never owned a car. I and my two siblings also cycled or walked to town. There have been many changes since I moved away in the 1960s. Even with these and an increase in population, the town is no larger than in my day or than in the original design. There is no urban sprawl. If people drive to work in the town now, it’s because they choose to. I’ve lived in many places since I left home. Each move brought home how lucky I was to have spent my childhood in Letchworth Garden City. Why did I move away? There are no mountains nearby. Even Letchworth isn’t perfect!Ken VinesHorrabridge, Devon To say that the west is “bullying Iran” suggests that Iran is the innocent victim (“Sabotage, sanctions and bullying of Iran will surely backfire on the west”, Foreign affairs commentary). This elicits sympathy that is very misplaced. Since the Islamic revolution of 1979, there have been periods of relative rapprochement and reduced pressure with the west, but this regime has continued with impunity its malign activities across the region and beyond, and the appalling abuse of its own people’s human rights. Under Hassan Rouhani’s watch, there have been thousands of executions, increased suppression and persecution of women, young people, political opponents, journalists, artists, environmentalists, non-Islamic faith groups and protesters. Donald Trump, Benjamin Netanyahu and Mohammed bin Salman are indeed “bully boys” but Rouhani and those Simon Tisdall calls moderate reformists also use “bully-boy” tactics to hold the rest of the world hostage to its demands. The Iranian people deserve our moral (not military) support instead of western appeasement of their oppressors.Jennifer CarterLondon NW2 Regarding your piece on Jack Charlton (“He’s one of us. Leeds honours World Cup hero Jack Charlton”, News): a few years after leaving York University, I returned to play in the Past v Present football match. For the only time in my life, I was sent off after a very minor tussle. That evening we all went for a celebratory meal, where the guest speaker was Jack Charlton. He gave a very funny speech, stayed on for the rest of the evening and socialised. My wife and I were lucky enough to share a table with Jack and his wife. He had no airs and graces, and I think we all felt very at ease in his company. He seemed to genuinely enjoy ours. Thank you Jack for cheering me up, and for turning a lousy day into a really good one.Alf OrtonRomford, Essex Rob Ford correctly identifies Westminster’s warped electoral system as one of Labour’s challenges (“Labour’s electoral task is daunting. But opportunity beckons”, Analysis). Labour banks a massive number of votes in areas it doesn’t “need”, and its supporters are denied any representation in swaths of the country. This set-up is damaging not just for trust but for our economy too, with cash splashed on swing seats while millions of people elsewhere go ignored. Despite an increasing trend of voters shopping around at elections, most seats don’t change hands (some since the time of Queen Victoria). It is a recipe for unchecked inequality and political isolation. What to do about it? During the leadership election, Keir Starmer identified the problem of under-representation in politics, and promised to consult Labour members on proportional representation. With trust in politics at rock bottom, it is time to be bold and back real democracy through electoral reform.Darren Hughes, chief executive, Electoral Reform SocietyLondon SE1 Your otherwise excellent columnist Emma Beddington is wrong to describe a sweetened Yorkshire pudding as”outrageous” (Up front, Magazine). Up north (Altrincham), we had them for (actual) pudding with golden syrup. Delicious!Chris HughesLeicester