Peter McKenna remembers the trickle of visitors who started panning for gold in the Sperrin mountains of County Tyrone in the 1970s. “We put them in the same bracket as the leprechauns and the ringforts, end of the rainbow type stuff.” It turned out there really was gold. But an attempt to start mining in the 1980s faltered – the Troubles were raging and authorities feared the IRA would steal any explosives brought into this corner of Northern Ireland. Now, with the Troubles a memory, a New York-based investment fund is planning to build a mine at Greencastle, a hamlet in the Sperrin mountains that sits atop what is by grade one of the world’s biggest unexcavated gold deposits, worth an estimated £3bn. McKenna, a gold sceptic no more, is a community relations manager for the mining company Dalradian Gold, and instead of leprechauns he envisages licences, drilling and jobs. “This is something that has world potential.” Its fate hangs in the balance. The Stormont government announced on 29 June a public inquiry into the application, saying it had received more than 40,000 representations, the vast majority objections. The proposed site at Greencastle is just one of a slew of applications to mine gold in the Dalradian supergroup, a 450-mile belt of rock spanning Ireland and Scotland. A surge in global prices – hovering at $1,800 an ounce as investors seek a haven from turbulent markets – may further whet the appetite for Celtic gold on both sides of the North Channel. Commercial extraction of ore at the UK’s only operational gold mine at Cononish near Tyndrum is to start later this year. Cononish is doing geological surveys at two other nearby sites and has exploration licences for 13 parts of the southern Highlands. A second firm, Erris Resources, has begun test sampling at two sites south of Loch Tay in Perthshire that it says have “good prospects” for gold, silver and zinc. Those licences cover hundreds of square kilometres. Other companies have obtained gold prospecting licences for several counties in Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, including a site in Clontibret, county Monaghan, said to hold about 500,000 ounces. It is 40 miles south of Greencastle. The Dalradian supergroup was becoming famous for untapped gold, said Richard Gray, the managing director of Scotgold Resources, which owns Cononish. “In the parlance of geologists, it’s elephant country.” The geological formation is named after the Dál Riata, a Gaelic kingdom credited with a golden age of influence in the sixth century. The prospect of mining companies ushering in a literal golden age has polarised opinion in Scotland and Northern Ireland. Some welcome the promise of jobs and investment. Others, including conservationists and environmentalists, fear pollution and despoliation. Politicians and regulators face intense lobbying from both sides. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency (Sepa) is drafting its first mining and quarrying strategy which will cover the water and environmental pollution laws gold mines need to uphold. “We’re clear that environmental compliance is non-negotiable. Every Scottish business will comply with the law, and we’ll work to ensure as many as possible will go even further,” said Kenny Boag, Sepa’s head of strategic regulatory initiatives. Northern Ireland’s infrastructure minister, Nichola Mallon, said a public inquiry would “robustly scrutinise” the proposed mine at Greencastle. Battle lines have formed for the greatest prize in the Dalradian supergroup. On one side stands Orion Resource Partners, a US investment fund that owns Dalradian Resources, the Canadian parent company of Dalradian Gold. After spending £130m exploring the site it submitted an application for a mine and processing plant in 2017, later revising the application when it dropped plans to use cyanide. The company posits hundreds of jobs, a £750m lift to Northern Ireland’s economy – and clean practices to protect a designated area of outstanding natural beauty. “We’re a first world country with first world standards,” said McKenna. To extract an estimated 3.5m ounces of gold the mine would remove about 1,500 tonnes of rock per day and return about half of it, backfilling tunnels. “Compared internationally it’s a baby, engineers call it a boutique mine,” said McKenna. On the other side stands a group of residents who doubt the promised jobs and fear contamination of air, land and water. They staff the Greencastle People’s Office, a clutch of caravans near the proposed mine which serves as a command centre. “First they’ll blast with explosives and that’ll just be the start. It would wipe out this whole area, it would be toxic,” said John O’Donnell, who fishes trout in rivers. Martin Tracey, 46, a farmer, said damaging dust particles could reach schools and homes close to the site. “If that lodges in the lungs it doesn’t come out again. How much is a human life worth? It’s like someone coming into your house and attacking your family.” The protesters accuse Northern Ireland’s main political parties of ignoring them and question the independence of an inquiry that will sit before the planning appeals commission. The proposed mine has divided the community and sundered friendships, with each side accusing the other of surveillance and intimidation. Instead of gold, the mine may excavate a history of resistance to outsiders that dates back centuries, said Tracey. “We’re well prepared to fight these guys. The pedigree is there. I’m not going to lie down.”