History and heritage have long been important to Silverstone, the scene of drama and spectacle, triumph and despair. The former airfield hosted the first Formula One world championship grand prix 70 years ago, and F1 was coming home as 2020 promised a celebratory meeting before the pandemic cast its shadow across the globe. Planning a party has became a process of adaptation, compromise and contingency just to go racing again. With the British Grand Prix and the 70th Anniversary Grand Prix presenting a double-header of races at Silverstone beginning this weekend, the circuit and Formula One have succeeded, but it has been far from straightforward. When Silverstone put itself forward to host not one but two grands prix as part of the rescheduled season, the scale of the challenge was clear. It is easier to host 350,000 people over the weekend in a normal year than a mere several thousand under the spectre of Covid-19. It has been a task like no other, but one that has been vital to the survival of the circuit. The pandemic shutdown was a body blow to the business. “We need to have a good, strong well-attended F1 race if we are not to have a challenging year. Then it got taken out of our hands,” says Silverstone’s managing director, Stuart Pringle. “The country got shut down, our business had to close its gates. I had no idea things would become so bad and so difficult for Silverstone. On 23 March we shut our doors and we didn’t have anybody back on track until the beginning of June.” When F1 began restructuring the season, with seven teams based in the UK, unsurprisingly they looked to Silverstone. Pringle stepped up, offering to host 12 races if required. Silverstone accepted that fans could not attend, that the financial return would be nowhere near the usual volume and that the race weekends would be run differently but that it was still worth taking on. “Running these two races is not going to be as good for Silverstone as running one traditional GP,” says Pringle. “We are a venue that values its fans, that is about the experience and atmosphere. Financially it is nothing like as good either, but it is better than nothing and it contributes to starting to fill the enormous hole.” Planning a normal GP weekend typically takes 18 months. Coming out of lockdown Silverstone had eight weeks to put these two meetings together. Leading this task is Alex Lacey, the operations director, who has worked at the circuit for 23 years. In a normal year her team has a tried-and-tested method for putting together the infrastructure, facilities and staff. The new reality required a whole new methodology. “The instruction to everyone was start with a blank sheet of paper and build this up piece by piece,” she says. “It has been a challenge because it has been an ever-evolving situation in relation to the pandemic. The government guidelines have been changing, the requirements from the FIA and F1 have been ever-evolving. In a lot of instances we felt like we have gone round in circles, one step forward and two steps back. It has been tough, sometimes frustrating but worthwhile.” This weekend there will be no fans but instead an endless effort to implement “mitigation measures”. They include cleaning processes, testing regimes, the creation of working bubbles, new working practices and amendments to operational plans – arranging, for example, for 60 utilitarian cabins to take the place of the lavish F1 motor homes. Instead of 7,000 staff on site they must function with 3,000 – a figure that includes F1 teams, support races personnel, marshals, officials, broadcasters and media. Every feasible scenario has had to be considered, including those of the worst case. Northamptonshire’s director of public health, Lucy Wightman, has been involved in the process since it began. If there are positive test results or indeed a Covid-19 outbreak, Wightman and her team will step in to look at quarantine and isolation measures, contact tracing and, if necessary, take over. That is, of course, a picture the sport hopes to avoid but the minutiae has to be considered as well. “Normally we welcome fans but we have had to establish an operation plan which actually deters and keeps people away from the venue,” Lacey says. In the expectation that some will still be drawn by F1’s forbidden roar, an entirely new procedure has been developed. Only local residents will be allowed into the area around the circuit and roads will be closed, as will footpaths, bridleways and local campsites. Even the airspace is restricted, with drones banned. Superintendent Dennis Murray, Northamptonshire police’s event commander, described it as an “exclusion zone”. Yet the show will go on. Silverstone expects to ensure this weekend that the British Grand Prix keeps it place on the F1 calendar , having hosted a meeting in every season of the world championship since it began. History will continue to be written here, even against the odds. “I am excited,” says Pringle. “We do what we do because we get a thrill from putting on something that is complex, challenging and demanding. Running this year’s event has been all of those things.”