The Liverpool manager, Jürgen Klopp, has paid tribute to Dejan Lovren after the defender completed a £10.9m move to Zenit. The Croatia international has ended a six-year spell at Anfield after making just 15 appearances this season, falling to fourth-choice centre-back in the pecking order behind Virgil van Dijk, Joe Gomez and Joël Matip. Lovren has struggled with injuries over the last two years and was set to enter the final year of his contract. The club chose not to take up an option they had for a 12-month extension, allowing the 31-year-old to sign a three-year contract with the Russian club. “Another Liverpool legend who leaves the club, because he was absolutely a very, very important part of this team from the first day since I was in,” Klopp told the club’s official website. “When he was fit, he was very, very, very often in the team. A great player and a great person. Really good, in the air a machine, and I really liked working with him.” Lovren joined Liverpool from Southampton in August 2014 for a reported £20m fee and experienced highs and lows during his Anfield career. Perhaps his greatest moment in a Liverpool shirt came when his stoppage-time header sealed a dramatic Europa League quarter-final win over Borussia Dortmund in 2016. The centre-back’s lowest point came 18 months later, when he was hauled off after just 31 minutes of the 4-1 Premier League defeat against Spurs. “I think he will not like the Tottenham game when I took him off,” Klopp added. “But it is part of football – and he always came back. “He had so many good games. He scored one of the most important goals of our history in the 4-3 against Borussia Dortmund; a really wonderful moment to share. It will be interesting to follow Zenit now. I wish him the best of luck.” Mohamed Salah also paid tribute to his friend and teammate in a video message on the club website. “We’re really going to miss you a lot, especially me,” Salah said. “You’ve been an unbelievable player and a great friend for me. We’re going to miss you a lot. I miss you a lot, I love you so much. You’ve been fantastic on and off the field. Thank you for everything you did for the club, [and] everything you did for me. “I wish you all the best in the future and I wish you to have a great career as well, enjoying the new club with your family. Thank you very much and see you soon.”