Beyond being one of the most visually and technically stunning games, the story forces the player to face the consequences of choices made in the first game and refuses to shy away from the pain of those choices. The main character and the player come to the realisation that a cycle of perpetual violence is the result of vengeance and only forgiveness can help us heal. While focusing on issues like transgender rights and homophobia, PTSD, loyalty, and survival, the game also gives representation to a multitude of different women, with varying personalities, motives, and dimensions. A phenomenal follow-up to its iconic original. Erin McDonagh, 26, student and retail associate, Toronto Rather than taking a safe and ‘predictable’ route with the story, Naughty Dog has sought to do something special by taking huge risks on a big AAA game. The main character (Ellie) is a lesbian in a relationship with a bisexual woman (Dina). This is a tremendous accomplishment for LGBTQ representation in the largely straight cis male dominated gaming world. Couple this with the fact that the game also features a transgender character and was released during Pride month? Ground-breaking. Antonio Navarrete, 26, accountant, California I grew up loving the first game. I was 13 when I played it and I used to fall asleep to the main menu music because it was so peaceful. That’s how the whole game felt; even in a world of distraction and death, the deaths meant something. But the second game was just death, upon death, upon death. It was genuinely depressing to watch all the characters I loved – like Ellie, Joel and Tommy – lose everything, for it to be all in vain. In the end we’re just left with two broken, soulless girls fighting each other, and for what? It broke me. Elena Mekhtieva, 20, student, London The graphics, acting and gameplay are first class. But about 20 hours in, when the game reaches what seems to be a devastating and realistic climax, Naughty Dog loses the plot and, without warning, I found myself playing as the character I had just spent the last 20 hours trying to kill. All the emotion and tension drained away and the game became a boring slog through all the same sort of stuff I’d been doing for the previous twenty20 hours, just now playing as a character I neither cared about or particularly liked. From then on the story just became tedious and increasingly unbelievable. The Last of Us Part II could have been Game of the Year but the second half ruins it. Anonymous, 69 A perfect sequel and a masterpiece on its own. Despite Joel’s early death, this game is still about him and Ellie. Their relationship is as complex and heart-warming as ever. There is also new depth in the themes – vengeance, violence and hate are delivered in a powerful way – as well as in the character development. Playing as Abby added a lot to the experience, and I still can’t believe I went from hating Abby for killing Joel, to being happy about her surviving. An intriguing story, complex characters, rock solid combat mechanics, and gorgeous graphics, as well as an immersive world and atmospheric music – Part II is the pinnacle of storytelling in video games. Pauliina Kivistö, 28, student, Finland It was disappointing to see the game shift from the relationship between Joel and Ellie, to some bleak revenge story that doesn’t get fulfilled. The gameplay is boring, and the story is not at all immersive. I don’t think the creators of the game did our characters any justice. Ellie feels completely different and is not the same girl so many fell in love with in the first game. . It feels very unreal, and the emotions and moods don’t make much sense, neither does the narrative. I have never felt so let down. Noor Randhawa, 19, pre-med student, Montreal I was blown away several times in the first couple of hours; gripping, emotional and often shocking, but this time the execution is almost flawless. Gestures, expressions and body language are more detailed and convincing than any game I’ve played. Enemies are people, with names and friends who care about them. The killing is graphic and inescapable, and it’s never easy. There are consequences. One perfectly crafted detail that sums up this game is the little hiss as your stealth kill’s last breath escapes the wound in their neck. The Last of Us Part II will be impossible to forget. Nordin, 51, musician, Glasgow