New York City’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, took part in painting “Black Lives Matter” in front of Trump Tower in Manhattan on Thursday, a week after Donald Trump tweeted it would be “a symbol of hate”. De Blasio was flanked by his wife, Chirlane McCray, and the Rev Al Sharpton as he helped paint the racial justice rallying cry in giant yellow letters on Fifth Avenue in front of Trump Tower. Activists watching chanted: “Whose streets? Our streets!” “When we say ‘Black Lives Matter’, there is no more American statement, there is no more patriotic statement because there is no America without Black America,” De Blasio, a Democrat, said. “We are acknowledging the truth of ourselves as Americans by saying ‘Black Lives Matter’. We are righting a wrong.” The mayor announced the plan to paint “Black Lives Matter” in front of Trump Tower last month after earlier saying the slogan would be painted on streets at several locations around the city. The president responded via Twitter that the slogan would denigrate “this luxury Avenue” and “further antagonize New York’s Finest”, referring to the New York police department. De Blasio tweeted back that Black Lives Matter is “a movement to recognize and protect the lives of Black people”. Applause as the final pieces of tape outlining the letters is lifted off the street. pic.twitter.com/DhLlwNxpcw Rahima Torrence, 20, who was among the people slapping yellow paint on to Fifth Avenue, said that even though the art might be a symbol, “it’s the beginning of something more”. She said the location in front of Trump’s own skyscraper “shows that we matter and it shows to him that you can’t ignore us”. Washington DC was the first US city to get giant yellow “Black Lives Matter” street art when the mayor, Muriel Bowser, had it painted on the street leading to the White House. Bowser said the painting was intended to show solidarity with Americans outraged over the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. Trump lived in Trump Tower before he took office as president but has spent little time there since. He changed his official residence from New York to Florida last year. His business empire is still headquartered there.