Labour and the Liberal Democrats have called for an investigation into the conduct of the Conservative MP Rob Roberts, who has been accused of propositioning an intern. BBC Wales reported that Roberts, who was elected in the north Wales constituency of Delyn last year, sent text messages to the 21-year-old woman asking her to “fool around” with him. In the messages, as published by the BBC, Roberts told the intern: “Don’t ignore me when I’m making you feel better,” before suggesting she might want to “fool around with no strings, you might come and visit me in London.” He told her he “might be gay but I enjoy … fun times”. The woman had told the MP she was struggling with her mental health and was in an “awful state”, according to the messages. Roberts responded: “I was just thinking about fun times … Maybe if you thought of them too it might help you.” The woman told BBC Wales the messages made her feel “incredibly sick”. “I had had one of the worst days ever, and then I messaged him saying: ‘I’m crying, I’m not OK’, and his solution to that was to proposition me,” she said. The acting Lib Dem leader, Ed Davey, said: “These are incredibly serious allegations that cannot just be brushed under the carpet. Women must be able to work in politics and know that it is a safe place for them. “The Conservative party must immediately remove the party whip while they urgently investigate, or they risk sending the message that they view this behaviour as acceptable conduct for a sitting Conservative MP.” The Labour MP for Gower, Tonia Antoniazzi, said: “The allegations about Rob Roberts are very concerning and should be investigated. Worryingly, these are not the first serious accusations of this nature that have been made against him in his seven months as a Tory MP.” Roberts has previously admitted propositioning a different member of staff, who subsequently changed job, and admitted the request had been “inappropriate”. He was also the subject of controversy when police broke up a party at his family home during lockdown, although he insisted he was in London at the time. Antoniazzi said: “Last week the Tory party showed they could remove the whip from an MP within hours when motivated to do so. Given the nature of the evidence against Mr Roberts, it is unclear why he still holds the Tory whip.” A Conservative party spokesperson said: “Our party takes all allegations extremely seriously and has safeguarding and complaints processes in place to investigate complaints made to it under the party’s code of conduct.” Roberts has been approached for comment.