Gardeners are incredibly good at getting their point across, aren’t they? For weeks, the plight of garden centres was at the forefront of the country’s collective mind. Then, last week, a collective of botanical gardens popped up, pleading with people who had reserved tickets to turn up. They were already on their knees and couldn’t cope with the no-shows. I felt a bolt of shame on hearing this, as just the day before I had tried to break into a botanical garden with one of my brothers. (It sounds worse than it was: we didn’t take bolt cutters or anything.) The brother in question met our father, and the rest of us, when he was 28 (I was 30). Then, 18 months later, our dad died, which felt more than unjust to the pair of them; it had that sour taste of the universe cocking up. They deserved more time together. But, from a selfish point of view, you know when a family suffers a terrible loss and they get a cat, and they somehow get it into their heads that it is inhabited by the spirit of their lost loved one and get solace from it? It was like that, except real, which is to say not a cat. My dad was a trickster, always looking for hacks decades before the concept of hacks existed. He had membership to the V&A, because he had calculated – really carefully – that you could make your money back if you went to the members’ private views and ate enough canapés. I would say: “But you’re not even interested in Victorian fashion,” and he would go: “Stand closer to the swing doors or you’ll never get anywhere near the mini sausages,” only I wouldn’t be able to hear that because he would have his mouth full. I’m not saying it was my brother’s idea, by the way, to break into the botanical garden. Our dad’s insistent scofflawing was something he passed down to all of us. We have another brother who lives in Hong Kong; I sent him a box set of Treme for his birthday once and he replied: “You have gone against my express instructions never to buy anything with money that I can get off the internet for free.” There is one more salient thing about our dad. He was extravagantly ugly – walleye, huge hooter, ginger beard masking a weak chin and bits of pork scratching – and women loved him, all of them, every demographic, wherever he went. I used to think the phrase “a roving eye” was deliberately singular and referred to the phenomenon of men with squints being irresistible to women. Plainly, the sequence of events that led from here to his having a secret son is completely unguessable. My brother is handsome, unlike our father – symmetrical eyes, normal nose, clean ginger beard adorning a proper chin – and yet looks just like him. It is hard to explain how that works; it just does. And everybody likes him, wherever he goes: women, men, children, dogs. Anyway, it was my idea to get into the botanical garden round the back, only I have no sense of direction and we ended up bang in front of the ticket office, like a pair of burglars who had accidentally broken into a police station. Eventually we relented and joined the queue to the gardens – I was prepared to pay. I’m not Oliver Twist; I’m a middle-aged woman who likes hydrangeas and in regular conditions has a strong sense of civic duty. I was definitely not intending to share our original criminal intent with a queue of horticulturalists, but when I turned round my brother was surrounded by respectable couples going: “Why yes, there did used to be a tunnel that went right down to the beach; we used to sneak in when the kids were small. They’re your age now, of course.” “Wait,” said one woman. “I’m a member, I could sign you in. I could say I know you. I feel like I do know you!” Obviously, I had bought the tickets by now, but in the nanosecond it took him to reach the gates he had made two more close friends, who had between them diagnosed my dog’s skin condition. “It’s blue staffy alopecia,” my brother said, with authority. “That’s not a thing,” I replied. “The vet would know if that was a thing. I’ve just spent £300 having a skin biopsy.” “Look it up,” he retorted. (It is a thing: colour-dilution alopecia.) Inside, he talked A-roads for ages, hours, with a DLR driver from south-east London, then sea-swimming with a five-year-old. He is not even noticeably friendly, so I can never see it coming. I will just be ambling along, then perhaps get distracted by a bee, look back and see that he has pulled in such a crowd that he looks like a tour guide. There is no moral to this story. Well, maybe there are a couple. Always pay for your leisure activities, especially in straitened times. Apples never fall too far from trees. Except in the one small respect that our dad would never have been seen dead in a botanical garden, unless there was free stuff in there that you could eat. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnist