We have seen little in the media about problems of getting a refund following the curtailment of a holiday. We were eight days into an 18-day package in Argentina with Veloso Tours in March when we were notified that, following Foreign and Commonwealth Office advice, we would have to return to the UK. The travel company organised our return flights efficiently, but it is refusing to accept liability for 10 lost days. We are claiming £2,269. We have sought legal advice which confirms our entitlement to claim for breach of contract. Veloso has offered to try to resume our holiday at a later date, but without confirmation of the value of our entitlement or financial protection, this is unacceptable. We tried to make a claim on our travel insurance, but we had not taken out the optional curtailment cover applicable for holidays curtailed on FCO advice.DP, Calverton, Notts We arrived in Jordan on a £2,700 diving holiday four hours before the Jordan authorities declared lockdown in March. A letter under the door of our hotel room from the management informed us that all flights would be suspended when the border closed in two days. We flew home on a rescue flight two days later. Despite buying a package holiday with Crusader Travel that we thought would give us more protection, we have struggled to get a refund and my travel insurer says we are not covered.LB, London Hundreds of thousands of travellers had already started their holidays when the world began to lock down. Some were forced to find – and pay for – their own flights home before borders closed. More may find themselves in the same plight if future lockdowns are declared. Package travel and linked travel arrangements regulations (PTRs) are clear that it’s the tour operator – not travel insurers – who are liable to refund the remainder of a holiday if the booking can’t be honoured, as well as fund alternative transport home. The only opt-out for travel companies whose services are disrupted by the pandemic, is additional compensation for damages. This is not applicable under the PTRs if a holiday is curtailed due to extraordinary circumstances outside their control. The regulations are less helpful on calculating how much is owed, especially if the flights there and back were provided. “The refund calculation would be based upon a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration what was provided and what wasn’t,” says Chloe Williams of DAS Law. “It is generally difficult to be specific about how it would be calculated – as it would fall into what would be deemed ‘reasonable’ in such circumstances.” Bruce Lyons, director of Crusader Travel, says that LB was advised to claim off her insurer while the company awaited refunds from its suppliers and that, since the flights, two nights of accommodation and one day’s diving were provided, the firm will not receive the full cost back. “Whilst some of the communications may have been disjointed, due to these unprecedented times, we have acted in good faith and kept the customer informed along the way,” he says. “In this particular instance, we will be refunding the full amount for her holiday, although it was not a cancelled holiday, but curtailed, and this will have a financial impact on our business.” Veloso Travel did not respond to requests for a comment. DP’s other options would be to raise a dispute with his credit card issuer who is jointly liable for the cost of the booking under section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act, or to take his case to the small claims court. To be fair to travel companies, the regulations were not designed for a global catastrophe like Covid-19 and some smaller firms, which have not yet been refunded themselves by their suppliers, face ruin. Holidaymakers that do try to enforce their rights might therefore find that there is no money left to refund. Some firms have been castigated for deducting admin charges from refunds for cancelled flights. Meanwhile, other lesser-known companies have been helping themselves to huge sums in unexplained fees when customers requested a refund instead of a voucher. When KL of Malton, Yorkshire was informed by her travel agent, Citrus Holidays, that her package to Cambodia was cancelled, she was offered a rebooking next year. Instead, she requested a refund and was sent a “cancellation invoice” which credited £1,290 and withheld the remaining £2,408 as “cancellation charges”. She was told to claim the sum off her travel insurer who refused as Citrus was liable. Citrus paid the balance within hours of my contact but did not wish to comment. JS was informed by his package tour operator, Malta Paradise, that a 15% fee amounting to £92 would be deducted from his refund after his holiday was cancelled. He, too, was refunded the charge after I intervened. Malta Paradise was invited to comment. If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions