Summer If I had a kid, it would check a box: “Oh, she’s a mom, done. We know what she is. Done for the next 25 years.” Whenever people can put you in a box – this race, gender, this ethnicity, this sexual orientation – it makes everything less threatening to them. “Mom” is just one more of those boxes, one that is very safe. You know what they do, you know their roles, she’s safe over there in that box. Jess But could it not be, “Summer is a mom, an editor, a writer, a really good friend and a feral cat rescuer”? Summer I don’t see it like that. Even with my own friends that all become moms, I’m just like, “Oh, they’re on hold for now.” I just see them completely vanish. It’s just about what the kid needs, which makes sense. It’s not like I don’t understand why. But to me, having a kid curtails your personal exploration because you have to let that go and focus on the kid. Jess But don’t you think that the hard part of being a mother only lasts for a few years, but that after a while you can slowly come back to a sense of self? You think of motherhood as an obliteration of identity. Where does that come from? If I could do one whole first dress rehearsal life, explore all I want, and then come back, I would be a mom to five kids. But I don’t see how you’re supposed to make that huge of a sacrifice all in one life. Summer Okay, here’s another line that resonated from Heti: “There is a kind of sadness in not wanting the things that give so many other people their life’s meaning.” Jess I love that line. Everyone says if you have a kid it gives your life purpose, because this love supersedes everything you’ve ever felt before. So if I decide not to be a mother, what does it leave me with? … And I’m afraid that I won’t find it anywhere. If you’re like me and you’re just a random person with a regular job, not an artist, is this enough? Summer My answer, of course, is yes. Of course it’s enough! Jess I want another drink. Summer (To waiter) Can we order another, please? Jess Can we talk about relationships for a minute? Summer They’re so hard. I think about how hard it must be to be exhausted and then have to be around the same guy or girl every night, and then also have to put your best foot forward with that person for the sake of your child. It just seems like asking so so much. Jess I absolutely, 100% do believe that emotional labor is still disproportionately placed on women’s shoulders. I’m usually the one who remembers to book the veterinarian, or renew passports, or handle the meal planning – even if your partner cooks! That, or your partner finally does the groceries, but then he comes back with five tomatoes and a celery and that’s it. And then you have nothing to eat for a week! And to add a kid on top of it? Not to mention I have to financially take care of my mother. You know, the sandwich generation: women who care for their parents and their kids. No thanks. I would feel so smothered. Summer Yeah and by nature, your kid makes the woman more responsible because … Jess Because… ? Summer Because they crawl out of your vagina! When one of my friends had a baby, her husband told me, “It was the weirdest thing. The baby came out and crawled up to her tit.” It’s animal instinct, it’s nature. The baby’s going to crawl to your tit forever. Jess It should be natural but I don’t trust myself to have enough love and patience to not feel resentful and angry. But this conclusion doesn’t make me feel good, it makes me feel deficient. Summer It’s so much to ask of anybody: that you hold onto your own identity, you cultivate that, and then also give literally all of yourself to the child. I don’t think it’s weird that we’re sitting here being like, “Are we missing something?” Jess Can I get a glass of rose? Summer Can I have another Old Fashioned? Summer Sometimes it blows my mind that anybody pulls this off in New York. Jess I don’t understand how they do it. But, see, then it makes me think, “Hang on. If I move back to France tomorrow, would I be more likely to have a child?” Because I do think childbirth and also pregnancy, defines what it means to be human. Does that make you sad that you’re going to miss an elemental … Summer A universal experience. Jess Yeah. When I picture childbirth, I think of it as something so big and overwhelming. It’s a bit like the biggest LSD trip, you’ll never be the same, there’s a before and an after. Summer But why isn’t that the opposite? Why isn’t that in society people are not like: Have you done LSD in the desert? Have you done acid in the forest? Why aren’t these the pillars that woman swing between? Instead, it’s just this overarching, “Have you become a mom?” Jess Because I don’t think you can imagine something as fucked up and amazing and horrible as birth. Summer Yeah, for sure. Jess Literally, it’s like alien shit, you know? Summer One of my friends told me, “I was in so much pain that I just threw up.” I guess the point I’m trying to make I hate that the concept has been so sanitized. I would like it more if in society it was accepted as, “Yeah, this woman’s about to go on this crazy journey, and we need to support her, and be realistic about how gnarly it is. Jess Yeah, and then you only get eight weeks to recover… Summer I have a friend who told me she only wants to tell me how she feels about having her second child … which is less than excited… because everyone just expects her to be so happy. I have another who said she realized she had a child with her husband because she didn’t just want to be a stepmom to his other children, like a competition, sort of. But if you met this friend, she’d just be like… Jess She’d be like, “I love my child. That’s the best thing that ever happened to me?” Summer She says that all the time. Jess Every time you ask the parent, they say their sacrifices are offset by the amount of love they feel towards the child, right? So for you, you’re saying you’re not willing to sacrifice your life to have a child, because … Summer Because I don’t believe them. Jess I keep on telling my therapist that I don’t want to make a passive choice. I don’t want to think maybe but maybe not, and then suddenly it’s too late, and I’m 42. I want to arrive at a place where I’m like you. You don’t want a child, and you feel completely comfortable and secure in that decision. You know when people judge you in silence: “Oh, she’s a spinster. She’s probably going to only have cats. That’s a bit sad”? Maybe I’ve internalized some of it. Maybe I’m scared of people thinking that about me. Or maybe I do think it would be a shame not to have a child. Or maybe I’ve digested the patriarchy. I just don’t know which one it is. Summer Yeah, my certainty about not having kids has never wavered. I know that that nurturing bone is in me, but just not for a child. You could show me any stray cat and I’ll just be like, “I need to take care of you. I need to find you a home.” Jess When I was 25 I was like, “I’m not even going to start thinking about a child when I’m 28.” At 28, “I will never have a child before I’m 32.” At 32, “No. I don’t really want to think about it until I’m 35.” But it’s only since four month ago that I’ve been like, “Oh my God, what do I do with my life?” Summer You know my plan B is to move to Hawaii and be a pre-school teacher. I like being around young people and hearing how their brains work. Jess So, you do have the patience to deal with little kids? Summer Yeah. As long as I can send them home at 3pm. Jess I don’t. I’d be like, “Please give me teenagers. I’ll do teenagers”. They’re little shits but at least they’re interesting. I would be a really good teenage mom. But under seven, no thanks. I do not think it’s cute that I need to read you dinosaur stories. Jess Do you want another drink?