If the European Tour is seeking an extraordinary tale to mark its return to a full format, the hope must be that Michael Campbell sustains early promise at the British Masters. It has been perfectly easy to forget that Campbell, now 51, saw off Tiger Woods to win the US Open of 2005. A decade earlier, the New Zealander held the 54-hole lead at the Open. More recent tales of Campbell’s demise have not been at all exaggerated, including by the man himself. He has not made a European Tour cut in seven years, with a long-term injury to his left foot triggering fears he might have to give up the sport he was once so prominent in. Campbell lies outside the world’s top 2,000 ranked golfers. At Close House on Wednesday a sterile, spectator-free environment made no difference whatsoever to Campbell. A three-under-par 68 planted his name on the leaderboards once again. Onlookers would be forgiven a double take in checking this was the same M Campbell who once jousted with – and defeated – the best. “I didn’t expect that,” Campbell admitted. “I started practising two weeks ago, hit a few balls and played a bit with some mates who I’m staying with down in Marbella. I hadn’t played in eight months, since October last year. So I’m really surprised to shoot three under. “My expectations were pretty much none, I wanted to get out here and enjoy myself. It’s weird with no crowds, no clapping. I think I made six birdies today and nothing there. It’s kind of weird, it’s like playing with your mates – more intense, but it’s the first time for me not playing in front of a crowd. It’s very different indeed. “I’ve had a good career the last 20 years, winning 15 times around the world, that’s good enough for me. If I have another one this week it’s a bonus.” Campbell estimated it had been at least a decade since he carded a sub-70 round on the European Tour. The appearance of his 21-year-old son, Thomas, as Campbell’s caddie seemed to act as an inspiration. “It’s like having 15 clubs in the bag,” Campbell said. “The thing is, unfortunately when I had my success from 1999 to 2005 he was so young, he can’t remember. For me it’s having fun with my boy, bonding with him. He gave playing up a long time ago, he was a good player but didn’t like the attention.” Campbell’s hope is to play senior golf in the United States but, strangely for a major winner, he has found opportunities incredibly hard to come by. He stopped short of criticising the Champions Tour’s qualification format but this appears an unsatisfactory scenario. “I asked for 15 invites last year and got one,” he said. Eddie Pepperell carded an opening 67. Lee Westwood, the tournament host, is one under par. A more encouraging number for the tournament organisers relates to Covid-19 tests: no reported positives so far. After AIG extended its sponsorship of the event until 2025, the R&A has announced the rebranding of the Women’s British Open to the AIG Women’s Open. The event will be held at Royal Troon next month.