With the sour tang of dry ice, pounding dance music and more strobe lights in one room than are normally on the main stage of Glastonbury it may finally be an opportunity for some hedonism. With strict social distancing and hand sanitisation, of course. “It’s not for the faint-hearted,” designer Adam Smith said of the sensory Chemical Brothers experience he has created with his studio partner Marcus Lyall. “We were trying to bring some of the visceral feeling you get from a live show into a different setting.” The duo have created the explosive final room of an exhibition exploring the history of electronic music, opening at the Design Museum in London on Friday. The show was due to open in the spring but lockdown meant exhibits have been sitting in boxes for five months, waiting to be unleashed on the British public. To begin with, 60 people an hour will be allowed in after booking time slots. A one-way system has been introduced, there is enhanced cleaning and face coverings are compulsory. Signs on the floor urge visitors to “keep the dist-dance”. Some reopened museums have abandoned audio guides but Design Museum curators said visitors need headphones to get the full experience. Numbers will also be restricted for the dramatic final room, which features visuals for the Chemical Brothers’ track Got to Keep On. The original plan was for it to be a communal experience but the hope is that visitors may still get into the club spirit. “We want to transport people somewhere else,” said Lyall. “That feels very important at the moment.” Museums in the UK are gradually reopening, with many taking a deliberately cautious approach. The V&A, for example, is initially only opening Thursday to Sunday, 11am-3pm, from 6 August. In contrast, the Design Museum is opening seven days a week, 10am-9pm, and feels it has to. It gets about 2% of its income from the public purse and its director, Tim Marlow, said the strategy was clear: “We need to maximise the slots available and try to mobilise the audience to come here.” Marlow said it might be the first live experience many visitors have had in months. “Of course there is trepidation because we see what has happened in Spain and we want to do things carefully. But I think there is something quite trance-like and hedonistic about going through the exhibition. There is something celebratory about it and we need that.” The show explores in detail the story of electronic music and its wild cast of characters including Kraftwerk, Jeff Mills, Frankie Knuckles, Aphex Twin and Jean-Michel Jarre, who has loaned objects from his studio. It tells stories from cities such as Detroit, where techno was born; New York, the birthplace of the modern nightclub; and Chicago, where the first house music came from. It is an adaptation of an exhibition that ran at the Philharmonie de Paris and the challenge in London, said co-curator Maria McLintock, was to give it more of a design and British focus. That has meant the addition of Daphne Oram, not a household name but “probably the most important woman in the history of electronic music”, said McLintock. She set up the BBC’s Radiophonic Workshop in 1958 and was a pioneer. “She was such an intelligent technologist who just decided: ‘I think we can do more with machines.’” One section tells the story of the UK’s second summer of love in the late 1980s when raves were everywhere and newspapers warned of the perils of ecstasy. The Mirror’s shock issue had on its front page: “East 17 pop star Brian Harvey caused outrage yesterday by claiming the drug ‘makes you a better person’. It can also make you a dead person. The Mirror investigates.” Nearby are a collection of flyers and membership cards for acid house club nights in cities and across the countryside. They include one proclaiming “The return of the happy happy happy happy happy happy Shoom!!! Club’ at the Fitness Centre, Crown House, 56-58 Southwark Street, SE1.” It has Chicago house and Frankfurt beat spun by Colin Faver and Danny Rampling. “All night bar. NO RUFFIANS.” McLintock hopes the show will get a wide audience and not only ex-clubbers. “So many emerging labels and younger artists are struggling right now, clubs might not survive, so we hope people will come and remember how important electronic dance culture is and will want to support it after seeing the show. “People have been at home and locked down so I think this will feel like such a contrast to the monotony of pandemic life.” Electronic: From Kraftwerk to the Chemical Brothers is at the Design Museum, W8, 31 July to 14 February