Clive Tyldesley says he has been left “upset, annoyed and baffled” after being replaced in his role as ITV’s lead commentator after 22 years. In an emotional video message posted on social media, Tyldesley insisted he did not know why the decision was taken and claimed he had been sacked from the role. Tyldesley has accepted a role as ITV’s No 2 commentator, with Sam Matterface taking over as lead commentator on England matches for the upcoming World Cup qualifiers. “I’m being replaced as ITV’s senior football commentator,” Tyldesley said. “To be clear, this is ITV’s decision – not mine – and I am upset, annoyed, baffled. “I’ve had broadcasters asking if I have any health issues, no I have got no health issues. I gather one or two sites are reporting that I have been sacked. Well I guess I have … from one job, but I’ve done nothing wrong. “I’m the same person I’ve always been. Like me or hate you’re entitled to do either. Like everyone else in football I’m a matter of opinion, I totally get that. I totally respect ITV’s right to change their opinion of me. “But, let me make it quite clear – I have not stepped down, I have been moved aside. I’m just going to miss the England games so much, even more than I’ll miss the Champions League games and that is all.” ITV announced on Tuesday morning that Tyldesley would no longer be the main voice of their football coverage from the start of next season. Joining ITV from the BBC in 1996, Tyldesley became their top commentator after the 1998 World Cup. He covered every international tournament since and noted that he had been due to commentate on the European Championship final last weekend, until it was postponed because of the Covid-19 pandemic. The voice behind any number of great international moments, Tyldesley was also synonymous with the Champions League. Thanks to ITV’s long-standing relationship with the competition he provided the words to go with Liverpool’s miracle in Istanbul, Didier Drogba’s header for Chelsea against Bayern Munich and, most famously, “that night in Barcelona” when Manchester United won the Champions League to complete the treble in 1999. The Sky Sports presenter Jeff Stelling tweeted: “Clive does more prep and stats than me – and his are useful! Baffling as you are as good as ever! Oh I forgot Clive you are 65. Ageism alive and well in UK broadcasting.” Niall Sloane, the director of ITV Sport, meanwhile, paid brief tribute to Tyldesley in a statement: “On behalf of ITV Sport, I would like to thank Clive for his superb work leading our commentary on some of the biggest occasions in world football throughout his outstanding career with us. “We are very glad he will continue with us and look forward to working with him on many more occasions in the future.” Matterface, 42, is already a regular commentator for ITV and will take over from Tyledesley in time for England’s proposed autumn internationals. He will not be obliged to give up his role at TalkSport, where he is also chief commentator. The BBC’s Gary Lineker paid tribute to Tyldesley on Twitter, saying: “One of the very best commentators our game has had. Seriously tough act to follow. Good luck, Clive.”