Amber Heard shouted insults at Johnny Depp, calling him “washed up” and “fat”, and was physically aggressive towards him during a Christmas visit to the Caribbean, it has been alleged at the high court in London. The claims were made by Tara Roberts, the estate manager at Depp’s home in the Bahamas, who was giving evidence at his libel trial via a video link from the actor’s private island. Roberts said she had seen Heard “screaming and berating” Depp as he shouted at her to “go away”, and claimed to have seen a “red, swelling gash” on his nose. Depp had told her Heard had thrown a can of lacquer-thinner at his face, said Roberts. Depp is suing the Sun’s publisher, News Group Newspapers (NGN), and its executive editor, Dan Wootton, over an article that called him a “wife beater” and referred to “overwhelming evidence” that he had attacked Heard. Roberts, who has worked for Depp since December 2008, described him as an “unusually kind man” and said she had never seen him be “violent or aggressive” with Heard, or anyone else. “I observed in December 2015 to my colleagues that Amber was a ‘thrower’, someone who threw projectiles,” she said in her witness statement to the court. She alleged she saw Heard “lunge violently at Johnny, pull his hair, and commit other aggressive physical acts against him”. The alleged events took place in December 2019, when Depp and Heard were staying on the island with his two children and a friend. Referring to an apparent argument, Roberts said: “While I could not hear what caused the fight, Amber repeatedly berated him with increasing ferocity. “She was insulting him, calling him names, and in the middle of this onslaught I heard her say specifically ‘your career is over’, ‘no one is going to hire you’, ‘you’re washed up’, ‘fat’, ‘you will die a lonely man’, and also screaming things that were incomprehensible.” Roberts was also shown video evidence, which had previously been played to the court, that shows Depp swearing and kicking a cabinet. Sasha Wass QC, representing the Sun said: “Would you agree it shows a different side of his character from the one you speak of in your witness statement?” To which Roberts replied: “No”.