Lost on the Frontline contributors Tue 7 Jul 2020 11.00 BST Lost on the frontline is a collaboration between the Guardian and Kaiser Health News that aims to document the lives of healthcare workers in the US who die from Covid-19, and to understand why so many are falling victim to the pandemic. Each week, we’re documenting new cases of healthcare workers who have died on the frontlines of the coronavirus pandemic. Here are their stories: Bernard Atta, 61Ghana-born nurse made ‘a deep impact across the planet’ Occupation: Registered nursePlace of work: Correctional reception center in Orient, OhioDate of death: 17 May 2020 Last December, when Kojoh Atta visited his father’s home town in Offinso, Ghana, he arrived bearing gifts. His father, Bernard Atta, worked overtime at an Ohio prison so he could afford to send drums of clothing across the Atlantic. Inside were sneakers, sandals and Ralph Lauren polos for cousins. “Always with stripes,” Kojoh said, “so the boys knew they were special.” His father’s generosity and his relatives’ regard for him made Kojoh realize “there are countless unsung heroes making a deep impact across the planet”. As Covid-19 ravaged Ohio, Kojoh urged his father to leave work, worried about inadequate protective gear. Bernard refused, saying it was his duty to stay. (A prison spokesperson said that personal protective gear “… was, and continues to be available to staff.”) After Bernard tested positive for Covid-19, he remained home, fearing the hospital bills. On 17 May, Kojoh awoke to a flurry of WhatsApp messages. His father died, leaving behind his wife, three other children and grandchildren. – Eli Cahan Nestor Bautista, 62Quiet nursing aide was a diligent worker Occupation: Nursing aidePlace of work: Clara Maass medical center in Belleville, New JerseyDate of death: 15 April 2020 Nestor Bautista came from a family of quiet men. He was quiet, too, said Cecilia Bautista, one of his four siblings. Cecilia and Nestor came to the US from the Philippines in the 1980s. Cecilia became a nurse. Nestor, who had studied engineering, became a nursing aide. Nestor lived with Cecilia’s family and worked at the same hospital for 24 years, she said. Nestor, who had diabetes, cooked for himself and “preferred to do things alone”. He picked up extra shifts on his days off. Cecilia said: “He was just work, work, work.” Eight days after he was hospitalized with Covid-19, Cecilia spoke to Nestor by phone. He said he felt OK. The next day, he was transferred to intensive care, where he died of cardiac arrest. One of Nestor’s colleagues died the same day of Covid-19 complications. A hospital spokesperson declined to comment on their deaths, citing privacy. Cecilia has placed an urn containing Nestor’s ashes in his bedroom. She plans to take his remains to the Philippines, and place them next to an older brother’s. Nestor had few friends, she said, but this way, “if someone will visit my other brother, someone will visit Nestor as well.” – Melissa Bailey John Robert Oglesbee, 80A doctor and a poet, he ‘wasn’t done’ Occupation: Family physicianPlace of work: CCOM Medical Group cardiology clinic in Muskogee, OklahomaDate of death: 26 April 2020 John Oglesbee accepted payment in the form of a bushel of corn or meat from the family farm. No matter, he always put his patients first. “He loved small-town Oklahoma,” said grandson Adam Oglesbee. For decades, Oglesbee ran a private practice outside of Ada, in south-central Oklahoma. In recent years, he practiced at a cardiology clinic in his hometown. An avid reader on every subject, he always returned to the Bible. He was a churchgoer and deacon for many years, often guest-preaching. He also wrote poems, sometimes on napkins or the back of an envelope; he stuffed them in books in his vast home library. He saw patients until he became sick with Covid-19. On 19 March, he went into home isolation. He tested positive days later. His employer did not respond to multiple requests for comment. “He told me when I last saw him at his home through the window, ‘Dammit, I wasn’t done,’” Adam said. – Eriech Tapia, University of Oklahoma Monemise Romelus, 61Nursing aide’s four children followed her into healthcare field Occupation: Nursing aidePlace of work: New Jersey Veterans memorial home at Menlo Park in Edison, New JerseyDate of death: 11 May 2020 Each day for lunch, Monemise Romelus and her fellow Haitian co-workers heated up bowl after bowl of traditional cuisine: fried turkey, rice and peas, griot – pork shoulder marinated in citrus. They shared with everyone, said Shirley Lewis, her union president. Romelus was quiet but had many friends, Lewis said. She beamed when talking about her four children, all of whom work in healthcare. When the pandemic began, workers were initially told not to wear masks to avoid scaring patients, said Paul da Costa, a lawyer representing Romelus’s family. Romelus, who worked on a floor where patients were treated for Covid-19, did not have adequate protective gear, contracted Covid-19 and died, Da Costa said. More than 100 workers at the veterans home have tested positive for Covid-19; 62 residents have died, state data shows. A facility spokesperson declined to comment on Romelus’s death but said workers “are directed to wear PPE in accordance with CDC guidelines”. Management never acknowledged Romelus’s death, Lewis said. When the police killing of George Floyd ignited protests nationwide, staffers and supervisors gathered for eight minutes of silence. Lewis said she insisted they hold a moment of silence for Romelus, too. – Melissa Bailey Mario Araujo, 49Lighthearted and warm, he was Chicago’s first firefighter to die of Covid-19 Occupations: Firefighter and emergency medical technicianPlace of work: Chicago fire department truck company 25Date of death: 7 April 2020 Despite fighting fires and treating the injured for nearly 20 years, Mario Araujo remained goofy and light. He had an uncanny ability to pry open roofs and pop open doors, said Richard Whitehead, a fellow firefighter. But he also loved playing virtual slot machines and cracking jokes. “He was always kidding around. You could never take him serious,” Whitehead said. “But when it came time to go to work, he was just always ready to go.” He was the first Chicago firefighter to die from the coronavirus, the department confirmed. Chicago’s mayor, Lori Lightfoot, honored him on Twitter: “Mario selflessly dedicated his life to protecting our communities.” Araujo approached his relationship with his girlfriend, Rosa Castillo, 48, and her son, Leo, seven, with the same care. He was attentive, picking up Leo from school and giving him a tablet computer so they could communicate when he traveled. “He taught my son a lot, even if they didn’t share the same blood,” Castillo said. Castillo told Leo that God took Araujo to ease his suffering. She said her child believes he is an angel: “He hugs me and says, ‘Mom, I can feel Daddy with us.’” – Carmen Heredia Rodriguez Roger Liddell, 64Hospital supply manager lacked protective gear for himself Occupation: Supply managerPlace of work: McLaren Flint hospital in Flint, MichiganDate of death: 10 April 2020 Roger Liddell was a family man. One of nine siblings, he frequently visited his extended family back in Mississippi. He was involved in his church and loved cooking, westerns and the Chicago Bears. Liddell joined the Marine Corps after high school and eventually settled in Michigan, working at McLaren Flint for almost 20 years. His job took him all over the hospital – including to floors with Covid-positive patients – and as the number of cases climbed, he grew worried. Liddell requested protective gear from his hospital, according to his union, but was denied since he didn’t treat patients. In an email, a hospital spokesperson said McLaren Flint had followed government guidelines to ensure employees received sufficient protective gear. On 30 March, Liddell posted to Facebook: he had worked the previous week in the ICU and critical care unit, without PPE. “Pray for me God is still in control,” he wrote. Liddell tested positive for Covid-19. He was put on a ventilator but died, leaving behind his wife, four children, two stepchildren and 11 grandchildren. – Shefali Luthra Quen Agbor Ako, 53 A nurse from Cameroon who liked to sing and dance Occupation: Registered nurse Place of work: FutureCare Old Court nursing home, Randallstown, MarylandDate of death: 10 April 2020 Quen Ako was known to wear stylish, bright clothing and break out in song and dance. Posting to an online memorial, friends, family and co-workers described a lively, compassionate woman. “My memory of you is that of a warm person, one that will break out in songs of joy,” one friend wrote. Another described laughing at an inside joke with Ako just weeks before her death. “Did I for one second think that I would never hear that resounding, hearty laughter again?” Born in Cameroon, Ako earned her nursing degree in the US and worked for a chain of nursing homes and rehabilitation centers that saw huge Covid-19 outbreaks. According to officials from Maryland’s department of health, the network of nine facilities confirmed 1,422 cases of Covid-19 and 181 deaths among patients and staff as of 26 June. Ako’s family declined to be interviewed for this article, but told a local news station that she died of Covid-19. The Guardian independently verified Ako’s cause of death with one of her former co-workers. Ako’s employer did not respond to requests for comment about her death. – Anna Jean Kaiser Susan Sisgundo, 50Friends say neonatal nurse was a baby whisperer Occupation: Neonatal ICU nursePlace of work: Bellevue hospital in New York CityDate of death: 8 April 2020 With eight siblings, Susan Sisgundo had to fight to stand out, whether it was academics or a new dance move, friend Lowelia Avellana said. The two met in grade school in the Philippines. Avellana moved to New York; Sisgundo followed. They studied nursing and lived in Queens, 10 minutes apart. Sisgundo worked in one of the country’s busiest hospitals, which in mid-March filled with Covid-19 patients. A hospital spokesperson said its employees had appropriate personal protective equipment. In the neonatal intensive care unit, Sisgundo was a baby whisperer, adept at coaxing the fussiest newborn to sleep. “She wanted to have babies,” Avellana said, “but she wasn’t lucky to find a good guy.” In March, Sisgundo started feeling sick. When she struggled to breathe, she was taken to Queens hospital, where Avellana works. The hospital was overwhelmed, and Avellana couldn’t reach her friend before she was intubated. She visited her every day. The friends had planned to travel to the Philippines later this year to celebrate their birthdays. Now Avellana is going to bring her best friend home. – Kathleen Horan