Anish KapoorMind-bending modern sculptures, including the sublime Sky Mirror, set in the elegant park of one of Britain’s most beautiful Palladian houses.• Houghton Hall, King’s Lynn, Norfolk, from 12 July until 1 November. Deutsche Börse Photography Foundation prizeMark Neville’s surreal portraits of Brittany folk stand out for their humour and humanity in a shortlist that also includes Mohamed Bourouissa, Clare Strand and Anton Kusters.• Photographers Gallery, London, 14 July until 20 September. Radical FiguresThe Gauguin-like art of Michael Armitage and the Picabia poses of Ryan Mosley’s fantastic creatures stand out in a manifesto for painting that also showcases Cecily Brown, Dana Schutz and more.• Whitechapel Gallery, London, from 14 July until 30 August. MasculinitiesMen are taken apart and perhaps even put back together again in photographs by Catherine Opie, Laurie Anderson, Sunil Gupta and Isaac Julien.• Barbican, London, from 13 July until 23 August. Grayson Perry: The Pre-Therapy YearsYay, the early pots of Grayson Perry are now back on view until the new year.• Holburne Museum, Bath, until 3 January. Capturing in living colour the daily lives of black families in segregated America, photographer Gordon Parks’s work shocks all over again today, wrote the Observer critic Laura Cumming in her four-star review of an exhibition of his work at Alison Jacques Gallery in London. Gordon Parks: Part One runs until 1 August. Observer critics have picked the best summer culture Boris Johnson has pledged £1.5bn lifeline to keep UK’s arts sector afloat … … meanwhile, the Guardian’s Stuart Jeffries asks if his rescue package matches up to Roosevelt’s New Deal … … now the arts sector must avoid treading water The National Gallery has reopened – and the Guardian’s Adrian Searle donned his face mask for a visit How Britain’s galleries have Covid-proofed themselves How museums are documenting Black Lives Matter protests Black architects are being excluded from public-sector projects Jameelah Nuriddin and Erin Hammond explored the complicated relationship between African Americans and the US flag Photographer Joanna Vestey’s Custodians for Covid documented caretakers of 20 closed London theatres … … and Ciaran McCrickard captured the eerie beauty of Britain’s abandoned playgrounds Laura Kern has explored toxic masculinity in urban architecture Far Side creator Gary publishes first new cartoons in 25 years A skywriting project is targeting US culture of incarceration The Notre Dame spire in Paris must be rebuilt exactly as it was, says chief architect An art project has been launched in honour of Grenfell artist Khadija Saye Salisbury Cathedral will reopen to tourists with an art extravaganza I ❤️ NY logo designer Milton Glaser has died Readers shared their lockdown art … … and children share their drawings of what’s special to them The great British art quiz visited the Government Art Collection, Leamington, Cornwall and Edinburgh (twice) The Adoration of the Kings, 1564, by Pieter Bruegel the ElderThe powerful don’t get it easy in the undeceived art of Bruegel. The three kings who have come to see baby Jesus in this bleak interpretation of a usually warm subject are empty fools, protected by heavily armed soldiers whose pikes and halberds poke incongruously into the sky. A witness in thick spectacles implies no one here can see the redemptive truth of Christ’s coming. But the kings have brought luxurious gifts whose gold is that of vulgar earthly wealth rather than heavenly riches. Religious conflict and the military might of the Spanish Empire were torturing Bruegel’s Southern Netherlands (now Belgium) when this was painted. The hope of the Nativity seemed like a sick joke. • National Gallery, London. To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here.