Nicola Barker is the author of 13 novels, including the Booker-shortlisted Darkmans (2007) and the Goldsmiths prize-winning H(a)ppy (2018). Her work is resolutely avant garde, typically finding revelatory significance in everyday situations, whether on a golf course or in a British seaside town. She’s seeing out lockdown in Faversham, where she lives with two elderly French bulldogs, Moses and Sarge. Barker’s most recent novel, I Am Sovereign, has just been published in paperback. I Am Sovereign is a novel that is intimately concerned with the difficulty of writing novels. Did writing H(a)ppy somewhat exhaust the form for you?This book exists to answer that question. It’s a way of explaining to myself why it’s impossible for me now to write novels. After I wrote H(a)ppy, I effectively felt as if I’d destroyed the novel for myself. So it’s what do you do then? How do you come back from that kind of destruction? Parts of I Am Sovereign put me in mind of David Foster Wallace’s The Pale King.I’ve not read that book, but I’m very interested in him as a person. I know that he had a sort of emotional crisis and I feel as if that same sort of thing happened to me. There was a moment where everything was so chaotic but something stops you destroying yourself. Some magic or some coincidence or some tiny bit of energy. If writing is a sort of refuge for you and then you realise that you can’t live inside the refuge, or you’re going to destroy yourself, you have to emerge and that emergence can be catastrophic. That’s what happened to me after writing H(a)ppy, you hatch into the world and fiction became less necessary. It was a terrible loss because fiction was my home, it brought great comfort and deep joy, and you have to wonder afterwards what you can do now you don’t have that refuge any more. I immediately felt that I understood where Wallace was, and it’s a terrible place to be, but when you come out of it, it’s as if everything has been blasted and you just stagger into the world, and it’s empty but there’s a calm to that emptiness and the question is then whether that emptiness can be used profitably. At the end of I Am Sovereign that is what I’m trying to work out. It's just so easy to love everything about Ali Smith. The whole package Will you write another novel?I was already writing a long book before the last three. An epic Victorian novel which is now three different books that I’m writing at the same time. It sounds very grand – I’ve spent the past year thinking about them. But I’m not really thinking about them, I’m just bumping into furniture. But that’s when inspiration comes. The first book is almost halfway done and the other two are started. But who knows if they’ll ever be finished. There’s a slow energy at the beginning of a book and then it just gets faster and faster and you have to wait for that moment to happen. If the moment doesn’t come then the project dies. What is the impulse that informs your work?It emerges from a very private place, it emerges from certainty but from a place of utter innocence. If I have a philosophy of life, it would be ferocious innocence. The two things almost contradict each other, but that’s how I approach the work and how I approach everything, really. How have you spent lockdown?I’m always too busy, I’m always having this little interior argument about how there’s too little time to do the work I need to do. The first part of lockdown, all of my busyness was taken away, but of course I just developed new forms of busyness. There were 10 days where I established a series of ladders to gain access to my roof and sat there to watch sunrises and sunsets and then the busyness crept in. New forms of mania presented themselves and it was not like I was not working, but there just wasn’t any time any more. What was the last great book you read?I have really been enjoying Audible. I never read fiction when I’m writing usually, but I have been listening to The End of the Affair [by Graham Greene] read by Colin Firth, exquisitely. It blew my mind. I loved it. Who is the living author you most admire?I have to say Ali Smith, because I love her joyfulness, her energy, her integrity. It’s just so easy to love everything about her. The whole package. Everyone pretends that she’s difficult to read but that’s bullshit. She’s easy to read. How do you organise your books?Since I split up with my very long-term partner, our stuff is divided but because we’re still such good friends, he’ll bring a book round if I need it. He does literally take every book I love and squirrels them away, but I do know I’ll get them back. The house we were living in before we split up has lots of the things I was reading at the time, whereas here I’m surrounded by books I was reading 15 years ago. I keep bumping into them like old friends. What book would you give to a 10-year-old?One of my favourite books is The Little Prince, so I’d give that to them. I don’t have kids so I don’t really know, but I love the work of Shaun Tan. He’s just written a book called Cicada which is just so incredible, so beautiful. They’re soulful. I do think for young people there’s an absence of soulfulness in the world and we need to give them access to that. • I Am Sovereign by Nicola Barker is published by Cornerstone (£9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15