Care home staff will be excluded from the government’s post-Brexit fast-track visa system for health workers, the government has confirmed, saying it hopes Britons will instead fill any jobs shortfall in the sector. Details of the immigration system, which comes into force in the new year, outlined in a 130-page Home Office paper, shows there will be, in effect, no route into the UK for the vast majority of overseas care staff despite repeated warnings from the sector of shortages and concerns about the impact of coronavirus. Home Office officials expect an increase in UK nationals joining the care sector amid rising unemployment in other sectors, caused by the Covid-19 pandemic. Amid widespread appreciation and praise for health and care staff during the pandemic, the government has come up with fast-track entry under a “health and care visa” with reduced application fees and dedicated support to assist those applying and their families. But despite the name, the list of professions that can use the visa, in an appendix of the document, does not cover care staff. Labour condemned the decision. Nick Thomas-Symonds, the shadow home secretary, told the Commons he was “disappointed if, unfortunately, not shocked at the evidence, yet again, that this government does not consider carers to be skilled workers”. Speaking at Home Office questions, he asked the home secretary, Priti Patel: “What does the government have against care workers?” Kevin Foster, the junior Home Office minister who answered in place of Patel, said the care sector should end its reliance on overseas staff. He said: “People will look at what’s happened over the past few months and think that surely the vision for the social care sector is not to carry on looking abroad to recruit at or near the minimum wage, but we need to prioritise jobs in this country.” Christina McAnea, the assistant general secretary of Unison, which represents many care staff, said excluding them from entry was “a disastrous mistake”. She said: “The huge vacancies in care can’t be filled simply by using newly unemployed workers. This shows how little the government understands the scale of the task ahead.” While a few very senior care roles in the NHS could allow arrivals to qualify for the visa, the minimum threshold is what is known as regulated qualifications framework (RFQ) three or above, roughly equivalent to A-levels. The Home Office classes most care staff as being at RFQ one, equivalent to lower-graded GCSE passes. New overseas nationals will still be able to work in care but only if they are dependants of someone else, or have another type of visa, for example a student visa. Much of the rest of the Home Office document sets out in more detail previously announced elements of the new immigration regime, which will close UK borders to lower-paid workers or those who cannot speak English after the country leaves the EU. The new system has prompted warnings about a lack of seasonal farm workers. Arrangements have been made for seasonal harvest workers, but below levels the National Farmers’ Union has said are needed. The updated immigration document gives no new details on this, saying the sector will be reassessed at the end of this year after the end of a pilot scheme. The document does outline the first details of stringent English language tests that will apply to all immigrants. In future, arrivals will have to demonstrate language competency by showing they have “passed a secure English language test” or that they “meet the required level in a previous successful immigration application”. The document gives the first details of the government’s “global talent” route, which will be led by an Office for Talent based inside No 10. The system will encourage the arrival of not just scientists and engineers but also leading workers in the humanities and arts. Would-be arrivals can be processed rapidly if their application is endorsed by bodies such as the Royal Society, the Royal Academy of Engineering or Arts Council England. On deportation, the paper outlines what it calls a robust and consistent approach for people from the EU and elsewhere. Currently, all EU nationals jailed for a year or more are considered for deportation, and possibly for shorter jail terms if they are serious or persistent criminals. This only applies for sentences imposed after the end of this year.