Leeds have defended the decision to parade the Championship trophy on an open-top bus after arrests were made during title celebrations outside Elland Road on Wednesday. There were similar scenes after Liverpool’s win against Chelsea when Merseyside police arrested nine people for a variety of offences when an estimated 2,000-3,000 fans gathered outside Anfield to celebrate the club’s first league title ceremony for 30 years. The police also introduced a 48-hour dispersal zone around the stadium after fans ignored appeals to stay away because of the Covid-19 pandemic. Four people were arrested for public order offences and a police officer received minor injuries outside Elland Road, where thousands of Leeds fans also ignored social-distancing rules to celebrate their Championship triumph. Unlike Liverpool, Leeds players appeared outside the stadium on an open-top bus after being presented with the title but the club insist that was to encourage fans to go home. A Leeds spokesman said: “Following consultation with the SAG [Safety Advisory Group] and [Leeds city] council, Leeds United arranged for a bus to be parked outside the East Stand reception as a contingency to assist dispersal should a crowd congregate at Elland Road, despite a month-long campaign from the club and supporter groups to encourage supporters to stay at home. “The safety group believed that a brief appearance from the players with the Championship trophy would help to signal an end to proceedings, encouraging fans to head home safely.” Liverpool staff, city council workers and volunteers cleared the mess left outside Anfield on Thursday. The city’s public health director, Matt Ashton, has arranged for a mobile testing site to be set up in nearby Stanley Park from Friday until Sunday for anyone experiencing symptoms of coronavirus. The Merseyside police assistant chief constable, Natalie Perischine, said: “Officers made a total of nine arrests outside Anfield last night for affray, assault, people who were drunk and disorderly and drug-driving. The vast majority of the crowd were good natured and had dispersed by 2am. “Thankfully we didn’t see the sort of incidents of disorder and criminal damage we saw at the Pier Head on 27 June, the investigation into which has seen more than 20 arrests made to date. “Although the numbers who gathered last night could have been significantly higher, it is still disappointing that people did not listen to requests from ourselves, Liverpool football club and Liverpool city council not to gather in large numbers because of the risks still posed by Covid-19.” Liverpool issued a statement on Thursday expressing disappointment that appeals to celebrate at home from Jürgen Klopp and Sir Kenny Dalglish, among others, were unheeded by many.The Premier League champions said they were “disappointed with the scenes outside Anfield last night and that more supporters did not heed the celebrate at home advice. As we have said before, when it is safe to do so we will celebrate, until then protecting our city is the priority.”