Since her 2012 bestselling debut The Unlikely Pilgrimage of Harold Fry, Rachel Joyce has specialised in stories about overlooked people jolted out of their routines into unexpected situations that allow them to face the buried griefs that have kept them trapped in small lives. She might almost be credited with inspiring the recently popular “up lit” genre, but it would be a mistake to think of her novels as merely “heartwarming”, though the word is frequently attached to them. Joyce has a clear-eyed, unsparing view of regret, failure and loss, and the cost that life exacts from so many, even while she counters it with a belief in the resilience of the human spirit and the possibility of second chances. Margery Benson shares these traits with Joyce’s previous protagonists, but is unhappy in her own way. In 1950 she is a frustrated teacher in her mid-40s, with a secret passion for beetles – an interest inspired by her father, who told her in 1914 of the fabled golden beetle of New Caledonia, shortly before he shot himself on learning that all four of his sons had been killed at Mons. A failed romance put paid to any hope of a career in entomology for Margery – not that she could have aspired to such a thing, except as a man’s assistant. “She was a woman who’d had a period of excitement, who’d dared to dream of adventure and the unknown, but who had retreated instead and made no further disturbance.” Her wakeup call is the sight of an unkind cartoon circulating among the girls in her class: “This lumpy old woman was clearly Margery.” The sight of herself as others see her is enough to propel her out of the school – stealing a pair of boots as she goes – and all the way to New Caledonia in the South Pacific. Joyce, as always, wears her research lightly, but she depicts with precise detail the drabness and austerity of postwar England, and contrasts it with the extravagant light and colour of the New Caledonian jungle. There are echoes of classic travel adventures such as Around the World in Eighty Days, as genteel British explorers attempt to maintain their customs and decorum in the most un-British environments, and plenty of madcap capers to hinder our heroine, who regrets her impulsiveness almost as soon as she has set foot on board the ship to Australia. But there is a darker side too; the war has left scars, and Margery and her brash assistant, Enid, are pursued by a man deeply traumatised by his experiences in a Burmese prison camp, who has convinced himself that he is the only guide Miss Benson needs. Joyce is at her most insightful in the novel’s moments of quiet reflection. The true object of Margery’s quest, of course, is finding the courage to be herself, and to become – though she doesn’t know it – an inspiration for other women who don’t fit society’s expectations. “She didn’t know how she was going to get there, or when. But the real failure as a woman was not even to try.” There’s a danger that novels affirming the value of kindness and connection can tip into cliche; Joyce knows her material well enough to avoid this for the most part, and her deadpan humour undercuts any sentimentality. Her endings may not always be neatly happy, but they are fiercely hopeful. • Miss Benson’s Beetle by Rachel Joyce is published by Doubleday (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15