Oxford United will take on Wycombe Wanderers in the League One play-off final at Wembley after the U’s prevailed in a penalty shootout to decide their semi-final against Portsmouth. Simon Eastwood was the hero for Oxford, the keeper going the right way to deny Cameron McGeehan as the hosts won 5-4 on penalties at the Kassam Stadium. Wycombe booked their place later on Monday night, earning a 2-2 draw at home to Fleetwood to go through with a 6-3 aggregate win. Oxford scored all five of their spot-kicks after the semi-final tie had finished 2-2 on aggregate, with substitutes Ben Woodburn and John Mousinho converting after being brought on by the manager, Karl Robinson, in the final seconds of extra time. “I’m just full of admiration for the players,” said Robinson. “We’re in the final, what more can you say? When you think that I’ve had to sell my two best players in January and we came into this game with three or four struggling with injuries, it’s incredible. “I had asked a few people in the game who have been in big penalty shootouts for their advice,” Robinson added. “I’m just gutted for our fans who couldn’t be here to celebrate it. But for Oxford United to be in the final is unbelievable.” The second leg at Oxford’s Kassam Stadium had finished 1-1, the same scoreline as the first leg at Fratton Park. Portsmouth took the lead after 38 minutes when Marcus Harness’s low shot wrong-footed Eastwood. The hosts drew level before half-time when the Pompey forward Ellis Harrison flicked a James Henry corner beyond his own keeper, the ball just crossing the line. Neither side were able to make the breakthrough in a tense second half and extra time although the visitors had the better opportunities. John Marquis struck the outside of the post from a Ronan Curtis cross in the 69th minute, while Harness curled a powerful effort narrowly over and Marquis shot just wide in extra time. Oxford, who spent four years in non-league between 2006 and 2010, will take on Wycombe in what is something of a fairytale final. The Chairboys, who have never played in the second tier, were in control of their semi-final tie with Fleetwood after winning the first leg 4-1 at Highbury. Gareth Ainsworth’s side could afford to lose by two goals at Adams Park, and fell behind to a Danny Andrew strike midway through the first half. Fred Onyedinma eased home nerves soon after the restart, surging into the box and pouncing on Harry Souttar’s error to leave Fleetwood with a mountain to climb. Ched Evans’ penalty put Fleetwood back in front on the night but Joey Barton’s side still needed two goals to level the tie. As the visitors poured forward in stoppage time, Onyedinma added his second to rubber-stamp their unexpected Wembley date with Oxford on 13 July, with a historic place in the Championship up for grabs.