Dario Calmese this week became the first black photographer to shoot a cover for Vanity Fair. Calmese’s portrait of Viola Davis, known for her powerhouse roles in The Help and How to Get Away With Murder, comes as the magazine industry publicly reckons with a dire lack of diversity. Condé Nast, the publisher behind Vanity Fair, has seen its share of controversies – including the ousting of Bon Appétit’s editor-in-chief over resurfaced brownface photos and Vogue’s editor-in chief, Anna Wintour, issuing an apology to the magazine’s black employees. Calmese was previously a director at the New York label Pyer Moss, helping stage large-scale runway shows that mined the history of black culture. He spoke with the Guardian about making history as a photographer, the need for representation behind the camera, and welcoming debate. I think that we mistake talent for access to opportunities “I don’t think it’s about black and white,” he said. “I think it’s about opportunity. I think that we mistake talent for access to opportunities.” You are coming off a history-making week, officially the first black photographer to shoot a cover for Vanity Fair. Many were shocked to learn that. Does an accomplishment like this feel bittersweet? There was no negativity in my mind about being the first black photographer. I felt really humbled, if anything. Because I knew that while I was the first black photographer to shoot a Vanity Fair cover, I wasn’t the first one that could have shot one. I worried that people would worry my selection was some kind of reactionary decision to the moment we’re in, that Vanity Fair was just scrambling to find a black photographer. But it was actually the normal story. I worked with them a year ago and did four shoots with them before this. Presenting our July/August cover star: @ViolaDavis. The Oscar winner—who’s set to star as Michelle Obama and blues legend Ma Rainey—talks to @SoniaSaraiya about her journey out of poverty and into the deeply troubling Hollywood system. https://t.co/NKm0nGeSbP pic.twitter.com/8QlGbh3OTS When did you learn you were shooting the cover? Were there limitations due to the Covid-19 pandemic? They called me nine days before the shoot! They entrusted a lot in me because none of the editors could be present on the shoot because of the pandemic. We had a lot of conversations about it before, but at the end of the day they really had to understand my vision and trust it. That meant a lot. There have been conversations around the need for more black photographers, especially in response to Annie Leibovitz’s photos of Simone Biles. Some feel white photographers are not taking the time to learn how to properly light black subjects. What are your thoughts on this? My lighting team – they were not black – but they were very aware to make sure we lit Viola properly. I don’t think it’s about black and white. I think it’s about opportunity. I think that we mistake talent for access to opportunities. So for you it’s more of an issue of gatekeeping that needs to be addressed? We see people in places, in the boardroom, as CEO and we assume that they got there because they’re just so talented and that’s the sole reason. But it’s so much more complex than that. This is someone who has been given a certain amount of opportunities to exhibit their talent. If we are able to provide more people with more opportunities, then we will see that talent shine. There was a lot of debate around your referencing a “slave image” for the cover. Do you take issue with the criticism? Oh, I think it’s absolutely wonderful! Look, I’m not a kid. I’m very aware that [the photo of “Whipped Peter”] is a very charged image. As a creative, I’m not here to please people. If an image starts a dialogue and a wrestling with our own feelings and history, then that’s a success to me. Kudos to Vanity Fair for allowing space for that conversation to happen. There is reaffirming of our agency when black people see ourselves in a place I believe Georgia O’Keeffe when she says, “Praise and criticism go down the same drain.” But what do you say to the black viewers who object to pulling from the trauma and pain around slavery? The question is, “What would you think of the image if you did not know the reference?” What I’m really doing is subverting the spectacle. We all understand what a magazine cover is and what a magazine cover does. There’s one reading of a cover image, which is a very surface level one. And what I wanted to offer is a deeper reading – should you want to read deeper. So many images that we see have so many references. Rarely do photographers share what they were thinking about in the creation of the image. So in me offering this reference, it was to offer debate. Because I could have just shot the image and not said anything about what I was referring to. For those who are encountering your work for the first time, what are you interested in as a photographer? I’m interested in projecting black people into places of beauty. Whether it’s me directing a Pyer Moss fashion show or running a podcast or shooting photos, I want to repopulate the landscape of black imagery and understanding that’s been told to us, by someone else. My shoot with Viola is a love letter to black women in particular. There is reaffirming of our agency when black people see ourselves in a place. There’s a subconscious barrier put up when you don’t.