In distant days when coronavirus was more mystery than misery, authorities were ambivalent on the preventive benefits of face masks. Those days are over. Evidence is mounting that mask-wearing restricts both the spread of coronavirus and the severity of its infection – but it was as far back as 3 April when America’s Centres for Disease Control and Prevention issued a recommendation to mask up against the virus. Our sad, plagued times have since provoked numerous community authorities to oblige mask-wearing. Last weekend, Daniel Andrews called for Melburnians to start wearing a mask where social distancing wasn’t possible. With the calls though has come resistance, especially in the US, and also pure drama. As the disease has also made a world where theatres are suddenly dark, it’s little wonder guerrilla videos of anti-mask incidents radiate allure. The form is so familiar, the conflict clearly drawn. Cramming all the players into the hand-held frame of an iPhone is as close as anyone these days can get to the confines of a stage. Amid well-decorated sets – American retail spaces dominate the genre – is a theatrical message that costume really can mean everything. And the characterisations provide some of the most emotionally-committed performances any audience will live to see. There are grand speeches and clowning. A man in a supermarket wiped his nose and face on the security guard who informed him mask-wearing was a condition of entry. A woman filmed herself trashing a mask display, screaming. It looks like comedy, but the stakes are tragically high – and not only due to coronavirus. Anti-maskers have fought mandated public health orders with violence and assaults. In Michigan, there were arrests for a security guard’s murder. It was a bus driver who was allegedly murdered by anti-maskers in France. It’s the recent American incidents that stick in the mind though – perhaps because it’s so hard to rationalise that a culture obsessed with Halloween, and whose seminal historical moment involved cosplaying colonists throwing tea in a harbour, has elements suddenly coy about putting a mask on. Maybe it’s because the American president was still avowedly anti-mask six weeks after his own administration issued the prevention directive. He mocked others for wearing them, and said he didn’t want to give the press the “pleasure” of seeing him in one. That line inverted this week when Trump was photographed masked-up on a hospital visit with a claim that masks “have their time and place”. What’s changed? No one could accuse the same president, who only a month ago allowed #BlackLivesMatter protestors to be teargassed and forcibly moved on, of a sudden outbreak of consideration, nor one who claimed climate change was a hoax of a newfound respect for scientific advice. The Washington Post suggested vanity informed his original rejection of masks; did he perhaps notice the masks on political rivals Joe Biden, Nancy Pelosi and Tim Kaine made them look … rather badass? Numerous commentators have observed avowed anti-masking has come to signify allegiance to Trump in America’s interminable cultural war, a rejection of instruction from those – like scientists – considered establishment, expert and elite. Scientific American identified a masculinist ideology among mask-refusing “white men with epic swagger” that seemed “to view masks as emasculating face condoms”. Only someone who has not been following Trumpism would believe there was no Venn overlap of the two positions. It certainly describes the tenor of the “small, loud” crowd that rallied – overwhelmingly maskless – to see Trump in Tulsa. If “celluloid masculinity” obliges men to put their lives at risk in the performance of the manly, the spike in coronavirus infections after that event was inevitable. Self-consciously macho Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro’s Covid-positive fate is something of a case in point. The example of the Australian health minister aside, wearing masks for self-protection is hardly without association to the powerful. Mediaeval knights and samurai had faceplates for their helmets because protecting one’s face from arrows was hardly considered effeminate; the US military confirmed in April it would be issuing masks to personnel. Of course, “Masking your face makes you a big creampuff kitten man!” is a valid critique to pose at a KKK meeting; I’m quite sure no public Trumpist would struggle to obtain an invitation should they wish to try. It’s analysis from social psychologists that furnish a more nuanced understanding of what mask refusals may symbolise. For Elliot Aronson and Carol Tavris, it’s the behaviour of cognitive dissonance. Individual psychologies are desperate to reject any suggestion that ingrained beliefs – about the virus, gender, Trump, capitalism, expertise, the media or anything else – may indeed just be beliefs, not material truths. “Coronavirus does not care about the news cycle” has become a popular refrain. The painful – fatal – events it wreaks cannot be spun away. This is a confronting realisation. Our lives have been spent in a world where visible realities of poverty, cruelty and environmental destruction – the most powerful threats to our continued existence – have been hidden, minimised or ignored as the deliberate work of political opportunists, bad faith media actors and the armies of the PR industry. But again and again – as people, as voters, as consumers – we’ve agreed to it. Masks antagonise because they represent the hard limit coronavirus has imposed on an ideological wilfulness that pretends we can perform our lives in a play of our choosing. We can’t. What we’d prefer to believe is irrelevant now; coronavirus can’t be willed out of the script. The masks remind us “what we owe to one another” isn’t an ideological choice any more. It’s the basis for human survival. • Van Badham is a Guardian Australia columnist