The Miami Marlins’ home opener on Monday night against Baltimore has been postponed as the team deal with a coronavirus outbreak that stranded them in Philadelphia. The Marlins postponed their flight home on Sunday night after their series finale against the Phillies. ESPN reports that the Phillies have cancelled their game against the New York Yankees too. ESPN’s Jeff Passan reported that 11 of the 33 Marlins players who travelled to Philadelphia tested positive for Covid-19. Sources told Passan that two Marlins coaches have also tested positive. Updating the Miami Marlins’ outbreak: The total number of infected players is 11 of the 33 who have been traveling with the team and two coaches, sources tell ESPN. The Marlins-Orioles and Yankees-Phillies games tonight have been postponed. For now, the rest may be played. Marlins pitcher Jose Urena was scratched from his scheduled start in Sunday’s game, and catcher Jorge Alfaro went on the injured list Friday. No reasons were given for the moves, but manager Don Mattingly said those who tested positive would be quarantined in Philadelphia. The Marlins’ precarious health raised anew doubts about MLB’s ability to finish the season during a pandemic. In Cincinnati, Reds second baseman Mike Moustakas and center fielder Nick Senzel felt sick on Sunday, a day after a teammate went on the injured list because he tested positive for Covid-19. Some Marlins players texted each other about the team’s health issues before Sunday’s game, but there was no talk of declining to play, shortstop Miguel Rojas said. “That was never our mentality,” Rojas said. “We knew this could happen at some point. We came to the ballpark ready to play.” Mattingly admitted the news had affected his players. “It’s fair to say guys are concerned about things,” he said. “They want how they’re feeling about the situation to be heard. I think it’s fair. We’re talking about health.” The Marlins played exhibition games at Atlanta on Tuesday and Wednesday against the Braves, who have since been without their top two catchers, Tyler Flowers and Travis d’Arnaud, after both players showed symptoms of Covid-19. Mattingly declined to say whether he thought the Marlins’ health issues were related to the Atlanta stop. Miami is a hot spot for the pandemic, but on Sunday, Mattingly said he had no concerns about playing in Florida. “You feel safe at the ballpark; I feel safe with my surroundings going home,” he said. “It’s a lot scarier on the road.”