Maria Ressa, one of the Philippines’ most prominent journalists, has pleaded not guilty to tax evasion charges in a case she has described as a form of harassment. Ressa, named a Time Magazine Person of the Year in 2018 for fighting media intimidation, is facing several government lawsuits that have caused international concern about hounding of journalists in the Philippines. Ressa, who is chief executive of the news site Rappler, was convicted of libel last month and sentenced to up to six years in prison, a ruling widely seen as a blow to democratic freedoms under Duterte’s increasingly popular authoritarianism. She was freed on bail to appeal against the libel verdict. Rappler has scrutinised the administration of Duterte, exposing bot armies and allegations of corruption and documenting his brutal anti-drugs campaign, which has led, by some estimations, to tens of thousands of extrajudicial killings. Duterte has publicly lashed out at Rappler, calling it a “fake news outlet” sponsored by American spies. Ressa’s court appearance on Wednesday related to accusations Rappler falsified tax returns by omitting the proceeds of a sale of depositary receipts to foreign investors, which later became the securities regulator’s basis to revoke its licence. The securities regulator alleged it was a scheme by Rappler to allow foreigners to illegally own shares in a domestic media firm. Ressa, a dual US-Filipino citizen, said in a tweet: “pleaded NOT GUILTY”. A verdict is expected at a later date. Rappler, a startup, has maintained foreigners never owned shares, but were allowed to invest without voting rights or involvement in operations. Rappler is still operating pending its appeal against its licence being revoked. Media watchdogs and human rights activists say the charges against Ressa are part of a broader strategy to silence or humiliate opponents of Duterte. Earlier this month, his allies in Congress voted overwhelmingly in favour of denying top broadcaster ABS-CBN’s bid to renew its 25-year licence, an outcome that Duterte had repeatedly promised would happen because of its refusal to air some of his election campaign commercials. Presidential spokesman Harry Roque said Duterte supports freedom of speech and any media facing legal cases are for breaking the law, not for their reporting.