Malaysia’s former prime minister Najib Razak has been found guilty of all seven charges in his first trial linked to the multibillion-dollar 1MDB scandal – a landmark conviction that means he now faces 12 years in jail. Najib has denied any wrongdoing in relation to what is one of the world’s biggest financial frauds, in which billions of dollars were allegedly looted from a state fund set up to promote development. The scandal shook Malaysian politics, led to the ousting of Najib’s Umno party after 61 years in power, and prompted a series of investigations in countries around the world. 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB) was an investment fund created in 2009 by former prime minister Najib Razak with a laudable aim: to finance the development of Malaysia and help its poorest people. The fund leveraged Malaysia’s reputation as a fast-growing "tiger economy" to raise debt to fund infrastructure. Between 2009 and at least 2014 the fund became a vehicle for government officials to steal an alleged $4.5bn (£3.5bn) and launder the proceeds. Instead of funding projects for Malaysia’s poorest, the money was spent on luxury property in the US and elsewhere, including London, and used to pay gambling expenses at Las Vegas casinos. The alleged thieves also acquired artwork worth more than $200m such as paintings by Vincent van Gogh and Claude Monet, bought lavish gifts for their family and friends and even invested in Hollywood productions, such as Martin Scorsese’s Oscar-nominated The Wolf of Wall Street – itself a story of investment fraud. The scandal reached the very highest political circles, with Najib accused of receiving $681m in his personal accounts. Najib, ousted in an election 2018, denies all wrongdoing. He was found guilty on 28 July 2020 of all seven charges in his first trial linked to the scandal. Najib’s wife, Rosmah Mansor, and stepson, Riza Aziz, were also charged in the case, but prosecutors recently dropped charges against Aziz following a heavily criticised settlement. One of the key figures in the fraud was Low Taek Jho, better known as Jho Low, a Malaysian financier with no formal link to 1MDB but who is alleged to have been a mastermind behind its looting. Low is a fugitive, with reports he may be living in China. On 24 July 2020, Goldman Sachs reached a $3.9bn settlement, in return for Malaysia dropping criminal charges against the investment bank over its role in helping 1MDB sell $6.5bn in bonds. Read more … 1MDB: everything you need to know On Tuesday morning, almost 16 months since the start of the trial, Kuala Lumpur high court judge Mohamad Nazlan Mohamad Ghazali sentenced Najib to 12 years in prison and a fine of RM210m £39m). “After considering all evidence in this trial, I find that the prosecution has successfully proven its case beyond a reasonable doubt,” he told the court. The court allowed a stay of the jail sentence and fine, which means Najib will not be sent to prison immediately. Najib, whose legal team had sought to delay the sentencing, asked for leniency. Speaking from the dock, he told of his successes as a leader and swore that he wasn’t aware of vast funds that had been transferred into his account. Dr Muhammad Mohan, the president of Transparency International Malaysia, welcomed the verdict, which he said would “boost confidence in the judiciary system and rule of law” for many. But he added: “There could be a group who feel that, because [Najib] can appeal, anything can happen.” Writing on Facebook on Monday evening, Najib vowed to fight a possible guilty verdict:  “From day one, I have said this is the chance for me to clear my name … Whatever the decision in the high court tomorrow, it does not end here ... after this, we will go to the court of appeal. I am ready.” In total, Najib faces five separate trials linked to the scandal. Tuesday’s verdict relates to seven charges over the transfer of 42m ringgit (£7.7m) from former 1MDB unit SRC International into Najib’s bank accounts through intermediary companies. He could face hefty fines and up to 20 years in jail for each charge. During the trial, the court heard of Najib’s lavish spending sprees, including how, on one occasion, he spent £620,000 at a jeweller in Italy in a single day and, months later, £84,000 at a Chanel boutique in Hawaii. Najib defended the credit card spending as purchases for official purposes. He had pleaded not guilty to criminal breach of trust, money laundering and abuse of power. Najib testified that he was misled by the Malaysian financier Jho Low and other 1MDB officials into believing the funds had been donated by the Saudi royal family and not misappropriated from SRC, as prosecutors allege. Saudi Arabia’s foreign minister said in 2016 the funds were “a genuine donation”, but the government has not commented on the case since. Low denies any wrongdoing. Speaking to the Guardian before the verdict, Bridget Welsh, an honorary research fellow at the University of Nottingham’s Asia Research Institute Malaysia, said: “People will be watching carefully because they know that Malaysia’s reputation was damaged by 1MDB, and I think they are looking to this case to hope that this is going to restore Malaysia’s reputation.” A not-guilty verdict would have been seen as “a miscarriage of justice on the part of many Malaysians”, said Welsh, but she added that the political situation in Malaysia was polarised, and that attitudes towards the verdict would reflect this. The judgment has major implications for the country’s leadership. Less than two years after being removed from government over the corruption scandal, Umno returned to power again in March, through an alliance led by the prime minister, Muhyiddin Yassin. Some have questioned whether this change in leadership would have ramifications for ongoing corruption cases. A not-guilty verdict could have paved the way for Najib to run again for office. The conviction, however, could weaken Muhyiddin’s coalition, which depends on Umno for support. Despite Tuesday’s verdict, Najib is likely to continue to play a role in politics from behind the scenes. “He may not be able to run for office, but he will still have power within the political party,” said Welsh. In total, the US justice department believes more than £3.5bn was stolen from the 1MDB fund and laundered by Najib’s associates. More than £540m from the fund allegedly landed in Najib’s bank accounts. Najib’s wife and several officials from his party and previous government have also been charged with graft. They deny any wrongdoing. Muhyiddin has said he will introduce anti-corruption reforms. A recent decision to drop charges against Najib’s stepson, Riza Aziz, the producer of The Wolf of Wall Street, in a settlement deal, has been criticised by activists. Last week, Goldman Sachs reached a £3bn settlement, in return for Malaysia dropping criminal charges against the investment bank over its role in helping 1MDB sell £5bn in bonds. Reuters contributed to this report