As a bookseller, I spent most of April recommending escapist fiction and travel writing. That was the single most common request I received: for books that would transport readers quarantined at home. A few joked that given their holidays were postponed, they would read a book set in India, or Italy, or wherever it was they were going, instead. Most of these transactions took place over the phone. I would then cycle to people’s homes in Geelong on my clumsy bicycle, delivering their parcels. The bookshop was empty, the entrance blocked by a trestle table, but we did more trade that month than we normally expect. So, there was armchair travel happening in the lounge rooms of our customers, and then there was the book I was reading, which led me straight back to where I was sitting – to the exact house in which I lived. Gregory Day’s 2019 Miles Franklin-shortlisted novel A Sand Archive, was set in my house. A Sand Archive follows the life of FB Herschell, a shy and brilliant civil engineer, historian, musician and antiquarian book collector: a polymath. The protagonist is based on Peter FB Alsop, who died in 2014 and whose Californian bungalow in Geelong I moved into in late 2018. I signed the lease “site unseen” from Perth; the agent sent me a photo of the floor-to-ceiling bookshelves in the hall. “The house belonged to a book collector,” she wrote. After I moved in, the owners of the house came by, bearing eggs. They told me about the man who had lived there all his life. When the house was sold, they said, there was a pair of pyjamas in the built-in wardrobe, folded and ready for their next wear. Peter bubbled up in conversations with my neighbours. I assembled an idea of him from others’ recollections, like a bowerbird snatching at little strips of a favoured colour. He always wore tweed, for instance, even in summer. He was gentle and kind. He had the same car in later life, lovingly maintained, that he had when he was a young man. He played the violin. He wrote a short history of the Great Ocean Road which was published by the Geelong Historical Society in 1982. He loved bridges and aqueducts. He cycled his rickety bike, laden with books, all around Geelong – a loose mirror image of my quarantine delivery service. It is uncanny to read a novel that describes the same dim hallway, the same scullery kitchen and outdoor bathroom, the exact ornate windows that face the street, the backyard, sunroom and bedrooms, as the house in which you live. To know exactly the kitchen that the characters baked in, to imagine them putting out washing from your laundry and hanging it on your hills hoist, shuffling from room to room – your rooms – and entertaining family in the same place you are sitting that very moment, as you read. In lockdown, bored and restless, I often retrieved A Sand Archive “from the top of the bookcase in the hall … big dark shelves almost to the ceiling”, to marvel again and again at this strange synchronicity. I have read A Sand Archive three times now to try and get closer to this man I never met but whose space I inhabited for over a year and a half, until I moved out in May. The novel does not unfold entirely within the space of the house – the reader ventures out into Geelong City, across Wathaurong and Gadubanud country, and to France. These movements are based on Peter’s life and travel. But even in these passages I had the sense that the protagonist carried his home with him – as we tend to do when we go out into the world – but especially this man, as he never lived anywhere else. Like his fictional counterpart, Peter grew up in the cottage I rented. He bought it when his mother passed away and lived there until his death. In the opening chapter of the book, Gregory Day’s unnamed narrator encounters FB Herschell in the bookshop where he works. “Herschell’s presence,” he says, “came as a stimulating intersection between what is written on paper and what is actually breathing and alive.” The narrator doesn’t approach; he watches, not quite believing that the man whose work he so admires is “real and whole”. A few weeks before they closed in December 2018, I went into Barwon Booksellers for the first time, where this opening scene takes place and where Gregory Day worked. I saw him in the shop but did not approach. I didn’t know then that his novel would be, for me, the most stimulating intersection between what is written and what is breathing and alive, real and whole. Instead of escape, A Sand Archive gave me a deeper connection to the four walls in which I lived. • Charlotte Guest is a writer and bookseller in Geelong, Victoria • A Sand Archive by Gregory Day is published by Picador