Hats off to Julian Lewis and the other members of the intelligence and security committee who derailed Boris Johnson’s cunning plan to install Chris Grayling as its chair. The speed and ferocity of the punishment meted out to Mr Lewis (MP who beat Chris Grayling to intelligence chair role loses Tory whip, 15 July) was clearly designed to make other independent-minded Tory MPs think twice before taking actions that might displease their leader. This episode prompts two important questions for those who value our democratic freedoms in the UK. First, why is the government so fearful of proper independent scrutiny from the ISC? Second, what other steps are they prepared to take to undermine established structures of accountability for those in power? The “hard rain” already falling on the civil service is now spreading to parliament. We must all keep a close eye on this authoritarian government, and stand ready to defend democratic institutions from attack.Rob DriverHexham, Northumberland • Catching up on the sanity-saving country diary columns, I read Charlie Elder’s great piece (6 July) about the grayling butterfly. Coincidentally, I then read Marina Hyde’s equally great piece (Chris Grayling’s track record? There is no track: just a stretch of scorched earth, 10 July). How apposite. Both flutter along from job to job and then “collapse in two movements”.Graham MarsdenSheffield • Is the expulsion of Julian Lewis from the Conservative party an example of the “cancel culture” which the Tories keep accusing the left of? Still, I have recently been much amused by seeing the words “Chris Grayling” and “intelligence” appearing in the same sentence.Pete DoreyBath • Julian Lewis seems to have committed the ultimate sin for a Conservative MP: he knows what he is talking about.Barbara PurvisWinchester • Johnson’s pique about Grayling and the ISC chair reminds me of what a lot of leavers have told me in recent years: “You lost, get over it!”Sue ProctorPiper’s Ash, Cheshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters