Inside a cavernous steel hut in the middle of Glasgow’s Springburn Park, the sweeping arc of keyboards, lids and carved panels has been taking shape, creating the UK’s first permanent auditorium made entirely of recycled pianos. Using mainly upright instruments, with a baby grand artfully sliced in half to make a corner balcony, about 40 pianos have been expertly disarticulated to create the tiered seating. “When you dismantle a piano you end up with a kit of different parts, from the ornate front pieces to the strong planks normally hidden beneath the key,” explains Tom Binns, who founded the Glasgow Piano City project in 2013, finding new uses for unwanted instruments in public places from hospitals to bookshops. It was Binns who brought together a Glasgow community activist with big plans and the Edinburgh-based instrumental innovators Pianodrome in what he says is a testament to the collaborative potential of social enterprise. Two year ago, Alex Docherty, a hip-hop artist and chair of Friends of Springburn Park, countered plans to demolish the site where the massive hut stands with a proposal for a community village with an event space, cafe and outdoor classroom. “When I talk to my gran who grew up in Springburn, it used to have cinemas and places to go,” Docherty says. “But since the decline in industry and the motorway demolitions [creating the unpopular dual carriageways and flyovers that bisect Springburn] they disappeared. We really need a community space in the area.” The area has its problems, including widespread unemployment and a high rate of drug deaths, but “there’s been an energy of change in Springburn over the last few years”, Docherty says. The hut was previously used by the council to store grit: Docherty and volunteers had to scoop it out by the shovelful. “It’s a nice size for a performance and we wanted to make it feel special to play here and sit in the audience. For me the park should be the centre of a community. It brings different areas together physically.” The plan to use old pianos for the seating came through Binns. He visited the team at Pianodrome, whose mobile amphitheatre has impressed audiences at previous Edinburgh festivals as a creative response to consumer culture, to see their initial constructions. “I thought: ‘This could work,’” he says. “We were hired to design a permanent theatre space,” says Matt Wright, a co-founder of Pianodrome. “It breaks down the division between audience and performer. You’re sitting on an instrument while you watch and listen to someone play.” As his fellow co-founder and designer Tim Vincent-Smith describes it, he settled on an arc for the auditorium rather than a full amphitheatre to fit the space better. “It has taken around a year to make, in seven sections and using about 40 pianos for an audience of up to 80,” he says, although that number is pre-pandemic. Nevertheless, Wright says, the arrangement of benches rather than having separate seats is more appropriate to social distancing: “You can space people out but it doesn’t look so stark as having empty seats.” For Binns, the project has grown out of a respect for people’s deep connection to their individual instruments and the hopes they have when they pass them on. “People have an extraordinary emotional attachment to their instruments and would be heartbroken to see them go in a skip. We’re giving pianos a new life. ”