Tributes have been paid to Fleetwood Mac co-founder Peter Green after he died “peacefully in his sleep” aged 73. A statement from Swan Turton solicitors, acting on behalf of his family, said: “It is with great sadness that the family of Peter Green announce his death this weekend, peacefully in his sleep. A further statement will be provided in the coming days.” Green, the influential blues rock guitarist from Bethnal Green, east London, formed Fleetwood Mac with drummer Mick Fleetwood in London in 1967. The following year the group released an eponymous debut also known as Peter Green’s Fleetwood Mac, gaining widespread acclaim and reaching number four in the charts. Mr Wonderful was released in the same year, without receiving the same plaudits, before Then Play On in 1969, which reached number six in the UK. However, Green then left following a final performance in 1970 amid mental health issues, saying he left the music business “for my freedom” after writing much-loved tracks Albatross, Man of the World and Oh Well. He was eventually diagnosed with schizophrenia and spent time in hospital undergoing therapy during the mid-1970s, later admitting he may have embarked on too many LSD trips. But he returned to performing in the 1990s, following a reported period in various jobs including as a gravedigger and a petrol-pump attendant. Green was among the eight members of the band – along with Fleetwood, Stevie Nicks, Lindsey Buckingham, John McVie, Christine McVie, Danny Kirwan and Jeremy Spencer – who were inducted into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame in 1998. Earlier this year, artists including Fleetwood, Pink Floyd’s David Gilmour, ZZ Top’s Billy Gibbons and guitarists Jonny Lang and Andy Fairweather Low performed at the London Palladium during a gig celebrating the early years of Fleetwood Mac and its founder, Green. In a testament to his influence on the British blues movement, legendary guitarist BB King once said of Green: “He has the sweetest tone I ever heard; he was the only one who gave me the cold sweats.” Green also performed in the band John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers, recording notable track The Supernatural which Mojo magazine later placed as third in a 1995 list of outstanding guitar tracks. Rolling Stone magazine ranked Green at number 58 in its all-time list of the 100 greatest guitarists, describing him as “Britain’s most progressive blues guitarist” in the late 1960s who took listeners on a melodic adventure. Whitesnake’s David Coverdale said Green was an artist he “truly loved and admired”. He tweeted: “From the first time I heard him ... I supported the original Fleetwood Mac at Redcar Jazz Club when I was in a local band … He was a breathtaking singer, guitarist and composer... I know who I will be listening to today ... RIP.” Peter Green - thank you for everything. pic.twitter.com/0dRpM4Luj9 Musician Peter Frampton tweeted: “Most sadly have lost one of the most tasteful guitar players ever I have always been a huge admirer of the great Peter Green may he rest in peace.” Mumford and Sons guitarist Winston Marshall tweeted: “RIP Peter Green. [Greatest of all time]. Man of the world, oh well, albatross, need your love so bad. Some of my favourites songs and performances of all time. Thank you for the music.” Yusuf/Cat Stevens tweeted: “God bless the ineffable Peter Green, one of the unsung heroes of musical integrity, innovation and spirit. When I heard he left Fleetwood Mac in 1970 to get a real life and donate his wealth to charity, he became somethingof a model for me.”