Steve Bruce has hailed Allan Saint-Maximin as the Premier League’s signing of the season. The gifted French winger is lighting up England’s top tier after joining Newcastle United for what, with hindsight, looks a bargain £16.5m from Nice last summer. “I wouldn’t put a price on Allan now,” said Bruce. “When you look at the level of money we bought him for, he’s arguably the best pound-for-pound signing in the Premier League. You show me another better. When you look at what he’s produced for us, we have probably got the buy of the season. He’s blessed with unique skills, which he’s got in abundance.” Whether or not Newcastle are finally taken over by the Saudi Arabian-controlled consortium which has been endeavouring to buy the club from Mike Ashley for £300m for some months, Bruce is confident Saint-Maximin will be at St James’ Park next season. “There’s no chance of Allan leaving,” said Newcastle’s manager, pointing out that the 23-year-old has five years remaining on his contract. “No chance at all.” Not that Bruce has always found managing one of the game’s mavericks plain sailing. “There have been one or two moments when I’ve lost my temper with Allan,” he said. “He needs to be reminded of certain things now and again but the great thing about him is he just loves playing football. He’s like a kid in the playground with a ball; players with real natural ability are like that. Whether he’s dribbling against his dog in the back garden or whatever, he enjoys the ball.” At Nice, Saint-Maximin’s coach, Patrick Vieira, has acknowledged he was frequently driven to distraction by the winger’s unorthodox persona, with an unwillingness to track back a particular bone of contention. Bruce, though, has introduced increased tactical discipline without losing the skills that set Saint-Maximin apart. “Allan’s hard work at times, there’s no disputing that, but as long as he keeps performing we’ll manage him the best way we can and try to unlock the vast potential he has,” Bruce said. “Managing him is different – on and off the field. Allan is going to test your managerial skills. I don’t know how many times I’ve fined him for earrings and headbands and all sorts.”