Formula One’s new reality has taken some getting used to but the sport should be proud of what it has achieved in putting on the two opening grands prix in Austria. Everyone has been learning and since this journey began over a week ago we have all endured ups and downs. Some painful, some personal, but what has been unmistakable is the sheer excitement and enthusiasm with which the sport has embraced going racing again. Several months ago, after the cancellation of the Australian Grand Prix, I believed there was a big possibility we would not go racing at all; I thought this could be a full season on the sidelines. Australia was an absolute wrench. Finding out late on the Thursday night that we would not be racing stirred such strong disappointment in me, emotions I have never felt before because there was so much excitement, so much anticipation. So even when Austria was announced I convinced myself that only when I was in the car on the Friday morning and driving, would I be excited to be back. We did make it but it has been no small effort. It began with testing for Covid-19. I was tested twice at the Williams factory and didn’t find it too bad. Here in Austria I asked my trainer to film my test because I had seen drivers posting videos making such a big fuss. I wanted a video saying: “I don’t know what all the fuss is about.” It didn’t work out like that. This time while being recorded I was in absolute tears, I was gagging, it was absolutely horrific. I don’t know what the guys at Williams were doing but they had the knack to get the test done nicely. Everyone has had to adapt to even the smallest, almost instinctive things. F1’s chief executive, Chase Carey, and the sporting director, Ross Brawn, are in my hotel. When I saw them, not to be able to go up and shake hands was so unnatural. Now you don’t know how to approach it. You just end up keeping your distance and giving a wave; that is very strange. At the track normally I go down to the team, pat the mechanics on the back or shake their hand, now that human side of things has disappeared. It has been even harder on others. There are a number of people in F1 who have partners in different teams and they can’t see one another. That must be very difficult. F1 is known for relationships within the paddock across teams but now they cannot be together. Crucially, though, that is being respected because it is really understood that what is at stake is bigger than a personal relationship. There is no physical contact, we are all wearing masks, using sanitisers, respecting social distancing and it took a bit of getting used to. Normally after being on track we are in our engineer’s office where there are probably 25 people. This time we were in our own little driver rooms – a sea container pod – with our laptops and our radio so we could talk to the guys. It shows how much work and thought has gone in to make this happen. What F1 and the FIA have done has been really impressive. The event has run so smoothly, there have been no hiccups or issues. That took a long time to arrange and it has not been easy, they have been working very hard since Australia. They are testing everybody; more than 4,000 tests so far across F1 teams, F2, F3, the Porsche teams, marshals, the FIA, cameramen, journalists and there has not been a single case so far. That surprised me because I would have thought the large number of people meant you would have at least one. We know we are all in this together and that as long as people are sensible there is no reason for those figures to change. It is a bit bizarre staying in the same country and returning to the track a week after we raced here, but that’s no hardship. I have been out hiking and enjoyed having my first meals away from my home since Australia. We are well and truly back, and unless anything catastrophic happens around the world there is no reason we cannot continue. Everybody has enjoyed seeing F1 return. It’s been needed for economic reasons, to help the teams get through this tough period and also for fans, for entertaining people, which can play a big part in mental health, especially with everyone stuck at home for the past three months. It has meant so much to us, too. In F1 we are all racers, the mechanics, the engineers, everyone in the team, they love it. F1 is our passion, we all needed it.