“Companies aren’t bad just because they are big,” Facebook executive Mark Zuckerberg is set to tell Congress on Wednesday, as the world’s most powerful technology companies face a historic investigation into their size and power. Zuckerberg plans to argue to Congress that Facebook became successful “the American way, by starting out with nothing and providing products that people find valuable”, according to a written testimony that was made public on Tuesday. “We compete against the companies appearing at this hearing, plus many others that sell advertising and connect people,” Zuckerberg plans to tell the panel of lawmakers that is investigating how the social media giant’s business practices and data gathering have hurt smaller rivals. “We also compete globally, including against companies that have access to markets that we aren’t in.” Zuckerberg will also defend Facebook’s acquisitions by saying the social media platform helped companies such as WhatsApp and Instagram grow. Facebook acquired both platforms. Wednesday’s long-anticipated hearing will also see the chief executive officers of Amazon, Google, and Apple testify. It comes after more than a year of investigation by the House judiciary’s antitrust subcommittee, which has collected 1.3 million documents and conducted hundreds of hours of interviews. The investigation of the tech industry is the most high-powered since 2001, when the US government pushed to break up Microsoft, accusing it of illegally maintaining a monopoly position in the PC market. The tech giants are under investigation by other government agencies as well, and have faced sustained criticism from politicians on both sides of the House. Federal and state agencies have launched investigations into Amazon, Apple, Facebook and Google. Donald Trump has accused Facebook and Twitter of censoring conservative views and launched numerous attacks on Amazon and its owner Jeff Bezos. Bezos owns the Washington Post, which has been a persistent critic of Trump’s presidency. In prepared testimony released ahead of the hearing, Bezos focuses on his personal background, invoking his mother’s struggles of raising him after having him at age 17. Leaning into the mythos surrounding the creation of Amazon – which was started with a $250,000 loan from his parents out of their garage – Bezos calls himself “a garage inventor”. Bezos will argue small sellers have succeeded on its third-party marketplace, a practice that has come under scrutiny from lawmakers. And his testimony says the coronavirus pandemic boosted e-commerce businesses across the spectrum and not just Amazon. Bezos expresses in his remarks a desire for more guidance and regulation from the government. “I believe that Amazon should be scrutinized,” Bezos wrote. “We should scrutinize all large institutions, whether they’re companies, government agencies, or non-profits. Our responsibility is to make sure we pass such scrutiny with flying colors.” Tim Cook, chief executive officer of Apple, is set to argue the company plays by the rules and does “not have a dominant market share” in any market where it does business. He’ll address criticism that the rules surrounding Apple’s App Store, the only way through which iPhone users can download apps, constitute gatekeeping. “After beginning with 500 apps, today the App Store hosts more than 1.7 million – only 60 of which are Apple software,” Cook’s testimony reads. “Clearly, if Apple is a gatekeeper, what we have done is open the gate wider. We want to get every app we can on the store, not keep them off.” He’ll also address questions about the costs Apple charges developers to sell on the App Store. Cook will argue the vast majority of apps developers keep “100% of the money they make” and said it was “comparable to or lower than commissions charged by the majority of our competitors”. Sundar Pichai, CEO of Google, also released his testimony on Tuesday, addressing the accusation that Google dominates the search market. In the comments, he argues that search – which Google dominates by most metrics – was broader than just typing a query into Google. He said he remained concerned about Google maintaining relevancy as people turn to Twitter, Pinterest or other websites for information. “We know Google’s continued success is not guaranteed,” the testimony reads. “Google operates in highly competitive and dynamic global markets, in which prices are free or falling, and products are constantly improving.” The hearings, which will be conducted remotely to account for Covid-19 risks, begin at 12 pm EST on Wednesday. Reuters contributed to this report.