As a snapshot of Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s evolving Manchester United, rewind to Bruno Fernandes’s second goal in the 3-0 win at Brighton on Tuesday. On 50 minutes, a commanding Harry Maguire header initiated a wow moment. Wow because of what it suggested of Nemanja Matic, whose best days are supposedly gone. And wow because it confirmed how the Serb’s rejuvenation is part of the larger team renaissance that Solskjær is overseeing. Matic took the ball on his chest, pivoted and found Mason Greenwood with a second sight-like vision that had the 18-year-old surging along the left, before a cross found the relentless Fernandes who volleyed home at the far post. Here was a quicksilver move akin to how United struck serially under Alex Ferguson: his 2009 vintage produced a near carbon copy when Cristiano Ronaldo, Park Ji-sung and Wayne Rooney tore Arsenal apart in a Champions League semi-final second leg, the still-running Ronaldo ending the sequence by smashing in. The victory on Tuesday took United’s unbeaten run to 15: their best under Solskjær and a club-best since the 2012-13 last title-winning campaign. Can United’s resurgence prove the start of a genuine return as a force? Or will they fall away as happened following his opening 11-game unbeaten run when first taking charge? The sense is of a more stable United than when, following the international break last March, they won two of their final 10 games, losing six. They followed up by starting this season with a 4-0 hiding of Chelsea before chequered results marked the next six months. A prime factor here was the considerable overhaul of the squad, something illustrated by a glance at the XI that lost 2-0 against already relegated Cardiff on the final day last season. Jesse Lingard, Phil Jones and Diogo Dalot have been demoted. Ashley Young has departed and Chris Smalling loaned out. Beyond those who started, Antonio Valencia, Ander Herrera, Alexis Sánchez and Romelu Lukaku have also been released, sold or loaned out. Deciding that nine frontline players needed cutting is the near-revolution United have required since Ferguson’s retirement seven years ago left them as champions but with a disjointed squad. Solskjær’s move can be characterised as brave given that this level of churn risks making team cohesion impossible in the short-term. The summer signings of Aaron Wan-Bissaka, Dan James and Maguire, as well as Paul Pogba, Greenwood, Marcus Rashford, Anthony Martial, Scott McTominay, Luke Shaw and Victor Lindelöf were to be United’s future – a core of experience and youth who would need time to blend. This was shown by the uneven return of 18 wins, 10 losses and 10 draws from the opening 38 matches. In late January, Fernandes arrived and began making a case for being United’s most vital signing since Robin van Persie in the summer of 2012: his 26 goals the following season fired Ferguson’s side to the championship. Fernandes’s debut came in a 0-0 draw with Wolverhampton on 1 February, which began the 15-game unbeaten run, of which eight have been victories. Fernandes is arguably the player of the second half of the season, an effervescent presence who has scored six times in 13 appearances, become the de facto captain and demands 100% of his teammates. It has elevated them. In the bid to reconstruct the squad with X-factor footballers who have formidable character Solskjær has his ideal on-field proxy. Shaw is in the form of his life. Wan-Bissaka’s defensive ability is now complemented with attacking forays. Matic is again a smooth midfield operator. Martial scored a first career hat-trick in the 3-0 dismantling of Sheffield United last week. In the same game, the usually quiet Maguire told Shaw to “switch on”: a Fernandes-like exhortation. Since the Premier League’s restart, United have won three of their four outings with the return to fitness of Pogba, who is world-class, and Rashford, who has potential to be the same. Before facing the Blades, Pogba had not featured since Boxing Day and had last started in September, his prolonged absence another factor in United’s early‑season form. That they could then go 11 games unbeaten without him or Rashford, who was injured in mid-January, suggests the manager is building a team rather than an outfit reliant on solo acts. Pogba remains an enigma who seems to find the game effortless while appearing serially unhappy. But he may now look at his partnership with Fernandes, and where United may be heading, and decide to stay. If not, the Solskjær project has to be robust enough to shrug off the loss of Pogba or any other player. The final six league matches will offer a further clue regarding progress. Bournemouth (home), Aston Villa (away), Southampton (h), Crystal Palace (a), West Ham (h), and Leicester (a) are eminently winnable but in the reverse fixtures they lost against Bournemouth, Palace and West Ham, while drawing with Villa and Southampton. Of Bournemouth’s visit on Saturday Solskjær said: “Everything is better than what it was back then. You can see the effort we’ve put in has worked, team shape is better. I’ve been pleased with the focus of everyone.” The losses by Leicester and Chelsea on Wednesday mean United, who are fifth, are two points behind the latter and three behind the former. A Champions League berth can also be secured by winning the Europa League. United are all but in the quarter-finals with their 5-0 advantage over Lask before the last-16 second leg next month. Then there is an FA Cup semi-final against Chelsea this month. If a campaign with a trophy plus Champions League qualification would confirm United’s upward trajectory, then summer investment is required from Ed Woodward, the executive vice-chairman. Three A-list signings would give United requisite depth. These may be a left-back – Leicester’s Ben Chilwell is an option; a centre-back – Napoli’s Kalidou Koulibaly is on the radar – and a goal-scoring forward with Borussia Dortmund’s Jadon Sancho remaining a long-term target. Recruitment may be only one issue, though. Another is the prospect of going deep into the Europa League – the final is 21 August – meaning a three-week break before next season. This compares to Liverpool, whose season ends with the league in July and Manchester City, who can focus on the Premier League if their two-year Uefa ban is upheld. But Solskjær would dearly love to have this kind of challenge: it is one only the true contenders face.