The least-helpful piece of advice in the world is: “Just be yourself.” (Seriously? It won’t go well.) The second-least-helpful is: “Just act normal.” I have been acting normal sitting on a train in a mask and gloves, while my glasses misted up, telling myself: “This is just fine.” Then I acted normally by sitting in the drizzle outside a pub with a young man desperate for his first pint of Guinness in a while, only to be told by frazzled bar staff that they had no Guinness. Then I acted normally in another small town and had a drink outside! Until I got up to go to the loo, and my mate stopped me. “Don’t go in there,” she said ominously. “I have a bad feeling about it.” In a world in which we’re all “acting normal”, we shouldn’t have all these bad feelings, should we? But they won’t go away. We are now required to make snap judgments about what is safe and what isn’t because, actually, we don’t really know. Friends have reported “accidentally hugging” their own grownup kids over the weekend. And despite the pictures, most people in Soho in London on Saturday night were not really engaged in some bacchanal. (Nudge, wink, what was all the outcry about, if not homophobia?) The truth is, most of us are edging back into the water, not diving in. Many feel that everything that is happening is too much, too soon, after months of too little, too late. We are suddenly being told that alcohol is the enemy of social distancing? Well, who could possibly have known? There is a strange subtext to all this, which is that if the virus spikes again there will be a lot of people saying: “I told you so.” This is, I guess, more comforting than thinking about the great number of deaths still being predicted. All through lockdown, people have reported highs and lows, feelings of abandonment and drift, a loss of structure as well as earnings, a sudden meaninglessness, giving way to epiphanies about what really matters. It turns out to be … other people. Again, who knew? But we suddenly felt this to be real. And we understood, too, that what is superficial also matters because we all need distractions. Too much reality has been distressing. Better to rant on about compulsory sourdough – has any carbohydrate ever been so overrated? – than think about writing a living will. Yet all through this I have been struck by the ability of ordinary people to talk about death in a way that those in charge seem unable to. We are, all of us, afraid, and one of the things we fear the most is dying alone. It’s that “other people” thing. It is a comfort to many to have been there when their loved ones were dying, and the denial of even this is part of our overwhelming loss. There is no easy solution to this collective trauma, and I don’t pretend there is, but understanding that we are in one might be a start. Go out and shop or have a pint, and don’t stare into the void, seems to be the only strategy. It is not just about the huge numbers of people who have died, it is now about coming to terms with the fact that certain ways of life are over for the foreseeable future; that this thing does not just end. Prince comes on the radio, and I think about seeing him at the O2 – which he seemed to turn into his living room – and find myself wondering when I will be able to experience anything like that again. When am I going to get on a plane and be intoxicated by a new, unknown place? When I see gangs of young people breaking the rules, it’s not anger that I feel, but fear Somehow I must accept these things in ways I can’t. When I see gangs of young people breaking the rules, it’s not anger that I feel, but fear, even though anger is the go-to emotion of the social-media age, where it’s always “other people” doing the wrong things. Fear is much harder to talk about; hence the delusional world-beating waffling of the government as they try, somehow, to be upbeat. This does make me angry because grieving collectively is a complex but necessary thing. As the psychiatrist Judith Herman has written, it takes organisation and it takes vision because we are overwhelmed. The normal responses are not enough – clapping doesn’t cut it. This is what trauma is: a skewing of the world because we have fallen off the edge. We need the experts here. The idea that the economy can just be revved up by letting people go to the pub, without bothering to deal with any of the emotions around this, is some kind of deranged machismo. We see it at its greatest extreme in the US, where the wearing of masks is seen by some as sinister and weak. In individuals, post-traumatic stress may cause paranoia and a paralysis of outlook, which can sometimes be helped by finding some kind of meaning or narrative. When whole groups of people are traumatised, there is a need to understand what we have gone through, to strengthen the bonds that have been made and emphasise our own ability to change. In essence, this is a process of rehabilitation, and it will take a long time, but without it there is no normal – not even a new normal – but simply anxiety. Indeed, a good few friends have told me that the easing of lockdown has been far more stressful than lockdown itself. Their moods are all over the place, and no one really has a clue about what they can and cannot do. We yearn for the pre-lurgy life as we start to forget it. What is life post-lurgy? We are all trying to comprehend that. The global has become local and virtual, which is not all bad. But the economy cannot just be switched on while people feel so unsafe. Far from acting normal, some of us feel more vulnerable than we did two months ago. Will we feel the fear and do it anyway? I have never felt so unsure. • Suzanne Moore is a Guardian columnist