Chelsea have calmed doubts over Tammy Abraham’s future after it emerged the striker has activated a one-year extension clause in his contract, which now runs until 2023. Abraham signed a five-year deal in 2017, raising concerns that Chelsea would need to agree a new contract with the 22-year-old this summer or risk being forced into a corner in negotiations. The club opened talks with the England international over a long-term deal last year but have seen the issue drag on with little sign of a resolution. However Chelsea have given themselves breathing space after Abraham activated the one-year extension by reaching a set number of goals and games this season. Abraham, Chelsea’s top scorer with 16 goals in 40 appearances, was also handed a pay rise to his previous £50,000 a week. Chelsea have moved to tie down their academy graduates, handing long-term deals to Mason Mount, Reece James, Billy Gilmour, Callum Hudson-Odoi, Fikayo Tomori and Ruben Loftus-Cheek in the past 12 months. Negotiations with Abraham have taken longer, though. He has seen the club hand Hudson-Odoi a deal worth £120,000 a week and James around £100,000 a week and believes he deserves similar financial rewards after a fine campaign under Frank Lampard. Abraham has found life harder since the turn of the year. He struggled after injuring an ankle against Arsenal in January and went nine Premier League games without finding the net before scoring the decisive goal against Crystal Palace on Tuesday. Abraham, who could start when Chelsea visit Sheffield United on Saturday, remains a big part of Lampard’s plans despite the signing of Timo Werner from RB Leipzig. Gilmour is expected to be out for at least three months after having an operation on a knee injury on Friday. The 19-year-old midfielder went off against Palace. Chelsea remain in talks over a new deal with Willian, who is out of contract at the end of the season. The 31-year-old Brazilian, a target for Arsenal, has had his request for a three-year deal turned down, with Chelsea determined not to give the winger more than two years.