Paul Parker is getting goose bumps. He has spoken in the preceding hour and a half about the racism he faced in the 1970s and 80s, of having a starring role in England’s journey to the 1990 World Cup semi-final, and the pros and cons of playing football at Old Trafford. But it is the memories of his mate David Rocastle that catch him off guard. “For the 1990 qualifiers, Dave and I shared a room together,” says Parker. “Normally we’d go away with England on the Saturday night and not play until Wednesday. Rocky would sneak in some drinks before training on Monday. I would bring four cans of lager, Rocky would arrive with brandy and Babycham. But that was him. He was the happiest man, always smiling and would often call his wife, Janet, late at night, just to hear the sound of his baby daughter’s voice. You would hear him just singing to Melissa down the phone.” There is a pause. It’s not immediately clear if Parker is emotional or simply collecting his thoughts. “Rocky was involved in every game leading up to 1990,” Parker continues. “Before the World Cup squad was announced, there was a knock at the door. I get up – Rocky was in the bathroom – and it was Bobby Robson. I went a grey colour. All the negativity went to my head and I thought that was me done. I thought he was coming for me. But Bobby just looked at me and silently pointed for me to get out the room. I knew what was coming. “When I went back into the room, Rocky was keeping a straight face but he was an emotional man and you knew that he had been cut from the squad. I carried his bags out to his car at the Burnham Beeches hotel. I was absolutely devastated because in my head, me and Rocky were going to be sharing a room together for weeks and weeks in Italy, having the time of our lives.” Despite Rocastle’s absence, that tournament transformed Parker’s career. He arrived with just 15 minutes of competitive international experience and left as a household name, overcoming his tournament nerves by “listening to Soul II Soul before every game on the bus on my Discman”. Having been on the bench for England’s opener against Republic of Ireland, Parker played every minute thereafter and his tactical awareness, versatility and pace at right wing-back helped England bound towards a semi‑final with West Germany, where his unfortunate deflection from Andreas Brehme’s free-kick spooned over Peter Shilton into the net before Parker’s fine, raking pass for Gary Lineker set up England’s equaliser. Robson singled Parker out after the 3-2 win over Cameroon – “He leaps like a salmon and tackles like a ferret” – and the Geordie manager left a big mark on the East Ender. “Sir Bobby Robson would always ask a question of you, never an order,” explains Parker. “So you always wanted to play for him, to answer him on the pitch. And whenever we won he would always come up to you like an excited child, not knowing where to look.” Robson also removed distractions off the pitch, with players encouraged to talk and forge friendships; many of the squad had been handpicked from a range of clubs rather than the usual elite, with as many from Nottingham Forest than Liverpool, three each, and two apiece from Derby County as Manchester United. “The only people that formed a clique were the Rangers boys,” remembers Parker, “Terry Butcher, Gary Stevens, Chris Woods and Trevor Steven. They would wear their clothes backwards just to wind up the FA committee members.” Representing England was the realisation of a dream. The son of Louis and Myra, who arrived in England from Jamaica in 1959 and 1961 as part of the Windrush generation, Parker and his family had to overcome overt racism in a predominantly white West Ham neighbourhood. He would watch as his mother was handed National Front leaflets on the street, and she was the victim of multiple incidents during her work as a nurse and traffic warden. “In the East End there were skinheads about, and I was always looking over my shoulder ready to sprint,” Parker remembers. His hopes of playing for his local team were also squashed. “West Ham was a very racist club,” Parker says. “Their chief scout, Eddie Baily, was renowned for it. All my mates used to go to Upton Park behind the goal. I would go sometimes and have to take abuse from people from behind. I knew why I hadn’t been picked up by West Ham. You could have the skin as thick as a rhino, and I think I’m one of those people, but you couldn’t have got through it as a kid.” Instead it was Fulham who gave Parker his start, with the long trips across London leading to his professional debut in 1982. Parker, then a 5ft 7in centre-back, would later captain QPR before a 1991 move to Manchester United for £2m. “Everyone thought I would sign for Spurs, and I was sat in the Royal Lancaster hotel with Terry Venables when Manchester United rung me up,” says Parker. “For anyone of West Indian origin, Manchester United was the team, going right back to Bobby Charlton and Denis Law. I went straight up north that day, was taken around the ground by Alex Ferguson and that was me done. “Fergie knew everything about that club. He could have closed his eyes and walked around Old Trafford. He knew people’s names and exactly where they sat. He saw past the playing staff right down to the security guards, would say good morning on first-name terms with every single person at the training ground. United managers since often sneak around the back to avoid people but they don’t understand that when things aren’t going well, you need absolutely everyone on your side.” Parker is now is a pundit and co-commentator as well as an ambassador for Cross Channel Racing, which helps people to co-own horses at the Danebury Stables in Hampshire and network at sport events. He would win two league titles, an FA Cup and a League Cup in his five years as a right-back at United, eventually forced out by an emerging academy graduate named Gary Neville. But his time there was hugely enjoyable, on and off the pitch. “Meeting Nelson Mandela on a pre-season tour of South Africa was amazing,” recalls Parker. “Mick Hucknall also turned up quite often because he was quite pally with Sir Alex. We all found out why the band was called Simply Red. He came away with us once for a European game, on the bus, and even warmed up on the pitch at training the night before doing a shooting drill. He was a genuine fella.” It is perhaps a surprise that Parker chose to sign for Manchester United at all. Just a few years previously he had been the subject of horrific racist abuse from the Stretford End as a visiting QPR player, as the home fans repeatedly sung a chant at Parker that included threats on his life, the line “trigger, trigger, trigger” and the N-word. “I remember I made a big strong block tackle on Lee Sharpe on the byline and I honestly thought the ball had popped,” says Parker. “If a challenge was made like that now, people would be screaming for me to be hung, drawn and quartered. But Sharpey just got up and walked off to take the corner. I looked up at the crowd who were chanting, and gave them what they wanted with a smile on my face, making a gun with my hand and putting it towards my head. “My reaction was always going to be: ‘If you’re going to put me down, I’m not going to let it affect my game. I’m going to make it difficult for you to enjoy the game. You’ve paid money to watch a little black fella wander round the pitch. More fool you, you hypocrites.’ I won the header from Sharpey’s corner. “That chant wasn’t in my mind when I signed for United. It probably should have been but I never received any racist abuse when I became a Manchester United player. “For me, a black player that walks off the pitch is never going to be a hero. They would be seen maybe as a scapegoat. I think it would be a major kick in the balls to [West Brom’s] Cyrille Regis, Brendon Batson and Laurie Cunningham. If a banana was thrown, they would take a bite, shrug their shoulders and throw it back. They never let it affect their game. They were the ones that I took everything from.” Things have progressed somewhat since that awful day in front of the Stretford End but as the Black Lives Matter movement suggests, there is still a long way to go to solve the deep structural issues in both football and society as a whole. “In time, I believe there will be more black people at boardroom level although I’m not really interested in the Rooney Rule,” says Parker. “All the black lads that are playing now, like Marcus Rashford and Raheem Sterling who have had their say, the best thing they can do now is to do their best for club and country. That’s the way I believe they can help the black community.”