Biscuits – like so much of life post-lockdown – may never be the same again. We are no longer content with a stale Hobnob for our tea break. Now, we want homemade gooey, chewy perfection. The obvious crowd-pleaser is the chocolate chip biscuit. But, home-bakers, it is not your only option. (By biscuits, we mean everything from chocolate digestives to custard creams – including cookies and, controversially, jaffa cakes – but not the soft and flaky scone-like “biscuits” often plonked on plates in the US.) With that in mind, and baking trays at the ready, here’s a roundup of delicious and unexpected biscuit recipes – and not a chocolate chip in sight. Traditional peanut butter cookie recipes tend to use just three ingredients (eggs, sugar and peanut butter). That is ideal if you are working within store-cupboard limitations, but less so if you are after something to dunk in your cuppa. New York’s Levain Bakery – renowned for its thick, indulgent cookies – uses peanut butter chips combined with a dark chocolate biscuit; Melissa Stadler, of Modern Honey, offers one of many copycat recipes. If you are after something a little more grownup, date and tahini cookies hit a similar spot, as do these chocolate and pistachio cookies. Somewhere between a dunkable biscuit and a Dunkin’ donut, stuffed cookies offer plenty of potential for surprise. Nutella is the go-to, but it is not exactly adventurous. Why not stuff red velvet cookies with cream cheese or, if that sounds a little too cake-like, try marzipan-stuffed almond sugar cookies? For the die-hard biscuit fan, follow the Bosh! recipe for cookies stuffed with yet more cookies (it has opted for Oreos). Not to be confused with stuffed cookies, as detailed above, sandwich cookies are a different means of getting more bang for your biscuit. Prue Leith’s tiramisu sandwich biscuits have a dessert-like quality, while Yotam Ottolenghi and Helen Goh’s custard yo-yos with roasted rhubarb icing offer a sophisticated take on a childhood classic, and Jeremy Lee’s shortcake sandwiches are filled with a combination of lemon curd, goat’s curd and marmalade. You might need a fork for that last one. An easy win if aesthetics are your thing: the spiral effect is created by layering two or more batches of cookie dough – ideally in contrasting colours – then rolling into a log, before slicing and baking. Candy cane-coloured Christmas iterations have an hypnotic appeal – this recipe adds extra dazzle by covering the outer layer in sprinkles – but they are not necessarily the most flavourful. Chocolate and mint pinwheels offer a little more oomph, as do Martha Stewart’s chewy coconut-chocolate creations. For cookies to feel truly contrary, ditch the sugar and make them savoury. Avoid veering into cracker territory by keeping biscuits thick and crumbly; parmesan shortbread with fennel and sea salt wouldn’t be out of place on a cheeseboard, but it also pairs well with a cocktail. These manchego and chorizo melting biscuits are incredibly straightforward to make but, if you’re not keen on cheese, go heavy on the herbs instead – see David Lebovitz’s rosemary cookies with tomato jam. At the other end of the spectrum, iced cookies are about as sweet as it gets. Hop on the trend for all things tie-dye with tie-dye butter cookies, iced using an innovative “swirl-n-dip method”. For those with a steady hand and artistic inclinations, master cookie decorator Amber Spiegel is a good source of icing inspiration, with tutorials on how to recreate everything from seashell cookies (sand included) to an April Fools’ Day dinner cookie. 