Richard Hannon is having a productive Glorious Goodwood, notching his second handicap success of the week yesterday, and his Urban Icon (2.45) is the interesting one at 14-1 for the Golden Mile, a race his trainer won last year. The colt is battle-hardened after 11 runs but perhaps not entirely exposed as he makes his handicap debut under top weight. A Listed winner on the all-weather just before lockdown, he was set an ambitious target when turned out for the Summer Mile, won by Mohaather three weeks ago. He ran above his rating that day, being squeezed out of the lead at the furlong pole. A prominent racer with a turn of foot, he might be well suited by the particular demands of this big-field contest. Things may pan out better for him than a hold-up type like Sir Busker. 1.45 One Master is the top-class talent slumming it in this Group Three but a sharp seven furlongs on quick ground might not play perfectly to her strengths and she was beaten in this race on her only previous visit to Goodwood two years ago. Invitational could be dangerous at double-figure odds, bearing in mind that she pulled clear of the Duke Of Cambridge field last month at 66-1. She got very tired on that first run since January but these conditions will be much less testing and Roger Varian’s filly may just keep going. 2.15 Taking odds-on does not appeal about Khaloosy, who faces a very different test in this small field than when so impressive in the Britannia last month. My Oberon, who is also a son of Dubawi but with more speed on the other side of his pedigree, looks a serious threat on the progress he showed to score easily at York. Pontefract12.25 Polastri 12.55 Humid 1.25 Iva Reflection 1.55 Little Ted (nb) 2.25 Sudona 2.55 Frankenstella 3.25 Squelch 3.55 Petitioner Goodwood1.10 Al Qaqaa 1.45 Invitational 2.15 My Oberon 2.45 Urban Icon 3.15 Battaash 3.45 Desert Encounter 4.20 Perotto 4.55 Ventura Diamond (nap) Lingfield4.15 Wrath Of Hector 4.50 Ayo Patsy 5.25 Watch Me 5.55 Equisential 6.25 City Escape 6.55 Billie Beane 7.25 Amor Fati 7.55 Prince Llyr 8.25 Capricorn Prince Wolverhampton4.30 Black Sparrow 5.05 Susucaru 5.35 Our Man In Havana 6.05 Inexplicable 6.35 Fresh Snow 7.05 Red Bravo 7.35 Elhafei 8.05 Crystal Pegasus 8.35 Recuerdame 3.15 Something about the full-pelt five furlong track here is right up Battaash’s alley and now the warm weather has come to tilt things even more in his favour. A fourth consecutive success in the King George looks on the cards, for all that Liberty Beach and Al Raya are worth respecting. 3.45 The old man of the party, Desert Encounter could come out on top in this Glorious Stakes, just as he did a year ago. Fast ground is his thing and may allow him to turn around recent Newmarket form with Communique. He beat Alounak when landing the Canadian International last autumn. We have a £100 account credit from Betfair to offer the winner of our Goodwood competition, which this week will run from Tuesday to Friday. You must pick four fancied horses to lose at Goodwood on each of those days. The winner will be the person whose nominated horses have the shortest average Starting Price, provided they were all beaten. You will be eliminated if:i) any of your nominated horses wins,ii) any of your nominated horses is returned at an SP bigger than 12-1,iii) you nominate more or less than four runners in a single day. Two or more of your four can be in the same race if you wish. If you pick a non-runner, you must make a replacement choice before the start-time of the last race at Goodwood that day. If everyone has been eliminated by Friday, we’ll run a fresh competition that day for the same prize. If there’s a tie, the prize will be split among those in first place. Please post your four picks for today in a single post, using the comment facility below. Obviously, you must post before any of your nominated horses have run that day. Otherwise, our usual terms and conditions, which you can read here, will apply. Those who made it through Thursday must now offer four more picks for Friday's Goodwood action. Good luck!