The Hive was a bustling arts centre in the middle of the historic town of Shrewsbury in Shropshire until it had to close its doors on 17 March. As well as being a venue for arts performances and workshops, it also worked to support vulnerable young people in the community. Kathleen Jones first started attending projects at the centre when she was 16 years old after she was referred by her mental health team. When she heard the arts centre was closing its doors, she felt very worried and “didn’t know what to do” with herself.The 20-year-old student, who is in supported-living accommodation, is a member of the MYC Music project for young adults struggling with the transition to independent living, or at risk of increased loneliness. It allows her to work directly with musicians and learn about songwriting. Over the past four years, she has saved up and bought her own acoustic guitar. Jones says the weekly music sessions have helped her a lot as, previously, she “didn’t really have much confidence” in herself. The Hive, which employs a team of 11 administrators and venue staff as well as about 30 freelance artists and musicians, is still continuing its project work and has been battling to stay afloat since shutting its doors. The centre, which receives limited funding for MYC Music and other projects from Arts Council England, National Youth Music and Children In Need, among others, relies heavily on income from hiring out the venue to community groups, from music sessions for babies and toddlers and a youth theatre for teenagers to life drawing, film nights, and jazz and folk concerts. Katie Jennings, the Hive’s chief executive, estimates that the organisation has lost about £20,000 in venue hire income during lockdown. This is on top of the significant amount already lost earlier in the year when the town was hit by severe flooding. The government has pledged £1.57bn of help for the arts and heritage sectors in a long-awaited rescue package. The news came after weeks of desperate warnings that the UK was facing an irreversible cultural catastrophe without targeted support. For some arts organisations, the funding will come too late. Even large venues are not immune. The Southbank Centre in London is proposing 400 job cuts, Andrew Lloyd Webber’s LW Theatres has begun redundancy consultations, while in the Midlands two of Birmingham’s most important venues, the Symphony Hall and Town Hall, announced they needed to lose half of their permanent staff because of the Covid-19 crisis. On Thursday a damning report by the Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) select committee criticised the government’s response to the plight of the culture sector during the pandemic as too slow, too vague and jeopardising its future. And it is still unclear whether the government’s money will actually trickle down to the small community arts centres such as the Hive.Jennings says that furloughing staff and receiving emergency funding from its existing funders has enabled it to survive so far. In addition, there was a speedy pivot to online provision – such as musicians leading MYC sessions over Zoom – which has meant existing funders are happy the arts centre is still meeting its obligations.“It was really important for us to try to offer a provision online, and our incredible artists rose to the challenge. For some of the people we work with, it’s a regular social event and maybe the one thing they would leave home for in a week,” says Jennings. “The pandemic was scary and isolating and traumatic, and a couple of the projects [including MYC Music] were actually created to tackle social isolation, so immediately we were thinking it was going to be detrimental to the participants’ mental health and wellbeing, and we really wanted to continue them.”On the other side of the West Midlands, a similar venue has not been so lucky. Artrix in Bromsgrove became the first arts organisation to announce its closure as a direct result of the pandemic. The Worcestershire arts charity went into liquidation on 7 April. A statement from its trustees said its income had dropped to zero when venues were forced to close in March.“With no income since March 16, and no certainty of returning to normal ticket sales and catering income for at least six months, our assets do not cover our liabilities and we are therefore technically insolvent,” said the statement.Artrix had already been struggling financially after funding from the district and county councils and the Heart of Worcestershire College was withdrawn in 2018-19, due to local government cuts. This led to a loss of £115,000 a year. The pandemic was the final nail in the coffin for the Artrix charity, despite having furloughed its small staff of 21.Jon Morgan, director of Theatres Trust, the national advisory public body for theatres in the UK, believes many more arts venues could also go into liquidation before the end of the year, as most need to be 70% full to be financially viable. Social distancing makes that impossible. Five theatres have already closed – four have gone into administration and one has been handed back to the authorities by the operator –while a dozen or more have already made redundancies, the charity calculates. About two-thirds of the 11,000 theatres in the UK have fewer than 400 seats, but there has been an indication that the government bailout will be earmarked to save national theatres. More than 90% of grassroots venues say they face permanent closure, according to the DCMS select committee report. Morgan believes the full extent of the damage to these smaller theatres from the pandemic won’t be seen until the autumn when the furlough scheme ends. “Nobody wants to see them go, but there is a lot of great work being done in regional theatres and small community theatres,” says Morgan.“For us, it’s all about access. It’s about people being able to see performances where they live and it’s also about place-making. Theatres are often in the middle of high streets or the centres of rural communities, and they aren’t just theatres, they are social hubs as well as cultural hubs and are a safe place for people to come,” he says. A 2017 report by an all-party parliamentary group on arts, health and wellbeing found that the arts can help meet challenges in health and social care associated with ageing, loneliness, long-term conditions and mental health.Spirit de la Mare, founder of the arts journal Brogue Magazine and a trustee of various community arts organisations, is passionate about the impact culture can have on society and the way it supports people’s wellbeing and mental health. She says: “Now, more than ever, we not only need to support the arts but arm ourselves with them and make access to them readily available to all.” Back in Shrewsbury, Jones says that despite not being able to attend the project in person, the weekly sessions with musicians on Zoom has made all the difference.She says: “With the pandemic, I was going through a really bad time. My anxiety was really bad and I was struggling with not being able to go out. It’s a bit different over Zoom, but I was really relieved when I heard it was happening. When I have my Hive sessions online, everything bad just disappears straight away. All my worries go. I just focus on the music.” Jennings hopes to reopen the centre, with social-distancing measures in place, in the autumn. And, following a petition and outpouring of support to keep the Artrix open in Bromsgrove, the district council has pledged to keep it as a centre for the theatre and the arts, although its future remains unclear.