As professional tennis gears up for its return next week at the Palermo Ladies Open, Andy Murray believes that after nearly five months of inaction, players should prepare for a considerably different tour with ample upsets and opportunities for anyone bold enough to take them. “You just can’t replicate matches in practice, it just isn’t the same,” said Murray. “It is different on the body, on the mind. The pressure is just different and no matter how hard you try to make your practices as challenging and difficult as matches, they just aren’t. “Some players who have had injury lay-offs will probably be a little bit more experienced in terms of coming back after a long period, but it’s an opportunity for players. There will be upsets for sure. Going into the US Open with potentially only one or two matches in the Cincinnati event in New York, it will make for some interesting results.”Murray was defeated on Tuesday evening in the Battle of the Brits alongside his mixed doubles partner, Jodie Burrage. Despite the fact male and female players compete in the same venues around the world, it is rare to see all British players under the same roof. For Murray, tennis continues to squander a big opportunity by failing to bring men and women closer together.“I think sports miss a bit of a trick with this stuff. The Hopman Cup, for example, was a brilliant event in my opinion … Putting match-ups in tennis like Serena Williams and Roger Federer on the same court, it is so brilliant for our sport. We are able to do that in tennis and I think we should embrace it a little bit more, not necessarily every single week, but at times it would be great. I would like to see Rafa on the court with some of the top female players.” Williams is among the entries for the Western & Southern Open starting on 20 August, while the men’s draw will feature Novak Djokovic and Rafael Nadal. The tournament is usually held in Cincinnati, but because of the coronavirus pandemic will now be played in New York at the site of the US Open, which begins three days after the finals. Both players had previously expressed doubt about travelling to the United States, so their entry is something of a surprise. In Wednesday’s Battle of the Brits action, Heather Watson continued to work off her rust with a 3-6, 6-1, 10-6 win over Eden Silva while Cameron Norrie ousted the British No 1, Dan Evans, 7-6 (5), 7-6 (6), his second win over Evans this week.Meanwhile the LTA has appointed Michael Bourne, the acting director of performance at UK Sport, as its new performance director. A well-respected figure, Bourne’s hiring was made with significant input from Tim Henman, who will become more involved with LTA performance. Bourne replaces Simon Timson, who departed for Manchester City in March.