McDonald’s is to reopen around 700 dine-in restaurants across the UK from Wednesday, as it returns to trading following the coronavirus shutdown. Food will be served by table service only with customers able to order directly via the My McDonald’s app, at the till or kiosk. Diners will also need to leave their contact details – using their phone to scan a QR code or visiting a dedicated webpage – in line with government guidance. The fast food giant said its restaurants will also be taking part in the “Eat Out to Help Out” scheme from the chancellor when it starts next month. Rishi Sunak’s deal – which aims to encourage families to start eating out – will offer 50% off dine-in bills up to a maximum of £10 per head on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays in August. McDonald’s is also among the brands offering price reductions on menus after Sunak announced VAT would be reduced from 20% to 5% for the hospitality and tourism sector from 15 July until 12 January 2021. The reopenings – which follow a successful trial in four restaurant sites – come seven weeks after McDonald’s reopened its McDelivery and Drive Thru services, attracting big traffic queues in some areas. Most outlets are now open for takeaways. The chain will not be reopening dine-in restaurants in Wales, however, where eating in remains restricted. Inside the restaurants floor markings and signposting will help customers and staff remain a safe distance from each other while touchpoints, including self-order screens, card readers and doors, will be sanitised at least every 30 minutes. Perspex screens have been installed in the kitchens, service areas and drive-thru windows and additional protective equipment has been provided for restaurant teams, including disposable gloves and face coverings for those dealing directly with customers and couriers. Customers can check if their local restaurant is open for dine-in by visiting the McDonald’s restaurant locator. Restaurants and pubs were given the go-ahead to reopen on 4 July by the government.