Experimental film-maker Jonathan Glazer continues his run of short films with BBC Two, following 2019’s The Fall – a nightmarish exploration of mob violence – with this wordless exploration of the “dancing plague” that took hold in Strasbourg in 1518, causing hundreds of people to uncontrollably dance for days. Collaborating during lockdown with a global selection of contemporary dancers, Glazer’s 15-minute reverie pairs their jaunty movements with a score from his Under the Skin collaborator Mica Levi. Ammar Kalia Season four for the culture-clash sitcom revolving around youngster Eddie Huang and his Taiwanese-American family attempting to assimilate in 90s suburban Orlando. In this opening double bill, Jessica and Honey compete on Wheel of Fortune, Eddie starts high school and Michael Bolton shows up. Ali Catterall Jason Manford is your host for a roundup of Corrie’s most evil characters from the past 60 years. Manford reminds viewers of Richard Hillman, who tried to kill Gail and her family by driving them into a canal. There’s also manipulative Pat Phelan and Maya Sharma, whose obsession with Dev got out of control. Hannah Verdier Camera crews get unfettered access to the West Midlands Ambulance Service during the peak of the coronavirus outbreak in April in this confronting doc. As the virus spreads, Richard deals with his mother’s death from Covid-19 while continuing to work on the hospital frontline. AK The final part of this compelling biography of the great composer confirms an eternal truth about unusually gifted people: many of them aren’t very easy to be around. As Beethoven’s muse fades (along with his hearing), he devotes much of his time to a bitter battle over the custody of his nephew. Phil Harrison #HoodDocumentary creator Kayode Ewumi’s surreal sitcom about a pair of young entrepreneurs returns for a second series. Kazim and Jeremiah are still trying to get their home-delivery service off the ground, but a host of shady characters stand in their way, namely a young girl running from a gang. AK Heal the Living, 1.05am, Film4 Adapted from Maylis de Kerangal’s award-winning novel, Katell Quillévéré’s singular French drama follows the journey of a human heart from a teenage crash victim to a fiftysomething mother (Anne Dorval) in the last stages of cardiac disease. With A Prophet star Tahar Rahim as a transplant doctor. Paul Howlett Premier League Football, Sheffield United v Everton, 6pm, Amazon Prime Video. A free-to-air clash. Premier League Football, Brighton v Newcastle United, 5.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event/Pick. Free-to-air from the AMEX. Premier League Football, Wolves v Crystal Palace, 7.45pm, BT Sport 1. Coverage from Molineux.