Face coverings will need to be worn inside shops, takeaways, indoor shopping centres, banks, post offices and transport hubs such as stations and airports in England by the public from 24 July. The rule will not apply to staff. The regulations enlarge on those in place since 15 June, under which passengers on public transport in England – including on buses, trains and trams – have been required by law to wear face coverings. If a shop, takeaway or supermarket has a cafe or seating area then those eating or drinking there can remove their face covering in that area. The face covering must be put back on once you leave your seat. Customers will not have to wear face coverings in hairdressers and other “close contact services” such as nailbars, dentists or opticians. Dine-in restaurants, cafes and pubs are also exempt alongside cinemas, concert halls, theatres, gyms and leisure centres, and visitor attractions such as museums. Though coverings – such as cloth masks, scarves and bandanas – should go over the mouth and nose, there is no specification on the type, with the government advising people not to use medical-grade masks to ensure they remain available for frontline staff. In Scotland, the use of coverings in shops has been mandatory since 10 July, while passengers on public transport have been required to wear them since 22 June. Although shoppers in Northern Ireland and Wales are not required to wear face coverings, both have said they will keep this under review. In Northern Ireland, the use of coverings on public transport has been compulsory since 10 July, while people in Wales will be required to wear three-layer face coverings on public transport including taxis from 27 July. The exemptions for shops in England are in line with the guidance for public transport. Children under 11 are exempt and those with a physical or mental impairment or disability that means they cannot put on or wear a face covering. Banks, building societies and other businesses, including shops and pharmacies, may ask for face coverings to be removed in order to aid identification. The rules are to be enforced by the police, and those who fail to wear a face covering in shops will face a fine of up to £100, reduced to £50 if they pay within 14 days. The environment secretary, George Eustice, has said retailers “will have a role to play” in ensuring shoppers comply with the official guidance. Ken Marsh, the chairman of the Metropolitan Police Federation, said it would be “nigh on impossible” to enforce the rule because there were not enough officers to police every shop. Staff in transport hubs will be expected to “remind passengers of the law” and if necessary ask those not not wearing a face covering to leave. Most retailers have said they will not ask staff to enforce mask-wearing among customers. Peter Cowgill, the chief executive of JD Sports, has suggested the rules could diminish customer confidence, and said the fact that they were not implemented immediately was confusing. He said his stores would offer face coverings to anyone not wearing them but it would not be his staff’s role to enforce the law. “The guidance so far is that our store colleagues are not really to get involved and it’s a police matter to enforce rather than for them to get involved in any potential public disturbances,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. Richard Walker, the managing director of the Iceland grocery chain, said that if mandatory face masks in shops made customers and staff safe then they were welcome. But he added: “We won’t put our staff at risk by asking them to police this. The UK cannot afford a second wave, so we all need to play our part and show care and consideration for each other.”