My family comes from Antigua, and my mission right now is to get to the heart of Caribbean home cooking. It’s an enormous region, and the food from the islands holds so much history. Influences from Spain, France, China, India and beyond all come together to create explosive, stunning flavours. The dishes I’m sharing with you are not at all complicated, but you’ll want to give them time for the flavours to develop, to meet each other and get happy.This is weekend cooking, so make them for your family and friends and feel the love. My new venture Wadadli Kitchen is named after the original Arawak Indian name for Antigua, and for me it’s the expression of all of that love: a joyful tumble of glorious flavours, all in balance, both light and dark, and kissed by the sun. Prep 10 minCook 30 minServes 6 1 litre vegetable stock 6 corn on the cob, husks removed 1 x can 400ml full-fat coconut milk Zest and juice of 2 limes1 green chilli, finely chopped, pith and seeds discarded if you prefer less heat Salt and black pepper25g butter (if you want to make this vegan, use vegan butter or leave it out altogether) For the topping 100g desiccated coconut100g crispy shallots (you can get these ready-made from many Asian and Caribbean food stores; they’re a great store-cupboard standby)10g finely chopped fresh coriander 10g finely chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley Bring the stock to a rolling boil in a big, deep pan. Slip in the cobs, leave to cook for about five minutes, then turn off the heat and leave the corn to sit in the stock as it cools. Put a heavy-based dry frying pan on a high heat and, once hot, lay the drained corn in the pan and char for a couple of minutes on each side – you’ll probably need to cook them two or three at a time, so you don’t overcrowd the pan. Put the coconut milk, lime juice and chillies in a small saucepan, season lightly, then bring up to a gentle simmer. Stir in the butter, turn off the heat and set aside. For the topping, toast the coconut flakes in a hot dry frying pan – coconut burns very easily, so keep them moving and keep your eye on them. As soon as the coconut has a golden, burnished, toasted colour, tip it into a bowl, leave to cool, then mix with the crispy shallots and herbs, and season to taste. To serve, spoon some of the coconut milk mixture over each cob, sprinkle with the toasted coconut mix and lime zest, and tuck in. We make this on the barbecue at Wadadli Kitchen, and it works brilliantly that way – start cooking when there’s a low glow on the coals and slow-cook with the lid down for about the same amount of time as below, basting the belly in the excess marinade over several hours. Prep 15 minMarinade 8 hr+Cook 5 hrServes 6-8 1.5kg boned and skinned pork belly (ask your butcher to prepare the meat for you; you may also want to keep the skin to make some crackling to decorate the dish, and use the bones for stock) For the marinade180ml olive oil4 tbsp (15g) chopped fresh coriander, plus extra to serve 4 tbsp (15g) chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley, plus extra to serve 6 tbsp (10g) fresh oregano leaves6 tbsp (10g) fresh mint leaves2 long red chillies, finely chopped 1 long green chilli, finely chopped Zest and juice of 2 orangesZest and juice of 2 limesJuice of 1 pink grapefruit40g garlic, peeled and chopped3½ tsp (10g) ground cumin 5¼ tsp (10g) ground allspiceSalt and black pepper, to taste Blitz all the marinade ingredients in a food processor or with a hand blender. Lay the pork in a large dish, pour over the marinade, then turn the meat in the mixture, rubbing in the marinade all over and making sure every bit of the belly is coated. Cover the dish and leave overnight in the fridge. The next day, heat the oven to 140C (120C fan)/275F/gas 1. Lift the meat out of its marinade (don’t wipe off any that sticks to the joint, though; just leave most of the marinade behind in the dish) and transfer to a large roasting dish. Cover with foil, slip into the oven and roast for four and a half hours – every now and then (say, three or four times over the whole cooking period), take the dish out of the oven, lift off the foil lid and spoon the juices from the bottom of the dish over the meat. Return the foil lid, then put back in the oven. After the time is up, remove the foil, turn up the heat to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 and give the pork a final blast – after 15-20 minutes, the top will take on a lovely colour and the meat should be yielding and soft enough to cut with a spoon.To make crackling shards to serve with the meat, heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6 and line a roasting tray with baking paper. Lightly score the skin from the pork belly with a sharp knife, then rub it with a three or four fat pinches of salt – I also like to add a few caraway, cumin or fennel seeds at this point (use anything that takes your fancy). Cut the skin into long strips and lay these fat side down on the lined tray (you can, of course, leave it whole, but I think its pleasing to dress the plate with long, golden shards of crackling). Lay a second sheet of baking paper on top of the skin, then put a second baking tray of the same size on top, and roast for 45 minutes to an hour (if by this point the crackling has not gone crisp, just put it back in the oven and carry on roasting it until it has). Cut or pull the pork apart, top with finely chopped coriander and flat-leaf parsley and shards of crackling, if you have made them, and serve at once. A chow is the most simple and delicious little thing, a bit like a super-fresh, zingy chutney. I’ve used mango here, but you can use almost anything you fancy – apples, spring onions, citrus fruit, pomegranate … Prep 10 minAssembly 5 minServes 4 ½ ripe mango, peeled and diced small1 spring onion, finely chopped 1 scotch bonnet chilli (or use another, milder variety such as a long red or green chilli, say, or a bird’s eye chilli), very finely chopped – discard the pith and seeds if you prefer less heat2 tbsp finely chopped fresh coriander1 lime, zested and juicedSalt and pepper Simply combine everything in a bowl and serve alongside just about anything. Prep 10 minCook 50 minServes 6 300-350g  roughly chopped cubes of brioche (or other enriched bread – depending on which type you use, you may need more bread) 80g butter, melted, plus a little extra for greasing2 whole eggs2 egg yolks 300ml condensed milk 300ml evaporated milk 100ml whole milk 2 tsp ground cinnamon2¼ tsp ground nutmegWhipped vanilla-scented cream, to serve For the butterscotch 50g unsalted butter 200ml double cream160g light brown sugar20ml spiced rum Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Pile the brioche (or other bread) into a greased baking dish.In a large bowl or jug, stir together all the other ingredients so they are very thoroughly mixed. Pour most of the resulting custard mix over the bread, reserving just a little to pour over later. Make sure every bit of the bread is soaked in the custard, then leave to steep for about 15 minutes. Pour the rest of the custard over the pudding, slip the dish into the oven and bake for 35-40 minutes, until golden on top. Meanwhile, make the butterscotch sauce. Melt the butter in a small saucepan over a low heat, add the cream and sugar, bring it up to a simmer, then add the rum. Turn up the heat just a notch or two, leave the mixture to bubble slightly more vigorously for about 10 minutes, until it’s thick enough to coat the back of a spoon, then turn off the heat. Once cooked, leave the pudding to cool a little, pour the butterscotch over the top and serve with whipped vanilla-scented cream. • Recipes by Andi Oliver, chef/owner Andi’s Wadadli Kitchen, London E5, and judge on the BBC’s Great British Menu