It’s no surprise that Thursday’s Treasury update confirms that Australia is in the midst of the most severe economic crisis since the Great Depression. The good news is that even with government debt the highest it has been since the end of the second world war, Australia’s net debt is still considerably lower than that carried by many comparable countries before the Covid-19 pandemic. Now is not the time to worry about government debt. The yield on 10-year government bonds is less than 1%, while inflation is about 1.7%. Government borrowing for public investment is essentially interest free, and public investment is the only thing that will lift Australia out of this depression. The private sector is on its knees, with demand smashed by the shutdown of much of the domestic economy, and a massive rise in unemployment. What we should worry about is household debt. Going into this crisis, Australia had some of the highest in the world. By year’s end, well over a million Australians will be out of work, and many still in jobs are likely to have reduced incomes for at least a couple of years. Consumer demand from heavily indebted households will be depressed, and business will be reluctant to invest. We will need more government investment over coming years, so the treasurer’s announcement that 99% of its $289bn stimulus will be spent over 2019-20 and 2020-21 is bad news, indicating that the government plans to withdraw investment too early. There is no indication that a permanent boost to jobseeker is on the cards, or that investment in nation-building infrastructure like public housing is being considered. Neither does there seem to be a willingness to extend free early childhood education and care, which would help women return to work and boost Australian children’s life chances. With personal income taxes accounting for almost half total federal government revenue, the level of un- and under-employment we face will cut billions from the budget over forward estimates. It’s highly irresponsible to proceed with tax cuts for high-income-earners now: anyone lucky enough to be earning over $180,000 during the worst depression in a century doesn’t need more money to squirrel away in the stock market. That money must be invested in rebuilding our common wealth. • Emma Dawson is executive director of public policy thinktank Per Capita Treasury’s economic and fiscal update confirms that the economy will contract sharply this year and next. Real GDP, the standard measure of economy-wide activity, is projected to contract by 3.75% in 2020 and by 2.5% in 2021. This severe recession will continue to be felt in higher unemployment, lower hours, and slower wage growth. That said, the update represents a somewhat more optimistic outlook than the Reserve Bank’s statement on monetary policy in May which projected real GDP to contract by 5% in 2020 and 3% in 2021. Although serious, the recession may be just slightly less severe than initially thought, due presumably to Australia’s relative success in containing the pandemic (even in light of Victoria’s recent outbreak). With that in mind we should remember the fundamental lesson of this crisis. There’s no economic recovery unless we tightly control the pandemic. As events in the United States vividly show, hastily “reopening” the economy will backfire if the pandemic is not under control, leading to worse economic outcomes and worse public health outcomes. In a clear sign of good economic management, the federal deficit is projected to be large, about 4% of GDP this fiscal year and 10% next. Large deficits are what’s required in a severe recession of this kind, especially when interest rates are near zero. In any case, while large by recent standards these deficits are by no means historically unprecedented (the federal deficit exceeded 20% of GDP during the second world war, for example, and at a time when levels of government debt were substantially higher to begin with). We should be much more concerned with outcomes that actually directly matter for people – whether they have a job, whether they have lost hours, whether they’ve had pay cut, whether they’ve had to draw down their super – than indirect instruments of policy such as the size of the federal deficit. Indeed, in light of Treasury’s projections for stubbornly high unemployment and low wage growth for years to come, we should, if anything, be pushing even harder on the fiscal front until we actually see economic recovery in the data, not just in the projections. The big threats to the Australian economy are that we lose control of the pandemic or that we lose our nerve on fiscal policy. Complacency on either front is an invitation to an even longer, painful slump. • Chris Edmond is a professor of economics at the University of Melbourne There were lots of concerning figures in the government’s economic and fiscal update and one was the employment growth forecast. Treasury expects only 1% growth in the year to the June quarter of 2021, after a 4.4% fall in the previous year. That means only a net 120,000 workers of the 660,000 who have lost their jobs in the past three months are expected to regain employment in the next 12. That is quite different from the 850,000 people who the government told us to expect to be back at work after stage three restrictions were lifted. Treasury’s employment forecasts incorporate the $173bn policy spend committed by the government since March. With unemployment expected to be so entrenched – on the surface – it seems more fiscal stimulus is needed. One particular concern we have is that payments for workers who lose their jobs won’t continue at a high enough rate or for long enough to avoid a big painful step down in GDP. Thanks to the government’s $20bn extension of the jobkeeper and coronavirus supplement to jobkeeper and jobseeker recipients, the fiscal cliff looks less dangerous in the December quarter this year that it did, but it’s still going to be pretty challenging. Spending across the economy will fall by $50bn from the September to the December quarter simply because many of the government’s payments come to an end or are tapered back. We now know Covid-19 and its economic wreckage will still be a part of our lives in the December quarter. July has been sobering as we readjust our expectations of how bad the damage will be. The government has just extended until the end of the year the amount of time individuals can have to withdraw money from their superannuation accounts. This is no doubt an effort to smooth the fiscal cliff and keep cash coming to the households who feel they need it. But the bottom line is that the economy needs more stimulus. We think the budget in October will deliver quite a bit more, though just how much is unclear. The sooner we have clarity the better. • Cherelle Murphy is a senior economist at ANZ bank