Hopes for a speedy substantial resurgence at the global box office were dashed as Disney and Paramount made substantial changes to their release schedules. Mulan, the live-action remake that had been scheduled to open in August after a string of delays, joins Christopher Nolan’s Tenet in being removed from the schedule entirely, pending a new date. Both films had been positioned as key titles to launch a summer revival in cinemas. In a statement about Mulan’s move, Disney linked the change to fresh coronavirus spikes, leading many to suggest the studio was prioritising the US market over international territories, given that many of them are now back up and running. The French Dispatch, one of the titles Disney inherited from Fox Searchlight, has also been removed from the calendars. Wes Anderson’s comedy was to have premiered at Cannes earlier this year. Meanwhile, Ridley Scott’s Ireland-set The Last Duel starring Christian Bale and Matt Damon has moved from this Christmas to October 2021. Disney also announced a new plan for its forthcoming Avatar sequels and Star Wars spinoff movies, with four Avatars scheduled for the Christmas holidays biannually between 2022 and 2028 and three Star Wars films arriving every other year from 2023. But the studio has kept some tentpole releases in the mix for this year, including Black Widow (due 6 November), Death on the Nile (23 October) and Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story (18 December). Spielberg’s film will no longer be competing for the holiday crowd with Tom Cruise’s belated return in the Top Gun sequel, Maverick, after Paramount again shook up their slate, and moved the film to 2 July 2021. Another Paramount title now due out more than a year after its original launch date is A Quiet Place 2, one of the first big casualties of March’s lockdown. It is now in the schedule for April 2021, following a second shift from September 2020. Still set for November is No Time to Die, the 25th James Bond film. Universal’s film was the first picture to have its release dramatically delayed as the pandemic spread; the studio recently moved the US release date forward five days, to 20 November. The UK date remains 12 November.