As lockdown eases – at least officially, if not psychologically – many people may be beginning to reflect on the months spent largely confined to their homes. Imagine: This House Is Full of Music (BBC One) is here to bestow an inferiority complex on those of us who had high hopes of learning a language, mastering a musical instrument or making bread that didn’t double up as a doorstop, but have ended up wondering exactly how it was possible to pass the time from March until July without so much as an online certificate in painting-by-numbers. Lockdown inertia does not appear to have been a problem for the Kanneh-Mason family, an extraordinary group of musicians who have spent their lockdown at home in Nottingham. There are seven Kanneh-Mason siblings, aged from 10 to 24, and a family friend from Brazil, Plinio Fernandes, who decided to ride out the pandemic here instead of attempting to make the journey home. All the children are astonishingly accomplished classical musicians, which makes for a very noisy household. Cellist Sheku is perhaps the most famous of the bunch, having won the BBC Young Musician of the Year in 2016, an award that sits on the mantelpiece in the background. He performed at the wedding of Harry and Meghan two years later, and had a Top 10 album. He is the pop star of cellists. But the other children are as in love with music as he is. Their parents, Stuart and Kadiatu, speak with knowing passion about the virtue of the arts when it comes to education. Music, they say, should be there for everyone. “If it’s taken away, the consequences for all children will be terrible.” This is a rare moment of seriousness and depth in an otherwise gentle film, and it’s a shame there are not more discussions like this. But Alan Yentob prefers a light touch here, asking the children soft questions about what they love and how they do it, through his laptop (this was all filmed in accordance with social-distancing guidelines). He briefly mentions the fact that the pandemic has taken away the possibility of live performance, for now, but it doesn’t do any heavy lifting on that topic. The house really is full of music. For musicians at the level that the Kanneh-Mason siblings are at, hours of practice are required every single day. There are eight young people living together, each with their own rehearsal schedule for their own instrument. They rotate locations, and find space in bathrooms, bedrooms and wherever they can. It’s not clear whether they have immediate neighbours; moving in next door could be a wonderful experience, depending on how much you love Chopin. To eavesdrop on Sheku performing No Woman No Cry on his 400-year-old cello in the garden certainly beats the hum of a lawnmower or the tinny rattle of a distant radio playing Magic FM. Each of the siblings gets their moment to shine, as does Plinio, who performs a new arrangement of Scarborough Fair for guitar and cello with Sheku. There is Coleridge-Taylor, Bartók, Rachmaninoff and a lot of Chopin, as well as Bob Marley; the tastes in the house are eclectic, and the kids grew up listening to everything from rock to country, rap to reggae. There is a real sense of enthusiasm and hunger for experience that adds an invigorating touch. I wonder if modern documentaries have conditioned my tastes towards the bombastic. This is slow-paced and meandering, and there is a lot of atmospheric footage of people jogging and bees on flowers. It feels old-fashioned. I would like to know more about their thoughts on what may happen to live music, when there is unlikely to be a live audience to sustain it for quite some time. Mostly, it is flawless, though I enjoyed the odd moment of upset, such as the interruption of a performance by Isata by an Amazon delivery. It is more of a compilation tape of performances than it is a documentary about the family. The performances, however, are gorgeous. There is a lovely moment of neighbourly solidarity, harking back to those “clap for carers” Thursdays, when the siblings play klezmer music out on the street. It is a sweet moment of unity. The siblings also talk about the benefits of learning an instrument, even for those who choose not to pursue it professionally. It teaches listening, perseverance, hard work. By the look and sound of it, it made their lockdown a busy, beautiful place to be.