What were you hoping for?Someone outdoorsy and intelligent. My friends say I should date a geography teacher. First impressions?He seemed more relaxed than I felt. What did you talk about?Film, food, books, dating, philosophy, activism and our parallel experiences of living in Scotland, London and New Delhi. Any awkward moments?It took us both a while to figure out how to order the food. Good table manners? I assume so. I was more focused on my own dinner. How long did you stay on the call?Almost three hours. Best thing about Anushrut?The number of weird coincidences we had in common, including having oil stains on our hands from rogue bike chains earlier in the day. Did you introduce him to your housemates?No, but I did update them when I went into the kitchen. Describe Anushrut in three words?Intellectual, relaxed, enthusiastic. What do you think he made of you?I was really nervous, but relaxed as the evening went on. Any connection issues?No. And... did you swap numbers?Yes, potentially to arrange a bike ride. How did the call end?I was really tired and was aware that I had to be up early the next day. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Other than the global pandemic meaning the date had to be online, nothing comes to mind. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again in-person?Lockdown permitting, yes. What were you hoping for?Nothing much, I was keen to see how things went. First impressions?Easy to get along with and I liked how she had done her hair. What did you talk about?Climate change, colonialism, our respective research areas. At one point we discussed geography teachers as good date options. Which was a bizarre coincidence, as geography enters my research a lot. Any awkward moments?None that I can really think of, other than me trying for a few minutes to find a slightly embarrassing video of mine. Good table manners? She was sharp at reminding us to get dinner and a drink. Surprisingly our orders arrived at exactly the same time. How long did you stay on the call?Close to three hours. Best thing about Eleanor?She’s passionate, keen to think through issues, and puts them across articulately. Did you introduce her to your housemates?No, my housemate was doing his own thing. Describe Eleanor in three words?Passionate. Biker. Podcasts. What do you think she made of you?I don’t know. Hard to say. Unnecessarily fond of David Hume? Any connection issues?Luckily, none. And... did you swap numbers?Yes, we did. Hopefully we’ll end up meeting in a socially distanced fashion. How did the call end?By briefly fixing up for a potential bike ride next week. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Possibly talking more about our hobbies. Marks out of 10?A good 9. Would you meet again in person?I would like to. • Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com