Ai Weiwei: History of BombsA seductive and terrifying array of fetishised weapons of mass destruction is mapped across the main hall of the Imperial War Museum in this powerful intervention that – like the museum itself – provokes uneasy thoughts about war, history and the modern world.• Imperial War Museum, London, from 1 August to 24 May. Electronic: From Kraftwerk to the Chemical BrothersPanoramic photographs of raves by Andreas Gursky and a 3D Kraftwerk experience are among the visual and aural treats in this survey of the history and culture of electronic music. For Doctor Who buffs, it explores the pioneering sounds of Daphne Oram and the BBC Radiophonic Workshop.• The Design Museum, London, until 14 February. Steve McQueen: Year 3This epic display of portraits appears in a year when Britain’s education system has been challenged as never before. These photographs of all Year 3 pupils in London schools show the old ordinary life with entire classes posed together, sitting close. What seemed unremarkable then is now fraught with nostalgia.• Tate Britain, London, until 31 January. Denzil Forrester: Itchin & ScratchinForrester’s pounding paintings of sweaty nightlife are more carnal and earthy than the ethereal dream of club culture you may experience at the Design Museum (see above). The chunkily painted bodies in his scenes don’t look as if they’re dancing to Kraftwerk. Sex is the real theme and it is all up front, and rear, in a pulsing setting of cubist shards, seen in this 40-year retrospective of the Grenada-born British artist.• Nottingham Contemporary, until 31 August. Forgotten Masters: Indian Painting for the East India CompanyIn 18th-century India two cultures met. Miniaturist painters at Muslim and Hindu courts encountered British East India Company officials who commissioned natural history illustrations in a spirit of science. The results are dazzling. This exhibition, curated by historian William Dalrymple, reveals the last great flourishing of an art tradition that would be crushed when Britain completed its imperial conquest in the Victorian age.• The Wallace Collection, London, until 13 September. The first retrospective show since the death of celebrated photographer Terry O’Neill shows stars at their most outrageous, including this shot of Audrey Hepburn swimming in the south of France during the filming of Two for the Road in 1966. Other photos in the gallery include Frank Sinatra, Elton John, David Bowie and Elizabeth Taylor. President Erdoğan led the first prayers in the converted Hagia Sophia Ai Weiwei’s History of Bombs is chilling, nightmarish and unmissable The hill scene in Van Gogh’s final painting has finally been found! Her Majesty unveiled the new royal portrait via videocall Sinatra swinging and Hepburn swimming are among Terry O’Neill’s most celebrated images The Design Museum has reopened with a dance music exhibition … … and it’s a poignant rave paradise, says our five-star review Snatched photos of New Yorkers’ texts reveal the city’s wild side New York artist Hank Willis Thomas says the work of the BLM movement ‘will not be complete in our lifetime’ Banksy is auctioning a million-pound trio of seascapes A new Linda McCartney retrospective shows the Fab Four at their warmest Norway’s demolition of building adorned with Picassos has sparked protests Artists have begun an initiative to get Trump voted out Yosuke Hasegawa has been making origami from banknotes Rankin’s biggest challenge yet: shooting Bafta nominees remotely Online art sales offer hope for indigenous economies Native American artist Jaune Quick-to-See Smith is breaking ground in Washington Denis Thorpe’s best photograph is a brave boy’s vaccination Alberto di Lenardo captures fleeting moments of intimacy Haircuts and mayo feature in the Potato Photographer of the Year shortlist Tyler Mitchell’s intimate photos are a vision of black utopia Ten photojournalists exhibited a decades worth of photo reportage covering everything from Libyan traffickers to Mugabe’s Zimbabwe We asked, is it time to invest in a new permanence for Trafalgar Square’s fourth plinth? A photo series documented the lives of those transitioning from girlhood to young adulthood Madame de Pompadour, 1759, by François BoucherJeanne Antoinette Poisson, known as Madame de Pompadour, mistress to Louis XV of France, commissioned this portrait as part of her elaborate self-presentation through art. It shows her meditating on the relationship between passion and compassion, as she rests in a garden in front of a statue of Friendship consoling Love with her pet spaniel keeping her company. The pinks, greens and blues in which Boucher bathes her create a delicate and dreamy mood. Madame de Pompadour shares her feelings with us through a contrived yet convincing romantic pose.• Wallace Collection, London. To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here.