In August 2015, Paulette Wilson received a letter telling her she faced deportation to a country she had left as a child nearly 50 years earlier. The 59-year-old grandmother, who had arrived in the UK legally in 1968, was frightened by the menacing tone of the letter. “You are specifically considered to be a person who has failed to provide evidence of lawful entry to the United Kingdom,” it announced. “Therefore you are liable for removal.” This was followed by a warning in alarming capitals: “LIABILITY FOR REMOVAL”. The letter continued: “If you do not leave the United Kingdom as required you will be liable to enforced removal to Jamaica … If you decide to stay then your life in the UK will become increasingly more difficult.” A list followed explaining that anyone who employed Paulette would face a £20,000 fine, that her landlord would also be fined for failing to spot her irregular immigration status, and that she could be charged for NHS treatment. Paulette, who died unexpectedly on Thursday, aged 64, was exposed to the full hostility of the “hostile environment” introduced in 2012 by the then home secretary, Theresa May, under the prime minister, David Cameron, as they pursued a doomed mission to fulfil a Conservative party promise to reduce net migration to the tens of thousands. During the two and a half years she spent trying to convince the Home Office that an error had been made, she was twice arrested and spent a week wrongfully detained in an immigration removal centre, before being driven to Heathrow, where she was booked to be deported to Jamaica. She was pushed into destitution by the government’s mistake. Despite having worked and paid taxes for decades, she lost her state benefits and was no longer allowed to work in the UK. As a result, she was unable to buy food regularly and started eating meals at the homelessness centre where she had previously volunteered as a chef. But Paulette should not be seen as a victim. She played a decisive role in exposing the government’s mistakes, and this week’s announcement by the home secretary, Priti Patel, that the Home Office must become a “fair, humane, compassionate” institution owes a lot to Paulette’s determination to speak out about her experiences. Patel described the Windrush scandal as “an ugly stain on the face of our country and on the Home Office”, and acknowledged that the department’s “institutional ignorance and thoughtlessness towards the issues of race and the history of the Windrush generation” was “simply unacceptable”. She announced a “full evaluation” of the government’s hostile environment policies. The government now has a clear responsibility to honour the legacy of Paulette Wilson and the many others from the Windrush generation who have already died prematurely by making sure that these promises are acted on. When I first met Paulette in November 2017 she was understandably nervous about speaking out about being classified as being in the UK illegally, but her daughter, Natalie Barnes, encouraged her, outraged that a law-abiding grandmother had been so appallingly treated. The publication of that interview inspired hundreds of people, who later became known as the Windrush generation after the name of the ship that brought some of the first immigrants from the Caribbean in 1948, to come forward with their own accounts of extreme mistreatment at the hands of the Home Office. These were people who had arrived in Britain legally in the 1950s and 1960s, but who had been wrongly classified as immigration offenders in later life. It is possible that if Paulette had not overcome her reservations about talking to the media, the Windrush scandal would have continued to remain hidden. A small woman, who was always beautifully dressed, her dreadlocks tied back beneath brightly coloured headscarves, Paulette turned out to have a powerful voice, which she used to enormous effect. She spoke calmly to a room packed with MPs in Westminster in April 2018, and later gave clear evidence to the joint committee on human rights. Only last month she met five other people affected by the scandal to deliver a petition to Downing Street calling on the government to speed up compensation payments and to introduce all 30 of the recommendations for Home Office reform made by Wendy Williams, the author of the Windrush Lessons Learned review. Just four days after that petition was delivered, Patel agreed that officials had been too slow in making compensation payments and unexpectedly announced that she would implement all the recommendations in the review. There is no doubt that their protest contributed to this week’s promise to look again at the hostile environment. Paulette often had a wry take on her treatment. She made me laugh when she told me how detention centre staff had asked her which airport in Jamaica she would like to be returned to when she was deported, and she responded by asking how she was meant to have a view on the relative merits of airports in a country she hadn’t visited for half a century. Later, when I read Paulette’s Home Office files (a shocking catalogue of bureaucratic negligence), whoever compiled the “return logistics” report wrote in the preferred home country airport box of the questionnaire: “Cannot provide a response as she has been here so long”. During one of our several long conversations, Paulette spoke movingly about the trauma of arriving in Britain in the winter of 1968. She arrived the year that Enoch Powell delivered his “rivers of blood” speech, which dwelt in agitated detail on the arrival of West Indian children like her into the nearby constituency of Wolverhampton South, which he represented. She remembered children at her primary school telling her: “Enoch Powell is the greatest.” She dealt with them firmly. “I punched them.” This fighting spirit helped her in later life when she was confronted by a new, government-sanctioned hostile environment. Patel and the team who will be responsible for evaluating the hostile environment (now rebranded the compliant environment) should look carefully at Paulette’s treatment and assess whether they want other people to go through what she was forced to experience. For two years, Paulette was obliged to travel from her home in Wolverhampton to a Home Office reporting office in Solihull, 24 miles away, and was told she faced a £5,000 fine if she missed an appointment. She hated the humiliating experience of queuing alongside hundreds of others also categorised as immigration offenders; Natalie said the building smelled of sweat and fear. Each time she hoped she would find an official ready to listen to her, but staff were only there to record that she was complying with the Home Office’s reporting routine, as she was processed for removal. They told her to contact her case worker, but as far as she was aware she was never allocated a case worker, and was never given a number to call. A compassionate, people-first Home Office would not treat individuals like this. Patel said this week that Home Office decision-making had been described to her as “a process that ground people down and lacked compassion towards the very people who should have been supported. I have heard people speak of being dismissed as if they just did not matter and their voices were irrelevant.” Paulette was one such person, but she wanted better treatment not just for Windrush victims but for everyone treated badly by the Home Office – the refugees and asylum-seekers she met there and in detention. If Patel is serious about reform, these routine humiliations need to end. There is a real urgency in the need for progress. The cause of Paulette’s death is not clear but the stress of dealing with the Home Office mistakes has already contributed to the premature deaths of a growing list of people affected by the scandal. Sarah O’Connor, Hubert Howard and Richard Stewart, who spoke to the Guardian about the difficulties they had had after being classified as immigration offenders, all died before they were even able to file compensation claims, as did Joshua Moses and Eddie Lindsay. Last month the Home Office acknowledged that at least five people had died before receiving the compensation they had applied for; the government has also previously acknowledged that at least 13 people who were wrongly removed from the UK died before the government was able to inform them that a mistake had been made, and that they were free to return home. Paulette had received an interim compensation payment for her time in detention, but had not yet applied under the Windrush compensation scheme. Natalie said her mother was overwhelmed by the prospect of filling in the forms, and she stressed that in any case her mother had never been interested in the money; she just wanted justice. A crowdfunding page has been set up to help with funeral costs. A Home Office spokesperson said: “We extend our deepest sympathies to Ms Wilson’s family. The home secretary has been clear that the mistreatment of the Windrush generation by successive governments was completely unacceptable and that she is determined to right those wrongs.”