Amber Heard has admitted she sometimes got angry and would “lose her cool” but has blamed a barrage of bottle-throwing on her ex-husband Johnny Depp. On the third day of giving evidence in the high court, Heard recalled a ferocious row between the two Hollywood actors, which she said started when she tried to stop him drinking spirits at a location house in Australia where he was filming for the Pirates of the Caribbean series. Depp, 57, is suing the Sun’s publisher, News Group Newspapers (NGN), and its executive editor, Dan Wootton, over an article that called him a “wife beater” and referred to “overwhelming evidence” that he had attacked Heard. Depp denies ever hitting Heard, 34, who has submitted details of 14 occasions during their relationship when she claims he assaulted her. The row between the couple in March 2015 erupted, Heard told the court, when she tried to stop Depp drinking. “He had given up the drinking for a while. It was on a list of: if this happens, I leave. He was taunting me to take [the bottle] and would revoke it when I reached.” Heard said when he was sober Depp would thank her for saving his life “by standing up to him about the booze” and thought this would be another such occasion. She continued: “I got the bottle a second time and I smashed it on the floor between Johnny and me. I think it snapped something in him. He started picking up bottles and was using them like grenades or bombs, throwing them one after the other in my direction. “I felt glass breaking behind me. I retreated into the bar and he didn’t stop. I was too scared to look behind me. I felt glass hitting my arms. He threw all the bottles that were in reach except one, which was a celebratory magnum-size bottle of wine. There had been 30 or so bottles on the bar.” Asked by Eleanor Laws QC, representing Depp, whether it had instead been her who had thrown bottles, Heard denied that she had done so. She also denied cutting Depp’s finger with a bottle and later stubbing a cigarette out on his cheek. Heard said: “No. Johnny did it [burned his cheek] right in front of me. He often did things like that.” Laws put it to Heard: “You would get yourself into rages on some occasions.” Heard replied: “Sometimes I would get angry but not to the extent of throwing something offensively … Sometimes I get angry and lose my cool, yes.” The only times she threw anything at Depp, Heard said, was to “escape Johnny when he was beating me up”. At the start of Wednesday morning’s session, Mr Justice Nicol said Depp’s lawyers should be given access to a mirror download of Heard’s phone so that images she had taken of herself could be examined. Depp’s lawyers have claimed photos were altered to make it look like she had injuries. The judge did not give his reasons for his ruling but read out part of the application by David Sherborne, also representing Depp, who alleged that filters may have been used in an attempt to make her face appear much redder. The hearing continues.