A much-mythologised high point of recent nationalistic pride, it makes perfect sense that the BBC would be filling the holes in the summer sporting schedules with a replay of the London 2012 opening ceremony, directed by Danny Boyle. Expect Daniel Craig jumping out of a helicopter into the stadium, Mr Bean performing with the London Symphony Orchestra and a pyromaniac’s dream in the lighting of that gigantic cauldron. It may all now seem a world away. Ammar Kalia From the 1966 World Cup to the 2012 Olympics, Britain’s tendency to get slightly carried away by sporting success endures. Jack Whitehall’s cheerfully irreverent series explores the losers as well as the winners, recalling the likes of Zola Budd and Eddie “The Eagle” Edwards. Phil Harrison The most barking mad of lockdown era commissions – a canine version of Through the Keyhole – comes to a close tonight, with a labradoodle and a pair of American spaniels guiding us around their homes. Travel sickness-inducing dog-mounted camera work aside, it really is a dog’s dinner. Hannah J Davies It’s all aboard the HMS Catkin, when Cat (Lauren Socha) takes a despondent Cathy (Ellie White) on their very own “sister honeymoon” (“We’ll eat a shit-ton of crisps and hit the deck like Di and Dodi”) in the final part of Holly Walsh’s odd-couple comedy. Meanwhile, there are even more surprises in store. Ali Catterall Closing this charming series charting a year spent in Britain’s wildlife hotspots is this film on north-east England’s North York Moors. We follow the hardy Swaledale sheep as they graze year-round, while wild grouse feed on the purple heather alongside majestic Emperor moths. AK Morgan ends his entertaining tour of Latin music with Puerto Rican music. Starting in New York, which is home to more than a million Puerto Ricans, Morgan learns how Latin rhythms were fused with American R&B to create the 60s craze of boogaloo before heading to the country itself. AK Ad Astra, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere Brad Pitt’s ace astronaut Roy McBride learns that his father (Tommy Lee Jones), lost in space near Neptune many moons ago, may be alive – and gone rogue, in a very Kurtzian way. Director James Gray’s starry saga takes a voyage to the far reaches of the solar system, and into a very Conradian inner universe. Paul Howlett Super Rugby: Reds v Western Force, 10am, Sky Sports Action. Third round of fixtures from Suncorp Stadium. Test Cricket: England v West Indies, 10.30am, Sky Sports Main Event. Second day of the second test in the series. AFL: Geelong Cats v Collingwood Magpies, 11am, BT Sport 1, Clash from Optus Stadium.