Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories this morning. Pressure is growing on Prince Andrew to talk to US prosecutors after the socialite Ghislaine Maxwell was arrested in relation to alleged sex crimes involving their mutual friend and convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. Maxwell appeared via video link in a court in New Hampshire yesterday after being arrested at a secluded estate and charged with alleged sex offences, conspiracy and perjury involving Epstein, the disgraced financier who took his life in jail last year. Acting US attorney Audrey Strauss told reporters in Manhattan yesterday that she would “welcome Prince Andrew coming in to talk with us”. Prosecutors in New York have accused Maxwell of “slithering away” into hiding and of previously lying repeatedly about her direct and indirect involvement in the abuse of underage girls. They alleged she helped Epstein to groom young women and that she also participated in the abuse. Maxwell has denied any wrongdoing. However, her arrest is likely to send tremors through the celebrity circle that Maxwell is said to have helped Epstein to build when she moved to New York in the 1990s. It will also focus attention again on the prince’s relationship with Maxwell, who introduced him to Epstein in 1999. Coronavirus updates – Boris Johnson will today use a televised address to warn people in England to behave responsibly when pubs reopen this weekend, adding that the country is not “out of the woods yet” on containing the coronavirus. People must abide by social distancing rules at pubs, restaurants and hairdressers or risk those businesses being shut down again in renewed localised lockdowns, he will say. Figures from Public Health England showed yesterday that acute respiratory outbreaks more than doubled in workplaces last week. English tourists will be able to visit Spain, Italy, France and Germany from next Friday without having to quarantine for 14 days on their return. Travel restrictions on up to 60 other countries and territories are also set to be lifted. The devolved nations will set out their plans at a later date. The English curriculum may need to be changed to “re-teach” subjects to children starting secondary school this year to make up for lessons missed during lockdown as the government outlined its plan to reopen schools in September with few restrictions. Prof Robin Shattock of Imperial College London says he is “cautiously optimistic” that his groundbreaking research using genetic coding will produce a vaccine that will work as well as any of the other 120 being pioneered around the world. The Trump administration has no regrets about its decision to push states into reopening their economies, treasury secretary Steve Mnuchin said, despite the huge surge in Covid-19 in the US that saw 37 states record a rise in cases on Thursday. It comes after former CIA director Leon Panetta said the president had “gone awol” during the crisis. Texans have been told by their governor that they must wear masks in public to help stop the spread. Pubs in Ireland have already opened to a positive welcome. In Australia, officials believe one so-called superspreader could be responsible for the spike in cases that has seen 300,000 people in Melbourne placed back into lockdown. You can follow overnight developments from around the world at our live blog here. Hong Kong call – Pro-democracy activists are discussing a plan to create an unofficial parliament-in-exile to preserve democracy in Hong Kong and send a message to China that freedom cannot be crushed. Simon Cheng, a former British consulate staffer in Hong Kong turned campaigner, revealed the plan after being granted asylum in the UK. He has said he was tortured by China’s secret police. Another leading democracy campaigner, Nathan Law, has left Hong Kong in the wake of the passing of draconian new security laws in the territory that appeared to usher in a new era of direct control by Beijing. Rowling row – Two of the most popular website catering for Harry Potter fans have distanced themselves from author JK Rowling because of her comments about transgender rights. The Leaky Cauldron and Mugglenet said they would no longer provide links to the British author’s personal website, use photos of her, or write about achievements that do not relate to the world she created. Rowling caused outrage by saying transgender rights could be at odds with the message of empowerment in her books. Flagging up – Organisers of the BBC Proms have announced plans for a slimmed-down version of the concerts which will go ahead this summer but almost certainly without a live audience. Live and audience-free proms begin on 28 August and will feature each of the BBC orchestras. Sakari Oramo will conduct the opening live concert while the Finnish conductor Dalia Stasevska will be on last night duties. Viewers and listeners will be encouraged to wave flags and sing along in their homes. Guardian reporter Aamna Mohdin meets residents from Church End, a small, deprived neighbourhood in Brent, north London. She examines how housing pressures, in-work poverty and racial inequalities contributed to the deaths of 36 residents from Covid-19 Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/07/02-76138-20200703_TIF_Brent.mp3 Vivica A Fox has played an influential part in shaping on-screen images of African American life for three decades, starring in Independence Day, Curb Your Enthusiasm and Kill Bill! She tells Ryan Gilbey about her rise to stardom, her encounter with a pre-presidential Donald Trump, and why Black Lives Matter will be his undoing. Pep Guardiola paid tribute to the attitude of his Manchester City players as Kevin De Bruyne and Phil Foden inspired them to a 4-0 victory against the newly crowned champions Liverpool. England’s smooth preparations for the Test series against West Indies have been undermined by the news that Sam Curran spent the day self-isolating in his room after sickness and diarrhoea overnight. England players will wear Black Lives Matter badges on the collar of their shirts during the series, calling it an “act of solidarity” with their Caribbean opponents. Lewis Hamilton has said winning the Formula One world championship this season would mean more than ever given his personal commitment to the Black Lives Matter movement. Manu Tuilagi can make a straightforward claim against Leicester for compensation and damages after he was stood down by the club, according to a leading sports lawyer. The prospect of a blanket ban on all Russian track and field athletes has increased after World Athletics froze the process allowing them to compete on the international circuit. And nine more NBA players have tested positive for Covid-19, less than a week before teams are set to travel to Florida to resume the 2020 season. The owner of the Bella Italia, Café Rouge and Las Iguanas restaurant chains has collapsed into administration, with the immediate loss of 1,900 jobs. The Casual Dining Group has appointed the advisory firm AlixPartners to handle the administration, which is likely to result in the breakup of the group but 91 of its existing 250 sites will remain shut. The FTSE100 will open flat this morning while the pound is buying $1.246 and €1.109. The Guardian sums up the line of most of the front pages with “Pressure on Prince Andrew as friend Maxwell arrested”. The Times has “Come and talk to us, prosecutors tell Andrew” and the Telegraph headline reads: “Duke urged to help with US inquiry as Maxwell is charged with grooming girls”. The Mail says “Prince is told: Time to come in”. The Mirror reads “FBI charges prince’s pal with grooming young girls”. The Express leads with the expected statement from Boris Johnson today: “Boris: don’t be reckless on super Saturday”, although the i reckons “Public to shun super Saturday”. The Scotsman says “Scots face the big cover-up as lockdown eased further” because Scots will be urged to wear face masks outside. The FT goes with: “Sunak plays down tax cut options and focuses in averting job losses”. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com