Wigan Warriors rugby league club have announced their intention to buy their troubled housemates Wigan Athletic. The Super League side, who share the DW Stadium with the Championship team, are one of 50 parties who have declared an interest in buying the club, according to the administrator. News of Warriors’ interest is a rare positive for the stricken Latics. It was welcomed by the local council, which backs the bid, and the lead administrator, Gerald Krasner, but it came at the same time as the announcement of 75 job losses caused by the club suddenly entering administration last week. The Warriors’ bid is being led by their chairman, Ian Lenagan, a former chairman of the English Football League. “We strongly believe Wigan Athletic is better being locally owned,” they said in a statement. “As sustainability and ownership of the stadium is equally important to both clubs, we are currently working with our longstanding advisers KPMG and talking to external parties. “Wigan Warriors and Wigan Athletic are both local sporting institutions and it is our belief this is a unique opportunity to bring the ownership of these two great clubs together under one roof, each operating independently as before, but under a Wigan Sporting Partnership banner. It is envisaged each club would retain all its training grounds, management and facilities.” Speaking at a press conference, Krasner said he had encouraged the bid. “They spoke to me earlier today and told me where they were,” he said. “I wished them well. I suggested they get in touch with the supporters’ club and local businesses to rally round and get this club saved and moved forward. I’m hopeful that ultimately they will be one of the bidders for the club.” Wigan were put into administration by Au Yeung, their owner since early June, who on Tuesday gave his version of events to Wigan Today. “We bought Wigan Athletic with the best intentions: to create a team that would get the club back into the Premier League and I have invested more than £40m,” the Hong Kong businessman said. “Unfortunately, the Covid-19 crisis has severely impacted people and businesses around the world – and Championship clubs, which rely on fans coming through the turnstiles, are no exception. “This has fundamentally undermined our ability to fund Wigan Athletic and, after struggling to find a solution, in the end took the difficult decision to put the club into administration to ensure its survival.” The administrator confirmed the majority of non-playing staff had been made redundant, with no guarantee further numbers will not follow. The players have been given 20% of the monies owed but future payments are dependent on revenues generated from player sales. “Last week I said I had two objectives,” Krasner said. “One was that Wigan should make it through to the end of the season. I said I was optimistic and this week I am more optimistic of achieving that objective. The second objective was to save the club so fans could come and watch them next season. I am still optimistic we will be able to find a buyer. “My other concern now is that the club do not get a further points deduction because they fail to pay creditors. This penalty would come in next season and together with my joint administrators we are working on a strategy to meet that minimum commitment.” Krasner said the club had received offers for players, including one in the past 24 hours for a young prospect that was “instantly turned down”. He confirmed also non-disclosure agreements had been sent to 50 bidders, three of whom have presented proof of funds. A deadline of 21 July has been set for bids. Krasner said the club had written to the EFL to appeal against the 12-point deduction for entering administration. Paul Cook’s side are six points clear of the relegation zone with five games remaining.