I forgot how to cry as a man. Laying in an economy box at the end of the funeral home was my departed grandmother. Flowers my mum had chosen hung from a borrowed vase. I sat with my family, numb. I knew I should feel something about her death, but I was empty. A celebrant was riffing from a lectern. “Sharon, I hear, was a lovely woman,” she said. “It’s Shirl,” came a hesitant voice from the audience. I cringed. “Sorry, Shirl. And now, she’s up there in the Lord’s kingdom in a great big room, with all of the friends who got there before her, and they’re so happy. They’re laughing with Sharon and they’re smiling, and they’re all eating her favourite cake!” I wanted to cry. I knew I should, but I couldn’t. I hadn’t cried in years. I exhaled, deeply. “Right,” I said, standing up. “I’m out!” I squeezed my hairy, manly frame past the mourners in my row. I stepped on my mum’s toes, apologised, and then slipped up the aisle and out of the building. Outside, I stood with my back against the wall and watched the morning traffic on the Mudgee highway. I thought about times I’d spent with nan, about her dry and endless Anzac biscuits – so tough you could prop up a wonky fridge with them. I wanted to cry. I knew I should, but I couldn’t. I hadn’t cried in years. At that point, I barely felt anything, and it seemed like a betrayal of my grandmother’s love. But I was as dead inside my male body as she was inside the box. A decade later, I’m a transgender woman. Thanks to hormone replacement therapy – or HRT – I feel again. There is a lot said about the obvious changes from HRT. The changes to secondary sex characteristics – skin, hair, fat and breasts. There is too much said about primary sex characteristics – that is, genitals. But for me, the real value of HRT is existential. It’s putting the right fuel in your engine, like filling up with unleaded instead of diesel at the pump. Trans women often describe the emotional benefit of their transition not so much by feeling something new, but by resolution. We’ve upgraded to high-definition emotions, feelings which are just below the surface instead of buried in entrenched layers of gender dysphoria. We still have to allow ourselves to feel, but because we no longer spend so much time hating our bodies, we can enjoy our existence again. Sometimes it can be overwhelming, especially after decades of feeling afraid to express yourself as the wrong gender. I still remember my first laughing/crying fit. A friend had given me the phone number for a person I idolised and told me they were expecting my call. The rush of gratitude, excitement, nervousness and giddy joy turned me to soup. One moment I was laughing, the next I was bawling. Then I was laughing about crying, and crying because I was laughing about it. To feel that range of emotions was something I never thought would be possible, and yet it’s now a monthly occurrence. There are other benefits, too. The loss of a male sex drive has been liberating. I loathed unwanted arousal, and as a guy it came often. Sometimes the male body just decides: it’s time to be aroused. I could get erections from the vibrations of a bus, from dropping a pie and sauce, from watching an ibis drink sweet nectar from a bin. For many men, this is a great perk. I would envy guys who could ride waves of testosterone, standing proudly, hanging one. They seemed so at ease and comfortable. But I would dive beneath the waves, a part of me hoping I’d be swallowed in the undertow. With HRT, my sex drive has completely changed, and it’s joyous. I no longer feel driven or distracted by arousal. Nowhere is this more important than around my women friends. I can enjoy their companionship at a deeper level, as they share with me their favourite ways to be. I don’t fear that my body might betray me in their company. There is a heavy price to being transgender. Especially if, like me, you transition after your teenage years, when hormones have already wreaked havoc upon your body. My partner is also trans, and to complete our transitions in our 30s we’re up for at least $200,000 between us. If we did everything we wanted surgically, that amount could double. We might spend as much to live in ourselves as we would buying a rural house. The defining quality of people is that we shape our reality. Animals respond to information. We change it. It’s what has brought us medicine, clothing, houses, warm water and humble toilets. None of these things are strictly needed to live, but they make our existence better. Voluntary evolution is the hallmark of humanity. Gender affirmation, through hormone replacement therapy, is an awesome celebration of that quality. Trans and gender diverse people today are in the forge of evolution, we are wayfarers, nova heralds. We seek out and discover new ways to be. It means I can be comfortable with who I am within myself, who I am around others. It’s made me a better person. When you transition, so does everyone around you. They must unlearn who they thought you were. That discovery can sometimes be daunting, but there is so much more love and joy to be found with a person who loves themselves. I often wonder what my grandmother would make of my newfound happiness, what she might say to see me evolved. It’s such a beautiful thing, I can cry.