Downing Street has rejected the idea of offering people forced to quarantine on their return from Spain the chance of sick pay, saying those whose employers will not pay them in their absence should claim universal credit or seek arbitration. Unions and others have urged ministers to ensure staff forced to quarantine who will not be paid are given statutory sick pay, and that this should be increased. The announcement of mandatory 14-day self-isolation for people coming into the UK from Spain was made on Saturday evening, with many thousands of Britons on holiday there, and others still set to travel. Asked about what help could be provided, Boris Johnson’s spokesman said the government “would encourage employers to be understanding of those returning, and flexible in accommodating their need to self-isolate”, for example letting them work from home when possible. Other arrangements could be made if this was not feasible, he said, with many companies having policies that would allow people to still be paid. Asked what would happen for those who would not be paid, he said: “If there are people who need urgent support, they may be entitled to the new-style employment support allowance or universal credit.” The UC support would start at an “assessment rate” of £58.90 a week for those aged under 25, and £74.35 a week for people aged 25 or over. While UC payments can take up to five weeks to begin, advances were available, the spokesman said. Another option would be for employees to seek arbitration from the workplace dispute settlement service Acas, he added. Asked what choice someone should make if they were told to quarantine but faced the sack if they did not turn up for work, the spokesman said: “Our advice is very clear on the need for people to self-isolate.” Asked if it would not be easier to simply extend statutory sick pay, the spokesman said: “There is support available for those in need. Of course, we keep our response to the pandemic under review, and regularly reassess the support available.” The spokesman said there was “a high level of compliance” to existing quarantine rules imposed on other countries. So far, police have issued only three fixed penalty notices to people who have not kept to self-isolation regulations, he said. Speaking earlier on Monday, the TUC general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said it was “not holidaymakers’ fault that the guidance has changed”. She said: “Wherever possible, employers should do the right thing and pay quarantined workers their full pay. The government must also make it clear that people who can’t work from home during quarantine will be eligible for statutory sick pay. And they should increase sick pay from £95 a week to at least the level of the real living wage of £320 a week. “In addition, ministers should change the law to stop employers from sacking quarantined workers.”