England’s cricketers are to wear Black Lives Matter badges on the collar of their shirts during the upcoming Test series against West Indies, calling it an “act of solidarity” with their Caribbean opponents. The logo Joe Root and his teammates will carry is the same as the badge on Premier League shirts, created by the designer Alisha Hosannah, partner of Watford’s captain Troy Deeney. With a clenched fist replacing the “a” in black it is a potent image in itself, but it is also becoming a symbol of English sport’s attempts to distance its own actions in protesting against racial injustice from those of the organisation that shares the name. Root said the decision to wear the logo had been shared by players and management. “It is very simple, we believe there is no room for racism or any form of discrimination, anywhere,” he said. “It is important to show solidarity to the black community and to raise much needed awareness around the topics of equality and justice. The England players and management are unified in this approach and will use the platform of international cricket to fully support the objective of eradicating racial prejudice wherever it exists.” Tom Harrison, the ECB chief executive, endorsed Root’s sentiments but also issued a clarification: “The England and Wales Cricket Board fully support the message that Black Lives Matter,” he said. “It has become a message of solidarity and a drive for progress and societal change. “Our support of that message is not an endorsement, tacit or otherwise, of any political organisation, nor the backing of any group that calls for violence or condones illegal activity. We are aware of certain aspects of the movement that promote their own political views, and their actions are not supported in any way by the ECB and our players.” Harrison’s words were echoed on Thursday by different organisations within sports and media, including the BBC and Sky Sports. The broadcaster, which has been assertive in its commitment to anti-racist messaging and content since the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis in May and particularly since the return of the Premier League, had come under scrutiny after some of its presenters had been observed to have stopped wearing Black Lives Matter badges. In a statement Sky Sports said: “Our support is for the moral cause and campaign, that Black Lives Matter, rather than for any political organisation.” It also, however, laid out three ways in which Sky intended to fight racism more materially, including “improving its Black and minority ethnic representation at all levels”. In explaining why its presenters did not wear Black Lives Matter badges, the BBC referenced its guidelines on impartiality which say the BBC must remain “distanced” from causes “no matter how worthy they appear”. A spokesperson said: “We are not impartial on racism, but as people will know, when on screen, our broadcasters remain independent and distanced from campaigners.” The flurry of clarifications came after a select committee hearing this week in which MPs interrogated the Premier League’s chief executive, Richard Masters, over the competition’s strong support for Black Lives Matter. MPs sought clarification over the difference between BLM, whose organisational arm supports specific anti-racist policies that include defunding police forces, and other political campaigns such as the pro-Catalan independence movement, supported by the Manchester City manager Pep Guardiola, an action which was prohibited by the FA. Masters suggested the league was drawing “a clear distinction between a moral cause and a political movement or agenda”. It Is understood the Premier League, in drawing up its pro-BLM stance, did not consult with the organisation Black Lives Matter.