Lando Norris has reasserted his commitment to fighting racism. In the runup to the British Grand Prix this weekend, the McLaren driver was unequivocal in his belief that he and his colleagues could make a difference in promoting equality. He is also confident drivers will agree to make a collective gesture before the race, after their efforts had proved disorganised at the previous two meetings. Norris goes into the British GP, the first of a double header at Silverstone, in fine form. He is fourth in the world championship, having taken a podium place at the first round in Austria, denying Lewis Hamilton third place with the fastest lap of the race on his final circuit. At the Styrian GP, which also took place at the Red Bull Ring, he claimed fifth with a brilliant late charge, passing Daniel Ricciardo on the penultimate lap and both of the Racing Point drivers – Sergio Pérez and Lance Stroll – on his final lap. McLaren are third behind Mercedes and Red Bull in the constructors’ championship. The 20-year-old is in his second season in F1 but was one of the first to publicly speak out against racism after Hamilton called out drivers for their silence on the subject. Norris has taken a knee alongside Hamilton at all three races this season. He believes it was imperative to act publicly in support of the cause. Norris said: “I take a knee because that is most meaningful for the situation we are in. I want to have the biggest impact I can on ending racism. It is one of the few times in life when people like me or us as drivers can have an impact on the future. This is one of the biggest initiatives around the world to go up against something and make a change going into the future and shape it in some way. I want to do everything I can.” At the first round in Austria, F1 arranged time for the drivers to gather on the grid to make an anti-racism gesture. However, at the following two rounds there were no formal arrangements, and while gestures did occur there was no display of collective unity. Some drivers were late, some did not wear the “End Racism” T-shirts and the procedure was rushed. “After the last race [the Hungarian Grand Prix] there needs to be a bigger discussion about what we’re doing for the next few weekends. It was a mess,” Norris said. “We all support it, no matter what. There just needs to be a bigger discussion and better planning for everything come Sunday. We just need to put a better plan in place along with the FIA and Formula One on what we are going to be doing. We will have a better structure and better plan in place for this weekend.” Hamilton has also said he intends to try and ensure there is a plan in place at Silverstone, in conjunction between the drivers, F1 and the FIA. It is understood F1 has scheduled a specific time for the anti-racism gesture to take place this weekend. With the McLaren performing strongly through the fast corners of Austria, the team will be optimistic they can return another good result at their home race. In contrast, Ferrari are struggling with an underpowered car that is well off the pace. They are fifth in the world championship. McLaren have not finished in front of Ferrari in the constructors’ championship since 2011 but Norris believes his team have every chance to overcome the Scuderia this year. “We have an opportunity to beat them,” he said. “We have an opportunity to fight them throughout the season. It would mean a lot to us as a team to take the next step and beat a team that’s been front-running for many years, to show the progress we have made. Ferrari are an extremely good team with a big budget, a much bigger budget than us, so it would be rewarding for us to beat them.” This weekend’s race and the following weekend’s 70th Anniversary GP, also at Silverstone, will be held behind closed doors. Norris is excited to be racing once more but admitted the lack of fans is a real blow. He said: “We call it the home race because of the fans. When they are not there it’s very difficult to call it a home race. You’re just racing on your home track without it having any proper meaning or atmosphere. “Why it was so cool last year was because of all the fans. That’s what makes it special. It’s not just the fact it’s the country I was born in. The reason everyone loves their home race is because of the fans. When you don’t have the fans it doesn’t mean as much, it’s not as cool, it’s not as special.”