How have you never been to Ibiza? Definitely in the 10 most tedious questions I’ve been asked several times over in life and the answer is, well, chill-out Café del Mar. I grew up when Ibiza Uncovered was very much a thing. If, as everyone says, the spirit of acid house on the island died in 1989 and the hippies had been outnumbered by the worst excesses of a genre we’ll call Very Drunk Brits Abroad, well, yikes! It just really wasn’t my bag. But what an incredible way to have been proved wrong. Ibiza, a bit like New York, has a bizarre overfamiliarity to it, particularly if you have an acute enthusiasm for dance and pop culture. So it was weird to arrive last week on an island that I’ve largely imbibed through vintage copies of the Face magazine, the music made here and really quite terrible films. Weirder still, when it’s so void of everything – noise, drunks, the three million people who visit the place every summer – in the middle of a pandemic. There is no escaping the virus. But it is not the all-encompassing alarm it is when you’re contained within your home space. Face masks, social distancing, hands sanitised within an inch of their skin are now a wearying feature of modern life but I’m a big believer in the sophisticated twin philosophies of Getting On With It and Make The Most Of Everything. Things would be too depressing otherwise. The idea of getting on a plane did still seem ludicrous on Tuesday. Friends were split between fear and envy. I didn’t dare tell my mum. Like everyone else, my lockdown has been contained in parks, supermarkets and long stretches on the sofa, gently expanding my waistline rather than horizons. But, touch wood, I can’t say any of the pre-airport jitters weren’t worth it. At this sedate pace, I’ve predictably fallen for Ibiza. It’s the characters, specifically the women I’ve managed to meet and interview, who fascinate me. Runaways, eccentrics, but full-on masterminds who have been emotionally and financially invested in the island for years. Scrabble, or at least the online version owned by Hasbro, has made an official move to ban ethnic and racial slurs from the board. News that passed most people by, but I’ve become hopelessly and pathetically addicted to the Scrabble app. So my obsession now extends to trying to understand why there are 192,000 playable words – some of them aren’t even real, guys! – that exist in this demented space. Offline, the game sold in shops banned slurs sometime in 1994. Not a bad shout, you’d suppose. But the Internet Scrabble Cartel (not its official name) is a different beast and so an uproar ensued somewhere online and hardcore Scrabble fiends are arguing that the game is about maths, not words. Either way, I’m mostly fixated on Philip K. The break in my winning streak. The tiny avatar wearing a tux and raising a glass of champagne in his picture. My Scrabble nemesis whose last play was dropping down C U N T on the board. Obviously I demand an immediate ban – he won by 23 points. I bumped into TV presenter Anita Rani last summer on the train back to London from Gloucestershire. She mentioned she wanted to work on a project commemorating south Asian heritage, something that would be a national month of education and celebration. Ambition on this scale can often get undercut by inertia but it is no surprise to me that Rani, a tornado of enthusiasm, actually did go out and do this. South Asian Heritage Month launched this weekend and is hosting events and debates online throughout August. Kudos to her energy and elbow grease. • Nosheen Iqbal is an Observer columnist