Downing Street sources have denied Brexit negotiations between the UK and European Union have broken down, but admit they are at an impasse. After two full days of talks in London, No 10 officials described the current state of play as neither a “breakthrough nor a breakdown”. The latest round is expected to end on Thursday without advancing on a deal. Michel Barnier, the EU’s chief negotiator, and his UK counterpart, David Frost, are in the midst of intensified discussions. A fifth round of talks will go ahead as planned next week, with another round scheduled for August unless agreed otherwise. After 47 years and 30 days it was all over. As the clock struck 11pm on 31 January 2020, the UK was officially divorced from the EU and began trying to carve out a new global role as a sovereign nation. It was a union that got off to a tricky start and continued to be marked by the UK’s sometimes conflicted relationship with its neighbours. The French president, Charles de Gaulle, vetoes Britain’s entry to EEC, accusing the UK of a “deep-seated hostility” towards the European project. With Sir Edward Heath having signed the accession treaty the previous year, the UK enters the EEC in an official ceremony complete with a torch-lit rally, dickie-bowed officials and a procession of political leaders, including former prime ministers Harold Macmillan and Alec Douglas-Home. The UK decides to stay in the common market after 67% voted "yes". Margaret Thatcher, later to be leader of the Conservative party, campaigned to remain. Margaret Thatcher negotiated what became known as the UK rebate with other EU members after the "iron lady" marched into the former French royal palace at Fontainebleau to demand “our own money back” claiming for every £2 contributed we get only £1 back” despite being one of the “three poorer” members of the community. It was a move that sowed the seeds of Tory Euroscepticism that was to later cause the Brexit schism in the party. Thatcher served notice on the EU community in a defining moment in EU politics in which she questioned the expansionist plans of Jacques Delors, who had remarked that 80% of all decisions on economic and social policy would be made by the European Community within 10 years with a European government in “embryo”. That was a bridge too far for Thatcher. Collapse of Berlin wall and fall of communism in eastern Europe, which would later lead to expansion of EU. Divisions between the UK and the EU deepened with Thatcher telling the Commons in an infamous speech it was ‘no, no, no’ to what she saw as Delors’ continued power grab. Rupert Murdoch’s Sun newspaper ratchets up its opposition to Europe with a two-fingered “Up yours Delors” front page. A collapse in the pound forced prime minister John Major and the then chancellor Norman Lamont to pull the UK out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism. On 1 January, customs checks and duties were removed across the bloc. Thatcher hailed the vision of “a single market without barriers – visible or invisible – giving you direct and unhindered access to the purchasing power of over 300 million of the world’s wealthiest and most prosperous people". Tory rebels vote against the treaty that paved the way for the creation of the European Union. John Major won the vote the following day in a pyrrhic victory. Tony Blair patches up the relationship. Signs up to social charter and workers' rights. Nigel Farage elected an MEP and immediately goes on the offensive in Brussels. “Our interests are best served by not being a member of this club,” he said in his maiden speech. “The level playing field is about as level as the decks of the Titanic after it hit an iceberg.” Chancellor Gordon Brown decides the UK will not join the euro. EU enlarges to to include eight countries of the former eastern bloc including Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic. EU expands again, allowing Romania and Bulgaria into the club. Anti-immigration hysteria seems to take hold with references to “cockroches” by Katie Hopkins in the Sun and tabloid headlines such as “How many more can we take?” and “Calais crisis: send in the dogs”. David Cameron returns from Brussels with an EU reform package - but it isn't enough to appease the Eurosceptic wing of his own party The UK votes to leave the European Union, triggering David Cameron's resignation and paving the way for Theresa May to become prime minister After years of parliamentary impasse during Theresa May's attempt to get a deal agreed, the UK leaves the EU. Differences are said to remain on the issues of a level playing field for businesses, governance, state aid rules and fishing rights. The EU’s preference for a role for the European court of justice is also a sticking point. The prime minister’s official spokesperson said the UK was continuing to engage with the EU constructively. “Round five negotiations are ongoing and we remain committed to working hard to find the outlines of a balanced agreement … but significant differences still remain on a number of important issues,” he said. “Our preference is to leave with an FTA [free trade agreement] as long as it guarantees our political and economic independence. But we will make sure that we’re prepared for all possible scenarios.” He added: “The discussions do continue to be constructive and I think that’s been the case throughout this intensified state of the discussions, but equally I think we acknowledge that there are still significant differences on a number of important issues.” Some backbench Conservative MPs are said to be getting nervous that a deal will not be ready in time for the end of the transition period on 31 December 2020. Reports that Frost had said the UK would accept tariffs on certain goods are believed to have added to confusion among the Tory ranks about the government’s position. Labour is also said to be looking closely at recent polling that has shown voters in their former “red wall” strongholds overwhelmingly want Johnson to strike a deal on Brexit rather than walk away from talks. The north and Midlands could bear the brunt of the economic downturn because of the coronavirus pandemic and potential consequences of a no-deal scenario. The UK has piled on pressure to get a quick Brexit deal sealed this month, with Boris Johnson saying in June there was no reason an outline agreement could not be struck in July, urging the EU to put “the tiger in the tank”, a reference to a 1960s Esso slogan. However, his flamboyant approach was immediately punctured by the EU, which said it expected talks to go into September. Charles Michel, the European council president, batted back that the bloc was “ready to put a tiger in the tank but not to buy a pig in a poke”. One senior EU source predicted before the latest round of talks that the UK would try and “inject some drama and theatre” into the talks, with rows seen as a by-product of the tension to create the space for a deal. 