This charming documentary tells the story of the world’s first residential recording studio, tucked away on a dairy farm in Monmouth, which has become home to revered recordings from the likes of Black Sabbath, Rush, Queen and Oasis since its founding by two brothers in the 1960s. Famous faces such as Sabbath’s Ozzy Osbourne, Oasis’s Liam Gallagher and Coldplay’s Chris Martin chart Rockfield’s early days as a remote DIY space to its current status as a haven for artists. Ammar Kalia The discord of the last five years has made the 2012 Olympics feel like a distant dream. But they really were the best of times. This wistful rerun recalls the delirious summer day when, thanks to Mo Farah, Jessica Ennis and Greg Rutherford, the golds kept coming. Phil Harrison Despite some abysmal weather, last year’s 148th Open championship ended up having a fairytale feel. Back in Northern Ireland for the first time in 68 years, the scene was set for a dazzling performance by Irishman Shane Lowry. James Nesbitt narrates the record-breaking story. Graeme Virtue This week we go behind the scenes of the Morgan Motor Company to witness how they still hand-build their limited-run cars with wooden shells. The focus is on their retro-designed latest offering, the £90,000 Plus Six, which takes a team of 170 people working 100 hours to build. AK Lovable linchpin Charlie is still struggling so much that even Connie, who’s not known for her empathy, is comforting him. But there’s work to be done down at A&E, with a sick patient insistent on discharging himself and a baby on the way. Meanwhile, troubled paramedic Lev’s backstory is emerging. Hannah Verdier Royal commentators assemble again, this time to unpick the thousands of speeches the Queen has made throughout her 68-year reign. Among the moments they alight on are her decision to avoid immediately speaking on the 1966 Aberfan disaster and Princess Diana’s death. AK Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri, 9.15pm, Channel 4 Rage simmers through Martin McDonagh’s drama, much of it embodied in the Oscar-winning Frances McDormand’s Mildred Hayes. The mother of a murdered teenage girl, she writes large on three billboards her dissatisfaction with police chief Woody Harrelson. Paul Howlett Test Cricket: England v West Indies, 10.30am, Sky Sports Cricket. Third day of the second Test from Old Trafford. Racing: Newbury, 1.30pm, ITV4. With the Group 3 Hackwood Stakes over six furlongs. Premier League Football: Norwich City v Burnley, 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event/Pick. Free-to-air from Carrow Road.