The Rio 2016 medallist Amy Tinkler has added to the growing pressure on British Gymnastics by announcing she submitted a formal complaint about her experiences as a gymnast to the sport’s governing body in December – but was still waiting for a response more than seven months later. Tinkler – the youngest member of Team GB in Rio when aged 16, finishing third in the floor exercise behind the American gymnasts Simone Biles and Aly Raisman – also stated that these traumatic experiences were behind her decision to retire in January, and not an injury as was suggested at the time. She also praised her fellow Olympians – including Beckie and Ellie Downie, Louis Smith and Lisa Mason – for their bravery in speaking out in the “dark and troubling times for the sport we love”. In a statement, Tinkler said: “I submitted a formal complaint to British Gymnastics in December 2019. It was an account of my experiences as a club and elite gymnast, and the experiences I shared were the reason for my retirement in January, not a physical injury as was suggested by some at the time. “My complaint was submitted in accordance with the British Gymnastics complaints policy by a legal team from Irwin Mitchell LLP. After eight months, I’m no closer to having any feedback or outcome.” Tinkler, who moved from her previous base at the South Durham Club in Spennymoor to train in Basildon with Max Whitlock’s coach, Scott Hahn, in 2017, said she had spoken out after receiving a lot of support and counselling. “I’m heartbroken by the stories that have been told over the past week. I’m so proud of my fellow gymnasts who have shared their stories, I know how hard it is, and your bravery has been a shining light and inspiration in dark and troubling times for the sport we love. “It took a lot of support and counselling to build up the courage to tell my story. I would like to thank Scott and the team at South Essex Gymnastics Club for everything they did for me, without their help I would never have had the strength to begin this journey. I hope someone now listens to us.” In a statement British Gymnastics confirmed it had received formal notification of the complaint from Tinkler last December. “She provided full details of this complaint to us on 10 March 2020, which then allowed the investigation to proceed,” it added. “It is at an advanced stage and we have kept Amy fully informed and provided her with the appropriate support and we will continue to do so. We can make no further comment at this stage in the process.”