When I was growing up, my father would cook a Madhur Jaffrey potato curry that I still make to this day. There is something pleasing about the way tooth meets the tender-firm cubes of potato, not to mention the spicy sauce that envelops them, flooding the mouth with flavour and heat. It always hits the spot. There is time to make flatbread while the curry cooks, but otherwise sit back, crack open a beer and think about how much you didn’t spend on a takeaway. In summer, I often swap the chickpeas for peas. Prep 10 minCook 45 minServes 4-6 6 large potatoes5 tbsp vegetable oil½ tsp mustard seeds1 tsp cumin seeds2 large onions, peeled and finely chopped1 large knob ginger, peeled and minced1 green chilli, finely chopped1 tsp ground turmeric2 tsp ground coriander2 tsp garam masala1 x 400g tin chickpeas, drained1 x 400g tin tomatoes1 tsp sugarSalt and black pepper To serveFlatbreadsYoghurt (I like to add crushed garlic and sea salt to mine)Chopped fresh coriander Peel and cut the potatoes into bite-sized chunks, then steam for eight to 10 minutes – you want them to soften a little, but not cook completely. Meanwhile, put half the oil into a large casserole (with a lid) and set over a high heat. When hot, add the mustard seeds and cumin seeds and, when they start to crackle, turn down the heat to medium and add the rest of the oil, the onion, ginger and chilli. Stir-fry for about five minutes, then add the rest of the spices and the chickpeas. Stir to coat the chickpeas, season generously and cook until the onion is soft – about 10 minutes. Next, add the tomatoes and sugar. Bring to simmering point, taste and season – the sauce will need to season the potatoes, which will be added soon, so you can afford to salt fairly generously. Simmer briskly for 10 minutes, breaking up the tomatoes with a wooden spoon, then stir in the potatoes and half a tin’s worth of water. Cook until the potatoes are tender and coated in the sauce – about 10 minutes. Serve with warm flatbreads, a dollop of yoghurt, a handful of fresh coriander and a great movie. Mango chutney is also a must. Coriander turns very quickly, so blitz any excess with garlic and oil to make a vivid green herb oil for dressing grilled vegetables and meat – I like to round off the taste with some mint or parsley, too.