Last month, the radio presenter Clara Amfo sent a poignant message to listeners explaining why she hadn’t been at work the day before at BBC Radio 1. “We talk a lot about mental health. And mine was in a really, really bad way yesterday.” She spoke candidly of sitting on the sofa in the aftermath of the death of George Floyd, an unarmed black man, crying, confused, upset at the news of “yet another brutalised black body”, and being unable to just suppress this and chirpily ask on live radio whether everyone had had a nice weekend. Amfo concluded: “There is a false idea that racism, and in this case, anti-blackness, is just name calling and physical violence when it’s so much more insidious than that.” Racism makes us sick. Dr Rageshri Dhairyawan’s recent blog in the British Medical Journal points out a number of race-based health inequalities in the UK, including the staggering statistic that black British women are five times more likely to die in pregnancy than white British women. There is a tendency to assume that ethnic differences in levels of risk for diseases are down to inherent biological differences. This assumption itself is a result of historical ideas of what race is, and the false notion that race is more of a biological reality than a social one with biological consequences. Minorities are at risk of receiving poorer medical care, for example. Bias exists in the medical profession, even when we believe or hope that it doesn’t. A heartbreaking example of this is the US study on appendicitis in children which found: “Black children are less likely to receive any pain medication for moderate pain and less likely to receive opioids for severe pain, suggesting a different threshold for treatment.” Dr Vanessa Apea is a consultant in sexual health and HIV at Barts Health in London, the UK’s biggest NHS trust. She is also lead author of one of the largest and most diverse British studies on Covid-19 in patients in hospital to date. The study, currently awaiting publication, showed that black and south Asian people were significantly more likely to become severely unwell with Covid-19, and significantly more likely to die of it, compared with their white counterparts. This difference persisted even when age, level of frailty, pre-existing conditions and deprivation were taken into account. When I asked Apea what struck her most about the results of the study, she said: “You were not only seeing more severe disease and more disease in black and Asian patients, but you were also seeing premature death – this gets lost in the narrative. You’re losing older white people, but it’s younger black and Asian people who are dying.” Amfo was right about racism being insidious. On top of the major pathways of social inequality such as wealth, access to resources and institutional bias, there’s something subtle about the way racism hurts people. We all know, intuitively, that experiencing the stress of being treated in a humiliating way can make us feel profoundly uneasy. We talk about feeling “run down” just before we get a cold sore or come down with a sore throat. The precise connection between psychosocial stress and illness is one that medical science hasn’t fully clarified. But there is undoubtedly a connection, all the same. I’ll never forget the person who while otherwise completely well, broke out in head-to-toe psoriasis on the anniversary of their loved one’s death. It isn’t exactly clear how this works, but the stress hormone cortisol is implicated, via the autonomic nervous system, responsible for “fight or flight” responses such as a change in heart rate and blood pressure. Michaela Coel’s masterful television series I May Destroy You features a scene in which a white doctor informs the black protagonist and sexual assault victim Arabella that her blood pressure is too high. He clumsily cites ethnic risk factors and tells her to stop vaping, completely ignoring the significant psychosocial context that might have contributed to her body feeling like it’s at war. While Arabella had other reasons to be stressed on top of being a dark-skinned black woman in Britain, experiencing discrimination has been shown to be associated with a reduction in the usual, healthy overnight drop in blood pressure, and as a result, a greater risk of heart attack and stroke. An increasing body of research from the US shows that the psychosocial stress of experiencing racism is causing illness even when socioeconomic status is accounted for. A study of a large cohort of black American women showed that experiences of racist discrimination were associated with increased incidence of adult-onset asthma, even when controlling for factors like education, income, smoking status, BMI and family history. The tool the researchers used to measure racism included questions about everyday encounters such as, “You receive poorer service than other people in restaurants and stores”, “People act as if they are afraid of you”, and, “People act as if they think you are not intelligent”. The effects of racism on the physical body are known in academic circles as “weathering” – a sadly fitting term for anyone who knows what it feels like. David H Chae, an epidemiologist from the University of Maryland, has found evidence of accelerated ageing — a shortening of cellular structures called telomeres — in black American men aged between 30 and 50. “Our findings suggest that racism literally makes people old,” Chae said, describing the experiences of African American men such as harassment by the police, workplace disrespect and stereotyping as “social toxins”. In other work, rather than asking people directly about their subjective experiences of racism, Chae’s team measured racism by proxy, by looking at numbers of Google searches that used a racial slur. They mapped out the United States into chunks and coded them green, yellow, orange or red depending on whether the searches for slurs were greater or lower than average. The map itself is fascinating, with patches of the deep south covered in red. The map revealed that where the use of slurs was highest, mortality in black people was also significantly higher. Like me, Apea welcomes more research on the impact of discrimination on the body. “There’s a reason why microaggressions are called that — there’s a physicality to it, how your body responds to that.” Apea, who is British but studied at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government, is careful to distinguish between black British and black American experiences of racism. “In America, it’s far more visible. In the UK, you still experience so many different and difficult situations, but a lot of it is ‘micro’ and subject to your interpretation. People are very good at being covert and subtle about it, but you know what’s driving it … I think studying the weathering effect here is going to be very interesting,” she says. “Once people realise what it is, they’re going to recognise it, and its emotional and physical toll. As a country we really need to reflect on this.” • Farrah Jarral is a broadcaster and doctor