Fun Lovin’ Criminals’ Huey Morgan begins his vibrant new series on the myriad music of Latin America with a visit to the home of samba: Brazil. Starting his journey in Rio de Janeiro, he visits the Mangueira samba school as their students prepare for a particularly contentious carnival – the first to be held under the reactionary government of Jair Bolsonaro. A meeting with the Tropicália pioneer Gilberto Gil also illustrates the country’s rich lineage of using music as social protest. Ammar Kalia If the return of Celebrity MasterChef ignites your kitchen inspiration, Jamie Oliver is on hand for some trademark no-frills recipes to try out over the weekend. There’s a family-friendly Sicilian tuna pasta, smoky and sticky teriyaki aubergine and an Indonesian-inspired beef dish. AK John Torode and Gregg Wallace are back to put another group of unsuspecting celebs through their culinary paces for the chance to rebrand as TV-friendly cooking experts. Tonight, our four celebs must cook a three-course meal to impress previous winner Greg Rutherford and finalist Vicki Pattison. AK More dog’s-eye journeys through the homes of the famous as this enjoyably daft series continues. Kevin McCloud is your host, and tonight’s curious hounds include a five-month-old cockalier and a four-year-old shar pei. But who are their owners? And what intimate secrets will the pooches reveal? Phil Harrison The first of three films tracking the seasons in a single British beauty spot, is imaginatively filmed, with a splendid narration from Toby Jones. This week it’s the windswept south-west coast of Wales, where puffins perch, seals frolic and fishermen catch first crab, then lobster. Jack Seale Bettany’s arrival in Crete is heralded by a suitably Odyssean storm and in the ancient city of Knossos she learns about the Minotaur. Surely there’s no truth to this myth of the half-man, half-bull who annually devoured a human sacrifice? Prof Stampolidis tells us more. Ellen E Jones Borg vs McEnroe (Janus Metz Pedersen, 2017), 11.20pm, BBC TwoMidway through what should have been Wimbledon fortnight, here’s Janus Metz Pedersen’s gripping account of the 1980 men’s final, among the greatest tennis matches of all time. Sverrir Gudnason is the ineffably cool Swede Björn Bjorg; Shia LaBeouf the raging John McEnroe, in a tale of ice and fire. Paul Howlett Golf: The 2020 Rocket Mortgage Classic 11.45am, Sky Sports Main Event. Day two coverage from the Detroit Golf Club. EFL Cup Football: Portsmouth v Oxford United 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. League One play-off semi-final. EFL Cup Football: Charlton Athletic v Millwall 8pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Championship fixture.