Ollie Pope shared his relief at getting some substantial runs under his belt after revealing the biosecure environment that England are operating in this summer had hindered his ability to switch off. Surrey’s 22-year-old middle order prodigy made his maiden Test century during the winter in South Africa but came into the third Test with an unbeaten 12 his highest score of the series to date. Moving up to No 5 to accommodate an extra seamer in England’s lineup only added to the pressure. But Pope now heads into day two just nine runs short of three-figures which, if it comes, would be reward for having ridden out a tricky time early on in his innings and the unbroken stand of 136 with Jos Buttler that, starting from 122 for four, has given the hosts a strong foothold in the match. Speaking after stumps Pope said: “It’s a really nice feeling and a little bit of a weight off the shoulders. I’ve missed out in the first two games and not being able to get away from it, you walk back to your hotel room, it overlooks the cricket ground … there’s really no escape. “You can’t go out for dinner or a coffee, you can’t see your family. It isn’t easy and you can think about your failures a bit more than normal. But the lads get around you and everyone’s tight-knit, so if anyone is mentally struggling a bit then we’ve got each other’s backs.” Pope, who revealed he still intended to take a sleeping pill before bedtime, said it would be a “massive achievement” to get his first Test century on home soil and “just as special” despite the lack of a crowd meaning the family he is currently missing while in the England bubble will be watching on television. He added: “Hopefully I can go on and make a big one. But that’s part of cricket, you have to stay as level as possible – especially as a batter – because there are as many bad days as good days, even for the best in the world. You have to deal with them in the best way possible.” Asked about an early wake-up from Kemar Roach, who struck him on the head with a bouncer, Pope added: “Sometimes things like that make you switch on and today sums up batting pretty perfectly. I didn’t feel great for the first 50 runs and got a bit of luck, edging one that dropped just short. “In [the first Test] I didn’t play and miss but then edged one, before chopping on in the second innings. Luck is involved and you have to make the most of your chances when they come around.”