Arabic science fiction, flying paint and a journey through the black techno scene: this year’s Jarman award nominees offer plenty of vibrant escapism. Among the six shortlisted artists for the £10,000 prize, which recognises the pioneering work of UK-based artist film-makers, are Jenn Nkiru, whose work is influenced by Afro-surrealism and electronic music, and Michelle Williams Gamaker, who tackles racial imbalances using the language of Hollywood. The duo Hannah Quinlan and Rosie Hastings, with their humorous and at times unsettling work exploring the history and politics of LGBTQ culture, are also on the shortlist, along with Project Art Works, an artist-led organisation working with children, young people and adults who have complex support needs. The latter’s 2016 work Tessellate found beauty in Jackson Pollock-esque paint splatters along with the noise of an electric sander. Larissa Sansour, whose work is informed by both science fiction and her Palestinian heritage, and Andrea Luka Zimmerman, a Munich-born film-maker whose work focuses on marginalised and working-class communities, complete the nominations list. Now in its 13th year, the Film London Jarman award – named after the late film-maker Derek Jarman – has a reputation for boosting the careers of its nominees. Laure Prouvost, Monster Chetwynd, Charlotte Prodger, Lawrence Abu Hamdan and Luke Fowler are some of the names who would go on to be shortlisted for or win the Turner prize. Recent winners have included Heather Phillipson, Oreet Ashery and Daria Martin. The 2019 winner, Hetain Patel, is one of the judge’s of this year’s prize and told the Guardian that being involved with the awards has helped him avoid being boxed in as an artist. “The biggest challenge I’ve faced has been trying to be recognised as a British artist outside of my ethnicity,” he said. “I’ll get invited to do shows around the subject of diaspora or race. So to be acknowledged for the medium I’m working in, alongside peers I respect and admire? That’s a freeing thing for me.” Adrian Wootton, head of Film London and the British Film Commission said: “With the impact of Covid-19 being felt so deeply by artists and exhibitors, we are more proud than ever to present this year’s Jarman award shortlist and help raise the profile of this important body of original work, that questions and articulates the world around us.” The winner of the award will be announced on 24 November. In the run-up to the announcement, the work of the shortlisted artists will be available to view through the Whitechapel Gallery website. A special weekend of online screenings, discussions and performances featuring all six shortlisted artists is set for 14-15 November. Andrea Luka Zimmerman Hannah Quinlan and Rosie Hastings Larissa Sansour Michelle Williams Gamaker Jenn Nkiru Project Art Works