The first replacement in a Test was Mike Gibson, who came on for Barry John during the first match between the British & Irish Lions and South Africa in 1968. It’s what quiz-setters say, except history had been made 61 years before at the Sydney Cricket Ground. John Spencer came off the bench for New Zealand in the 1907 Test for John Colman and later Australia made two changes. Although the then International Board did not sanction teams being able to make replacements until 1968, the Wallabies and the All Blacks agreed the provision to cover injuries in a number of series until shortly after the 1939-45 war. It was an example of the co-operation between the neighbours that initially lasted the transition from amateurism to professionalism. New Zealand have always been the stronger partner in terms of success on the field: no other side comes close to its winning ratio over the years and union is the dominant sport whereas in Australia it tends to be rated between 11th and 19th in terms of popularity. Australia’s first Test was in 1899, four years before New Zealand’s, but the 1914-18 war stunted union’s growth there. The Queensland union was disbanded in 1919 after a number of clubs switched to league, along with schools, and was not revived for a decade: the Wallabies did not play an official Test between 1914 and 1929, although the Waratahs’ 1927-28 tour of the five nations was half-a-century later granted international status, along with a series of matches against New Zealand, who did not reciprocate and so they remain unofficial. Sport is grounded in rivalry, much of which is geographic. It gave Welsh club rugby its distinct identity until professionalism rendered it uneconomic and the Bledisloe Cup, which has been fought for by Australia and New Zealand since 1932, remains cherished by both countries, even if the All Blacks are well ahead in the series. When sport went into lockdown, rugby administrators throughout the world talked of the need for everyone to work together at a time of unprecedented economic strife. A result has been breakthrough talks on a global calendar and the major unions in the two hemispheres have shown a willingness to exorcise sacred cows: the Premiership clubs have acted together to reduce costs despite the greater means of some to ride out the storm. New Zealand, though, are prepared to weaken ties with Australia, according to reports. Super Rugby, once the club game’s premier tournament that became bloated by expansion and lost much of its appeal, is set to be revamped next season because of the travel restrictions that have become part of the drive to contain Covid-19. A trans-Tasman competition has been proposed which would leave South Africa looking at the Pro14, and more travelling, and Argentina with nowhere for them to roam (the Rugby Championship would remain intact). One report suggested that only two Australian teams would be invited, since any more would dilute the strength of their teams and so weaken the tournament. It has been officially denied, but prompted a war of words that the former New Zealand coach Steve Hansen aggravated. “We have been looking after the Aussies for years,” he said. “Every time we have required something from them, particularly at a high level, sometimes they have gone missing. Do we owe them something? No. But because of the nation we are, and we care about the game more than just about ourselves, we bend and buckle a bit.” In this case, he said, New Zealand rugby had to come first. “I think NZ Rugby are in the mood for having strong discussions because they only get one shot at it. You have to start with what you want to get out of it. It has to be really competitive and produce world-class players. If you allow it to become watered down, there is too big a gap with Test rugby.” One of Hansen’s references to the past was the 2003 World Cup hosted by Australia. New Zealand were the sub-hosts, a reverse of 1987, but lost the right after refusing to guarantee clean stadiums for matches because of the financial sacrifice. It was Rugby World Cup Ltd which took the matches away from them, not the Australian union, but the sore still festers. John O’Neill, the Australian union’s chief executive in 2003, told Hansen to stick to his day job. “Rugby Australia and New Zealand Rugby understand in their heart of hearts they need each other,” he said. “If you have a New Zealand-only competition, see how much you get for it in terms of broadcast rights and sponsorship. Yes, our Super Rugby teams need to lift their standards and become better but for trans-Tasman rugby in the longer term, our financial future lies as a unified group.” Neighbours do not have to be best friends but recognise mutual interest. A game is being played, with New Zealand establishing its superiority early. It does not have enough teams to run its own tournament without, in Hansen’s words, adding a few rungs on the ladder to Test rugby, and while a knee-jerk reaction to these times is towards insularity, it would prove crippling. Australian rugby is teetering, challenged on and off the pitch to the point where Hansen’s successor, Ian Foster, pointed out that New Zealand rugby was not a charity and that teams from the other side of the water needed to be “feasible and financially viable”. Australia are bidding for the 2027 World Cup with a suggestion that, if successful, matches will be offered to New Zealand. Travel restrictions may be in place, but this is not the time for New Zealand to deny access to Australia who, for all rugby’s minority status there, have consistently been pioneers over the years, driven by the need to attract an audience. They should not be abandoned. • This is an extract from our weekly rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.