Wherever migrant cooks roam, they pick things up and leave others behind. They cross so many borders that their food repertoire becomes vast, seasoned with the intonations of many cultures. These dishes are the bonny love-children of those blended borders – African ingredients overlaid with warm Arabic spices and Indian culinary traditions. They pay tribute to migrants who learned to reconcile the old and new with grace, who preserved memories while learning to let go, who carved a place for themselves in their new nations and expressed their contentment with food. This iconic dish is eaten all over Kenya. Its roots are in coastal Mombasa, a port on the Indian Ocean where many immigrants arrived (of which my own grandfather was one in the 1940s). Every family has its own version – the spices can differ and some may not include tomatoes – but they all share coconut milk. In my version, I smoke it at the end to recreate the memory of cooking it over an outdoor stove. Prep 20 minCook 2 hrServes 4 1 tbsp ghee1 red onion, peeled and finely chopped1 thumb ginger, peeled and finely grated4 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed2 green chillies, finely chopped1 tsp ground turmeric100g chopped tinned tomatoes6 chicken drumsticks400ml coconut milkJuice of 1 limeSea salt1 piece lump charcoal (optional)2 hard-boiled eggs, peeled and cut in half, to serve1 small handful chopped coriander, to serve For the masala2 tbsp coriander seeds2 tbsp cumin seeds1 tbsp fennel seeds1 dried red chilli1 tsp green cardamom pods¼ tsp cloves1 star anise1 tsp black peppercorns1 cinnamon stick1 tsp hot paprika1 tsp ground ginger¼ nutmeg, finely grated Begin by making the masala. Heat a dry frying pan over a medium heat and toast all the whole spices until they are aromatic, stirring frequently and being careful not to scorch them. Pop the spices into a spice grinder and whizz to a fine powder, then stir in the paprika, ground ginger and nutmeg. Put the ghee in a large frying pan over a low heat. Add the onion and cook, stirring occasionally, for about 20 minutes, or until dark and caramelised, then add the ginger, garlic and chillies and fry until fragrant. Next, add two tablespoons of the masala and the turmeric, and cook for a few minutes, until your kitchen is full of the fragrance of the spices. Now tip in the tomatoes and season with salt. Cook for 10 minutes, then add the chicken and coconut milk. Mix well, then cover and simmer for 25 minutes, or until the chicken is tender and toothsome. Squeeze in the lime juice and season with salt to taste. If you want to smoke the dish, sit the piece of charcoal directly on a gas burner or barbecue, letting it catch light and burn. When it is smouldering and grey, carefully transfer it with tongs to a small, heatproof bowl. Nestle the bowl inside the pan with the chicken and drizzle a little oil over the charcoal – it will start smoking immediately. Cover the pan with a tight-fitting lid and leave to smoke for half an hour. Serve the kuku paka topped with hard-boiled egg halves and scattered with chopped coriander. Thai curries do not have to be searingly hot, such as the mild massaman, traditionally belonging to the Thai Muslim community. It is generally made with beef or lamb, but is equally good with pork, chicken or robust vegetables like pumpkin. This one always tastes even better the next day, so I tend to make it a day in advance. Serve with jasmine rice. Prep 30 minCook 2 hrServes 6 1 tbsp coconut oil1kg diced pork neck1 star anise3 green cardamom podsA few curry leaves1 cinnamon stick, broken up300ml coconut milk3 potatoes, peeled and diced3 shallots, peeled and halved1 tbsp fish sauce2 tbsp tamarind concentrate1 tbsp palm sugar1 handful roasted peanutsSprigs of Thai basil, to garnish For the curry paste4 dried Kashmiri chillies2 tsp coriander seeds2 tsp cumin seeds7 green cardamom pods1 cinnamon stick1 star anise1 tbsp rapeseed oil2 banana shallots, peeled and roughly chopped6 garlic cloves, peeled and roughly chopped1 tsp shrimp paste100ml coconut milk2 lemongrass stalks, roughly chopped1 thumb-sized piece fresh ginger, peeled and roughly chopped For the relish½ small pineapple, finely chopped70g jaggery, grated3 tsp basil seeds (optional)4 tsp fish sauce2 tbsp rice wine vinegar2 tbsp lime juice1 red chilli, finely chopped1 banana shallot, peeled and very thinly sliced into crescents2 kaffir lime leaves, stalks removed, very thinly sliced1 handful finely chopped mint1 handful coriander leaves For the curry paste, put the chillies, coriander and cumin seeds, cardamom pods, cinnamon stick and star anise into a dry frying pan and toast over medium heat, stirring frequently, until aromatic. Transfer to a spice grinder or pestle and mortar and grind to a powder. Pour the oil into the frying pan, add the shallots and garlic and fry until caramelised, then add the shrimp paste and the ground spices and fry, stirring constantly, until fragrant. Tip the contents of the frying pan into a food processor, add the coconut milk, lemongrass and ginger and blend to a smooth paste. In a large frying pan, fry the pork in the coconut oil with the star anise, cardamom pods, curry leaves and cinnamon stick until the meat is lightly sealed. Add the coconut milk, then fill the empty tin with water and add that to the pan as well, along with the curry paste. Bring to a simmer, cover and cook for one and a half hours, or until the pork is butter-soft. Meanwhile, make the relish. Put the pineapple in a bowl. Put the jaggery into a small pan with 100ml water and stir over medium heat until the jaggery dissolves, then bring to the boil and simmer for two minutes, or until syrupy. Remove from the heat and leave to cool completely. If you are using basil seeds, put them into a small bowl and soak in just enough water to cover for 10 minutes – they will puff up. Pour the cooled syrup over the pineapple, then follow with the soaked basil seeds, if using, and the remaining ingredients except the mint and coriander. Refrigerate until needed. Just before serving, toss through the herbs. Add the potatoes, shallots, fish sauce, tamarind concentrate and palm sugar to the curry and simmer, uncovered, for 30 minutes, or until the potatoes are tender, then stir through the peanuts. Garnish with Thai basil leaves and serve with the pineapple relish. In east Africa, this is served both as part of a main meal with rice or chapatis, or on its own as a snack. The original uses crushed peanuts, but I use peanut butter to make a thick, funky, creamy sauce spiced with aromatics such as star anise and curry leaves. Always look out for unsweetened peanut butter. Prep 15 minCook 40 minServes 6 5 corn on the cob, 1 left whole, and the rest cut crossways into 4 chunks2 tbsp rapeseed oil1 tsp brown mustard seedsA pinch of asafoetida20 curry leaves1 cinnamon stick1 star anise1 thumb ginger, peeled and finely grated4 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped1 red chilli, thinly sliced200g tinned tomatoes1 heaped tbsp tomato puree3 tbsp smooth peanut butter2 tbsp tamarind concentrate1 tbsp soft brown sugarSea salt1 handful each toasted desiccated coconut and coriander leaves, to serve Heat a grill to medium and toast the whole corn cob, turning it frequently so it chars all over. Leave to cool, then shuck the sweetcorn kernels from the cob and reserve for later. Meanwhile, steam the sweetcorn chunks until tender and set aside. Pour the oil into a large frying pan and put over a high heat. Add the mustard seeds and, when they pop, follow swiftly with the asafoetida, curry leaves, cinnamon and star anise, and fry briefly. Turn the heat down to low, add the ginger, garlic and chilli and cook until fragrant. Stir in the tomatoes, tomato puree, peanut butter, tamarind and sugar, and cook foreight to 10 minutes, stirring every so often, until you have a sauce that’s thick enough to cling to the sweetcorn. Add salt to taste. Throw in the sweetcorn chunks and stir to coat thoroughly. Finish with the coconut, coriander and reserved sweetcorn kernels. Rendang is an aromatic, dry, braised curry from Malaysia. It is normally made with tough cuts of beef that require lengthy cooking, but I like to use duck legs, which also become luscious with a long, slow braise. The duck is first seared to render any excess fat, then simmered for hours in a lip-tingling, chilli-spiced, coconut sauce that turns the meat into a meltingly tender, flavourful sludge. Serve with steamed rice. Prep/soak 2 hrCook 2 hrServes 4 4 duck legs400ml coconut milk3 tsp palm sugar, or to taste2 tbsp fish sauceJuice of 1 lime For the curry paste15 dried kashmiri chillies15 dried bird’s eye chillies1 red onion, peeled and roughly chopped50g ginger, peeled and roughly chopped25g galangal, roughly chopped4 fat garlic cloves, peeled and roughly chopped2 stalks lemongrass, roughly chopped8g fresh turmeric, peeled and roughly chopped3 tsp shrimp paste2 tbsp rapeseed oil First, make the curry paste. Break up the chillies and soak in hot water for two hours, then drain. Roughly chop the chillies and put into a small food processor or blender, along with the onion, ginger, galangal, garlic, lemongrass, turmeric, shrimp paste and oil. Process to a coarse paste. Heat a large, deep non-stick frying pan over medium–high heat. Add the duck legs, skin side down, and fry, without turning, until the fat renders and the skin is golden brown – two to four minutes. Set the duck legs aside, reserving a tablespoon of the fat in the pan. Add the curry paste and fry over a medium heat, stirring constantly, until the colour deepens and the onion becomes fragrant – it will take around 10 minutes to cook out the rawness and to tease out all the flavours. Add the coconut milk and 375ml water and bring to a simmer. Add the duck legs, return to a simmer, reduce the heat to low, cover and simmer gently for one and a half hours, stirring occasionally, until the duck is very tender and the sauce is thick and deepened in colour. Finally, add the palm sugar to the sauce, stirring to make sure it all dissolves, then stir in the fish sauce and lime juice. • This is an edited extract from Jikoni, by Ravinder Bhogal, published by Bloomsbury at £26. To order a copy for £22.62, go to guardianbookshop.com