Ida Ivowi’s three younger brothers who live in Luton had all fallen ill from the coronavirus in April. She was in shock when one brother had died within hours of being admitted to hospital and tried to come up with a plan of telling her youngest, who has Down’s syndrome, of the death. But just over a week later, he too would die from the virus. Ivowi, who lives in New York, first saw the coronavirus pandemic as a distant international news story. But within a few weeks, she watched from across the Atlantic as the deadly virus wreaked havoc on her loved ones. Olume Ivowi, 46, died on 10 April, Good Friday, in Luton and Dunstable University hospital within hours of being taken by an ambulance. Ida said she could not understand when she got the phone call that her brother died. “It was very difficult for any of us to wrap our heads around it. He went from being fine to now being dead,” she said. “We then started the process of grieving.” Olume left behind his devastated wife, Juanetta Ivowi, and their daughter, Mireille, three. Ida would spend the next 24 hours talking to her sister-in-law, while contemplating how to tell her younger brother, Isi Ivowi, 38, who lived in supported accommodation in Milton Keynes and was incredibly close to Olume. “We did not want to give him such news over the phone,” Ida said, but as she figured out how to tell him the news, she got a call from his carers that Isi had fallen ill and had been hospitalised. She was getting regular updates from the hospital on her brother’s prognosis, but the virus had taken its toll. Isi died on 19 April in Milton Keynes University hospital – just over a week after his older brother. The family believe the two brothers, who have underlying health conditions, may have contracted Covid-19 from one another as Olume was in constant contact with his younger brother. A third brother, Osi Ivowi, 50, from Milton Keynes, would be the only sibling to fall ill from the deadly virus and survive. The entire family has been hit particularly hard by the coronavirus pandemic, with two other extended members of the family also contracting the virus. Ida said her brothers have always been close with her and each other. They spend Christmas together and go on holidays throughout the year. She described Olume as a loving father who brought everybody together. “He was somebody who like to unify people.” She said Isi was a caring person who loved music. “When my brother went into hospital, he took in his radio because he likes music, and his phone so that we could get to speak to him.” At times, Ida feels like she is in an alternative universe. She added that it was impossible to go through something like this without feeling fearful. “So now it’s trying to get over that personal fear because you know what this virus is capable of doing.” She called for people in both the UK and US to continue following the guidelines around the lockdown. Ida is, however, determined to celebrate the lives of her brothers and focus on moving forward together as a family. “It was my birthday this week and we all met up online to remember our lost ones and support Olume’s widow but we also think it’s important to celebrate life in the now. “What has happened to us demonstrates how fragile life is and how we have to remember to appreciate each other and find the joy in every day because we never know what is around the corner.”