Maureen Preedy’s favourite show was Home and Away. “It was always a joke you are never allowed to call at seven o’clock because she was an addict,” says Maureen’s daughter, Simone. “You would be just putting the kids down and give her a ring and she would be like, ‘Nup, my show’s on’.” Maureen and her husband, Barry Preedy, were avid travellers. They would go on trips around the world with friends each year and bought a caravan to fill in the time in between. The 69-year-old loved her family above all else and spoke to her daughter nearly every day. When Simone called her mother on 29 March, she had no idea it would be the last time she would ever speak to her. Simone had spent weeks before desperately campaigning to get Maureen and Barry rescued from Italy, where they were trapped, confined to their rooms on the Costa Victoria cruise ship, which had been hit by a wave of Covid-19 infections. She spoke to TV, went on podcasts and called the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the cruise company dozens of times. When she got word her parents and the rest of the passengers were on a charter flight back to their home state of Western Australia she was so relieved. Maureen had been unwell on the ship and was getting worse on the flight home. Simone says she was checked at the airport but was given the green light to go to the hotel. “When they got to their rooms we FaceTimed them and had a chat. We told them that we loved them and we let them get along with their night,” Simone said. “It was getting towards 7pm.” The next day Maureen was rushed to the hospital. She tested positive to Covid-19 and was put almost immediately into an induced coma. Maureen never woke up. “I wish I had said more,” Simone says, her voice cracking with tears. “I wish I had pushed on the health stuff. Maybe if she got medical attention sooner things might have been different. “It just all didn’t feel real. I hadn’t seen them in more than a month.” Even though Barry was also diagnosed with Covid-19 they didn’t let him into the hospital. “My dad wasn’t allowed to be with her when she passed,” Simone says. “They got engaged when my mum was 21 – they were coming up their 50th wedding anniversary. They had never been apart.” Email: sign up for our daily coronavirus newsletter App: download it and never miss the biggest stories Social: follow us on Facebook, Instagram or Twitter Podcast: listen to our daily episodes on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or search "Full Story" in your favourite app Simone wasn’t even allowed to see her dad after Maureen died; he stayed trapped and alone in that hotel room for more than two weeks. “You can’t comfort him, you can’t hold him or hug him. We couldn’t be there for him, it was devastating,” she says. “He’s from a generation where they are a bit more stoic but you can see he is devastated … He is really upset with what happened. But what can you do now? We can’t change it, we can only change it for the next person.” Barry was cleared of the disease and returned home on 15 April. “He is terrified that there is a chance he is still contagious and that he could pass that on to someone else.” When Simone visits her dad they stay on opposite sides of the room and don’t hug. Western Australia seems to be breathing a sigh of relief, with low case numbers and social distancing laws slowly relaxing. But for Simone, the virus feels just as dangerous as ever. “I hate it. I’m terrified of it. I’m terrified that it will make another member of my family or someone I love this sick,” she says. “I think I get more paranoid or extra cautious than other people because I know it’s real. Other people, they understand it’s there, but I don’t think they realise how real and damaging it is.” After the initial shock of losing Maureen, Simone and Barry had to face everything that comes after. Including organising a funeral in lockdown. “Mum was a very well-loved person within quite a big family network, she had lots of friends, was active within the community. It would have been a huge funeral. But only 10 people can come and we feel like we can’t give her the send-off she deserved.” But it’s clear Maureen hasn’t been forgotten. “It’s amazing how many people have reached out to us who knew her from years ago. People she did darts with, people who met her on a cruise in 2016, people who knew her back in the day. “It just goes to show how much of an impact she had on everyone she met,” Simone says. “After all this is over we are going to have a huge party and really celebrate her life. She was vibrant.” Postcards from the pandemic looks at how everyday Australians are coping with immense changes coronavirus has brought to their lives. We’d like to hear your story about how you are managing during this crisis. Email: postcards@theguardian.com