Britain has been accused by MEPs led by an ally of the French president, Emmanuel Macron, of discriminating against EU nationals left destitute in the UK as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. Those who have not lived in the country for more than five years are said to be facing “significant obstacles” or having their claims outright rejected when seeking the benefits on offer to UK nationals. There are around 1.2 million people with so-called pre-settled status under which they do not have an automatic right to welfare payments. Many of them have lost their jobs during the crisis but have found they are unable to rely on the welfare safety net at at time of unprecedented economic strife. The issue has sparked concern in EU member states, with the German newspaper Die Welt reporting of a couple, showing signs of a fever, left unable to pay their rent after losing their jobs working in warehouses in Somerset. The article was reported by the newspaper under the headline: “This month we have a total of £200 to survive on.” Direct cash grants for self-employed people, worth 80% of average profits, up to £2,500 a month. There are similar wage subsidies for employees. Government to back £330bn of loans to support businesses through a Bank of England scheme for big firms. There are loans of up to £5m with no interest for six months for smaller companies. Taxes levied on commercial premises will be abolished this year for all retailers, leisure outlets and hospitality sector firms. Britain’s smallest 700,000 businesses eligible for cash grants of £10,000. Small retailers, leisure and hospitality firms can get bigger grants of £25,000. Government to increase value of universal credit and tax credits by £1,000 a year, as well as widening eligibility for these benefits. Statutory sick pay to be made available from day one, rather than day four, of absence from work, although ministers have been criticised for not increasing the level of sick pay above £94.25 a week. Small firms can claim for state refunds on sick pay bills. Local authorities to get a £500m hardship fund to provide people with council tax payment relief. Mortgage and rental holidays available for up to three months. A cross-party group of MEPs led by Nathalie Loiseau MEP, a former European affairs minister in Macron’s government, has said the British government is breaching the spirit of the withdrawal agreement under which the government said it would not discriminate against nationals from the EU member states. In a letter to the cabinet minister Michael Gove, who sits on a joint EU-UK committee implementing the Brexit deal, the MEPs write: “While the country is facing the severe consequences of the global pandemic of Covid-19, EU citizens under pre-settled status are facing significant obstacles to access social benefits such as universal credit. “This would constitute a violation of the good implementation of the withdrawal agreement … As you are well aware, the number of EU citizens under a pre-settled status cannot be considered as marginal, as it exceeds a million individuals. “Among them, those who may be in need of assistance during the current crisis are facing undue discrimination at the worst possible moment.” The government changed the law in 2019 with the result that unless EU nationals have lived in the UK for five years and gained so-called settled status they do not automatically meet the test of being habitually resident. Without such status, claimants need to prove that they are economically active through providing pay slips or accounts to successfully claim social assistance. The changes were made as part of the government’s stated intention to protect the social security system from people coming to live off benefits rather than to work. The law has been recently tested in the high court, which ruled that while there was discrimination it was justified and not unlawful. Luke Piper, a lawyer with the campaign group the3million, said the government should rethink the implications of the policy given the unfolding crisis. He said: “On the one hand, the UK is saying to EU citizens, you can live here, you are valued here, but we are not going to make it easy for you to access your benefits.“But this is not just a political issue, it is a legal issue. But nobody wants to go down a legal route and it should just be sorted out politically.” The MEPs further complain in their letter about the Home Office’s announcement last month that a resolution centre responsible for processing EU settlement applications would “no longer answer inbound telephone calls, and the postal route for submitting identity evidence is currently suspended, thus delaying the applications”. EU nationals have until June next year to successfully apply for settled or pre-settled status in order to be able to stay and work in the country. The MEPs write: “We, as elected representatives of EU member states, wouldn’t accept that British nationals would be discriminated against in the EU in the current situation. Similarly, European citizens living in the UK shouldn’t be unduly deprived of their rights.” A Department for Work and Pensions spokesman said: “The government is protecting the rights of EU citizens resident in the UK. “By applying to the EU settlement scheme, EU citizens living in the UK will be able to work, study and access benefits and services in the UK on at least the same basis as they do now. “Whether someone has pre-settled status or settled status, this means they have been accepted through the scheme and have secured their rights in UK law.” Udo, a self-employed IT consultant who asked for his real name not to be used, moved to the UK with his wife and child last year from Cyprus. The family has pre-settled status but have been unable to claim universal credit. His sole trader company is not able to benefit from the government’s Covid-19 business interruption loans as his company was set up after 6 April 2019, the cut off date for eligibility. He said: “Unfortunately, with the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic, my contracts are permanently cancelled. There is a big uncertainty of not knowing when I will be going back to work as a self-employed or finding a way to pivot my job to generate income. “In the meantime, I have to pay rent, bills and buy food for my family.” Udo’s wife is pregnant with their second child, due in mid-May. He said: “This is supposed to be a very exciting time for our family. However, under these uncertain circumstances it’s a very fearful and stressful for us as we have no idea how we are going to survive financially in the coming weeks and months.”