As hundreds of thousands of children return to classrooms around New Zealand, welfare services are bracing themselves for a spike in reports of abuse and neglect after weeks of “invisible” lockdown. The country entered lockdown on 25 March and emerged late last week. During lockdown reports of family violence to police dropped, and reports of concern to Oranga Tamariki, the country’s welfare agency for children, fell by around 40%. New Zealand has one of the highest rates of child abuse and neglect in the OECD, and on average one infant is murdered every five weeks. Oranga Tamariki’s chief executive, Gráinne Moss, told the Guardian that reports of harm always drop over the school holidays, because the “eyes and ears” that usually identify harm – education, social and health workers – aren’t around. But the prolonged nature of lockdown and the added stress of job losses among already strained families was creating “a perfect storm”, Moss said, and rises in family violence overseas are likely to hold true in New Zealand too, though no local research has been conducted yet. “Lockdown is a lot longer than the school holidays so we are right to be concerned that there is hidden, invisible harm occurring to children,” Moss said. “I have a serious level of worry about kids that we don’t know about and kids that have never been reported to us and were locked down in situations where there is family violence, troubling dynamics in the house, maybe drugs and alcohol, or mental health problems.” Moss said although Oranga Tamariki was “always busy” (last year there were 15,000 substantiated reports of abuse or neglect against children) she is aware that many children will be returning to school in a worse state than when they left, and teachers, school counsellors and health care workers will be conducting individual “welfare checks” on children. “Sadly, in New Zealand every year is quite busy in terms of child abuse and neglect, [but this year] it’s going to be particularly tough,” Moss said. Moss said many of the tools social workers used to stay in touch with vulnerable children during lockdown – video and phone apps, craft projects and meal preparation kits delivered to homes as a family bonding activity – will continue after the Covid-19 crisis because they have proved so effective. She praised police and the large supermarket chains for assisting with welfare monitoring activities, including police providing “spot welfare checks and holistic care” at roadblocks around the country. Children’s Commissioner Judge Andrew Becroft said lockdown also offered him the chance to interact with his clients – those in state care facilities and juvenile detention – via video chat, a method he intends to continue because he found it suited the children better. They seemed less intimidated and it offered a more immediate, frequent way to communicate with him, and their families. Becroft praised Oranga Tamariki’s work during lockdown, and said the burden of the Covid-19 crisis has not fallen evenly but “has disproportionately impacted those who were doing it tough beforehand”. “Bubbles aren’t transparent, we can’t see what’s going on inside families,” Becroft said. “We know there’s a strong association between poverty and family violence and child abuse and neglect. It is therefore likely, knowing what we do in some of the overseas trends, that as stress from lockdown increased, it’s likely that abuse and neglect will also commensurately increase.” “We need to be concerned that abuse and neglect have gone up – even though I desperately hope that is not the case.” During lockdown around 80 children were taken in care by Oranga Tamariki workers. Moss said her team planned carefully for any removals during the pandemic but: “At the end of the day we will break a bubble to save a child’s life”   