For the first time in its 150-year history, the Royal Albert Hall is to stage a concert behind closed doors when Katherine Jenkins performs to an empty auditorium to mark the 75th anniversary of VE Day on Friday. The special concert at the venue – closed for the first time since the Blitz – is intended to evoke the community spirit of the second world war period with the mezzo soprano performing wartime classics, including a virtual duet with “forces’ sweetheart” Dame Vera Lynn, 103. The two will perform thesong We’ll Meet Again, the lyrics of which evoke a sense of togetherness in the face of adversity, and have been adopted by many during the coronavirus pandemic, including by the Queen. The pre-recorded concert, Jenkins’ 46th appearance at the RAH, will be streamed on YouTube at 6pm on Friday. Strict physical distancing guidelines were in place during filming. Lynn said: “I’ll never forget how We’ll Meet Again meant so much to all those soldiers going off to war as well as with their families and sweethearts. Seventy-five years since the end of the war in Europe, the virus has given those lyrics a whole new meaning. “I have found the nation’s renewed love for the song very moving. I hope this special duet lifts the spirits of our VE Day veterans and all those separated from loved ones at this time.” Jenkins said: “In London, on VE Day 1945, over a million people celebrated victory in Europe and the end of nearly six years of war. Crowds gathered en masse in Trafalgar Square and up the Mall to Buckingham Palace and whilst we may not be able to celebrate this year as we once did, it’s only right that we don’t allow the 75th anniversary of this historic day to be overshadowed. “Having been part of the 60th and 70th events, I wanted to do something to help bring the nation and the world together in commemoration and celebration at this difficult time. I’m excited that we can still come together, albeit virtually, for a tribute of wartime songs and musical memories from London’s most iconic concert venue. “The Royal Albert Hall will be seen like never before – empty, isolated and yet still breathtakingly magnificent.” The half-hour performance, which will end with a rendition of Jerusalem, is the first of the #RoyalAlbertHome series to come from the hall itself, and received funding from the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, as part of #LondonTogether. Being streamed free of charge, it aims to raise money through text donations for SSAFA, the armed forces charity’s emergency response fund, and to the Royal Albert Hall’s fundraising appeal. The Grade-I listed building currently has no regular income to support its staff. Khan said: “Music unites us through times of hardship and this behind-closed-doors concert embodies the true British spirit of overcoming challenges and remembering those who served our great country and paid the ultimate price for our freedom.” Since Rufus Wainwright launched the streaming series on 9 April, there have been performances from the homes of artists such as Alfie Boe, Ayanna Witter-Johnson and KT Tunstall.