The last funeral I attended was back in January. It was just a few months ago, and yet reflecting on it today feels like peering into the past through a smeared lens. We gathered at the local crematorium and although the occasion was undeniably sad, it also felt quietly celebratory. My neighbour, a doughty 96-year-old, had lived a full and fascinating life, spanning some of the most remarkable events of human history. There was a slideshow of photos, a this-is-your-life eulogy by the celebrant and heartfelt words of remembrance from his daughter. Later, over tea and sandwiches, we swapped stories and agreed that Peter’s was a life well lived; that he’d had a good end. The Dominic Cummingses among us don’t have to play by the same rules, accept the same privations, make the same provisions My brother died at the beginning of May. Aged only in his early 60s, his death didn’t feel like a timely ending but an early interruption: a life only part lived. He spent his last days in hospital. The staff were unfailingly kind and went above and beyond to make his final hours as comfortable as possible. Although he was in a coronavirus-free ward, visiting wasn’t possible unless we nominated one family member who would have then had to isolate for 14 days. When my mother broke the news that my brother had finally lost his struggle, it triggered unexpected emotions: regret over the circumstances of his death; relief that it marked the end of his suffering; guilt that we hadn’t been close in the last years of his life; and the sadness that came with the knowledge that I wouldn’t be able to be with my parents in their time of unutterable sadness. We live only 50 miles apart, but the government had told us in no uncertain terms that we should stay at home. Mum and Dad, who are in their 80s, have been self-isolating since the start: washing their hands, having groceries delivered and keeping everyone at the required distance. Doing the right thing. That’s why it’s so galling to read about Dominic Cummings’s actions. The apparent insouciance with which he travelled the length of the country for reasons most people would judge less pressing than the death of an immediate family member. How can the government say it was OK for him to do that, while having asked so much of the rest of us? How are we to think now of the sacrifices we made? Were they in vain – or were we just not important enough to be permitted to bend the rules? In my mind’s eye, I can picture the kind of funeral we might have arranged, in normal times. I would have driven down to stay with my parents, in my old bedroom. The vicar would have visited, and we’d have planned a service in the local church. I like to think that some of my brother’s old friends would have popped in to help us remember him and that, afterwards, we would have congregated in the church rooms for tea and reminiscences. Our lockdown funeral was more prosaic. I wrote a eulogy and planned to deliver it in person. But my parents asked me not to travel; told me that it wasn’t worth the risk of either spreading or contracting coronavirus for the sake of a 20-minute slot in the crematorium followed by a socially distanced farewell in the car park. All the arrangements were managed by the funeral director – flowers, coffin, music – over the phone. In the end my parents didn’t attend as they were anxious about the potential health consequences of breaking their isolation. I hear that the service went well. My other brother and his wife (who live nearby) were among a handful of mourners who sat apart and made sure the occasion didn’t go unmarked. The celebrant read my words. The songs my parents had picked were just right. “Your brother would have enjoyed it,” commented one friend. And yet, for me, and for my parents, it almost feels as if none of this has happened. The funerals I’ve attended over the years have helped me to appreciate how the familiar rituals ease the way for those of us who mourn. The pace and rhythm of them allow us to begin our journey of grief and acceptance. There’s comfort in familiar words and succour in the arms of our friends and family. Ours isn’t the saddest story of our times – not by a long chalk. Each day I’m humbled by the sacrifices others are making for our collective wellbeing. Healthcare workers who are living apart from their families, putting their lives on the line, enduring privation so we can be safe. Be saved. As a nation we’re all being asked to contribute to the national effort. We’re shuttering businesses, cancelling longed-for holidays, postponing special occasions, shopping for elderly neighbours. In my own town – as in so many places up and down the country – mutual aid groups are thriving because of the selflessness of ordinary people. Staying at home seems the least we can do. Except now we know that for some people it’s optional. The Dominic Cummingses among us don’t have to play by the same rules, accept the same privations, make the same provisions. They can flout the rules because they make the rules. It’s the kind of exceptionalism that could be the death of us. • Diane Nowell is a writer