Somehow the quiet made it louder. By rights, marking the 75th anniversary of VE Day in the midst of a pandemic that has confined us to our homes – forcing us to keep our distance from one another, denying us the right to gather in crowds – should have muffled this commemoration. A celebration in private would surely feel like no celebration at all. Katherine Jenkins singing to an empty Albert Hall, streets with no street parties and the pubs all shut: how could that add up to anything other than a damp squib? And yet Friday’s marking of the end of the second world war struck a deeper chord than it might, had it been just another sunny bank holiday. Yes, the usual rituals had to be suspended. There could be no wreath-laying at local memorials: instead, Prince Charles and Camilla laid two small wreaths on their own, in a crowd-less corner of Balmoral, watched by a lone piper. There could be no veterans’ parades, no reunions for those who had served, no grateful handshakes from the politicians: 102-year-old former staff sergeant Ernie Horsfall had to make do with a Zoom call from Boris Johnson. And there were limited opportunities for silliness: the Winston Churchill impersonators were all dressed up with nowhere to go, forced to perform their cigar-and-V-sign shtick online. All the same, Britons seemed more conscious of this 75th anniversary than previous ones. Manufacturers of bunting and flags reported record sales, busier than for any previous VE Day commemoration, busier even than in the summer of 2012 when the London Olympics and the Queen’s diamond jubilee coincided. Perhaps it’s no surprise that Britons in the grip of the coronavirus pandemic should seize on the memory of the allies’ victory in Europe. After all, the second world war has hovered over this crisis from the start. The instant lockdown was declared, headline writers and politicians alike invoked the Blitz spirit, implicitly urging us to keep calm and carry on. In those early days, fear of a return to the wartime ration book sent many to the supermarkets to stock up, even to wrestle with each other for rolls of toilet paper. As Churchill’s grandson, the former MP Nicholas Soames, reflected in a BBC interview on Thursday, seven decades ago people had had to get by on one egg a week, but “these days there’s practically a riot if you can’t get strawberries in November”. But the last war is the lens through which we see ourselves even in good times – a decent run in the World Cup has us dusting off the parallels – so it’s hardly a shock that we do the same facing a menace that has killed tens of thousands in a matter of weeks. That association has been certified from the top. The Queen made the connection in the TV address she delivered last month, when she channelled Vera Lynn to promise the country that “we will meet again”, and VE Day was bound to be no different. The link between Covid-19 and the war has found a human face besides that of the monarch and it was on display again on Friday. It’s not a coincidence that Captain Tom Moore has been the anointed talisman of this crisis, raising north of £31m by walking 100 times around his garden to mark his 100th birthday. Moore – now elevated to the status of both honorary colonel and national treasure – embodies the notion that there is a continuity of British resilience, that the same collective backbone that enabled us to see off Hitler will allow us to “send coronavirus packing”, as Johnson put it before he himself was struck down. It was all but ordained that the hero of this hour would be a second world war veteran. Only someone who had contributed to our finest hour could steel us for one of our darkest. Even so, coronavirus and the war that ended 75 years ago make an odd fit. For one thing, war and disease are not the same. Covid-19 reduces no buildings to rubble; it drops no bombs from the sky. It will not send a general and an admiral, in dress uniforms, to sign an unconditional surrender. There will be no moment when, at the stroke of midnight, we can declare that the war is over. And even if there were, we know that we are nowhere near it. Those who listened to the BBC’s rebroadcast of Churchill’s 3pm victory speech, granting Britons a “brief period of rejoicing”, knew that the two stories were out of sync. Joan Bakewell recalled on these pages her childhood memories of VE Day, the day “the great deadly cloud of threat lifted”. But that deadly cloud still looms over a country whose official death toll from the virus is now the highest in Europe, above 30,000 and rising. For a moment, and by a benign quirk of timing, it seemed as if the anniversary might coincide with a measure of relief. “Happy Monday”, promised Thursday’s Sun on its front page, suggesting the government was poised to ease the lockdown, in line with its decision to ditch the slogan – with its wartime ring – “Stay Home, Protect the NHS, Save Lives”. That now seems to have been another bit of bungled comms by a government that is making a habit of them. Even if it’s not true that social distancing will endure into 2021, or that a vaccine could take several years to develop, plenty of Britons will feel that, when it comes to the war against the coronavirus, we are rather closer to 3 September 1939 than we are to 8 May 1945. There is another difference, one that can feel like bad form to mention. Britain may have stood alone for a valiant year of the war, but it did not end it that way. Victory in Europe was a victory of an alliance, won at a high cost in British, Commonwealth, American and especially Russian blood. Not for nothing did Churchill’s VE day speech spill over with “gratitude to our splendid allies”. But there is no such alliance, and all too little global cooperation, in the war against the virus. At the desk where Franklin D Roosevelt once sat now lurks Donald J Trump, who first denied that a threat existed at all and whose energies since have been devoted not to leading a worldwide effort to defeat it – a task for which the United States is uniquely equipped – but to finding someone to blame for the fatal havoc it is wreaking (usually Democratic state governors, the media, China or all three). Trump shows nothing but contempt for the global institutions created after 1945, designed to ensure that the peoples of the world would face future perils together – institutions that are now creaking under the strain. Britain stands especially alone. Not long after VE Day, Churchill was pressing the case for what needed to happen next. “We must recreate the European family in a regional structure called, it may be, the United States of Europe,” Churchill declared in Zurich in 1946. Five years later, he was warning of the “disadvantages and even dangers to us in standing aloof” from a more united Europe. He was sad that Britain had refused to discuss the creation of a European army. He hoped Britain would join the European Coal and Steel Community, the precursor of the Common Market. Close ties to our European neighbours were precious, Churchill argued, even if that sometimes meant “the abrogation of national sovereignty”. Seventy-five years on, those who most like to invoke the name of our wartime leader choose to pretend he never did or said those things. In Friday’s Downing Street there’s a Churchill tribute act who led the campaign to wrench Britain away from its allies in the European Union, who has made Brexit into a defining credo and who has presided over a government that passed up three chances to protect its doctors and nurses from a deadly virus, lest joining an EU procurement scheme be seen as engaging in treacherous European cooperation. So, yes, it was natural for Britons to bask in the May sunshine and remember a brighter moment, to take comfort from it and draw strength from its lesson: that even the darkest hours end eventually. It made sense to come together and raise a glass for the day when we will meet again. But we are fighting a different war now, against an invisible enemy and led by lesser men.