 It’s hard to write about rejection; perhaps it’s the hardest thing of all. Who wants to revisit such pain? Who really cares to crack open the smooth shell of their carefully deployed pride, to reveal the gaping wounds beneath? Michèle Roberts’s new book, subtitled A Diary of Surviving, was written during the months that followed the rejection of her latest novel by her publisher and, in one way, it is in itself a means of keeping up appearances: in its pages, we find her determined to construct something elegant and worthwhile out of her humiliation. But it is also valiantly candid. Like onions, she peels her feelings; not even the silliest or most shameful among them will escape the blade of her sharpest knife. Roberts, as readers of her novels will know, is a wonderful writer: one in possession of immense feeling not only for people (in this book, even strangers, half-glimpsed among the aisles at Morrisons, are described so vividly you can almost smell the too-ripe fruit in their metal baskets), but also for inanimate objects: it’s in her power to make almost anything seem beguiling, whether an ordinary salad, pulled together from bits and pieces left in the fridge, or a slightly chipped statue of the Madonna found at a French brocante. In this book, though, she is the principal character: outwardly strong and capable, but with a newly frangible centre. Her identity – her entire way of life – being so bound up with her writing, the rejection of her novel feels calamitous; a personal disaster as well as a professional and financial one. But what to do? “Just get on with your work, Miss Roberts,” her tutor at university liked to tell her – and so she does. She rewrites (more than once) her novel, and alongside this agonising labour, she also produces this journal, a radiant and absorbing account of her day-to-day life in her basement flat in Walworth, south London, and in her tiny, damp house in the Mayenne, in north-west France (Roberts is half-French). Roberts’s friendships, whether with other women or with her ex-husband, Jim, are rich and sustaining I like the raggedy crowds that populate this unlikely diary: English writers and French farmers gathering in its gardens and sitting rooms, each one of them with their (often forcefully expressed) point of view. Roberts’s friendships, whether with other women or with her ex-husband, Jim, are rich and sustaining, and you know how her pals must feel about her in return, for she makes you feel so close to her: a warm, generous, clever and (to me) agreeably spiky person. However, what I find most powerfully moving about this book is its gentle, sidelong acknowledgment of her status as a single woman; the way she moves about the world, independent, alone, and yet only rarely lonely. Though Roberts is without self-pity, she has tenderness for herself; though her confidence is hard-won, she also knows her worth. Her description of joining the line at a supermarket till soon after her publisher has told her that her novel is “too intense”, and of finding a certain consolation there – “just being in a queue was a comfort: I had a place, braced by other people” – brought me, I have to admit, almost to tears. I recognised, too, the way that one spurning – in this case, of her novel – causes her to remember others: a lover who returned to his wife; her mother, who never thought her daughter’s books much good. Is rejection ever invited? Is there a sense in which, having learned that we can survive it, we somehow bring it on ourselves? When is calling a life “unconventional” just a way of avoiding putting a more brutal label on one’s failures? These are the questions she bravely asks herself. Her title, Negative Capability, is from Keats: in a letter of 1817, the poet wrote of this state as one in which a man is “capable of being in uncertainties, Mysteries, doubts, without any irritable reaching after fact & reason”. Roberts first read this line in her 20s and, longing to be invulnerable, couldn’t appreciate it. Now, though, it is newly resonant for her, not only as a strategy for dwelling more peacefully within contradictions and even tumult, but as a kind of promontory, on which she must likely stand, sometimes waving and sometimes not, for the rest of her life. Concomitant to this is her sense that the writing of her journal has ultimately helped her to take pleasure in the day to day. Which brings us – doesn’t it? – to the present moment. If someone had told me a month ago that I would find, during this lockdown, such solace and pleasure in a book about the drama of one woman’s quotidian and interior life, I might have shaken my head: ordinary sadnesses are supposed to seem trivial now, bashed into shape by the horror of the times. But of course this is not the case. Roberts’s wisdom worked on me like a spell: her growing awareness that there is no making a pattern of life; the sense that we can control relatively few of the things that are most important to us. Our adventures – our love affairs, our marriages, our struggles at work and at home – go on, unabated, irrespective of Covid-19. A sense of perspective, as Roberts repeatedly shows, is no cure at all for heartache. • Negative Capability: A Diary of Surviving by Michèle Roberts is published by Sandstone Press (sandstonepress.com, £14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15             