McDonald’s has reopened 33 of its drive-through restaurants as it gets back to business amid the easing of the coronavirus lockdown restrictions. The fast food chain opened 15 of its 1,270 branches for delivery orders earlier in May. The latest restaurants to open, in London and the south-east of England, will offer a limited menu between 11am and 10pm, with workers separated from customers by a perspex screen at the drive-through window. Customers will be asked to pay using a contactless method if possible and spending is capped at £25 per car. The branches are: BEDFORDSHIREDunstableLuton (Chaul End Lane)Luton (Leagrave) Luton retail park (Gipsy Lane) CAMBRIDGESHIREPeterborough (Boongate) Peterborough (Bourges Boulevard)Peterborough (Eye Green)Peterborough (Glinton)Peterborough (Hampton)Peterborough (Morrisons, Lincoln Road) ESSEXChelmsford (Boreham Interchange)Chelmsford (Riverside)Chelmsford (Regiment business park)Chelmsford (Westway) SUFFOLKIpswich (Cardinal Park)Ipswich (Ranelagh Road)Ipswich (Ravenswood)Ipswich (Whitehouse) HERTFORDSHIREBusheyGarston (Watford)Watford (Hertfordshire Arms) KENTMedway (Beechings Way)Bobbing (Sheppey Way)Gillingham (Bowaters)Rochester (Medway City Estate)Rochester (Medway Valley Park)Sittingbourne retail parkStrood LONDONNorth CheamWest Sutton (Oldfields Road)Hounslow (Travellers Friend) SURREYStaines (Two Rivers retail park)Staines (London Road) Fast food and takeaway restaurants are reopening widely. Others now open for business include: Burger King, which began a phased reopening for delivery at sites in Bristol, Swindon and Coventry in April, and has since reopened about 120 outlets nationwide for delivery and drive-through orders. The burger chain intends to reopen about 20 restaurants a week until its entire UK chain is open and aims to have at least one open in every city by the end of May. KFC has about 100 outlets open for delivery only. The UK’s largest fast food chicken chain is offering a limited menu in locations including London, Hampshire, Birmingham, Glasgow, Sussex, Greater Manchester and Staffordshire. The chicken chain Nando’s has reopened six restaurants for delivery orders in London and Manchester, and is also offering click-and-collect to customers at other sites including Belfast, Maidstone, Sevenoaks and Worcester. Subway is reopening 600 of its 2,600 sandwich stores across the UK and Ireland. The bakery chain Greggs has started a trial selling food and hot drinks from a limited menu to walk-in customers at a small number of outlets in its home city of Newcastle and the north-east of England. It withdrew its initial plans to reopen 20 of its 2,050-plus locations, over fears that crowds could gather outside. Pret a Manger is offering takeaway and delivery food and hot drinks from 100 branches in London and other locations, including Birmingham, Brighton, Bristol, Cambridge, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Leeds, Manchester, Oxford, Reading, St Albans and Tunbridge Wells. Starbucks has reopened 150 branches, with customers able to buy coffee to take away or for delivery. The Costa Coffee chain says it has reopened 79 of its 2,700 branches across the country for takeaway and drive-through, from Swindon and St Ives, to Wrexham and Doncaster. The Five Guys burger chain has opened the doors of 47 of its 104 restaurants for click-and-collect and delivery orders in locations including Aberdeen, Bath, Nottingham and Norwich. Wagamama, the Restaurant Group-owned noodle chain, intends to reopen 67 of its sites for delivery by the end of June after successful trials in London and Leeds. Its restaurants, offering pan-Asian cuisine, will initially be open from Thursday to Sunday and from 4pm to 9.30pm, although the Kensington and Peckham branches in London will try out a seven-day operation. Pizza Express is reopening 13 London restaurants for delivery only in the next 10 days. The casual dining chain said it would restart with an edited menu, available from outlets in “London villages”, including Balham, Chiswick, Fulham and Notting Hill. Leon, the fast food chain with an emphasis on healthy eating, kept 16 locations in London and Brighton open to provide takeaway orders to key workers during the shutdown and intends to reopen more restaurants over the coming days. Harry Ramsden, the fish and chip restaurant chain owned by Deep Blue Restaurants, has opened sites in Bournemouth, Brighton and Eastbourne for takeaway only. Moto motorway service stations are gradually reopening some of its brands, including Burger King and Costa, for takeaway. On Thursday it will open a further seven Costa drive-throughs, following 27 Burger King branches. Greggs and KFC will reopen next.