When New York City initiated its quarantine – when the subways emptied out and the restaurants closed up, when the well-off and well-connected abandoned ship, when the ambulances began howling down deserted streets – I went fishing. Like an estimated 36 million Americans (at last count), I found myself out of work and with no immediate prospects. My wedding, scheduled for March, was postponed indefinitely. So, with the future on hold, I grabbed my fly rod and did what I normally do when it’s time for a timeout from the world: I hit the water. At first, I fished a trout stream 45 miles north of the city, a tree-covered brook where, even in normal times, it’s hard to bump into a stranger. I went every few days, even if it was too cold for a hatch of insects. But as the lockdown dragged on and I began racking up highway tolls at an alarming rate, I shifted to the East River in front of my apartment, in Dumbo, Brooklyn, the waterfront neighborhood famous for its stone streets, loft apartments, and high carrying capacity of insufferable tourists. A few years ago, the non-profit Billion Oyster Project created a manmade reef underneath the Manhattan Bridge by dumping shucked oyster shells into the water. Most gawkers who come to the neighborhood to take selfies under the bridge don’t realize there’s a living (if not exactly thriving) marine habitat directly below. In 2016, middle schoolers studying the East River habitat discovered horseshoe crabs and even a tiny lined seahorse, among other underwear critters. There also happens to be a resident population of striped bass, the north-east’s most celebrated piscatory prey. (It’s the state saltwater fish of New York and New Jersey, as well as five other east coast states.) Ordinarily, the parks enforcement patrol frowns on casting from the shoreline here – too great a chance of snagging an unwitting Instagram influencer, I suspect. But with out-of-towners non-existent and most New Yorkers at home feeding their sourdough starter, the paths were mostly empty. Every few days, depending on the weather and outgoing tide, I walked five minutes from my apartment to a paved boardwalk that juts out into the water near the bridge’s Brooklyn-side pylon. From there I’d cast out into the tidal current and strip in a yellow and silver fly. The best spot for landing the lure lined up directly with One World Trade rising in the distance. I didn’t always catch fish, but I did occasionally; stripers up to 25 inches that I quickly released. It was my version of backyard birding or indoor gardening: a modified version of an old hobby that let me turn off the news for a few hours. Plus, I got to see the city life on the streets, at least what remained: firefighters on a morning coffee break, Orthodox Jewish families strolling along the waterfront, dog walkers letting their charges run free on the grass (also frowned upon by the park patrol). Once, a young couple sat on the bench across the path from me and proceeded to make out as if I was invisible to them. Some New York habits, it seems, are hard to break. As the weeks wore on and New Yorkers began tiring of their side projects and stagnating routines, more people appeared on the pathways. Occasionally, tensions peaked. A few times I heard someone scold a stranger for not wearing a face covering. I wore a buff around my neck, but because of my looping casts with fly line and a 2/0 barbed hook, I never worried about onlookers getting too close. Eventually, the act of fishing began to wear thin, even for me. Hospitals like Elmhurst remained overwhelmed by the virus. Millions more joined me in the ranks of the unemployed. (But hey, at least Wall Street was booming.) Whatever reprieve fishing offered began to wane. Still, the water was hard to resist. Just this morning, as gray clouds hovered above Lower Manhattan and spit out drops of rain, I returned to my usual post underneath the Manhattan Bridge. I didn’t catch anything. Something about the conditions just didn’t feel right. My fiancee, an executive coach and motivational speaker, is fond of expressions like: “Not all storms come to disrupt your life; some come to clear your path.” She’s pathologically positive, and only has moments of doubt when she realizes we can’t host Shabbat for the tenth week in a row. This is to say – at least for a chronically jaded journalist like me – she’s delightfully annoying. While I’ve been fishing or walking the dog, she’s been busy volunteering as a suicide counselor for Crisis Text Line and giving free webinars on mastering mindful productivity at home. Twice a day (at least) she cranks to We Are the World and belts out one particular line, every single time. “There’s a choice we’re making … we’re saving our own lives!” I thought about this while staring off into the Manhattan skyline. In the recent stories I’ve read about the spike in mental health issues, it’s often argued that humans are a social species. We’re hard-wired for human connections, and that’s why forced seclusion is so difficult for us. More than that, I think, we’re a communal species, designed for collaborative work and shared progress. That’s the reason why, at least in part, it feels so good to lean out the window every night at 7 o’clock and cheer for the frontline healthcare workers. In that context, fishing for a few striped bass wasn’t the antidote. I was no longer craving a distraction; I was longing for expansion. So I did the only thing I could do: I reeled up and went home, then opened my laptop to do a quick sweep for jobs. Afterwards, I signed up to volunteer with City Harvest. I didn’t do it for anyone else, exactly. It was time to save my own life.