It has sold out of slides, sandpits and swingball as families with gardens try to keep children occupied but The Entertainer has still seen sales dive by three-quarters after being forced to close all its stores. The family-owned toy store chain has become an online-only operator by necessity, converting a warehouse that usually supplies stores into extra space to serve home deliveries as it battles to keep up with demand while protecting staff with physical distancing measures. Gary Grant, the chain’s founder and chairman, who is yawning after long days battling to try to keep his family business alive, says: “We have 173 shops in the UK and now our only sales channel is the internet. Sales are down by three quarters despite a 10% rise online.” The company is experiencing Black Friday levels of demand but cannot meet them as its warehouse is only operating at 40% capacity because of the measures to keep staff safe. “We are not going to sit back and let an opportunity pass us by but we can’t suddenly change in a week,” says Grant. The first news of the virus reached Grant after Christmas when there were concerns in China about workers returning to work after their new year holiday. “In January and February we were dealing with a broken supply chain,” he says. Deliveries were delayed and he spent two or three weeks trying to secure enough stock for Easter. But by the end of February it was becoming clear the virus could have a much wider impact, as parts of China went into lockdown. Sales at The Entertainer’s larger city-centre stores began to drop and Grant said he took the hint from what was happening overseas: “If China had closed its shops, we realised that could happen to us.” By mid-March sales in some stores had fallen by as much as half. While small local outlets were holding up and online trade was brisk, that didn’t compensate for the loss of trade in large outlets. Grant decided to run a “buy one get one free” sale, which brought in lots of cash to help underpin the business in the week before the government announced the high street shutdown. “Our business is 39 years old but there was a period of time we were unsure if there was a future,” he says. Weeks into the lockdown, The Entertainer has changed the way it operates, with only a skeleton staff in the office. Hundreds of staff have been furloughed, spending plans have been cancelled and all unnecessary costs cut. Grant says government support, including a business rates holiday and tax delays, have been vital in keeping the business alive. The future became slightly clearer on Monday when the government outlined a plan for how the lockdown might ease in stages. In a 60-page document, the government said the intention was to allow non-essential retailers to reopen shops in phases from 1 June – as long as they could follow the “Covid-19 secure guidelines”. Looking further ahead, Grant’s next big problem is working out what Christmas in a time of coronavirus will look like. He is pondering not only how their stores will operate but how much stock will be needed for the period when The Entertainer usually makes a quarter of its sales. Will families will be itching to splash out to cheer themselves up after a tough year? Or will they be forced to cut back, given the economic climate? He says: “We need to batten down volumes [for Christmas]. At the moment our whole world is cancelled or deferred and the incoming stock is starting to dry up. But now we have got to turn the tap back on. We need the right stock at the right time. It is difficult as I can look at last year’s numbers and do a model but who knows?” He says The Entertainer and other retailers are likely to be cautious about the amount of stock they source for Christmas, given the expected economic climate. That could mean a change in shopping patterns. In the past few years families have gradually left their present-buying later and later, but this year Grant expects them to buy early. “People will be concerned that if they wait they won’t get what they want and for the first time in a while that will be true.” At present, Grant says, there are huge increases in sales of anything to do with education, such as matching or spelling games, as well as art materials and craft products as parents try to teach children at home. The group is selling as many adult puzzles in a week as it normally sells in a year. “We sold twice as many slides last week as in the whole of April last year,” says Grant. Swings, sand pits and trampolines are sold out and Grant says he has sold more swingballs in a week than he usually sells in three months. “All of our summer stock is gone.” But he adds: “We’re asking ourselves: what does retail look like past the closures? Is everyone going to spill out or still be concerned and reserved?” Physical distancing measures, of the kind operating in supermarkets, would drastically reduce the number of shoppers The Entertainer’s stores could serve during its usually hectic Christmas week. There would be no room for appropriately spaced queues in many shopping centres and high streets. Grant says he hopes this won’t be necessary in the longer term. “Buying toys is an experience for a child. I don’t think buying online delivers in the same way as a toy shop. I am really hopeful that when we reopen and are stable again and not so many people are suffering, toy shops will go back to normal.”