Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: England’s deputy chief medical officer, Jonathan Van-Tam, warned on Saturday that people would need to follow the guidelines and not “tear the pants out of it”, as he urged the British public to adhere to a high level of compliance in order to keep the spread of the virus down. Parts of Colombia will come out of the nationwide quarantine that has been in place since late March, but new measures were issued to control the spread of coronavirus in three of its most affected cities on Saturday, including the capital Bogota. The country has reported more than 26,600 coronavirus cases and 853 deaths. India extended its coronavirus lockdown until 30 June in high-risk zones but permitted restaurants, malls and religious buildings to reopen elsewhere from 8 June, despite a record high number of cases detected nationwide on Saturday. India reported a record daily jump of 7,964 new Covid-19 infections on Saturday and has so far recorded 173,763 positive cases and 4,971 deaths, making the world’s second-most populous country ninth on the list of most infections. A Chinese-made coronavirus vaccine could be ready for distribution as early as the end of this year, China’s state-owned assets supervision and administration commission said in a social media post on Saturday. Austria’s government has approved hosting Formula 1’s season-opening races on 5 July, but fans might be disappointed to hear that the races will take place behind closed doors. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, will not attend an in-person meeting in the US with the leaders of the world’s major economies if Donald Trump goes ahead with it, unless the course of the coronavirus spread changes by then, her office said on Saturday. Thousands of Bosnians took to the streets on Saturday to protest against bad governance, nationalism and corruption as senior officials face public anger over the government’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. President Hassan Rouhani said mosques are to resume daily prayers throughout the country, despite some areas seeing high levels of coronavirus infections. The hours of shopping malls, which had been allowed to open only until 6pm, will be extended, as part of the government’s plans to ease coronavirus restrictions.