Michael Gove has told local authorities refusing to reopen their schools on 1 June to “look to their responsibilities”, saying: “If you really care about children, you’ll want them in schools.” Appearing on the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show, the Cabinet Office minister said: “We are confident that children and teachers will be safe.” He said schools could implement staggered lunch breaks and arrival times, seat children at individual desks and teach them in classes of 15 at most, supervised by one adult. Asked what he would say to councils, including Liverpool’s and Greater Manchester’s, which have questioned the plan, he said: “I respectfully ask them to think again. “The clear scientific and clinical advice is that it is safe to have schools reopen, accompanied with social distancing.” He added: “Children only have one chance at education. Over the course of the last decade we’ve made significant strides in closing the gap between the richest and the poorest in our schools. This lockdown has put that backwards. “If you really care about children, you’ll want them to be in schools. You will want them to be learning. You will want them to have new opportunities. So look to your responsibilities.” The government has asked schools to prepare to open their doors to children from reception, year 1 and year 6 from next month. But some councils, including Liverpool, Hartlepool and Greater Manchester, have said they will not be implementing the plan. In a letter to parents, Liverpool’s director of children’s services, Steve Reddy, said: “Our guiding principle is that schools can only reopen to other pupils when it is safe to do so and not a moment before.” In the clearest explanation yet of the government’s rationale for its “stay alert” approach to the next phase of the crisis, Gove said it was impossible to eliminate completely the risk of catching Covid-19, unless people were kept “perpetually imprisoned in their homes”. “The whole point about life is that you need to manage risk,” he said. “We cannot have a situation where we keep our economy and our schools and our public services continually closed down, because the health consequences of doing so would be malign as well.” In a separate interview on Sky News’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday, Gove announced that the government had recruited 17,000 coronavirus contact tracers, and would be ready to roll out the system nationwide by the end of this month. Building up the ability to find and control new local outbreaks is a central part of the government’s approach to progressively reopening schools, and the wider economy. The outsourcing giant Serco was given the contract to recruit the call-centre workers needed to run the new system. The Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, suggested last week that just 1,500 had been hired, but when Gove was asked for a number on Sunday, he said, “just over 17,000”. The health secretary, Matt Hancock, had suggested 18,000 contact tracers would be in place by the middle of this month. Gove heaped praise on Hancock, amid reports of a testy relationship between the health secretary and No 10. “We’re on course to meet that target. It’s more evidence that we have, in Matt, an energetic and determined health secretary who is throwing everything into the fight against this virus,” he said. The government gave up trying to track every case of Covid-19 in March, when the virus began circulating in the community, with the deputy chief medical officer for England Jenny Harries saying at the time: “There comes a point in a pandemic where that is not an appropriate intervention.” But the shadow health secretary, Jon Ashworth, and Hancock’s predecessor Jeremy Hunt have consistently called for community tracing. The government also announced this weekend a third large-scale study to track the progress of the virus, and try to establish how many people may have built up some immunity to it. Teaching unions have said the implementation of a testing and tracking system should be a precondition for schools reopening – so that individual outbreaks can be controlled. The deputy Labour leader, Angela Rayner, backed their stance on the BBC Marr show, saying: “We urge the government to publish the science, and to ensure the test, track and isolate is in place.”