Derek Jarman’s GardenToday’s episode of Words and Music on Radio 3 finds Tilda Swinton and Samuel Barnett reading from Derek Jarman’s books and more, with special reference to the artists for whom he made videos (Pet Shop Boys and Annie Lennox) and Jarman’s own musical inspirations. BBC Radio 3, today, 5.30pm. Kitty Empire Book now: Laura Marling liveThe British singer-songwriter, whose recent album Song for Our Daughter is a keeper, is due to broadcast a live, full-length gig from London’s Union Chapel on Saturday 6 June, doors 8pm. Tickets, limited to 1,500, from dice.fm KE Only the AnimalsGerman-born French genre auteur Dominik Moll returns to the form of Harry, He’s Here to Help and Lemming with this sleek, slippery thriller that keeps springing new surprises. On Curzon Home Cinema from Friday. Guy Lodge New York City BalletLast chance to catch New York City Ballet’s dazzling online spring season, which has combined gems from the past with the new work that is mapping their future. Balanchine’s Donizetti Variations is the attraction from Tuesday to Friday, then (until 31 May) a mixed bill with pieces from Justin Peck, Pam Tanowitz and Alexei Ratmansky. Streaming at nycballet.com Sarah Crompton Unprecedented: Real Time Theatre from a State of IsolationTwelve new pandemic-inspired digital plays made by BBC Arts, Headlong and Century Films. A terrific lineup includes actors Gemma Arterton, Monica Dolan, Cecilia Noble and Olivia Williams and dramatists James Graham, Charlene James and Jasmine Lee-Jones. Ned Bennett, Tinuke Craig and Blanche McIntyre are among the directors. Nine of the plays will be broadcast on BBC Four from Tuesday to Thursday, 10pm; all 12 will be available on BBC iPlayer. Susannah Clapp Anno DominoUnfazed by the postponement of the premiere this summer of his 84th play Truth Will Out, Alan Ayckbourn sat right down and wrote another one for Scarborough’s Stephen Joseph theatre. The lockdown-proof Anno Domino, available exclusively on the theatre’s website, features four characters, aged from teens to 70s, experiencing the effects of the breakup of a long-established marriage on family and friends. It will be performed by the 81-year-old Ayckbourn himself, along with his wife, Heather Stoney, acting together for the first time since 1964. Streaming from 12 midday tomorrow until 25 June at sjt.uk.com Clare Brennan Aurora OrchestraAurora Orchestra’s new digital series continues with an unmissable performance of Beethoven’s “Pastoral” Symphony No 6, played from memory, at the 2015 BBC Proms, with new interactive content from the orchestra’s founder/conductor Nicholas Collon. Free to watch, today, 4pm on Aurora Orchestra’s YouTube channel. Fiona Maddocks Wysing Arts Centre: TransmissionsLast in an impromptu series of art broadcasts, in classic DIY television show format, commissioned by Tai Shani and other artists through the experimental Cambridgeshire arts campus. This episode is hosted by the American performance poet CAConrad, with invited guests: rich and unexpected. Wysing Arts Centre via twitch.tv, Thursday, 9pm. Laura Cumming Block UniverseThe London performance art festival returns with a virtual programme featuring live performances, augmented reality, online cooking and workshops from Jade Montserrat, Eve Stainton, Inês Neto dos Santos and more. Tomorrow to Saturday, 6pm on Block Universe’s Facebook page. LC The Pack PodcastNew US spoken-word podcast series presenting new short comedies written and directed by the Emmy-nominated Eugene Pack. Actors include Cecily Strong, Blair Underwood, Laraine Newman and Cheryl Hines. New episodes every Tuesday on thepackpodcast.org Kadish Morris