Germany will have to learn to live with the coronavirus, building tactics such as physical distancing and strict hygiene into normal daily life, the country’s leading public health institution has said as it wound up its regular press briefings on the pandemic as a result of a continued fall in new infections. Lars Schaade, the vice-president of the Robert Koch Institute, said that as Germany’s infection rate had been “substantially pushed back”, the decision to drop its briefing – which has attracted millions of viewers since it began in February, firstly daily and later twice weekly – marked a “new phase”. “The epidemic is of course not over,” he said. “But having substantially pushed the virus back so that the number of new cases are between 600 and 1,300 a day … our approach now has to be to learn to live with the virus and to control it.” Journalists attending the briefing strongly voiced their opposition to the briefing being scrapped. It has provided the public and media with detailed information on Germany’s infection rates, up-to-date information on the virus’s development, and explanations on preventive measures and the science behind public health decisions, free of any political colouring. Schaade said the media could continue to put questions to the institute’s press department and there would be press conferences in the event of significant developments. Germany has had 166,091 confirmed cases of coronavirus as of Thursday, according to figures registered with the RKI, an increase of 1,284 since Wednesday. There were concerns that the numbers of new cases were increasing, but Schaade insisted they reflected the normal development on a weekly basis, with higher numbers often registered on Wednesdays and Thursdays. The country’s reproduction or R rate has fallen to 0.65, meaning that on average every 10 infected people are infecting between six and seven others. Schaade said he expected the pandemic to last for many more months, and most likely into next year. “It’s clear this virus cannot be eradicated in Germany. There’s consensus on that – at least until there’s a vaccine or a treatment. We will have to try to build this virus into our everyday lives, changing our behaviour to reduce its transmission. We find ourselves in a new normality.” He said tackling the virus required each person to take responsibility for his or her own behaviour. “Only then can we control the virus and lead an appropriate life as a society.” On Wednesday the leaders of Germany’s 16 states agreed to put the onus on regional public health authorities to monitor the virus’s progress and instigate emergency measures if infections start to rise. If the rate of new infections in a municipality exceeds 50 per 100,000 inhabitants within seven days, communities will be swiftly forced into lockdown, including the closure of schools and shops. Schaade called the measure a “pragmatic safety limit”. There is considerable nervousness in Germany over decisions to allow all shops to open and schools to return. Angela Merkel called the decision to come out of lockdown “brave”, stressing the risk that Germany could quickly lose the advantage it has gained over the spread of the virus. “We have to be careful that this thing doesn’t slip from our grasp,” she said on Wednesday. The chancellor has been accused by some political parties of acting too late to save the economy, while some virologists say the measures go too far too soon. The effects of the relaxation of rules are expected to be visible in infection rates around two to three weeks after their implementation. Schaade said testing and tracing remained essential to tackling the virus. Although Germany has maintained a capacity to carry out 964,000 tests a week, only 317,000 tests were carried out last week. Schaade said this was a reflection of the fact that the number of infections had fallen, but owing to a global shortage of items such as reagents “it is not bad to have a certain remaining capacity” in expectation of a second wave.