Richard Ford, 76, is a novelist whose particular feat has been to translate failure into literary success: he writes about human beings and their disappointments with unfailing insight and, while he never mocks his characters, is keenly aware of the absurdity involved in being alive. His best-known novels are about Frank Bascombe, sportswriter turned real estate agent. His novel Independence Day won the Pulitzer prize in 1996. He lives in Maine, teaches English at Columbia and his new collection of short stories, Sorry for Your Trouble, is exemplary in its nuanced understanding of the relationships between men and women. Your stories explore choice and the rogue ways life behaves. Do people have a choice about who they fall in love with? And what part does luck play?I think about both these questions. I was the luckiest man in the world when I met Kristina back in 1964 – I’ve been married to the same girl for 52 years. Yet throughout that long period, you choose all over again. I used to tell Kristina, “I choose to be married to you every day.” You write about moments that “come from nowhere” in which life is “reframed.” What were your own moments?In 1982, I had to make a decision to tear my whole apparatus down and start my writing life again. The first books I’d written were OK but I had to devise a way of getting more of what I knew into what I was writing. I knew I wasn’t smart enough – although I was dogged enough – to be a great writer unless I could bring everything I had to the page every single day. I devised draconian clerical procedures. I immersed myself in raw material. I slowed everything down. It worked out better. Are you more comfortable with short stories? Is the commitment of a novel too much of a good – or long – thing?No – I’m writing a novel at the moment. Short stories are easier because they are shorter but are acutely demanding. Pulling together a collection of fundamentally disparate stories which you’d also like to be cohesive is more trying than writing a novel. You’ve lived in many places in the US. Is restlessness a novelist’s prerogative? And why did you swap New Orleans for Maine?I grew up in Jackson, Mississippi – the backside of the moon – and wanted to get away and see America. Fortunately, Kristina was an air-force child and had lived all over the US so was up for it. I moved to Maine because of my wife’s job which drove me crazy. She was director of city planning in New Orleans. I just told her, I know this is the job of your lifetime and I know you really want to keep it but I have to get out. So first, I went to Paris and then I came back and went to Maine. I had never been to Maine before. The making of ourselves is how we go beyond disappointments You’ve written about real estate with such panache… how would you describe your house in Maine if you were trying to sell it to me?Refurbished Cape Cod, 75 yards from the ocean. Six outbuildings, a guesthouse, four acres – a mini estate. I’d add: “Why you’re not already living in it is a mystery.” When I walked into this house, after six months of looking, I picked up the phone, called my wife and said: “Get up here right now. This house won’t be on the market tomorrow.” I showed her the house and she loved it. I said: “Please come up here and live with me.” And after four years, she did. Does getting older bring freedom?It brings the freedom of having seen a lot of things and survived them. Particularly other people’s failure to understand. It confers veteranship on you; it makes things a bit easier. I’m transgressive by nature but feel bad when I transgress. A guy at the supermarket yesterday got very close to me without wearing a mask. I turned to him and said: “Don’t you like me? Are you trying to kill me? Get the hell away.” Then I felt bad. I don’t exercise my freedoms with alacrity. How often do you think about death and in what spirit?The novel I’m writing is about death and dying and is a comedy. Frank Bascombe is dying of a fatal disease… It’s called Be Mine. I’ll tell you one thing I’ve thought about death. It’s simple-minded in a way. But at 76, I’ve seen a lot of my friends “transition” and am shocked by how little gets left behind. Leaving aside the question of legacy, there will be some residue in the hearts and minds of others that lingers but I find there is so much less than I’d have liked. Why the fascination with Irishness in your book?My father’s family was Irish. I’m American. I’m not pretending to be an Irishman. But I taught at Trinity College Dublin and it was wonderful. I travelled round, picked up bits of stuff to put in my notebook. At some point, I thought I could use these to make a suite of stories. But I wasn’t trying to get to the heart of Ireland. The stories, if they’re any good, could equally have been set in Latvia. Are most people disappointed with their lives?Disappointments come to everybody willy-nilly. The making of ourselves is how we go beyond it. What do you read for sheer pleasure?I’m such a slow reader, I read to learn. I was raised a Presbyterian: you have to decide the hard things are the fun things. I started War and Peace during lockdown because it is one of those monolithic books you dare not undertake for the disappointment it would bring were you not to finish it. It is completely enrapturing… Is there any author or book you always return to?The Moviegoer by Walker Percy, Something Happened by Joseph Heller, A Fan’s Notes by Frederick Exley. And Elizabeth Bowen’s The House in Paris. What sort of reader were you as a child?Dyslexic. I am less dyslexic now because, in this perverse way, I’ve developed a writing and reading life. I didn’t finish a book until I was 19. • Sorry for Your Trouble by Richard Ford is published by Bloomsbury (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15