The celebrity chef Pete Evans has come under fresh criticism for promoting the coronavirus views of David Icke, the British conspiracy theorist previously accused of Holocaust denial and barred from entering Australia. On Tuesday, 11 days after the Therapeutic Goods Administration fined him $25,200 for spruiking a $15,000 light machine to fight coronavirus, Evans urged his Instagram followers to watch a three-hour-long interview in which Icke simultaneously claims Covid-19 is “a fake pandemic with no virus” and links infections to 5G antenna installations. Icke also compares Covid-19 distancing measures to “Nazi Germany fascism” in the interview that appears to have been recorded during the same week that Facebook and YouTube deleted his accounts for making claims about 5G and coronavirus. Evans’s social media post prompted the Labor MP Josh Burns, who is Jewish, to write to the chef on Thursday, warning him about Icke’s “long history of anti-Semitism” and cautioning him against promoting his views on social media. On Friday it emerged that Channel 7, who employed Evans as a co-host of My Kitchen Rules, had parted ways with the chef, who is understood to be “pursuing separate endeavours”. There is no indication that his departure was related to Evans’s social media posting. In his Instagram post linking to the interview, Evans wrote: “Here is an alternative view, I would be keen to hear your thoughts on this video as to whether their is any validity in this mans message, especially as there seems to be a lot of conflicting messages coming out of the mainstream these days. “What is the truth? I personally loved the last 30 minutes talking about heart frequency and LOVE,” Evans told his 231,000 followers. On Thursday evening, the link to the Icke interview on the London Real website was still set as Evans’s Instagram biography hyperlink. The interview was also uploaded to Spotify, but later taken down by the company for violating its content policies. Burns, the federal Labor MP for the Melbourne seat of Macnamara, cautioned the chef against using his public platform to promote Icke and his “abhorrent” views. In 2019, Burns and several Jewish community leaders campaigned for the government to revoke Icke’s visa, which it ultimately rescinded hours before he was due to board a plane to Australia for his speaking tour. “I felt that it is important you are aware of the offensive historical works by Mr Icke,” Burns told Evans in the letter, seen by the Guardian. “Mr Icke was denied a visa to Australia for good reason – his conspiracy theories incite hatred of Jewish people ... David Icke is not just controversial; he is a racist. He espouses a dark and old form of anti-Semitism that is personally offensive and that has no place in Australian society. “While we obviously do not agree on vaccinations, I would hope that we could agree that all forms of racism must be confronted and opposed. As such, I ask you to not promote Mr Icke and his abhorrent views again,” Burns wrote. Icke has denied being antisemitic and a Holocaust denier. The Guardian has contacted Evans for comment. There is no suggestion Evans holds antisemitic or racist views. A former footballer and sports presenter, the 68-year-old Icke claims the world is run by an Illuminati of lizard people, with the Jewish Rothschild family among its leaders. Icke was dumped by his publisher after writing in his 1995 book And The Truth Shall Set You Free: “Why do we play a part in suppressing alternative information to the official line of the Second World War? How is it right that while this fierce suppression goes on, free copies of the Spielberg film, Schindler’s List, are given to schools to indoctrinate children with the unchallenged version of events?”