True-crime series might be engrossing for some, but those endless tales of bodies discovered in some dark corner of suburbia can get a little overwhelming. Still, for those seeking their mystery fix, there are plenty of podcasts investigating gripping – though rather less grim – cold cases. From a crisp-based conspiracy to the truth behind who really let the dogs out, we round up some of the best murder-free mysteries to listen to right now ... If you ever reach into your multipack of crisps for salt and vinegar and end up with cheese and onion, you are not alone: plenty of people swear blind that Walkers swapped the colours of their popular flavours, despite the company claiming it never happened. In the podcast The Walkers Switch, Lauren Peters and Augustine Cerf investigate this curious case in the serious tone it deserves, interviewing psychologists, crisp representatives and even Gary Lineker. Is there a huge cover-up going on or does the answer lie in our own false memories? There’s a flute, some do-do-do-doos and a Barenaked Ladies-esque “your love is better than … ” refrain, but just what is that mystery song from the 90s? It has bothered Tyler Gillett for years and if you’ve ever searched for your own lost earworm you’ll feel his pain. PJ Vogt and Alex Goldman, hosts of this long-running series on internet culture, are on the case, putting a band together to perform Gillett’s favourite song and delving into the powerful way music brings back memories along the way. Starlee Kine’s podcast solves everyday mysteries that cannot be Googled, and her finest moment comes when she answers the big question about how tall Jake Gyllenhaal is. There seemed to be some discrepancy around his height in the film Source Code, with fans questioning whether the actor is, as he claims, “happily six-feet tall”. Would seeing Gyllenhaal shaven give a better perspective? Can Starlee drop the question into a conversation with the man himself? When the mystery is told this beautifully, the answer is not even that important in the end. Comedian Connor Ratliff has been baffled by his sudden firing from Band of Brothers for 20 years. Rumour got around that the show’s co-creator, Tom Hanks, thought he had “dead eyes”, and Ratliff hasn’t ever let those words go. He enlists some great guests to reassure him, help him understand the rejection and search for the sadness in his eyes, with Jon Hamm being a particular highlight as he talks about the rollercoaster of auditioning. It is a very personal mystery, but one that’s easy to get hooked on. Zoe was a precious doll, loved by her owner Dodai. She chose it on a childhood trip to Paris and after her mother died Dodai became obsessed with finding that lost toy. Brittany Luse, co-host of this series examining the black experience in America, is the woman to help her, calling in doll experts, falling down internet holes and discovering Black Dolls Matter. Behind The Nod’s light touch is a tale of loss and family. “I don’t actually need Zoe,” concludes Dodai. “She became a symbol of a mother’s love.” Where did Who Let the Dogs Out come from and what makes it so memorable? Like Baby Shark years later, the canine anthem wasn’t particularly good but it got stuck in many a head. Dogs Out expert Ben Sisto unravels its origin story, which is more complicated than you might expect. Did a British hairdresser called Keith really gift it to the Baha Men? No spoilers, but you’ll be left with the song in your head for days after listening to this instalment of the popular podcast on design and creativity.