There was a rare moment of relative unity in the UK at the start of April when nine out of 10 people said they supported the lockdown. However, as the government seeks to ease the lockdown, a polarised landscape is starting to re-emerge, the fault lines reflecting attitudes toward Brexit. A recent YouGov survey found that 47% of leavers supported the government’s easing of the lockdown compared with 26% of remainers. Remainers and leavers both indicated high levels of support for letting people exercise outside more than once a day, but YouGov found that leavers showed more support than remainers for allowing people to play tennis or golf, visit garden centres, meet one friend, sit and sunbathe in public areas like parks, and encourage people to return to work. Why would support for Brexit correlate with attitudes towards easing the lockdown? One might think this is simply due to confirmation bias. Brexit supporters who backed Boris might be motivated to look out for evidence that their candidate is doing a good job. I suspect, however, the factors driving polarised responses to coronavirus run deeper than that. To understand these factors, it’s helpful to look back on some of the psychological characteristics of people who supported leave or remain. Two of these differences can be explained by what American social psychologist Jonathan Haidt describes as “the moral intuitions”, the underlying values that shape how we think about politics. Remainers placed more emphasis on the value of care and the need to minimise harm, whereas leavers placed more emphasis on the value of personal liberty. When evaluating an action or a policy, remainers would ask “will this cause harm?”, whereas leavers would be inclined to ask “will something restrict our freedom?”. This emphasis on care/harm versus liberty has quite logical consequences in terms of how opinions divide on easing from the lockdown. The emphasis on care and minimising harm puts the focus on reducing the spread of the disease at all costs. Interestingly, the care/harm reasoning is stronger among women. This might help to explain the gender difference in concern around coronavirus, and why male and female leaders have responded differently to the first wave of the virus. We also know that endorsement of liberty is associated with vaccine hesitancy, so we can expect those who are opposed to further lockdown to also be more likely to oppose a mandatory vaccine. We might disagree with the values underlying people’s political beliefs, but understanding the depth of moral sentiment that shapes these different responses could provide a more effective basis for communication or persuasion. Neglecting to do so risks getting us back to a position where people stop listening to the other side – not because they don’t have good ideas, but simply because they are in the “other” camp. In other domains where we critically need collective action in order to avert further crisis, a deeper understanding of the moral values underpinning politically polarised positions has resulted in more persuasive communication. Indeed, American sociologist Robb Willer and colleagues have argued that the left in particular needs to learn how to better engage with moral intuitions of the right in communications designed to tackle challenges like climate change. A lesson adopted by centre-left leaders like Barack Obama, who framed the investment in renewables as an issue of national security. Finding a policy response that reconciles the tension between concerns for liberty and care was actually at the heart of the original formulation of the idea of a “nudge”. The concept has got something of a bad press after it was associated with herd immunity, so let’s set the record straight, nudge theory has nothing to do with herd immunity. Chicago University economist Richard Thaler and legal scholar Cass Sunstein originally developed the concept of nudge as a reconciliation between “paternalistic” state intervention and the liberty of the individual. One of their key insights is that providing people with information regarding the right thing to do, is often not sufficient to change behaviour. It is sometimes necessary to make structural changes to people’s environments to make the desired behaviour easy. Hospital staff, for example, know that washing their hands is important, but are still more likely to do so if hand sanitiser is easily available and visible in the hospital. As we explore how to safely restore some personal freedoms while minimising the harm caused by the spread of the virus, we will need people to engage in a range of behaviours, from social distancing to washing their hands, wearing masks, download tracing apps, and (hopefully one day) getting vaccinated. Governments have a huge role to play in structuring our daily environments to make it easy to engage in the behaviours we need to engage in. Telling people to follow “common sense” is likely to prove a lot less effective than making masks easily available, or making hand sanitisers more widespread in public buildings. There is no quick fix to Get Corona Done. However, behavioural science can help create new habits to slow the rate of infection until a vaccine is created – and a little bit of understanding of the values behind people’s beliefs will go a long way to avoid the spread of further division. • Lee de Wit is a lecturer in political psychology at Cambridge University