Denis Goldberg, who died last week, was one of Nelson Mandela’s two surviving co-defendants from the 1963-64 Rivonia trial at which 10 men were on trial for their lives for conspiring to overthrow the apartheid regime by force. It was the most important trial in South Africa’s history and led, 30 years later, to a relatively peaceful transition to a non-racial democracy. Mandela’s defiant speech from the dock, in which he declared that the ideal of a democratic and free society was one for which, if needs be, he was prepared to die, was widely reported and made him a household name throughout the world. Less widely reported was that Mandela did not act alone and that of the eight defendants who were convicted and sentenced to life without parole one was white. They all approved his speech, knowing that it made it more likely they would hang. They had all approved his strategy to turn the trial into a political one in which they would put apartheid in the dock of international opinion. By not exposing Mandela to cross-examination, they deliberately courted conviction. Goldberg, the youngest defendant, went further. He offered to pretend that, in attempting to buy grenade casings, he had exceeded his mandate – thereby effectively signing his own death warrant – if that would save the lives of the black ANC leaders. His offer was refused. His readiness to sacrifice his life for his beliefs and his comrades, along with that of a handful of other white and Indian activists, was instrumental in persuading Mandela to abandon narrow Africanism in favour of non-racialism and thus played an important part in the eventual creation of the “rainbow state”. As a white man, Goldberg was denied the comfort of serving his sentence on Robben Island with his comrades Goldberg’s courage flowed from a commitment to achieving racial and economic equality and the belief that change comes from the bottom up. His parents were lifelong communists who had emigrated to Cape Town, where he was born in 1933. Aged 11, he asked them why his history book said South Africa was a democracy when black people couldn’t vote. They explained the nature of apartheid and, as he later said, “once you tear away the veil of lies around a society, you can’t put it back together unless you lie to yourself every day”. It was the start of a lifetime of political activism. For him, ending apartheid was personal as well as political. He wanted his children and grandchildren to be free to pick their friends irrespective of colour. He lived to see his dream of a non-racial South Africa realised. But it came at a heavy price. At the University of Cape Town, where he studied engineering, he was ostracised for his political beliefs and was later sacked from jobs at the instigation of the security police. Through the non-racial Modern Youth Society, he met Esme Bodenstein, another activist. They married in 1954 and spenttheir honeymoon running a holiday camp. By 1957, Goldberg had oined the Communist party and the Congress of Democrats, an affiliate of the ANC for white opponents of apartheid. After the Sharpeville massacre in 1960, he was detained without trial for four months. He was then recruited by Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK), the armed wing of the ANC, took part in its campaign of sabotage against installations and rose to run its first military training camp. In May 1963, when the regime passed a law allowing 90 days’ detention without trial or access to lawyers, the MK ordered Goldberg to leave the country for military training. But he was persuaded by Joe Slovo to delay his departure to secure munitions for the armed struggle. That is how he came to be in the Lilliesleaf safe house in the suburb of Rivonia on the day of the raid. The Rivonia trial was the defining moment of Goldberg’s life. He served nearly 22 years in Pretoria Central prison. As a white man, Goldberg had to endure the isolation of being the only Rivonia defendant in Pretoria jail, denied the comfort of serving his sentence on Robben Island with his comrades. Goldberg’s life after he emerged from prison in 1985 was characterised by the same integrity and commitment. Based in London and reunited with Esme, he worked tirelessly for the ANC on a pittance. When Mandela was elected president, he agreed to stay in London for the sake of their children, but two years after Esme’s death in 2000, he married Edelgard Nkobi, a German journalist; together, they returned to South Africa. Not for Goldberg the spoils of victory. He lived modestly. Dinner chez Goldberg might be a slab of fatty mince from the freezer, the onions burned while he read a framed poem by a Scottish trade unionist. He fought against corruption but for years only within the ANC. The struggle and prison years had taught him discipline and loyalty. Eventually, on a visit to London in 2016 to receive the freedom of the City of London, he publicly called on the Zuma government to resign. His last campaign was to create the House of Hope, an arts and educational centre in Hout Bay for deprived children, to which he left his collection of vibrant African art. Sir Nicholas Stadlen is a former high court judge and producer and director of Life Is Wonderful: Mandela’s Unsung Heroes