Spilling beer on your answer sheet, fighting over the pen, shushing your tipsy teammate who keeps whispering the answers too loudly … there’s nothing quite like a proper pub quiz. However, with coronavirus keeping pubs shut, many locked-down quiz lovers have moved online. It’s not just about reading questions off a sheet, though – with a little preparation (and a few drinks if you want to pretend you’re back in the pub), you can host a quiz to remember. Here is how … Once you have assembled your contestants and chosen a day (a Doodle poll is handy for narrowing down a date and time), you will need to pick a platform to host your quiz on. The Guardian’s technology editor, Alex Hern, explains: “Zoom is an obvious default choice to start with. It’s capable of hosting large groups of viewers, into the hundreds, and provides ample tools to the host to share images and video, mute or kick out irritating audience members, and generally control the flow of the event.” If you would prefer to simply stream your quiz, he suggests YouTube, Twitch or Streamyard, which means less tech setup for players. For many of us, there’s not much reason to change out of loungewear, so why not give quiz-goers a reason to get dolled up? Advise them beforehand you will be dishing out points for outfits. It could be themed, general fancy dress or even black tie for a real sense of occasion. A wide range of questions is the best way to get everyone on board, advises Jay Flynn, host of The Virtual Pub Quiz, which streams on YouTube each Thursday and has had up to 180,000 households playing along. The former pub landlord says: “Make it as broad as possible. Niche specialist subjects are the things to avoid, as it can really frustrate people if it’s something you have had to study for years.” Keep it fair by making each round worth the same amount of points so no one has an advantage. Chris Lochery, who sets the questions for the Popbitch quiz, says: “You really want to avoid a situation where you end up with one big trivia buff dominating the team, blurting out answers before the question is finished and leaving everyone else to twiddle their thumbs. So the crucial things to consider are variety, both in subject matter and delivery. Keeping rounds quite short and changing the style of questioning helps things feel fresh and stops any one person getting a foothold on the team.” You don’t have to stick to question-and-answer format either. Flynn says picture rounds are a real favourite. Having access to a screen means you can use all sorts of visual prompts. You could also ask players to name countries from their flags or satellite images, guess well-known figures from bad fan art or Photoshopped images, identify logos or even pronounce ridiculously long words you have flashed up on the screen. Lochery has found word searches to be surprisingly popular. Audio rounds are also a hit. “Line up 10 songs and play the intros, people always enjoy that,” says Lochery. “No one cares if they’re easy to identify if they can sing along at the top of their lungs – so don’t be afraid of chucking in a few crowd-pleasers.” You could also ask contestants to identify animal noises, television theme tunes, film soundtracks, well-known speeches or famous catchphrases. A tip from Lochery on making everyone feel included: “Make sure you’re picking things of general interest rather than your own personal niche interests. In practical terms, that means, rather than mining your iTunes library for B-sides you think would make a fun audio round, get inspiration from Spotify playlists or compilation CD tracklists.” Award points for the best dance routine, send everyone on a scavenger hunt or ask teams to craft items (for instance, a glamorous pair of glasses or a hat) from anything they have lying around. You could even announce a mini talent show, with extra points for silliness and creativity. You’re not going to be able to get teams to switch papers, but you have got a few options depending on how trusting a host you are. You could let teams swear honesty and mark their own, calling out answers at the end of the round for you to tot up, or instead tell them to email you their answers or send a picture of their answer sheet (although that’s a lot of extra work for you). Once you get to the end of the game (Flynn and Lochery suggest an hour is about the right length), it’s time to reveal the winners. As Lochery suggests, “victory seems to be its own reward for most people”, but if you want actual prizes, you could send a small something by post or do a doorstep drop if they live nearby. The ultimate honour is, of course, that they can host the next quiz. It won’t be as good as yours, though.