European leaders have pledged to raise billions of pounds to help find a vaccine and treatments for Covid-19 as part of an “international alliance” fighting the disease. An online pledging conference due to be held on Monday will aim to pull in raise €7.5bn (£6.6bn) in funding to support the global response to the coronavirus pandemic. Writing in the Independent newspaper, the leaders of France, Germany, Italy and Norway and senior EU officials said the outbreak had “caused devastation and pain in all corners of the world”. They said responding to the “global challenge” required “bringing together the world’s best – and most prepared – minds to find the vaccines, treatments and therapies we need to make our world healthy again”. This would accompany “strengthening the health systems that will make them available for all, with a particular attention to Africa”. The politicians declared their support for the World Health Organization (WHO) and backed the recent launch of the “Access to Covid-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator”. The “global cooperation platform” aims to accelerate research, development, access and distribution of a Covid-19 vaccine and other treatments, the leaders wrote, adding that it has “laid the foundation for a real international alliance to fight Covid-19”. Money pledged through the online conference on Monday will make up a global funding “shortfall” estimated by the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board (GPMB) – an independent monitoring and accountability body that ensures preparedness for global health crises – and others. The Independent article was jointly written by Giuseppe Conte, prime minister of Italy, Emmanuel Macron, president of France, Angela Merkel, chancellor of Germany, Charles Michel, president of the European Council, Erna Solberg, prime minister of Norway and Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European commission. The political leaders wrote: “The funds that we raise will kickstart an unprecedented global cooperation between scientists and regulators, industry and governments, international organisations, foundations and healthcare professionals.” The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and Wellcome Trust were also said to be joining forces with the leaders. Funding will be directed to health organisations such as CEPI, Gavi, the Vaccines Alliance, the Global Fund and Unitaid. “If we can develop a vaccine that is produced by the world, for the whole world, this will be a unique global public good of the 21st century,” the leaders wrote. They added: “This is our generation’s duty and we know we can make this happen.” They said the current target will only cover “initial needs”, with more resources needed to manufacture and deliver medicines globally and ensure universal access to vaccination, treatment and testing. The leaders said the coronavirus crisis was “a defining moment for the global community”. “By rallying around science and solidarity today we will sow the seeds for greater unity tomorrow,” they concluded. “Guided by the sustainable development goals, we can redesign the power of community, society and global collaboration, to make sure that nobody is left behind. “This is the world against Covid-19. And together we will win.”