Here’s one nurse you wouldn’t clap for: equal parts Miss Trunchbull and Miss Hannigan, the monstrous Matron in The Midnight Gang wants the “little stinkers” on her children’s ward to pass out with fear. Played with swagger and wicked disdain by Jennie Dale, she is a brilliantly hissable villain in this musical version of David Walliams’ bestseller. When we get to the end, my six-year-old, Hilda, rewinds to watch Matron get her comeuppance again. That’s one benefit of watching plays online. A fairly rudimentary archive recording of Chichester Festival theatre’s 2018 production, adapted by Bryony Lavery with music and lyrics by Joe Stilgoe, has been made available to view until 29 May. I haven’t read any of Walliams’ books, and neither has Hilda or her sister, Aggie, 10, but the RSC’s glorious version of The Boy in the Dress last year made me want to read more. Or, indeed, watch more: Walliams has become one of the most bankable names in children’s theatre as well as literature. In 2018, there were UK stage versions of Gangsta Granny, Awful Auntie, Mr Stink and Billionaire Boy, too. You could call this one The Boy in the Nightdress. That’s what Matron gives the unhappy Tom to wear when he arrives at a creaky old London hospital with an almighty bump to the head from a cricket game. Tom has neither PJs nor parents – they’re far away, and he soon finds the other young patients feel similarly abandoned. Their secret gang isn’t so much about midnight feasts, to my two girls’ dismay, but about helping realise each other’s dreams. Tom is hesitantly allowed to witness them recreate a north pole expedition for their friend, Amber, as a sort of DIY Punchdrunk immersive experience. Solidarity between kids and the shared spirit of mischief – being “a little bit naughty”, as Matilda might put it – run throughout Dale Rooks’ production. The gang is a tradition that has kept going for years, passed down from kid to kid (“like nits!” we’re told gleefully). Aggie and Hilda enjoy the antics – what’s not to love about crinkly-bottomed Nelly floating away nude with a bunch of helium balloons? – and there’s plenty of crowd-pleasing toilet humour. But they are also intrigued by little mysteries in the staging. How did they make Tom’s cricket ball-sized bump? How does the actor playing Robin, dressed with bandages and glasses like James Whale’s Invisible Man, see what’s going on? And is the actor playing Nelly really 90 years old? (No: it’s the fantastic Marilyn Cutts.) Designer Simon Higlett’s imposing hospital is grim and gothic with a moonlike window from which Matron watches the children. There’s some satire of hierarchies, budget cuts and bureaucracy, especially in an opening scene where Tom is quizzed by a bumbling junior doctor about his NHS experience so far, despite having only just been admitted. The standout number is a rollicking breakfast anthem performed by Lucy Vandi and there are Mission: Impossible-esque instrumentals full of intrigue. But a great musical should leave you singing or at least humming one song, and none of these melodies linger. Not that the girls seem bothered, although Aggie thinks few songs can top the classic Delia’s a Weirdo, from the Tom Gates stage show. Funny, touching and spirited, The Midnight Gang is particularly suited to lockdown viewing with kids. It not only urges you to be kind while confined but also to beat boredom with the instruction: “Do a bit of pretending and your dreams come true.” The Midnight Gang is available to view for free until 29 May.