Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: Doctors in Italy have reported the first clear evidence of a link between Covid-19 and a rare but serious inflammatory disorder that has required some children to undergo life-saving treatment in intensive care units. The mysterious condition emerged last month when NHS bosses issued an alert to doctors after hospitals admitted a number of children with a mix of toxic shock and symptoms seen in an inflammatory disorder known as Kawasaki disease. The number of lives lost worldwide in the pandemic is nearing 300,000, according to Johns Hopkins University figures, with 297,197 deaths reported. There are 4,347,015 confirmed infections. The true figures are likely to be significantly higher as a result of underreporting or differing definitions of what constitutes a death from coronavirus. The Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, has lifted the state of emergency for 39 of its 47 prefectures, but said it would remain in place in Tokyo, as well as the second-largest urban area of Osaka, until the coronavirus is contained. Abe also said he would begin work on a second extra budget as part of his government’s economic stimulus measures. “While controlling the spread of the virus as much as possible by acting on the premise that the virus is all around us, we will restore ordinary work and daily life,” Abe told a news conference. The British head of a French pharmaceutical company has caused an outcry by saying any vaccine discovered by his firm would initially be reserved for the United States. Paul Hudson, chief executive officer of Sanofi, told Bloomberg News that any vaccine invented by his firm would go to the US first since it had done the most to fund the company’s research. France’s higher education minister, Frédérique Vidal, said Sanofi’s plan to give the US priority access would be “incomprehensible and disgraceful” since a successful vaccine must be “a public good for the world”. The European commission has said it is monitoring the Hungarian government over coronavirus laws that created a state of emergency with no end date. The commission, the body charged with upholding European Union law, said the absence of a clear time limit on the emergency decree raises “potential concerns as regards legal certainty”, while a media law criminalising the spreading of misinformation about the pandemic “may have a chilling effect on freedom of expression in Hungary”. Burundi’s foreign ministry, in a letter to the World Health Organization’s Africa headquarters, said the UN agency’s representative in Burundi and his three colleagues “are declared persona non grata and as such, must leave the territory of Burundi” by Friday. The letter did not provide a reason for the decision. Diplomatic and administrative sources told AFP the foreign ministry aborted a similar attempt to expel the same four officials a month ago. The east African nation is scheduled to hold a presidential election on 20 May. Afghanistan has recorded its biggest one-day rise of new cases as the health ministry warned of a second phase of transmission amid war raging with full intensity across the country. Wahid Majroh, the deputy health minister, has warned the nation that if it continued to break the lockdown there would be another phase of the virus. The health ministry recorded 413 new transmissions over the past day, the biggest one-day rise of new cases, and four deaths, raising the total number of infections to 5,639 and the death toll to 136. Lloyd’s of London, the world’s biggest insurance market, expects to pay out between $3bn (£2.4bn) and $4.3bn (£3.5bn) to its customers due to the coronavirus pandemic, as it warned of a $203bn hit for the entire industry. The Lloyd’s of London chief executive, John Neal, said the pandemic was an unparalleled event. “What makes Covid-19 unique is the not just the devastating continuing human and social impact, but also the economic shock,” he said. “Taking all those factors together will challenge the industry as never before.” US federal agents have seized the cellphone of Republican senator Richard Burr as they investigate stock transactions made in the early days of the coronavirus crisis. Burr has denied any wrongdoing and said he relied solely on news reports to guide decisions on stock sales, amid reports that he and other senators sold off shares after being briefed on the risks of the crisis. Mexico’s border states are home to more than 6,000 maquiladoras – largely foreign-owned factories that manufacture products for export – and the plants, which employ hundreds of thousands of people, have been the focus of several coronavirus outbreaks. But official efforts to keep the factories shut and contain the spread of Covid-19 have come under intense pressure from companies – and US government officials – who have urged the Mexican government to keep the maquiladoras running at any cost. Spain’s daily coronavirus death toll report rose above 200 on Thursday for the first time since 8 May, the health ministry reported. The overall death toll from the disease rose to 27,321 on Thursday as 217 people reportedly died overnight, the ministry said, according to Reuters. The overall number of diagnosed cases rose to 229,540 on Thursday. The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Germany rose 933 on Thursday, a similar number to Wednesday, to stand at 172,239, according to the Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases. The reported death toll rose by 89 to 7,723.