A six-week-old baby is believed to be the youngest person to die from coronavirus in England. The infant was among 332 people who are the latest to have died after testing positive for the virus, bringing the total death toll in English hospitals to 22,764. At this stage it remains unclear whether the baby had any underlying health problems before contracting the disease. NHS England said the baby died in hospital on 3 May and the family has been informed. The oldest patient among the latest deaths was 103, and 22 of the deceased – all aged between 40 and 96 – had no known underlying health conditions. This comes as tributes were paid to a leading cancer specialist who continued to help patients remotely despite being diagnosed with coronavirus, who also died. Tariq Shafi, a consultant haematologist at Darent Valley hospital in Dartford, Kent, died on Wednesday after being on a ventilator for two weeks. His wife, Varda, told Geo News: “Tariq passed away in the blessed month of Ramadan in the line of duty. Even after he had developed symptoms of corona and isolated at home, he continued to do telephone clinics.” Dr Shafi, who was from Lahore in Pakistan and often returned to help at cancer centres in the country, first began to show symptoms of the disease at the beginning of last month. However, his family said he continued to work non-stop, holding telephone clinics from his home. A week later, he became breathless while still working with his patients over the phone. His sons, Taimur and Umar, work as a doctor and a dentist and his daughter, Meeral, is a radiographer. They said: “We asked [him] to stop but he said there was no one else to look after his sick.” He died on Wednesday. Dr Riyaz Shah, a friend and colleague of the doctor, expressed his deep sadness in a post on Twitter, describing the 61-year-old as “a very softly spoken and humble man”. “A dedicated doctor and astute clinician. We’ve lost one of our best,” he added. In Manchester, the daughters of a “legendary” market trader who died along with his wife after contracting coronavirus have pledged to keep his business going. Ken Kayani, 73, from Chorlton in Manchester, who ran a stall at St Johns Market in Liverpool for 40 years, died on 30 April, four weeks after his wife Aziza, 72. Their daughters have decided to “continue his legacy” by taking over his electrical goods stall at the market. His eldest daughter, Siaqa, told the Liverpool Echo: “It’s devastating. To lose Mum was bad enough, but then to lose Dad was a double tragedy.” The couple had been together for 53 years, and had five daughters Siaqa, 43, Sam, 42, Smiara, 39, Afshan, 37 and Amber 35, and 12 grandchildren – five girls and seven boys. The family lost their mother on 4 April and she was buried the same day. Kayani died on 30 April, and was laid to rest on 1 May, his wife’s birthday. “Dad was buried on a Friday, which is a blessed day in the Islamic culture, Friday is a day of prayer, and it’s Ramadan as well, so we believe it is very, very blessed. “The only thing that gives us a bit of peace is that they’ve been laid to rest next to each other – they were a match made in heaven,” added Siaqa. In Lancashire, dozens of people linked by paper chains lined the streets to pay a special tribute to a grandfather, Mick Lord. Lord, 59, from Bacup, died on 22 April, three weeks after being diagnosed with Covid-19. His funeral was held on 2 May at Burnley crematorium. Family friends and mourners gathered in Bacup and Weir mindful of social distancing rules to pay their own respects as the cortege passed by. Paper chains formed a guard of honour on Burnley Road from the Memorial Garden, linking together friends who used to drink with Lord in his local pub, The Crown. Beverley Armitage, a family friend who helped organise tributes, said the paper chains were a poignant symbol, and despite making 50 there still were not enough for everybody. Lord’s daughter Claire Clarkson said: “It was so unbelievably heartwarming and overwhelming to see everyone out just for my dad.” On Thursday night, the Royal Hospital Chelsea announced it had lost nine of its residents to the Covid-19 pandemic. The retirement home for British military veterans revealed five of the deaths occurred at the home, while four died while receiving hospital treatment elsewhere. Fifty-eight of its residents, known as Chelsea Pensioners, have recovered from the disease.