The Spanish government has refused the Madrid region permission to loosen its coronavirus confinement, as angry officials in Italy issued a warning that they would not hesitate to reimpose strict lockdown restrictions unless distancing rules are respected. The Spanish health ministry said the area in and around the capital was not yet ready to move to the next phase of de-escalation, 24 hours after the regional public health director resigned over the regional government’s bid to loosen the lockdown from Monday. Yolanda Fuentes said the move to relax restrictions “was not based on health criteria”. The deputy prime minister, Pablo Iglesias, went further, accusing the region’s conservative president of “playing with people’s lives” for political ends. Spain, which has been under one of Europe’s strictest lockdowns, is easing its way out in four phases, aiming to reach “a new normality” by late June. In a sign of life starting to return to normal, beaches in Barcelona opened for a few hours, from 6am to 10am, on Friday to allow people to swim and jog under police supervision. The Covid-19 pandemic has so far infected nearly 3.9 million people and killed more than 270,000, according to the Johns Hopkins University tracker, sparking a war of words between China, where it originated, and the US, the world’s worst-affected country. On Friday it emerged that the US had stopped a vote on a UN security council resolution to support secretary general Antonio Guterres’s call for a global ceasefire during the pandemic. After more than six weeks of wrangling, France thought it had achieved a breakthrough, but the US mission wanted no references to the World Health Organization in the resolution. The French watered down the reference in the resolution to “specialised health agencies” of the UN (of which there is really only one: the WHO). The US mission seemed to be on board on Thursday, but on Friday they signalled that the wording was still not acceptable, leaving western diplomats at the UN to suspect that someone high up in Washington must have intervened. Meanwhile, Beijing denied allegations by Donald Trump that the virus escaped from a lab in Wuhan and that China did not do enough to stop its spread, though it did say on Friday it would support an international investigation into the outbreak led by the WHO “after the pandemic is over”. Citing a leaked internal memo, the news weekly Der Spiegel said Germany’s defence ministry and foreign intelligence service viewed Trump’s claims largely as a “calculated attempt to distract” from his administrations own failings. Covid-19 has claimed more than 75,000 lives in the US. Across Europe, many countries are now juggling the conflicting imperatives of easing restrictions to revive economies devastated by up to two months of strict lockdown, while somehow averting the risk of a second wave of infections. The WHO’s Maria van Kerkhove said it was vital that restrictions were lifted in a “slow and controlled way”, adding that there was likely to be something of “a push and pull for some time as we really work to try and suppress this virus across the globe”. Leading a muted commemoration of the end of the second world war in Europe on Friday, the German president, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, said that for Germany, “‘never again’ means ‘never again alone’. We want more, not less cooperation in the world – also in the fight against the pandemic.” Denmark said it would allow cinemas, museums and zoos to open from 8 June, and also eased a limit on group gatherings from a maximum of 10 to 30 or 50, depending on the type of event. Shopping centres are to reopen from Monday, with restaurants and schools for 11-15-year-olds following on 18 May. The prime minister, Mette Frederiksen, said it was “expected that the reopenings will lead to a rise in infections and hospital admissions”, and that restrictions would be reimposed in the event of a sharp rise in infections. Fearing precisely that, the mayor of Milan on Friday threatened to close down popular open spaces following TV footage showing crowds gathering and ignoring distancing rules after Italy loosened some lockdown restrictions on Monday, allowing many companies and businesses to reopen. “Yesterday’s images from along the Navigli were disgraceful,” Giuseppe Sala said, referring to Milan’s popular canalside area. “Either things change today, or tomorrow I’ll pass measures to close it and I’ll stop takeaway services. This isn’t a game.” The head of the National Health Institute, Silvio Brusaferro, also called for responsible behaviour. “If we form gatherings and break the rules that have given our health system some breathing space, the virus will circulate again,” he said. Meanwhile the number of new coronavirus cases in Russia, Europe’s new Covid-19 hotspot, rose by by more than 10,000 for the sixth consecutive day, bringing the country’s nationwide tally to 187,859 with a total death toll of 1,723. Underlining the scale of the economic damage wrought by the coronavirus, Germany’s statistics agency said the country’s exports had suffered their biggest collapse since reunification, plummeting nearly 12% in March from February. Across the Atlantic, more than 20 million people in the US lost their jobs in April – the worst monthly figure on record. Unemployment more than trebled, wiping out a decade of jobs growth in under two months. In Asia, Hong Kong allowed gyms, beauty parlours and cinemas to reopen on Friday, with some drinking spots serving their first customers at 12:01 am, although health authorities in South Korea were investigating a small but growing outbreak in a handful of Seoul nightclubs. In further developments: The WHO warned that up to 190,000 people in Africa could die of Covid-19 during the first year of the pandemic if containment measures fail, adding that the virus could ‘smoulder’ on the continent for years. Facebook and Google said they will allow workers who are able to work remotely to do so until the end of the year. Levels of toxic pollutants in China, including nitrogen dioxide and particles known as PM2.5, were all higher in April compared with the same period last year as the country’s industry tries to make up for times lost to lockdown. The WHO said that although a market in Wuhan selling live animals probably played a significant role in the emergence of the virus, it recommends making such markets safer rather than shutting them down.