Public Health England’s report on its validation of the Roche Covid-19 antibody test (which the government is promoting for widespread use) reveals a number of limitations that were not mentioned in the public briefings (Public Health England approves Roche test for coronavirus antibodies, 13 May). The test showed inadequate levels of sensitivity for detecting antibodies to Covid-19 until 40 days after the onset of symptoms, so will only be useful from six weeks after the start of infection, and cannot be used for the diagnosis of acute infections; the validation process did not include controls from patients with other coronavirus infections (eg Sars/Mers) to exclude potential cross-reactions with these; it did not address how long antibodies persist following infection; and does not inform whether an individual is protected against reinfection, and therefore does not indicate whether they are safe to return to work, nor whether they are suitable for an “immunity passport”. While the availability of antibody testing undoubtedly represents an important step in the fight against Covid-19, limitations such as these mean that these tests are not as clinically useful as the public has been led to believe.Dr Michael BrowningNHS consultant immunologist, Pickwell, Leicestershire • I have just carried out the self-administered Imperial College/NHS/Ipsos Mori Covid-19 home test (Randomised test of 100,000 to help decide end of UK lockdown, 30 April). I assume I was invited to participate as the result of a random selection. I was required to take a swab from my tonsils, and (using the same swab) from well inside my nostrils. The instructions for the tonsil swab warned that “this may be uncomfortable, and you may feel like gagging”. And yes, it was uncomfortable and I did gag. Which worries me. I fear I did not take the swab properly, so should my result be declared “negative”, I have no confidence that this would be valid. Do others share the same concern? How reliable are the survey results likely to be? If there are an unknown number of false negatives, attributable largely to the instinctive gagging reflex – which is likely to be especially associated with self-administered tests – might this lead to a systemic underestimation of the R rate?Dennis SherwoodExton, Rutland• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters