Perhaps best known as the exasperated mastermind behind the 1985 Live Aid concert, Bob Geldof has since been somewhat overlooked as one of the architects of Irish punk through his work with the Boomtown Rats. With a new album released this year, this documentary features testimony from Geldof and his bandmates on their rise in Ireland and then dominance throughout Britain, before Geldof’s tabloid-friendly lifestyle overtook their musical releases. Ammar Kalia Michael Portillo is on the move again, taking his preferred mode of transport through Malaysia from Penang to the Cameron Highlands. His trusty 1913 Bradshaw’s Continental Guide is with him for the ride as he takes in the stunningly verdant vistas along the way. AK The pre-recorded auditions may be coming to an end but the 14th series of BGT has pulled in decent ratings and created some cheerfully daft moments, such as an Auto-Tuned T-Rex bopping to LMFAO. But with all the golden buzzers deployed, tonight’s acts will need to really impress to progress. Graeme Virtue Opening an episode of Casualty with a sweaty wrestling match can only suggest some kind of A&E visit lies ahead, and this one certainly confirms that. But, as always, it’s the staff’s lives that offer the most intrigue; this week it’s Jacob who’s the hero, spotting a patient’s real problem, while Fenisha finds herself in danger. Hannah Verdier The Norwegian oil industry drama reaches an unexpected and uplifting conclusion, as Toril seeks to regain acceptance in her religious community. And if Anna’s interventions on wealth distribution are anything to go by, modern Norway owes her generation a debt of gratitude. Ellen E Jones Adding to the chorus of voices desperate to analyse the Duke and Duchess of Sussex’s move to the US, this doc assembles the talking heads for another foray into the reasons behind it. Was it because of internal rifts inside the royal family? Or the relentless media coverage? AK The Program, 11.45pm, BBC One Stephen Frears’s efficient biopic of disgraced seven-time Tour de France winner Lance Armstrong flies along on the back of Ben Foster’s riveting portrayal. Based on the book by David Walsh – the journalist (played here by Chris O’Dowd) who exposed the cyclist’s drug-cheating – it’s a fast and furious ride. Paul Howlett