In his five years as a hospital chaplain, the Rev Steven Chewning has anointed the sick more times than he can remember. The ritual of applying oil to the forehead of someone ill or dying is considered one of the most intimate of Christian sacraments. But when Covid-19 restricted Chewning’s access and left him working from home, a family’s request to anoint a young father who was intubated and critical forced him to get creative. While performing the rite over speakerphone with the help of a nurse (who is an atheist), Chewning found himself not only reimagining his own duties, but the very conception of holy space. From his bedroom, the chaplain recited his litany, reading from James 5 and Mark 6, where Jesus first sends his disciples to anoint the sick. “O Holy One, giver of health and salvation, send your holy spirit to sanctify this oil,” he prayed, his words ringing over the drone of the ventilator. “As your holy apostles anointed many who were sick so may those who in faith receive this holy unction be made whole. Can you please rub a drop of oil on the patient’s forehead?” “You want me to make it like a cross? I think that’d be meaningful.” “Yeah, sure, if you don’t mind.” He then wet his finger with oil and anointed the intubated believer. As soon as Chewning wrapped up his prayer, he shouted: “Hey, did you hear that alarm going off? He moved while you were doing the blessing! He hasn’t move since he got here three days ago. I think he heard what you said.” ••• “For me, the hospital room has always been sacred ground,” says Chewning, who works at UNC medical center in Chapel Hill, North Carolina. “When I wash my hands it’s to purify myself before I go into meet God and the patient. But that theology no longer applies.” 'A lot of people are dying and they’ve not had any kind of touch since it all began' For chaplains working in hospitals, the virus has obliterated the old places and practices where they once channeled the divine: the quiet bedside, an embrace in the hallway, a hand on a trembling shoulder. Like the ancient Israelites who carried God in a tent while they wandered through the wilderness, chaplains are having to find God in unexpected places. They’re using Zoom, FaceTime and Amazon Echo to comfort those who are afraid or seeking answers about death and dying, to administer last rites, or connect families for prayers and final wrenching goodbyes. The intimacy of a hospital room has been replaced by the cold detachment of a telephone call to comfort a grieving spouse or parent, who are often in quarantine themselves. And chaplains are doing all of this with half their skillset intact. “A lot of what we do is based on non-verbal communication,” Chewning says. “A lot of what we do involves holding sacred silence, trying not to fill that sacred silence with empty words. Just being still and fully present with people. How do you do communicate sacred silence over a phone call?” Chewning normally works in the hospital’s oncology unit, but started staying home once UNC admitted Covid patients. His six-year-old son has a congenital heart defect that has required three open-heart surgeries, and due to the boy’s vulnerability to the virus, his doctor told Chewning that if he reported to work not to come home for two months. So when UNC restricted the Covid ward to medical personnel due to lack of PPE, Chewning became its chaplain from the remove of a makeshift bedroom office. While his mother-in-law watches his kids, Chewning spends his days talking and praying with people he’s never met in person, usually through their room phones or a tablet administered by a nurse. For patients who are intubated on ventilators, he’s the bridge of support with their worried families. For the man who received the anointing, the request came from his mother, who was Pentecostal. The patient was young, married with small children, and identified as Christian. At first the other chaplains felt it wasn’t possible, but Chewning felt determined to make it happen. He found the nurse who worked the floor and asked if he’d be willing to apply the anointing oil while Chewning prayed. “Well, I’m an atheist,” the nurse answered, “but I’m glad to do it.” Chewning asked his fellow chaplains to run the oil to the Covid floor, and the next time the nurse made his rounds, he called Chewning: “I’m at the bedside and I’ve got you on speakerphone.” The next morning, the man’s wife called Chewning elated and requested he continue to pray. “We’ll take anything,” she said. So he started dialing her in with FaceTime, and together with their bodies and prayers projected into a room where fear and sorrow lick at the four corners, they consecrate sacred space, one the virus cannot hold. “All I have are my words now,” he says. ••• For the Rev Angela Maddalone, everything has become holy, every step of ground. The former Presbyterian minister had been working at Northern Westchester hospital in New York for exactly a month when the coronavirus swept through the suburb. Now, as the lone chaplain in her hospital, she confronts death on a daily basis. Although she’s allowed to minister to patients who are “immanent”, she laments that the cumbersome PPE works to distance her from those who need physical comfort. “When someone starts to cry, my first reaction is to hold their hand,” she says. “Now it’s with a gloved hand. So a lot of people are dying and they’ve not had any kind of touch since it all began.” But even with floors in lockdown, she says, no one is dying alone. “The nurses have been unbelievably compassionate. They’re present in these people’s lives. One nurse asked me, ‘I just don’t know what to say.’ I told her, ‘Just keep on saying, ‘You’re not alone. I am with you.’” Each floor of the hospital is equipped with tablets that Maddalone uses to connect family members to loved ones who are on the brink of death, family who would otherwise receive a phone call after the fact. A son in Oregon who was able to speak to his father one last time. A woman gazing at her husband through a screen. “Imagine yourself in the room,” Maddalone tells her. “Imagine holding his hand and telling him whatever you want to tell him.” She uses Zoom and FaceTime, and when she’s unable to visit a certain patient, some rooms are equipped with Amazon Echo Show, where a camera can beam images to loved ones in an instant – all under the hospital’s secure network that ensures privacy. As a pastor for 20 years at churches in neighboring Rockland county, Maddalone plied her trade with a warm embrace. She baptized babies and laid hands on the sick, passed the peace and buried the dead. God was in the hugs that congratulated newlyweds and young graduates, in the tears that fell whenever anyone received a scary diagnosis. So much assurance had passed through her hands, and now that conduit has been largely closed. “Sometimes I’m behind my PPE and I can’t wait …” she says, then pauses to compose herself. “I can’t wait until I can hold all these people again.” The virus and its cruel isolation have reminded her what she’s long known, that God lives in the small and in-between spaces of each day, in the seemingly inconsequential. In the case of Gatorade that miraculously appeared one afternoon after a nurse, sweltering in her PPE during long and awful shift, had muttered, “I could really use a Gatorade.” And the divine is in every pair of eyes that open after a ventilator is switched off and life is granted another day. In the small and labored steps down a hallway as they learn to walk again, each little shuffle a thousand loaves and fishes. “Everything feels so sacred right now,” she says. “These little synchronicities assure me there’s a force greater than myself out there at work.” And she’s learned to embrace the divine that moves through a Zoom chat, even as her hands can no longer touch. “We have to get used to seeing God differently,” she says. “It’s made me so grateful that we even have this technology. Because imagine if we didn’t.” Just that day she’d witnessed a last exchange between a man and his two sons. The man was intubated and going quickly. Using FaceTime, Maddalone called the sons so they could see their father and tell him that he wasn’t alone. At the sound of their voice, he was able to let go.