People living in the poorest parts of the country are dying from Covid-19 at double the rate of people in the richest areas, a data analysis has found. The most deprived areas had 55.1 deaths per 100,000 people, more than double that of people in the least deprived areas, where the death rate was 25.3, according to figures published by the Office for National Statistics on Friday. The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine. The UN agency advises people to: Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. Check with your local authorities for up-to-date information about the situation in your area. In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home. The findings will prompt questions about why poorer people appear to be dying in greater numbers than the wealthy in England and Wales. People living in deprived areas experience higher levels of ill health, poor quality housing and tend to be more diverse, with a higher proportion of black, asian and ethnic minority residents. “General mortality rates are normally higher in more deprived areas,” said Nick Stripe, ONS head of health analysis. “But so far Covid-19 appears to be taking them higher still.” Of the 20,283 Covid-19 registered deaths in England and Wales to 17 April, an overwhelming proportion of fatalities were of people from the poorest areas. Newham had the highest mortality rate in the country, with 144.3 deaths per 100,000 population, followed by Brent with 141.5 deaths and Hackney’s 127.4 fatalities. Other local authorities including Hertsmere, Salford, Watford, Middlesbrough, Luton, Sandwell and Slough also had rates above 65 deaths per 100,000 people. Ceredigion, Rutland, Conwy and North Lincolnshire all had the lowest Covid-19 death rates, with 7 deaths per 100,000 people or less. London had the highest proportion of deaths, with four in 10 deaths occurring in the capital. However it also had the highest mortality rate with 85.7 deaths per 100,000 people, compared with 16.4 deaths in the south west – the lowest rate in England and Wales. All the data is age-standardised, which means the age profile of people living in the areas has been accounted for.