The England No 8 Billy Vunipola is among five Saracens players who have been forced to apologise for flouting physical-distancing rules during lockdown. Vunipola and his teammates were spotted meeting together in St Albans for coffee on Monday, ignoring government guidelines to keep their distance. The former England full-back Alex Goode, Scotland’s Sean Maitland, Nick Isiekwe and Josh Ibuanokpe were the other players involved, prompting a damning rebuke from Saracens and reminder to quintet of their responsibilities. Vunipola was warned over his future behaviour by the Rugby Football Union last April after coming to the defence of Israel Folau over the Australia’s homophobic rant on social media. It is understood, however, that the RFU does not intend to take any action over Vunipola in this instance. “The matter has been dealt with by Saracens,” said an RFU spokesperson. The incident will embarrassVunipola, all the more so given he recently posted on social media, “Supporting the NHS. Spread the survey – ¦not the virus”, on behalf of a coronavirus tracker app. Vunipola, who has not played for Saracens since January because of the broken arm that ruled him out of the Six Nations, has already committed to staying at the club in the Championship next season after they were condemned to relegation in disgrace as a result of salary-cap breaches. Saracens have already implemented 25% wage cuts on their squad in line with blanket reductions among Premiership clubs, while their top earners including Vunipola have also agreed to huge wage deferrals. The incident in St Albans is the latest indignation in a sorry season for the European and Premiership champions. “The club was very disappointed to learn about a small group of Saracens players being sighted together in St Albans,” read a Saracens statement. “The government guidelines on social distancing and public gatherings of more than two people are very clear and the club has been vigorous in its messaging to all players and staff members about the importance of adhering to these guidelines whilst in the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic. “Management has spoken to the players involved, all of whom accept they made an error of judgment and have apologised for any upset they may have caused. The club has reminded these players as well as the whole Saracens squad of their responsibilities to themselves and the community around them and we are confident this will not happen again.” During the lockdown Saracens have provided their Allianz Park catering facilities to Charity Compassion London. “Saracens would like to reiterate our tremendous admiration and respect for the work being undertaken by NHS and other frontline staff who are tackling this virus,” the statement added. “Our recent partnership with charity Compassion London, where we were supporting efforts to provide hot meals for up to 10,000 NHS staff and vulnerable people in north London every day from the kitchens of our stadium, is an example of our commitment and support for these heroes.”