The novel virus first emerged in east Asia. By spring, a pandemic suffuses the globe. In America, businesses shut down, airports empty, misinformation abounds. The president, a divisive figure with a tanning bed in the White House, offers baseless reassurances, and appoints the dubiously pious vice-president to lead the pandemic response. This would be a decent summary of the past two months, if it wasn’t the plot to The End of October, a new novel by Lawrence Wright, which flies thrillingly, eerily close to reality – a global outbreak of a deadly pathogen with no known cure in the kinetic, flammable information torrent of the late 2010s. “It’s unnerving” Wright, a New Yorker staff writer and Pulitzer-winning journalist, told the Guardian on the surreal fortune of releasing a global pandemic novel during a global pandemic. “It was meant to be a warning cry, when we weren’t buffeted by all this dire news. Whenever I open the paper it feels like I’m reading my own book. It’s weird.” The End of October, which Lawrence began writing in 2017 (his final draft was submitted in summer 2019), is a deeply researched scenario-play of a novel – the world faced with a 1918 Spanish flu-type pathogen – told in brisk, unsparing prose. Competence and expertise serve as its compass; Wright’s American protagonist, Dr Henry Parsons, is a cunning, emotionally clamped virologist with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), outrunning a shady past at a secret lab in Maryland’s Fort Detrick. Alarmed by a mass die-off in an Indonesian political concentration camp for young gay men, Henry travels to Jakarta, where he discovers “Kongoli virus”, named after the camp, a gruesome new form of hemorrhagic influenza. Wright’s writing is clinical and unblinking – you stare into chest cavities, at lungs subsumed in fluid, at bodies turned blue by cyanosis, or lack of oxygen. The Kongoli camp is quarantined and swarmed by various health agencies that are, like Henry, veterans of the 2014 Ebola outbreak in west Africa. But when an inadvertently exposed taxi driver makes the hajj – the Islamic holy pilgrimage to Mecca – along with 3 million other people, all bets for containing the spread are off. Within days, people die en masse around the world. The idea for a modern pandemic story originated in 2010, when film-maker Ridley Scott approached Wright to write a screenplay about the end of civilization. “In my mind, the more likely way civilization would be threatened like that would be a pandemic,” said Wright, who long admired the “really creative, intelligent” epidemiologists, microbiologists and virologists he encountered as a journalist. Though they never made the movie, “I was always interested and I thought it was a really good story,” he said. “I decided that if I was going to do it, I would have to do the research I had failed to do when I was working on it as a script.” Wright, known for incredibly thorough research in his non-fiction work, took a journalistic approach to researching the novel – reading as much as possible, contacting experts (the acknowledgments cite leading experts from the NIH, Columbia and Pfizer, among others). His sources were “the same guys who are developing a vaccine – they’re the best minds around” and helped Wright contort his way out of a medical puzzle he’d written into the novel’s second half, when pandemic-stranded Henry is trying to get home to his family in Atlanta. They also color the novel with rich and accessible scientific detail on viruses, bioweapons and past pandemics. Wright primarily based the Kongoli virus on the 1918 Spanish flu, which also arrived in the US in the spring, lulled in the summer, and returned with a deadlier second wave in the fall. The title The End of October pays tribute to arguably the most mortal month in American history, in which 195,000 people died. “The question I was asking my experts was: what would happen if something like the 1918 flu appeared in our civilization?” Wright said. “Would we be any better prepared than our ancestors? It’s not clear what the answer is.” The fictional Kongoli virus is, however, far more lethal than Covid-19, with a mortality rate closer to previous coronaviruses Sars (15%) and Mers (about 35%). The End of October plunges beyond the relative chaos of the current moment into full societal breakdown – the government in bunkers, schools looted, ATMs empty of cash. Millions die in the US, including celebrities like Taylor Swift. Blood drips from the president’s eye on national television; one character searches the radio and finds only conspiracy theorist Alex Jones. In writing Kongoli’s geopolitical fallout – Russia escalates cyberwarfare and tensions boil over in the Gulf – Wright worked in expertise honed in his previous non-fiction books on conflict in the Middle East (Thirteen Days in September), religious fanaticism (Going Clear, an exposé on Scientology turned into a 2015 HBO documentary) and the War on Terror (The Looming Tower, on al-Qaida’s road to 9/11, which earned him a Pulitzer prize in 2007). “I looked at the antagonisms, the rivalries, and I just imagined if you add stress – a pandemic – then what would happen?” he said. “It’s pretty dismaying to watch the blame game going on right now and seeing that governments are behaving pretty much as expected.” Though (as of now) much more apocalyptic than the present, Wright’s book anticipates several elements of the Covid pandemic: hate crimes against the minority group blamed for the virus (in the novel’s case, Muslims). Ventilator shortages. Empty, flailing attempts at reassurance from the administration. But he, like many public health experts, did not anticipate a breakdown in testing. “I was horrified,” said Wright of the testing debacle. “And saddened, because the CDC in my experience had always been one of the glittering prizes of American government, something you could always rely upon – their expertise, their competence, their authority. And to see them stumble so badly, it’s heartbreaking.” He also didn’t anticipate one hopeful development of this pandemic: “the solidarity of individual citizens to isolate themselves at enormous personal costs, social costs, spiritual costs, financial costs”. There’s a compulsive thrill to reading a book which grazes, and then runs off with, our increasingly ungraspable reality, but Wright is careful not to tout his writing as prescient. “I made some lucky guesses, but for the most part, what people are reading as prophecy is just what experts told me would happen,” he said. Expertise, briefing books, scenario exercises – “all of that stuff was on the table. It was there for anybody who was interested, and I was interested.” As for how he imagines a new normal, “I think we’re at a crossroads,” he said. “War or depression or pandemic gives you a kind of X-ray vision about the society you live in, and you see it for what it is – its shortcomings, its strengths. And I think the shortcomings are plainly apparent: the partisanship, the needless international antagonisms, the lack of preparation, the disrespect for science, all of those things are creating havoc that we shouldn’t have to deal with.” And while Wright understands people might have pandemic reading fatigue – “There are going to be a lot of people who aren’t emotionally ready to read this book,” he conceded – he hopes people leave the End of October with a “clearer understanding of disease and contagion and the dangers of pandemics, and also be impressed, as I am, by the courage and ingenuity of the people who are fighting disease. That’s why the book is dedicated to them.” The End of October is out now