Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The total number of confirmed cases stands at 4,055,863, while the global death toll has reached 279,892, according to Johns Hopkins University. The US has reported the most fatalities at 78,932, followed by the UK (31,930) and Italy (30,560). Italy recorded 165 new coronavirus fatalities on Sunday, bringing the death toll to 30,560, while the number of new infections rose by 802, the lowest daily rise since 6 March. The country, which started easing lockdown restrictions last Monday, has recorded a total of 219,070 cases. More than 90% of hospital beds reserved for Covid-19 patients in Tokyo have already been occupied, the Japanese health ministry has announced. The ministry said 1,832 Covid-19 patients were hospitalised in the capital as of 28 April, taking 91.6% of the 2,000 available beds. Tokyo, which represents nearly a third of Japan’s total infections, stands in contrast with the rest of the nation, where the bed occupancy rate is at 38%. Greece will extend to 21 May the lockdown imposed on migrant camps, which had been expected to be lifted from Monday, the authorities said. The Greek government started easing restrictions for the wider public on Monday, after imposing a series of measures in late March. Lebanon’s army has said 13 soldiers at a military court have contracted the coronavirus. The army said it had taken “all necessary preventive and medical measures”, while some 40 lawyers have been tested, and other soldiers and judges will be tested on Monday. Some Austrian companies are abusing state subsidies for staff on short-time working or using illegal workers during the pandemic, the finance ministry has said after spot checks found hundreds of violations of the law. Austria has authorised €10bn to support short hours, and 350 financial police officers have been doing spot checks on businesses for three weeks to measure companies’ compliance. Italy has tightened up rules for the release of mafia mobsters from jail due to coronavirus fears, after public outcry. A decree adopted overnight now requires any release to be reviewed every fortnight to ensure that it was fully justified, following some 376 mafiosi and drug dealers – including notorious Cosa Nostra boss Francesco Bonura – being transferred to house arrest. Turkey’s senior citizens have been able to venture outside for the first time in seven weeks after restrictions were relaxed on Sunday. As part of a rolling programme of reduced controls, they are now allowed out for four hours. People aged 65 and over were subjected to a stay-at-home curfew from 21 March. Chinese authorities have reported what could be the start of a new wave of coronavirus cases in the northeast of the country, with one city in Jilin province being reclassified as high-risk. Jilin officials raised the risk level of the city of Shulan from medium to high, following the confirmation of eleven new cases on Saturday. China has issued a 30-page rebuttal of what it termed “preposterous allegations” by some leading US politicians, including the secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, over its handling of the coronavirus outbreak. The Chinese foreign ministry has spent the past week rejecting accusations that China had withheld information about the outbreak and that it had originated in a laboratory in Wuhan.