Taylor Swift has accused Donald Trump of “stoking the fires of white supremacy and racism” after tweets sent by the president appeared to threaten violence against protesters in Minnesota. The singer weighed in on Trump’s response to the volatile demonstrations in Minneapolis this week, where anger has anger erupted over the death of George Floyd, a black man who died after a white police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes. In a tweet sent late Thursday night, Trump called the protesters “thugs” who are “dishonouring the memory of George Floyd”, adding, “Any difficulty and we will assume control but, when the looting starts, the shooting starts.” In response, Swift tweeted on Friday to her 86 million followers: “After stoking the fires of white supremacy and racism your entire presidency, you have the nerve to feign moral superiority before threatening violence?” “We will vote you out in November,” she added. After stoking the fires of white supremacy and racism your entire presidency, you have the nerve to feign moral superiority before threatening violence? ‘When the looting starts the shooting starts’??? We will vote you out in November. @realdonaldtrump Swift has been relatively quiet about politics in the past but she has recently become more outspoken, endorsing the Democratic Senate candidate Phil Bredesen in 2018. In a 2019 interview with the Guardian, the pop star spoke of her disillusionment with America and with Donald Trump’s presidency: “We’re a democracy – at least, we’re supposed to be – where you’re allowed to disagree, dissent, debate. I really think that he thinks this is an autocracy,” she said. Trump has faced immense backlash over his tweets, which he denied were an attempt to incite violence against protesters but which appeared to quote the former Miami police chief Walter Headley, who in December 1967 promised violent reprisals to protests over stop-and-frisk tactics. On Friday, Twitter placed a message alongside his tweet, warning that it breached the site’s rules for glorifying violence. Trump has claimed that he has been unfairly treated by the social media platform, and accused it of targeting him and his supporters.