It’s hard to pick the best PB combo, but PB+J must be pretty far up the list. Layer the flavour with yoghurt, PB and a quick and easy berry chia jam (or jelly, for our American friends). If you’re scared of making jam, don’t be put off by this one! It really is so simple, and you’ll love it on your toast, pancakes, waffles and bagels as well. Serves: 3550g yoghurt of your choice3 tbsp peanut butter3 tbsp berry chia jam (below) or other berry jamCrunchy granola and sliced strawberries, to serve For the berry chia jam750g frozen mixed berries or fruit of your choice45g chia seeds2 tbsp orange juice (from ½ orange)60ml maple syrup or sweetener of choice (optional) To make the chia jam, combine the berries, chia seeds and orange juice in a medium bowl and stir well. Cover and set aside at room temperature for 1–2 hours, or refrigerate overnight, to thaw. Use a potato masher, fork or spatula to mash to your desired consistency. Add syrup to taste. Set aside for 20–30 minutes for the chia seeds to absorb the moisture and expand. For each parfait, divide about half the yoghurt between serving jars or bowls. Top with layers of peanut butter and jam. Repeat each layer and refrigerate until ready to serve, up to three days. Top with granola and strawberries to serve. This is a simple version of the peanut soup or mafé that appears in various forms across West African countries such as Senegal, Gambia and Mali. It’s a comforting and cosy winter meal, either on its own or over rice. Serves: 4–6 1.5L vegetable broth1 large red onion, chopped3 tbsp fresh ginger, finely chopped4 garlic cloves, finely chopped1 tsp paprika1 tsp salt¼ tsp black pepper200g protein (eg firm tofu, seitan or meat; optional)125g tomato paste (concentrated puree)185g peanut butter100g kale leaves, finely chopped, plus extra to garnishChopped peanuts, to garnishHot sauce, to garnish Steamed brown rice, to serve (optional) Bring the stock to the boil in a large saucepan over a medium–high heat. Add the onion, ginger, garlic, paprika, salt, pepper and protein, if using. Reduce the heat to medium–low and cook for 20 minutes. Add the tomato paste and simmer for 5–10 minutes. Add the peanut butter, increase the heat to medium and bring to the boil. Add the kale, then reduce the heat to medium–low and simmer, stirring frequently, for about 15 minutes. Garnish with extra kale, chopped peanuts and hot sauce, and serve with rice if you wish. These fan favourites are ridiculously easy to make at home. You probably have the three ingredients in your cupboard right now, so there’s really no excuse to not walk straight into the kitchen and make a batch. Once you’ve mastered them, try adding an extra layer of flavour to the centres, such as salted caramel or jam. We’ve also got a pretzel-topped cup, but you could finish yours with some crunchy peanuts, dried raspberries or edible dried flowers before they set. Makes 10–12 255g cooking chocolate of your choice185g smooth or crunchy peanut butter½ tsp natural vanilla extractRice malt, coconut or maple syrup (optional) Line a mini muffin tray with 10–12 mini baking cases, or sit the cases on a baking tray. Melt two-thirds of the chocolate, either in a small bowl placed over a small saucepan of boiling water on the stovetop (the water must not touch the bowl) or in short bursts in the microwave. Working one at a time, spoon 1 tablespoon of the melted chocolate into each paper case, tilting the case from side to side to spread the chocolate up the side to the desired height while ensuring there is an even chocolate base at the bottom of each cup. Set aside for 20 minutes to cool to room temperature or refrigerate for 5 minutes. Meanwhile, in a separate bowl, mix the peanut butter with the vanilla and syrup, if using, to taste. Using a teaspoon, fill each chocolate base with the peanut butter mixture, leaving a small chocolate gap at the top. If you would like to add an extra flavour, such as the berry chia jam (recipe above), leave more of a gap in the peanut butter and then top with your next gooey layer. Melt the remaining chocolate and, working one at a time, add a teaspoon or two over each cup. Rotate each cup from side to side to spread the chocolate evenly, ensuring it reaches the side. Top with a garnish, if using, then refrigerate for 20 minutes and serve. Leftover cups will keep in the refrigerator for up to 1 week or in the freezer for 1 year. This is an edited extract from Peanut Butter: Breakfast, Lunch, Dinner, Midnight by Tim Lannan and James Annabel published by Hardie Grant Books ($22.99)