Someone won Sunday night’s Numberwang, but it wasn’t any of us. What we can do, and who we can do it with, has been turned into some sort of fake algebra with a red-and-blue PowerPoint hump. Boris Johnson, all clenched fists and lockdown hairdo, was resolute about, er, stuff. Ours is not to reason why, his is not to understand how the other half lives. He talked of a world of golf, tennis, garden centres and people who can go to work in their own cars or on their Bromptons. England in repose. Where, apparently, no one has to think about childcare. The reality is that it is the construction workers, bus drivers and security guards (mostly middle-aged men) who are dying of Covid-19 at an alarming rate, as well as NHS staff and carers. These people are called low-skilled. Many of them are his voters. He risks losing them, so must frame the back-to-work instruction as a matter of personal choice. For now. Never in the field of human conflict have so many talked about exercise to so few; the right to chunter along the pavements is now dressed up as a key freedom. This exhortation to keep yourself fit in the middle of a pandemic is a peculiar form of denial, but again it is clearly about moving the narrative from collective to personal responsibility. And personal failure. We are told to “stay alert”, but if alertness could conquer this virus, we would all be fine. The anxiety many of us are experiencing is actually hypervigilance. Alertness implies we can create an antiviral force-field around us. Well, it’s cheaper than personal protective equipment, testing and all that faff. Apparently the fault is not the government’s. It is just difficult to dial down a threat such as “we’re all going to die” to “go back to work with no protection and sort of try not to get on a bus”. Instead, we have to use the dread words “common sense”. Whenever common sense is invoked, I shudder: all kinds of ideological posturing follows. Common sense may say “I’m all right, Jack” or “you get it from 5G” and “you only live once”. Common sense may say keep calm and carry on. Dominic Raab spoke of common sense: you can meet your parents in a park. Then a government source had to announce that “they can see both parents, but not at the same time – they would have to see them individually”. Common sense turns out to be remarkably like unpoliceable chaos. And a lost father. This is not surprising because what common sense never does well is risk assessment. We are all spectacularly bad at this, and common sense or risk assessment tends to shift over time. When I was young, my mum thought her menthol cigarettes kept her healthy, and we all got into cars with drivers who had been drinking. No one wore seatbelts. Sure, boys died on motorbikes, and there were drug overdoses – we thought that when your number was up, there wasn’t a lot you could do about it. It is only later in life when you examine so-called “risky behaviour” that you see the interweaving of trauma, peer pressure and the basic tenets of your personality. Once you have kids, you undertake an exercise in risk management which at some point you fail. We want to protect our kids and make them able to survive in the world when we are no longer there. I nearly lost mine (meningitis, serious bike accident) so I learned the hard way that my anticipation of risk was all wrong. Now, in the midst of this virus, I feel far from fatalistic about it. The risk for young people is minimal and very high for old people. Every seven or eight years, your risk of dying if infected doubles. I am not complacent at all. The statistician David Spiegelhalter explained all this clearly on The Andrew Marr Show, saying that we need to be proportionate about the risk we face. He called the press briefings “number theatre” – underlining the need to communicate data properly and treating people with respect. If we are to be run by a second-rate ad agency, with graphics from the 80s, it is no wonder we feel vulnerable This is the opposite of what the government has done, and people are right to feel angry. Johnson, the great risk-taker, has diced with death himself. His administration is still delaying practices such as quarantining new arrivals to the UK. He is risking the union, with other parts of the UK in open derision of his sloganeering. If we are to be run by a second-rate ad agency, with graphics from the 80s, it is no wonder we feel vulnerable. We may, therefore, take matters into our own hands. The lockdown will break from the bottom up as people need an income. The middle classes need their gardeners, cleaners, dog-walkers and nannies. Roots need doing. It is in these small and everyday decisions that advice will be bypassed and risks will be taken. Given what we have seen so far, do we think this government is capable of the sort of protection of workers that is needed? Choices will be made. And we can get it wrong. After 9/11, remember, many more people in the US died in car accidents; 2,996 people died in the attack, but road use jumped because of fear of flying, killing an estimated extra 1,595 people in road deaths. If we don’t trust the government to protect us and make risk assessments for us, we will take it into our own hands. The public has run ahead on this. Many of us locked down before being instructed to. Doing so was a way of keeping safe and extending empathy to others through our behaviour. This moment now feels scarier than ever for, as things fall apart, the centre cannot hold. There is restlessness and there is deprivation. How can we ask ordinary people to understand their own risk when those in charge have failed to do so? But there is no other option. Dying from the virus is one thing, living with it is another. • Suzanne Moore is a Guardian columnist