The Jockey Club’s commitment to staging this year’s Derby and Oaks at their traditional home of Epsom Downs was confirmed on Wednesday. Plans have been published proposing to use several miles of fencing to seal off the track and its surroundings if Epsom & Ewell council approves a proposal to run both Classics on a Saturday in July or August, with 4 July the early favourite. Epsom’s scheme to create an exclusion zone around its famous 12-furlong circuit will be considered next Tuesday by a special meeting of the Epsom and Walton Downs Conservators. In its submission to the meeting, the course says it “understands that some local residents may feel aggrieved that they cannot access the exclusion zone to enjoy their normal jog, dog walk etc but our messaging will be clear that this is for a strict 24-hour period and that other areas around the Downs will remain open and accessible”. Epsom is situated on downland which is normally open to the public and, in addition to around 40,000 paying spectators in the stands, up to 100,000 traditionally crowd into the middle of the course and its surroundings to watch the Classic for free. This year’s Derby has already been postponed from its original date in early June because of the coronavirus pandemic, with early July seen as the best slot for a rearranged race under the British Horseracing Authority’s “best-case” scenario for a resumption of racing. Newmarket staged the Derby several times during the first and second world wars, but the unique challenge of Epsom is integral to the race’s challenge and appeal. As a result, the Jockey Club is keen to stage both the Derby and Oaks on the same, one-day card this year, despite the logistical challenges this poses. David Gulland, a Liberal Democrat councillor for Epsom & Ewell, told BBC Radio Surrey on Wednesday that the proposals would need to be considered in detail before being approved. “Normally, you’d get 100,000 people coming down but a closed event will not quite be the same thing,” Gulland said. “I’m really pleased that the Jockey Club is trying to find an innovative way of doing it, but we need to think about the wider issues and obviously the health aspects. “What we don’t want is the appearance of it just happening to suit a small sector of the community, and also we don’t want to have a way people are encouraged to gather together in groups when it’s not yet healthy to do so. “No one knows what the health situation will be in July and August, and even if it’s fenced off, there’s a danger that people will be attracted up there. It’s a huge open area and you don’t want to encourage behaviour which might not be appropriate, even in July or August.”