When Papa died recently – Mum’s father – I knew Covid-19 was going to make it harder to attend the funeral. In the hours after his death, all of the energy that I would’ve used to grieve him was taken up by the logistics of attending the funeral in Sydney. I got on the phone with Mum, who told me not to come. “Honey, it’s 10 people only,” she said. I talked to my brother, who echoed my own feelings; we wanted to be there, not only to remember and grieve Papa surrounded by family, but also to support Mum. Even if it meant not attending the funeral service. When I called Dad, we were on the phone for ages weighing up options. Would we have to quarantine in Sydney? If Mum and Dad both had to quarantine coming back into Brisbane, who would shop for groceries? Would our being there make things more complicated? Would the travel, although necessary, put the people near us at risk? In the end, we decided to stay put. I stayed in Melbourne, and Dad in Brisbane with my brother. In the days after those conversations I found myself struggling to process Papa’s death. Without the ceremonials of the funeral, how was I meant to grieve? Distractions came up every day – I was still working, I had a deadline coming up for my thesis, and on the weekend our new housemate moved in. When I was a kid Dad always talked to me about the importance of ceremonies. Weddings, funerals, graduations. He would launch into a version of the same sermon at every opportunity. Humans need ceremonies, he said. They need a way to mark change. Otherwise these things just pass you by. So when Mum told me the funeral was going to be livestreamed, I was glad. The unsettled, intangible feeling I’d had since Papa died wasn’t going away. It needed a place to find anchor. I went to another funeral a month before Papa died – not a livestreamed funeral but a funeral in real life. It was the week before coronavirus became a pandemic and Covid-19 was not yet the topic on everyone’s lips. When a close friend called me and told me her mum had passed away suddenly, it was a no-brainer. I booked my nine-hour Murrays bus from Melbourne and was in Canberra that weekend. I shared her bed and tried to make her laugh and helped her and her sisters make fridge magnets for the funeral. I sat with her mum’s orphaned cat Lucy on the cold laundry floor, trying to calm its nerves. Being there for her and helping her grieve her beautiful mother was hard and exhausting. The first day I was back in Melbourne I slept all day. But it was also deeply necessary for both of us, and I’m so grateful I could be there. When I realised I couldn’t be with Mum, not only for the funeral but for all the difficult, complicated moments in between, I was devastated. I missed out helping her carry the weight of her grief, on the conversations that would make it easier for both of us to lean into the sadness. Here, in Melbourne, I grieved alone. The livestream began at 11:30am on a Tuesday. I watched from my bed as everyone arrived. I sent a text to my brother. “This is weird, isn’t it?” He replied straight away. “It’s bizarre.” Inside the chapel the chairs were evenly spaced apart, like pieces on a checkerboard, separated by the mandated 1.5m. I saw Mum at the front of the room, talking to the minister. Her sister sat behind her and her brother’s family were only a few meters away, but the space between them seemed vast. When she got up to give the eulogy, I clutched my tea and cried. The pain of watching the service from afar made me feel like a gatecrasher, like a bad daughter. But when Mum rang after the service, she said: “I could feel you supporting me, even though you weren’t there.” She told me that Papa’s family in Trinidad also livestreamed the service. Drupeti, Indu, Kalawaty; my aunties, uncles and cousins on the other side of the world who, without the help of modern technology and the catalyst of a global pandemic, would have almost certainly missed the funeral. As Mum said: “I felt carried by all of you.”