My boyfriend and I have been together for a year and a half. We enjoy a very active sex life. However, some of the things he is sexually attracted to are just abhorrent to me. He enjoys being dominated and treated as if he were a woman, with clothes and makeup, and wants me to act as if I were a man, including changing my vocal pitch and calling him derogatory names. I tell him it makes me highly uncomfortable, and he tries to respect that, but sometimes, in the heat of the moment, he’ll ask and I feel pressured to say yes, so as not to ruin the mood. I don’t want to hurt his feelings but it seems the only way he listens is if I tell him my thoughts on it in a very assertive way. His argument is that if I did it more often, then I would start to like it because that’s how he got interested in the things I like. The difference is that he didn’t have any previous experience with my kinks, whereas I already had an established dislike for his. I love him with all my heart, and in every other aspect of our relationship I’m 100% satisfied, but we are having trouble resolving this. No matter how adventurous or conventional one’s sex life is, if both partners don’t agree with doing something, then it stops being fun and tips into something else. If you feel pressured into doing something sexual, is it still consensual? I contacted sex and relationship psychotherapist Silva Neves (cosrt.org.uk). His first thought was that there wasn’t a lot of hope of you getting to like this kink “because you’re using words such as abhorrent; you have an established dislike of his kink and when you start with that, it’s really hard to change and meet halfway. For your boyfriend it was different; when he was introduced to your kink, he was neutral towards it, tried it and was able to incorporate it into his sex life. Because of that, he expects you to be able to do the same; but not all kinks are equal.” Of course, in various aspects of relationships, we sometimes have to try new things, and compromise, but if he is asking you to do something that is really not acceptable to you, Neves said, “This goes into a question of sexual health principles, and one of them is consent.” In other words, you have to want to do it, not just do it to please him. If you don’t, over time, you will not only start to resent each other but if you don’t feel relaxed during sex, it may well kill your sex drive, because you’ll be constantly worrying you’ll be asked to do something you don’t want to. You say that this is a no-go for you, but in other ways you are very happy, so what to do? “A lot of couples have different erotic worlds that don’t match,” Neves said, “but you can still have a successful relationship.” He suggested shifting your focus from “How can I enjoy this kink?” to accepting that it’s really OK to not like something and not try to force yourself. What you need is an honest conversation – don’t wait until you are having sex. “Honesty is more important than sugar-coating it,” Neves advised. “If you try to do that, he may think you’re leaving the door ajar and if he just pushes it a bit more, you may give in. Over time this will erode the relationship.” Instead, Neves suggested talking to him with love, kindness and empathy. “You can talk about all the other things you can do together but make it very clear that this one thing is not for you.” Also make it clear that you aren’t asking him to repress his kink, just that you don’t want to do it with him. “So you may decide,” Neves said, “that he explores that kink with other people and you open up the relationship to include that, or that he masturbates thinking about it on his own, or finds some erotica to fantasise over, so that he doesn’t have to repress it. He has to find ways of expressing his fantasy, because that side of his sexuality sounds really important to him, so he shouldn’t feel ashamed about it. But you have to think about the boundaries of your relationship.” It’s important to think about how he can give vent to his kink without involving you, because to deny it would erode his sense of self over time. Neither of you is right or wrong, but you have very different needs and they must both be recognised and respected. If you can manage this, it bodes well for future stumbling blocks in your relationship. • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.