Protests against police brutality have spread across the US overnight and into Saturday morning. Here are the key developments: In the capital, there were reports of a brief White House lockdown as demonstrators clashed with secret service and law enforcement agents into the early hours of the morning. The CNN reporter Jim Acosta used the word “volatile” to describe the protest, although video that he tweeted from outside the White House shows protesters gathered calmly outside, some chanting “Black lives matter” and others “No justice, no peace”. Volatile situation outside WH https://t.co/8zH6byFSVX Derek Chauvin, the Minneapolis police officer captured on video kneeling on the neck of 46-year-old George Floyd for nearly nine minutes, has been charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter. Floyd’s killing sparked the latest upheaval but follows a string of killings of black people. Despite the move, protests in Minneapolis continued overnight, with gunshots heard and fires engulfing businesses in parts of the city. Tim Walz, the governor, told a late-night news conference that law enforcement had been overwhelmed. “Quite candidly, right now, we do not have the numbers,” Walz said. “We cannot arrest people when we’re trying to hold ground because of the sheer size, the dynamics and the wanton violence that’s coming out there.” He called the situation “an unprecedented threat to our state”, and also apologised for the arrest of a CNN reporter on Friday. An unknown assailant fired a gun from a car into a protest, killing one person, local police said. The shooting occurred at around 11.30pm local time on Friday, and the victim, 19, was pronounced dead at the hospital. The killing came on the same day the US president, Donald Trump, threatened protesters, tweeting: “When the looting starts, the shooting starts.” Twitter hid Trump’s tweet, saying it said broke rules on “glorifying violence”. Later on Friday Mark Zuckerberg defended Facebook for not taking similar action, saying that though he had a “visceral negative reaction” to Trump’s message, which was also posted on Facebook, the company considered it “a warning about state action, and we think people need to know if the government is planning to deploy force”. In Atlanta, protesters smashed up the entrance to the CNN headquarters and set a police car on fire. Erika Shields, Atlanta’s police chief, said protesters were “understandably upset” and that the country faced a “recurring narrative” of violence against black people. “Black men are routinely killed, and whether it’s by police or other individuals, the reality of it is, we’ve diminished the value on their life,” she said. The mayor of Portland imposed a curfew on Saturday morning and declared a state of emergency after what he described as a ‘riot’ in the city overnight. Ted Wheeler said citizens must stay home between 8pm and 6am, starting immediately. “This isn’t calling for meaningful change in our communities, this is disgusting,” he tweeted. Burning buildings with people inside, stealing from small and large businesses, threatening and harassing reporters.All in the middle of a pandemic where people have already lost everything.This isn’t calling for meaningful change in our communities, this is disgusting. In Louisville, police fired projectiles at a reporter and her cameraman during a live shot. Authorities later apologised. The Associated Press reported that the Pentagon ordered the army to put military police units on alert to head to Minneapolis. The move allows Trump to deploy the units at short notice, the news agency said, citing three people “with direct knowledge of the orders”.