If you haven’t yet heard, Animal Crossing: New Horizons is the best-selling video game of 2020. In the two months since its debut on the Nintendo Switch console, ACNH has sold over 13m copies and cemented itself as the game of the moment, and probably the entertainment title of the coronavirus era. In Animal Crossing you’ll find pop culture coming to life in an alternate adorable reality. Elijah Wood and Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez are playing the game and visiting virtual fan islands. There’s a late-night talkshow, complete with studio set, hosted by screenwriter Gary Whitta. Streetwear label 100 Thieves launched their entire clothing line as a free download. NFL team Detroit Lions released their 2020 schedule through a hilarious video staged inside the game. Guy Fieri has finally created an actual Flavortown. As the fourth installment in the Animal Crossing franchise, New Horizons is the first to see this level of global success, far outselling the season’s most highly anticipated AAA title Final Fantasy VII. But would this game have taken the world by storm if Covid-19 didn’t? The answer boils down to one thing. Or entity. God. Bear with me here. For decades, we’ve witnessed a decline in younger generations claiming religion and attending services. According to a 2019 Pew study, weekly worship attendance is most common where expected life is shortest. Millions of worlds have come crashing down with the coronavirus, and while belief in a God continues to drop, there remains a huge need for a heaven to escape to – a place where people can control how everything goes. Is Animal Crossing a modern interpretation of a call to religion? When you first begin your Animal Crossing game, you’ll design a human character in your own likeness. The next step is to descend your progeny to your new island utopia, free from the pressures of the outside world. No global pandemic or murder hornets. No problematic political candidates or undead dictators. It’s just your chosen one and a few adorable talking animal neighbors, all looking to start over. During the early zen garden stage of the game, you’ll water flowers, mine rocks for minerals, pick fruit and reel in fish. At the end of your first ACNH session you can sit back like Thanos in retirement, watching the fruits of your effort take bloom. Forget seven days, you just birthed a new world in a couple of hours. From morning to night. Animal Crossing is your escape from the darkness of the real world. As your character becomes more intelligent, he or she will learn to craft the tools and objects that please you. The island you control is your reward for finishing that work video call, possibly taking place during that work video call. As you spread the word of ACNH to anyone who’ll listen, a new circle of friends will emerge. In a weekly communal ritual every Tuesday night, you’ll visit each other’s islands on your “Animals Crossing” Zoom and discuss how to intelligently design a more perfect paradise. While they show off their cute homes, hilarious fashion and physics-defying landscaping, you might give them a peek at your island’s hedge maze and spooky new dungeon. You inevitably become a cruel God. As more animals take residence on your island you grow favorites. The cute, funny ones that approach and seemingly worship your character get preferential treatment and are showered with daily gifts. The needs of the boring and annoying ones are ignored. And when the residents you don’t care for come to you in despair, you let them pack up and leave the island rather than see to their emotional needs. You might even ask Isabelle, the human resources shih tzu in Town Hall, to banish them. You can, because it’s your island. Your final act of corruption comes when you enter the Stalk Market, an in-game Wall Street-style mechanism where your player purchases turnips each Sunday and during the week sells them off for a profit or loss of Bells, the in-game currency. Once you hit it big in Stalks, you risk shifting your focus to profits and productivity and market volatility. You’re back to where you started before you ever turned Animal Crossing on for the first time: in debt. Uncertainty. Competition. Every Animal Crossing player is aware of losing sight of what makes the game a perfect escape – talking animals and the long, slow blossom of nature. They know the risk of forgoing the slow meditative tasks that brought them sanctity in the first place, when it’s no longer worth their time to water the flowers, harvest the orchard, or catch butterflies. It’s OK, maybe more than OK, for a video game to remind us of what matters. Playing God isn’t a bad thing. It’s OK for us to want to shape our world, even if that world is a fake island with talking animals. Is Animal Crossing a modern interpretation of a call to religion? Right now we’re yearning for a sense of divine creation, a way to connect with the goodness and innocence of nature. We seek a congregation of like-minded believers to build something beautiful together. A promised land where everything is perfect, just like we deserve. Salvation doesn’t have to occur inside a church or temple. For some it can be found in a Nintendo game designed for children, needed by adults. Rohit Thawani is a creative working at the intersection of tech and advertising. He is co-host of The Hopeless Show podcast