Waves of panic radiate from the government. Each day ministers sent out to steady the ship in press conferences and broadcast studios tip it a bit closer to capsizing. Asking Michael Gove to soothe the teachers on Sunday with his, “Teachers will be safe in schools” line was about as reassuring to those he called “the blob” as Chitty Chitty Bang Bang’s Child Catcher summoning children from their cellars. When there are differences of opinion between scientists on what counts as safe, only honesty about what is in doubt earns political trust. But daily, they blow their credibility away. Paralysis during their leader’s brush with death has given way since his return to alarm at their helmsman’s zigzag steering. His 13-minute address to the nation did more to hole the ship than buoy it in public opinion. No efforts were made to ease in his new back-to-work message. Without consulting teachers, care home managers, mayors or leaders of the other nations, of course he faced a backlash. Stay alert? It hasn’t exactly tripped off ministerial tongues since then. Boris Johnson swept to power on brilliant messaging, his spinners turning straw to electoral gold with “Take back control” and “Get Brexit done”, but all that’s gone. He likes to be liked, yet approval ratings are tumbling: Opinium polls showed a +42 net approval rating for his handling of the virus in March; that has fallen to -3. YouGov’s +51 net approval rating on 27 March has plunged to -2. Keir Starmer’s personal rating overtook Johnson’s last week. The government was sent into a flat spin by Starmer’s trouncing of Johnson at prime minister’s questions over the appalling care home death rates. Fresh from a mega-victory and an age from the next election, why should the government panic? Because serial bungles, missteps, policy reversals and a vanishing connection with honesty risk damaging it beyond repair. No one knows all the right numbers yet, but trust shrinks when the government misuses them anyway. After Prof Tim Spector warned that Britain’s failure to list all 14 primary symptoms of the virus meant between 50,000 and 70,000 people with Covid-19 were wrongly not being told to self-isolate, the government dashed to add “loss of sense of smell” to its official list of symptoms. But expressing uncertainty is alien to ministers who were selected for an absolutist Brexit cast of mind. One report last week said that Johnson had warned the 1922 Committee of Tory backbenchers that they faced an agile opposition and a “slippery opponent”. How revealing: there’s nothing slippery about Starmer. But Johnson, captain of the chancers with his hand-picked crew of fly-by-nights, fibbers and fabricators, fears being shown up in unflattering contrast to Labour’s frontbench of serious, earnest policy heavyweights. Politics is not a game for them, as it always has been for Johnson, but he’s bereft when his old bluster can’t beguile away deaths. Trust is ebbing away just when it’s most needed to persuade anxious parents to send their children to school; it’s frittered away on slippery pledges made to fill front pages for a day, but that are bound to be exposed soon after. We could walk down the well-trodden path: the government tacking wildly between herd immunity, tracking and tracing, then neither tracking nor testing, then locking down, then relaxing it but only to visit estate agents and garden centres, but not family. “Only following the science,” ministers claim, or as one wit put it, the political science. But they get that political science badly askew. Take Matt Hancock’s dumbfounding claim on Friday: “Right from the start we’ve tried to throw a protective ring around our care homes … we’ve made sure care homes have the resources they need.” What sentient voter doesn’t know that to be a flat-out lie? No testing and no PPE, as care homes – some close to bankruptcy – were pressured to take untested, possibly infected, hospital patients, without enough doctors, staff, training or isolation space. Taking the public for fools destroys trust. No government could have been fully ready as the tsunami of horror swept in. No reasonable voter would have expected everything to have been waiting, just in case. True, a decade of cuts had left us exceptionally unprepared and the government preferred failed private companies to handle PPE, testing and tracing over better equipped local authorities. Yet it might have kept the public’s trust with honesty and transparency, consulting everyone, publishing everything, admitting failures. But on it goes, the absurd targets missed and lied about, graphs of global comparisons hastily dropped. Hancock promises all staff and residents of care homes will be tested by early June – but will that be every week, with prompt results? “Following the science” often means ducking behind the scientists to let them take the flak: Sir Patrick Vallance, the UK government’s chief scientific adviser, and Prof Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, are, after all, civil servants, not independent. The most hapless figure giving cover to ministers has been the deputy chief medical officer for England, Jenny Harries. Before lockdown she backed Johnson’s plan not to ban large gatherings, noting: “We’ve looked at what sorts of interventions might help manage this as we go forward, push the peak of the epidemic forward, and in general, those sorts of events and big gatherings are not seen to be something which is going to have a big effect. So we don’t want to disrupt people’s lives.” She defended a fatal halt to tracking and tracing: “There comes a point in a pandemic where that is not an appropriate intervention.” She called the UK “an international exemplar in preparedness” and told doctors to have a “more adult” conversation about the lack of PPE. She reiterated advice that it was “very unlikely” care homes would be infected. This government of world-class spinners and top-dollar public opinion manipulators are learning nothing: on Friday Hancock’s disingenuous figures on how many tests had been carried out – almost double the number of individuals actually tested – were instantly tripped up by the BBC’s Reality Check. As trust evaporates, why keep setting new targets the government will miss? Politicians in a panic grab for two life rafts: internal fall guys and public enemies. Internally cabinet secretary Mark Sedwill is taking a beating, while Hancock protests it’s not fair he’s being blamed. But finding public enemies is their favourite of the two. Despite a surge of public appreciation, the BBC is battered in the rightwing press. Teachers were set up for the enemy role, and are being bounced into opening schools at an arbitrary date. Gove extols the Danes for a smooth reopening: they did it with extensive union consultation. When the British Medical Association backed the teachers, doctors came under attack: that certainly won’t end well. Local authorities and the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish administrations are as ever cast as enemies, too, with none of them consulted. But if “levelling up” is still Johnson’s aim, councils ask why extra funds are flowing to richer places rather than poorer ones – for example, to Wiltshire more than to Knowsley on Merseyside. Sadiq Khan, meanwhile, is the Tories’ favoured regular enemy, as they force him to raise public transport fares in London. But political aggression towards public servants is as tin-eared a response to public sentiment as Priti Patel’s refusal to lift the £625-a-year NHS surcharge on foreign health and care staff for the privilege of caring for us: doesn’t she hear the clapping? Brexit negotiations heading for no deal are, ministers hope, a winner – but they may not succeed in hiding chaos at the ports and a fall in GDP amid the coronavirus economic crisis. Everything about this low-grade, callow crew makes them the most unfit government in living memory to cope with this great crisis. Rishi Sunak has done well to spray the meltdown with money, but his real test is still to come. For the rest, they learn nothing from their errors, eroding any trust in the notion that their prime motive might be serving the public’s best interest, not saving their own skins. Boris Johnson looks an ever more inadequate figurehead for their floundering ship. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist