Few readers will come to Emily St John Mandel’s fifth novel, The Glass Hotel, unaware of her fourth, 2014’s Station Eleven, which imagined a world ravaged by a hyper-lethal form of swine flu. That book was always going to cast a shadow over its successor – such is the curse of a career-defining blockbuster. But as we face Covid-19, the strange, masochistic allure of havoc-lit has catapulted Mandel’s post-pandemic tale of itinerant Shakespearean actors back into bestseller territory. How better to while away a stint in lockdown than by bending our waking terrors into the most comforting and redemptive of shapes – the narrative arc. A handful of quietly placed clues suggest that The Glass Hotel exists in the same universe as Station Eleven, in a time before the outbreak. The “Georgia Flu” is lurking, but we will never learn if it is days, months, or a year away. Mandel has not penned a ticking-clock prequel; rather, her new novel is a portrait of everyday obliviousness, the machinery of late neoliberalism juddering along with characteristic inequity. This is a tale of Ponzi schemes, not pestilence. New York financier Jonathan Alkaitis carries himself with “the tedious confidence of all people with money ... the breezy assumption that no serious harm could come to him”. He’s the owner of the book’s titular hotel, a surreal monolith planted on the northernmost tip of Canada’s Vancouver Island, accessible only by boat. It’s a pocket of “wilderness-adjacent” extravagance for aspiring plutocrats; an “improbable palace” in that borderless nation, the “Kingdom of Money”. Mixing cocktails in the hotel bar is directionless Vincent, a young woman marking time in her remote hometown, a stifling place with one road and “two dead ends”. Her best friend drives the hotel boat; her brother, Paul – aspiring composer, recovering addict – sweeps the floors. Vincent has a “very particular gift”: she’s a lithe social chameleon. When newly widowed Alkaitis orders a drink, Vincent is who he needs her to be. Alkaitis then requests her companionship in exchange for “the freedom to stop thinking about money”. The keys to the kingdom are hers, but not for long. The time of plummeting stock prices and collapsing banks is near. The future is restless in The Glass Hotel, impatient and insistent: it interrupts the present to tether consequences to actions, ends to beginnings. Alkaitis, we learn, will die in prison; Vincent will drown. What are we to make of these future echoes? They are not warnings it seems, but hauntings. “There are so many ways to haunt a person,” Mandel writes, “or a life.” The Glass Hotel is crowded with phantoms: lost mothers; wronged victims; a “ghost fleet” of empty container ships; a beyond-the-grave curse scrawled in acid. In his medium-security cell, unrepentant Alkaitis conjures a spectral “counterlife” so intoxicating the real world loses form, a luxurious dreamscape with no extradition treaty. It’s a beguiling conceit: the global financial crisis as a ghost story. As one of Alkaitis’s employees reflects of a swindled investor: “It wasn’t that she was about to lose everything, it was that she had already lost everything and just didn’t know it yet.” But Mandel’s abiding literary fascination is even more elemental: isn’t every moment – coiled with possibilities – its own ghost story? Isn’t every life a counterlife? Like Joshua Ferris’s And Then We Came to the End, a central section of The Glass Hotel is voiced by a collective workplace “we” – a mea culpa chorus of Alkaitis’s underlings. “We had crossed a line, that much was obvious,” they tell us, “but it was difficult to say later exactly where that line had been.” Mandel is not interested in righteous outrage, she’s interested in that illusory line, how it is possible “to both know and not know something”. But there’s a hallucinatory, fairy-dust sheen to The Glass Hotel that makes the real world cruelties of 2008 feel as remote and otherworldly as the transparently symbolic (and symbolically transparent) hotel. Here is a realm of kingdoms, palaces, and “the shadowlands”, which is how Mandel characterises American poverty: “a country located at the edge of an abyss ... a territory without comfort or room for error”. The language of allegory can illuminate, but it can also be a form of camouflage. It does both in this novel. With its shattered narrative, the joys of The Glass Hotel are participatory: piecing together the connections and intersections of Mandel’s human cartography, a treasure map ripped to pieces. But it is as a spectral sequel to Station Eleven that The Glass Hotel stumbles into poignance, as pre-pandemic fiction. All contemporary novels are now pre-pandemic novels – Covid-19 has scored a line across our culture – but what Mandel captures is the last blissful gasp of complacency, a knowing portrait of the end of unknowing. It’s the world we inhabited mere weeks ago, and it still feels so tantalisingly close; our ache for it still too raw to be described as nostalgia. “Do you find yourself sort of secretly hoping that civilisation collapses ... Just so that something will happen?” a friend asks Vincent. Oh, for the freedom of that kind of reckless yearning. • The Glass Hotel is published by Picador in ebook and audio on 30 April and hardback on 6 August.