The winds of change continue to blow through Rugby Australia after director Peter Wiggs resigned from his position on the board. The latest exit from the sport’s governing body comes as it seeks a replacement for the former chief executive Raelene Castle, who resigned last month. The Australian reported Wiggs’s decision came after a heated email exchange with interim chairman Paul McLean on Tuesday night. Touted as RA’s next chairman, Wiggs had been pushing for the immediate instalment of Australian Olympic Committee CEO Matt Carroll as Castle’s successor. McLean entertained Carroll’s appointment, according to the report. However, citing a conflict of interest because of Wiggs’ friendship with Carroll, McLean suggested Wiggs remain in a director role. Instead he proposed incoming board member Hamish McLennan, a former Ten boss and News Corp senior executive, as a more suitable chairman. Fellow board members had also reportedly pushed back on the move that would have skipped any formal recruitment or interview process. Supercars chairman Wiggs, credited for steering RA’s player pay-cut deal during his brief RA posting, replied by saying what little regard he had for the board had “extinguished” and he would resign on Wednesday. Confirming Wiggs had done just that, McLean said he “understood his reasons” for departing. “He has undertaken some very important work and has made a valuable contribution to the organisation, in a very short time, and we are thankful for his contribution,” McLean, who is also RA’s acting chief executive, said. “The immediate priority of the board is to install a replacement for Peter, and an interim chief executive.” It is another setback as the cash-strapped organisation navigates a way back to the field while trying to arrange a new broadcast deal. It is hoped a domestic Super Rugby season could return in July, while a Bledisloe Cup series remains a prospect later this year. But RA, awaiting rescue funds from World Rugby, faces a potential revenue hit of $120m if no play is possible this year.