 For the past 40 years it has been a warning to parents about the monstrous consequences of ignoring their children. Now new illustrations of the classic picture book Not Now, Bernard have been created to better reflect the daily life of families in the age of smartphones and tablets. They show the protagonist Bernard’s parents paying more attention to their digital devices than their son – even when he is eaten and replaced by a raucous purple monster from the garden. The publishers hope the new version, which is being released on 4 June to celebrate the book’s 40th anniversary, will appeal to all those parents spending the lockdown shouting “not now!” at their kids as they try to work from home. “I know there are more reasons now – because there are more electronic things – that people say ‘not now’,” said the author and illustrator David McKee, 85. “It’s a bit sad... But we humans continue to make the same mistakes.” He was speaking to the Observer from his partner’s home near Marseille in France, where he has spent the last month gardening, painting – and struggling to concentrate. “It’s just not a normal life. I was brought up during the war. Everything was shared and people were united. This business of lockdown – with everyone supposed to be wearing masks and keeping their distance, even from friends – it separates people.” He thinks listening to children is one of the most important things a parent can do – and during the lockdown, when children are isolated from their teachers and friends, it is even more important. “If they’re good parents, they’ve got to make sure during this time that they do listen, that they do say: ‘Yes, what is it?’” At the very least, he says parents should take the time to explain to their child why they are unavailable, if they are busy. One of the great jokes of the book is that neither Bernard nor the monster understand why their interruptions are constantly met with indifference from Bernard’s parents. “At the end, the monster doesn’t know how to handle the situation, because they’re so insistent [on ignoring him].” Picture books are one type of book shared by adults and children. A few adults didn’t like it – it made them feel guilty McKee, who also wrote and illustrated the childhood classics Elmer the Patchwork Elephant and Mr Benn, reveals he came up with the idea for Not Now, Bernard while having a bath. “The phrase went through my mind and I just lay there with my skin all wrinkling, as it does, and listened to the story being told to me, in my head.” He is aware that some children see the monster as “Bernard, really”, while others think it is a separate being who behaves a bit like Bernard when he’s naughty. The story can be read either way, he says – but he does think there is an angry monster inside all of us. “If we are ignored or badly treated, there’s something inside of us that starts to rise up and we react. And that’s something we have to control, and it’s not always easy. Bernard realises he’s going to be eaten by a monster – and he is.” The book also highlights how children feel when they are provided with material things, like toys and food, but not love and attention: “Picture books are the one type of book which is shared by adults and children. I’ve seen a few adults who didn’t like it, because it made them feel guilty.” But he has also noticed that children today say “not now” to their parents more often than they did 40 years ago, favouring the virtual world in their pocket to the one outside. “It is a world they are used to being in, I suppose.” As for himself, McKee doesn’t own a smartphone, send emails or even wear a watch. Few locals who know him are aware that he is a famous children’s author: “I prefer to be just that silly old man who walks down the road. I like my books to be popular, but I actually like to stay hidden.”