1) This was supposed to be Champions League final week, with a return to Istanbul, scene of 2005’s all-time classic, hosting the showpiece this Saturday evening. The Ataturk Stadium appears to have had something of a scrub-up since then. Those missing the Champions League can relive the thrills and spills of last season’s competition here. 2) The Women’s Champions League final was due this week too and set to be played in Vienna’s Viola Park if a date can be found. Lyon won the last four finals, though were set to be without the brilliant Ada Hegerberg, out for the season with a ruptured ACL. She scored a hat-trick in last year’s 4-1 defeat of Barcelona. 3) Inspired by Tom Brady’s fine chip-in last Sunday in a Covid-19 fundraiser, here are a few memorable golf shots from down the years. A youthful Phil Mickelson playing an outrageous overhead flop shot, Tom Watson shocking Jack Nicklaus at the US Open in 1982, Miguel Ángel Jiménez hitting a wall at The Open, Tim Herron holing out in 2012, and the Daddy of them all, Tiger Woods at the par-3 16th at Augusta in 2005. Brady – and his fellow NFL franchise quarterback Peyton Manning – were following in the finest traditions of celebrity golfing, following in the footsteps of greats such as Bruce Forsyth, Bernard Cribbins, Harry Secombe, Tim Brooke-Taylor, Fred Trueman and Roy Kinnear, seen here teeing off in 1980 for charidee in Scotland and the Caribbean. 4) Manchester City are mourning the loss of Glyn Pardoe, who died this week at the age of 73. Pardoe, the club’s youngest ever debutant, scored the winning goal in the 1970 League Cup final against West Brom but his career never really recovered after having his leg broken by George Best in this Manchester derby in December of the same year. The next day, Malcolm Allison, City’s coach, travelled down to London to give his view of the incident to Brian Moore on The Big Match. 5) When league football was paused in March due to coronavirus, the Tranmere chairman, Mark Palios, devised Project Malthus, his plan to keep the League One club alive. He explained to The Guardian why football needs to get serious about its messy economic situation, and why a club such as Tranmere need to look after their community in difficult times. 6) An excerpt from Lance, the ESPN 30 for 30 documentary. In this clip Lance Armstrong and teammates describe the training regime under the notorious Italian doctor Michele Ferrari. 1) Last-lap battles from MotoGP in 2019 (and here’s some bonus moments of drama) 2) Welcome to the Murderdrome, a brief history of board track racing. 3) Channel 4’s Serie A coverage is the stuff of legend – and you can watch the first-ever match it broadcast right here – a 3-3 corker between Sampdoria and Lazio. Spotters’ badges: LeeWall, whobroughtoranges Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.