Robert Ormerod had just moved house when lockdown began. “We lived in a flat before. We moved for a garden,” he says. “So when this kicked off, we couldn’t believe how lucky we were to have moved in time.” As with most photographers, his ability to work has been limited, so Ormerod hit upon the idea of shooting his Edinburgh neighbours in their gardens. These outdoor spaces have been a boon for millions of families across the UK, who have over the past two months used their patch, however small, to get some fresh air, exercise, escape, grow their own food or get to know the wildlife. Ormerod had been using a drone for a couple of years and got his licence for a previous project, shooting crop circles. “It is perfect for now,” he explains. “It allows you to stay away from people, to keep them safe. But it gives you the flexibility you would usually have as a photographer – you can move around.” His images present an eerie juxtaposition; the apparent ordinariness of everyday life giving only the slightest clue to the horrors happening in our care homes and hospitals. “The stuff going on in the gardens is very normal, but the medium is a sign of what’s happening. There’s this distance between people.” When it came to finding people to take part, Ormerod was limited by the rules of lockdown and the range of his drone. “You can’t travel too far. In normal times, you might shoot in different cities, or countries, to get a cross-section of cultures. But lockdown forces you to work in the small area you have.” He started with close neighbours and friends, “people I’ve known for years”. He found others by posting online, asking friends of friends and ringing round the city’s mosques. (Shabbir Hussain initially said no because he hadn’t cut his grass, before managing to borrow a mower.) As for the gardens themselves, there’s a pleasing homogeneity to them. Most of the people Ormerod photographed have a lawn; there is something very British about that. Also notable is the lack of screens as people indulge in analogue pursuits; these could almost be images from the 1950s. Seen from above, the grass acts as a canvas, Ormerod says, as well as a symbol of recreation, relaxation and domesticity. Here is a record of how his neighbours, near and far, found refuge from the storm, in the spring of 2020. Chad works in construction and is using the lockdown to undertake major home renovations, so the garden provides useful extra living space. “We have a little trampoline for the girls, and Hula-Hoops. They’ve been roller-skating, too.” He says the garden is “an absolute sanctuary”, despite their neighbours’ cricket balls flying in occasionally. They’ve been watching over the wall. The girls get on well with the boys; when it’s all over, they hope to play a match together. Peter and Sarah decided the lawn was “acceptable collateral damage”, so he painted on the pitch. “It was definitely a lockdown measure. The kids are cricket mad. They’ve got a lot of energy to burn off by the afternoon.” The family had been desperate for a garden, and this is their first. They are overlooked by a block of flats and Peter says at times they feel guilty knowing people are stuck in high-rises, including the boys’ classmates. “Some have been moved on by the police for having a kickabout in the park,” he says. In the front garden, the boys sail boats in the pond, while the adults enjoy the peace that comes with no traffic – until the quiet is broken by the sound of breaking glass. “Smashed window total now two!” Peter texts later that day. “We’ve been doing quite a bit of gardening. We only started a week ago,” says Sarah. She is on maternity leave and her husband Alan is working from home. Not spending money elsewhere means they have been able to buy some garden tools. “We’ll absolutely have to carry it on because I’m getting daily messages from my aunt: ‘How’s the garden? I’m so glad you’ve got green fingers now.’” Alan’s been using the space to work out, while Sarah’s been reading Wasted, “a book about a guy who has managed to kick a heroin addiction. He’s a tree surgeon now. It’s not exactly Gardener’s Digest.” This wasn’t the maternity leave she was expecting. “I had all these children’s classes that we can’t go to. But then Alan’s getting a chance to see way more of our son growing up. And we are some of the lucky ones, because we haven’t been affected by the illness.” “During lockdown, we’ve been in the garden quite a bit,” Graeme says. “We often sit there having lunch, and Rosie has been doing classes on Zoom twice a day.” She does Zumba, yoga and barre, while he has been practising the golf he would usually play twice a week at the local club. “The coach is doing webinars, and he’s got virtual courses you can chat about, and he’s given us a series of practices we can do in our back gardens. Obviously in a garden this size you can’t swing a club too much, so it’s about practising my short game.” He is also a keen gardener and is pleased others, keen to grow their own veg, have been asking his advice. “It’s important to stress the therapeutic aspect,” he says. “No matter how small your garden, you can do a lot with it.” James and Stefanie managed to finish their garden, which Stef designed, just in time, before many shops closed. “Since then the emphasis on the garden has been significant,” James says. “Being stuck indoors with a three- and one-year-old – when it gets a bit stressful, the back doors fly open and out they go.” James is seriously into food (he Instagrams at @saltbyjames) and has been cooking anything he can get his hands on, while the kids have been using the play area. They’ve all been gardening. Well, Harley “spends a lot of time eating mud and pulling flowers’ heads out”. Bennie loves spraying the hosepipe: “We told him the apple tree was his, and that’s the only one he cares about.” “We’ve planted a whole bunch of seeds and are trying to grow vegetables. We’ve been engaged in when things are growing a lot more than we usually would. The apple tree got flowers this morning and it was exciting for all of us.” “It was meant to be with their help,” Kat says of the rainbow she was painting when the photograph was taken. Her family have done “loads” of rainbows, and keeping her sons occupied has been going well, though they are a bit hyper. “They don’t understand. They are young enough to think this is just normal.” The family lives in a flat and though their access to the garden is round a corner and down an alley, they are grateful for it. “It feels like a luxury,” Kat says, conscious that some neighbours have no alternative to crowded parks. Since lockdown began, they have been growing tomatoes, chillies and sunflowers. “It really resets you to get outside when you’ve been stuck indoors all day,” Kat says. “It’s nice for the boys to spend so much time together – Ben would normally be at school. Everything has just slowed down.” “Sam’s just left school and is a little bit lost, and Dan is a little bit lost because he’s suddenly not doing any exams,” Sue says. She has been teaching online during lockdown, and has used it as an opportunity to get the garden sorted. The boys have been tidying it, and she’s been weeding. “I’m going to try to plant some herbs. Going to the shops, they’re not always easy to get hold of.” The boys have been using the outdoor space every day. “Sam’s been doing sit-ups and Dan’s been bouncing around all over the place. They’re just trying to stay active.” Dan, who is into parkour, usually has the whole city at his disposal, to jump, climb and run on. “He trains on a Saturday, but walks to school and back most days – well, bounces. Suddenly he can’t do that.” “It was quite a shock,” Dan says. “I’m used to having so many different spots with different challenges and I’ve gone to being very restricted. I’m having to be quite resourceful.” He’s been using the trampoline and garden fence instead. “It’s given me a good opportunity to take care of my knees and do stretches. When I go back, I won’t be really stiff.” “Friends would say I juggle because I’m a bit of a clown,” Kenny says. “But colleagues say it’s because of all the number juggling.” Kenny is chief financial officer of an ethical energy company, People’s Energy; he and his wife Galya, a translation manager he met while working in Kazakhstan, are both working from home. “During lockdown, juggling has been a fun thing to go out and do, to move about and get some fresh air,” he says. Especially as the room he works in has no windows. As for the kids, “They have been out there kicking footballs. There’s a basketball net. And a trampoline. They’ve been on that nonstop.” “We’ve been praying in the garden when the weather is good enough, which isn’t very often,” says Shabbir. “Praying outside under the sky is regarded as natural and preferable, but in this country people are often embarrassed to do so,” he says. “We pray for the ill to be cured as routine, but now especially for Covid-19. Coronavirus is the first subject of everyone’s prayers on the daily Ramadan programmes on TV and online.” When the weather is poor, they have the cabana. “My children and grandchildren sometimes sit in it. Edinburgh’s weather is very unpredictable. It’s either too rainy or too windy. We only get a few days of summer, but we try and make the best of it.” Out in the garden, they admire the cherry blossom from their three trees, and the apple blossom across the road. It’s going to be a much quieter Ramadan this year. “I organise a mosque. We would normally be ending the fast there after the 30 days of Ramadan. That has had to be cancelled: we can’t go any more, at least not in any numbers.” At some meals there would be more than 100 people, he says. Instead, the mosque has set up programmes on Facebook and Zoom so that worshippers can watch Qur’anic recitations, prayers and lectures on religion. “Our priests travel about a lot, for seminars and talks across Europe, and now they are locked down. They will have problems earning their living if they can’t travel. They are dependent on the local community for their income.” This is tricky because money isn’t coming in. “People are not attending mosques, so there won’t be any collections. Everything’s come to a halt. People’s jobs have come to a halt. We will have to change our lives quite a bit.” • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.