A quick glance at my Reddit account will show you all I really want to look at on the internet are videos of racists getting owned and people falling off skateboards, but I imagine esteemed readers will want something slightly more cultivated. I don’t know if these are the funniest things on the entire internet! They’re really just things I’ve watched a lot and laughed at a lot. I decided to pick things that were intentionally funny. Things that people made in order to be funny. I tried, mostly, to choose things that didn’t require a lot of explanation or back story. Otherwise the whole list would just be The Dud memes and annotated screenshots of other comedians melting down on social media. This is part of Australian comedy folklore. It’s an old radio prank where a station was running a quiz and people would call in and, regardless of what question was asked, they’d just answer “India”. It’s obviously juvenile and silly and pointless, but it’s so good. If you don’t love this you’re a cop and I can’t help you. This is my personal favourite in the “short twitter comedy video” genre. It’s very simple, and is a beautiful artefact. I think any further explanation is unnecessary. here’s my impression of the engineer who was in the studio with Fat Joe that day pic.twitter.com/21S7ez7BqX This is from a sketch and improv group called Astronomy Club, out of New York. They recently had a Netflix show that was cool and funny and interesting for lots of reasons, but this is a great example of a funny sketch that goes in several different directions without losing sight of its main idea. Wild Horses is a hilarious improv group. This is a sketch they did a few years ago for Funny or Die, full of extremely subtle performances. Three people are organising a heist and a person they thought was dead turns up out of the blue and is incredibly passive-aggressive about being left out. That’s the basic premise, but the sketch is so much more than that. Hehehehe. Kate McKinnon makes funny faces. The chemistry between these two is palpable. #SNL pic.twitter.com/cTmecvCR78 These guys have done a few great sketches recently that I would broadly class as very specific parodies. This is a very specific parody of one of those pompous, tense, university culture war exchanges that happens, is filmed on a cell phone and goes viral, but has absolute emperor-has-no-clothes energy, which I love. conservative lecturer DESTROYS sjw college student pic.twitter.com/QmrIaqsonq This sketch is funny on a lot of different levels, not least of which is the classic “watching comedians trying not to laugh on stage”. This makes me cackle with laughter every time I watch it. It’s an incredible, satirical stunt in which Sacha Baron Cohen runs a mock sex offender detector over Roy Moore, who clearly fails to see the funny side of it. This is pure chaos. It’s from Nick Ciarelli and Brad Evan’s recent appearance on Comedy Bang Bang. In this episode, they’re playing two FM radio DJs who decide they’re going to use their time on Comedy Bang Bang (a show on which they’re guests) to record some station IDs, like some ads for their own radio station. It’s truly unhinged. I have no idea if I’ve given this enough context for it to be funny. And if you’ve got this far down the list, here’s a nine-minute video of Conan O’Brien bullying his interns to prove that not all comedy has to obviously punch up.