The Bournemouth goalkeeper Aaron Ramsdale tested positive for Covid-19 in the second round of Premier League testing, three days after returning a negative result in the first batch. The club had said on Sunday a player had tested positive but did not disclose his identity. “My test last Monday before we started training was negative,” Ramsdale told the Sun. “So this last week, I’ve done the usual things like going to the supermarket and going to the petrol station to fill my car up. I’ve been just as careful as before on lockdown and it seems to be a shopping trip where I’ve caught it.” Ramsdale had returned to training when the league allowed clubs to conduct sessions in small groups with players adhering to distancing guidelines. The 22-year-old said he did not have any symptoms and was now self-isolating. “Now I have seven days’ isolation at home … it’s not ideal, obviously, with training. The club have been fantastic. The players and especially the staff have been saying if we need anything to just ask. Things like shopping, they’ll leave it at the door.” Bournemouth said on Sunday their training facilities were still safe environments. “Following strict adherence of the Premier League’s return to training regulations, the club’s training ground remains a safe working environment for players and backroom staff, who will continue to be tested for Covid-19 twice per week.” Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/05/25-33694-25-22612-gnl.fw.20200525.ic.EnglandHolland96.mp3 The league said on Saturday two people had tested positive, each from different clubs, out of 996 players and staff who were screened last Tuesday, Thursday and Friday. That represented a drop from the first round of testing, announced last Tuesday, when six people from 748 were shown to have the virus. Three of those were at Watford, one player – who was revealed to be Adrian Mariappa – and two members of staff. Burnley confirmed that Ian Woan, their assistant manager, was another of the positive tests.