Every morning these days, I challenge myself to fill the kettle and then stand at the stove … and wait until it boils. For the first month of quarantine, those four precious minutes between clicking on the gas to hearing the urgent whistle were my chance to run around the house, make sure the kids’ computers were charged for another day of remote learning, and quickly transfer the next load of laundry from washer to dryer. Now, I’m trying to embrace every opportunity, modest as they may be, to get well and truly bored. Quarantines have meant different things for people. It exhausts some as they spin from remote work to remote school and checking in on friends and family, all amid the miasma of disease and dashed dreams. Others are exhausted by vast stretches of open time, cornered at home with nothing to do but binge movies, scroll through Instagram and agonize. Some may crave solitude; others are suffocating in it. All this monotony is, for many of us, incredibly boring. But please don’t wish away your boredom. Despite its bad reputation, boredom is secretly powerful and quite wonderful. I began studying boredom six years ago during a creative dry spell. I was struggling to come up with ideas for my podcast. The feeling was more disturbing than my usual writer’s block, like sand filling my cranium. I responded with a pavlovian impulse to be productive. Every empty crack in my day was filled. Instead of staring at people’s feet on the subway, I attacked my inbox. Why wait idly for the barista to make my coffee when I could check the headlines or how many steps I walked? It was then that I realized this mental state itself was worthy of consideration, maybe even worth indulging. I decided to find what happens in our brains when we allow ourselves to get bored – when we just stand by the swings as our child goes back and forth for the hundredth time and don’t text someone. I wasn’t sure I could even manage to do that any more. But perhaps I should. Because what if the human condition of boredom actually has a purpose? The cognitive psychologists and neuroscientists I interviewed explained that when boredom strikes and our minds begin to wander, we ignite the default mode of our brain: a neural network where our most original ideas and problem solving happens. This neural network, discovered by neuroscientist Marcus Raichle 20 years ago, kicks into gear when we aren’t focused on a specific external task. Think of it this way. When you first get into the shower, you’re attentive, concentrating on getting the water temperature right and locating the shampoo. But once you’ve scrubbed your scalp, the water lulls you … and your mind drifts away … into the default mode. Though you’re ostensibly doing nothing, or seemingly mesmerized by a patch of grout, this is when the mental magic begins. Perhaps it’s on a small scale, like if you come up with an amazing way to sneak vegetables into your child’s meal. Or, it can be on a much grander scale, like if a biochemical researcher has a eureka moment in the shower and figures out a new way to save lives. Beyond presenting us with ideas, the brain’s default mode also facilitates a process called autobiographical planning, a neuroscientific term which refers to what our mind does when we daydream. Lying there, staring at the ceiling, we think back to high and low moments in our lives, take note of the good and bad times, and tell ourselves the story of … ourselves. Our personal narrative. We imagine the future, visualize ourselves in new situations, set personal goals and then concoct strategies. Think of the default mode as a time machine in your brain with which you visit your past and future personhood. After learning all this I began the Bored and Brilliant Project (and later wrote a book by the same name) for my podcast Note to Self, drawing 20,000 listeners all eager to see how being bored more often might change them. My favorite moment was when we all, simultaneously, deleted the app that we felt compelled to incessantly tap to relieve boredom instead of simply experiencing it. “I feel like I’m waking up from a mental hibernation,” one listener wrote. “I pick up my guitar more, sleep better.” Other stories included people who helped their child make friends at school, solved office conflicts, found ways to finish a doctoral thesis, and started a new business. One listener, Liam, removed every single social media app from his phone. He described the feeling of seeing no new notifications on his phone as a “kind of embarrassing emotional experience”, but, he said, “I like not giving my phone the power to decide that for me. So thank you.” Boredom isn’t all great. It has been found to trigger some unpleasant thought patterns, including rumination – going round and round in your head about mistakes or fears. Too much mind wandering can lead to anxiety or depression. There’s a lot we don’t know about how boredom works. Still, I’ve been hearing from a small but vocal contingent of people who are teaching themselves to embrace boredom while in quarantine. “My boredom has led me to searching for my passion,” wrote one. “I am reading more and am more focused than ever.” Startlingly, some young people have told me that they’ve never experienced boredom. One even said, “ I don’t think I could get bored because I can’t be alone with myself.” Quarantine grants us a gift: time. Time to clear out the dishwasher slowly. Time to go for a (socially distanced) walk without listening to anything. Time to lie on the ground while your child builds a fort around your head. We need to use this time wisely, embrace this uncontrollable ambiguity and reset our relationship to longer-term thinking. In meditation, we’re told to let our thoughts waft away. But when with boredom, I suggest you watch those thoughts carefully. See where they lead you. Don’t worry if you feel like you’re not doing it right. It can take time to pass through the uncomfortable side of boredom and into the empowering part. You might find embracing boredom jumpstarts your creativity too or, at the very least, relieves you from feeling any guilt about spending an afternoon on the couch doing nothing. You’re actually being productive – and just might change your life. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.