Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: At least 3,357,450 people have been infected and at least 238,787 have died around the world since the pandemic began, according to researchers from Johns Hopkins University. The figures, which are based on official and media reports, are likely to significantly underestimate the scale of the outbreak, due to suspected underreporting, as well as differing testing and statistical regimes. Malaysian authorities are rounding up undocumented migrants as part of efforts to contain the spread of coronavirus, the country’s police chief said late on Friday, after hundreds of migrants and refugees were detained in the capital, Kuala Lumpur. More than 700 migrants were taken into custody, including young children and ethnic Rohingya refugees from Myanmar, during Friday’s raid in a downtown area where thousands of migrants and asylum seekers live, rights groups said. Russia has had another record daily increase, with 9,623 new cases of coronavirus on Saturday, bringing the total to 124,054. Reuters reported the nationwide death toll rose to 1,222 after 57 people died in the previous 24 hours, according to Russia’s coronavirus crisis response centre. Russia has been in partial lockdown since the end of March. The mayor of Moscow said about 2% of the city’s population, more than 250,000 people, had the virus. Officials have allowed the emergency use of the experimental drug remdesivir, which appears to help some coronavirus patients recover faster. It is the first drug shown to help fight Covid-19. Donald Trump announced the news on Friday at the White House alongside Stephen Hahn, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) commissioner, who said the drug would be available for patients admitted to hospital with Covid-19. A nursing home in New York has reported a “horrifying” death toll of 98 people from Covid-19 as residential facilities continue to emerge as a deadly source of outbreaks around the world. The death toll at the Isabella Geriatric Center in Manhattan is one of the worst such outbreaks in the US and caused a shock even in hard-hit New York, where the official state tally of nursing home deaths listed only 13 at that particular home as of Friday. )fficials at the 705-bed centre later confirmed that up to 46 residents who tested positive for Covid-19 had died, as well as an additional 52 people suspected to have had the virus, Associated Press reported. Some died at the nursing home and others in hospitals. The UK health secretary, Matt Hancock, has been accused of changing the criteria for counting Covid-19 tests after he claimed victory in reaching the target of 100,000 a day. Critics said that a large proportion of the 122,000 tests counted on Friday were tests that had been mailed to addresses but not yet carried out.