It has been said that people in glass houses should not throw stones. But that didn’t stop Steve Mnuchin, the US treasury secretary, from shooting straight at Axl Rose yesterday. The Guns N’ Roses frontman (real name William Bruce Rose Jr) has recently aired his frustrations on Twitter about the Trump administration’s response to the coronavirus. But this time, Rose engaged in a simple bit of name-calling. It’s official! Whatever anyone may have previously thought of Steve Mnuchin he’s officially an asshole. To be fair to Mnuchin, the name-calling seemed pretty uncalled for. It’s been at least three days since Mnuchin did something stupid (like encourage US citizens to start traveling domestically during a pandemic); and at least a decade since he practically caused the financial crash. Mnuchin responded by asking Rose: “What have you done for this country lately?” Which would have been ironic enough on its own – seeing as Mnuchin is one of the people at the helm of an administration that has seen almost a quarter of the global deaths come from the US during this pandemic. But to make matters worse, Mnuchin accidentally ended his tweet with a Liberian flag emoji instead of the American flag. An exchange on Twitter. pic.twitter.com/OW07nX09zT Mnuchin quickly amended his tweet to show the American flag, but not fast enough to duck another Rose attack. “My bad, I didn’t get [that] we’re hoping 2 emulate Liberia’s economic model,” said Rose. Liberia has one of the lowest GDP ranks in the world. My bad I didn’t get we’re hoping 2 emulate Liberia’s economic model but on the real unlike this admin I’m not responsible for 70k+ deaths n’ unlike u I don’t hold a fed gov position of responsibility 2 the American people n’ go on TV tellin them 2 travel the US during a pandemic. Now, the Trump administration has been having a hard time recently – just yesterday, Trump walked around a mask-manufacturing plant without a mask on, while Guns N’ Roses’ cover of Wings’ Live and Let Die blared out in the background. And the US and Liberian flags are easy to mistake – the only difference between the two is that the Liberian flag has one star in the box on its left corner, instead of 50. So you almost feel sorry for the guy. Then again, it is also the millionaire Mnuchin who thought Americans could live on $120 a week, because of, uh, bridge liquidity. It was also reportedly Mnuchin’s idea to delay stimulus checks to millions of Americans because he wanted to get Trump’s signature sprawled on all them before they were sent out. So maybe mixing up flags isn’t the worst thing he’s done.