A Canadian aerobatics jet has crashed into a British Columbia neighbourhood during a flyover intended to boost morale during the Covid-19 pandemic, killing one crew member, seriously injuring another and setting a house on fire. Video appeared to show the crew of the Snowbirds’ plane ejecting during the crash on Sunday. Debris was scattered across Kamloops, the neighbourhood near the airport 260 miles (418km) north-east of Vancouver. The Snowbirds are Canada’s equivalent of the US Air Force Thunderbirds or the UK’s Red Arrows. The Royal Canadian Air Force said in a tweet: “It is with heavy hearts that we announce that one member of the CF Snowbirds team has died and one has sustained serious injuries.” The air force said the surviving member did not have life-threatening injuries. The Snowbirds began Operation Inspiration in Nova Scotia earlier this month and features the team’s signature nine-jet formation. It was aimed at boosting morale amid the pandemic. Rose Miller lives directly across the street from where the plane hit. Miller said she heard a loud bang and wondered whether it might be a sonic boom. Then she saw the plane hit the ground. “It looked to me like it was mostly on the road, but it just exploded. It went everywhere,” she said. “In fact, I got a big, huge piece in my backyard. The cops said it was the ejection seat.” Video posted to Twitter in Kamloops appears to show two Snowbirds taking off from what is believed to have been Kamloops airport. One of the aircraft subsequently climbed into the sky before rolling over and plunging to the ground. The video appears to show at least one person ejecting from the plane before it disappears behind a stand of trees and an explosion is heard. About five houses had to be evacuated. Kamloops mayor Ken Christian said: “This accident really shakes us to our core.” The Royal Canadian Mounted Police said the cause of the crash was under investigation. The Department of National Defense said in a statement: “Our number one priority at this time is determining the status of our personnel, the community and supporting emergency personnel. When appropriate, more information will be made available.” Kenny Hinds, who lives in a house seven doors down from the crash site, said it looked like the living room of the house where the crash occurred was on fire. “I just started running down the street. And I got there maybe a minute after it crashed and there was a couple of residents that had their hoses out and they were trying to put the flames out because it hit a house,” he said. “It looked like most of it landed in the front yard, but maybe a wing or something went through the roof perhaps.”