Like the good citizens emerging from a deep slumber in Sleeping Beauty, where I live we are stirring, ready to go forth into a semblance of our pre-Covid-19 routine, back to work and socialising in groups of five. What did that kingdom look like after the freeze frame? Did the merchants re-establish their haggling? The woodcutters resume their felling of trees? The chefs and restaurateurs recommence the stirring of industrial-sized stock pots and setting of tables with gleaming cutlery? For us in 2020, I implore you to pause before you pick up the car keys and head to the front door. Yes, we are keen as mustard to move forward. I for one miss eating with new faces, I miss great big bear hugs from my friends, and food cooked by someone else – especially if that someone happens to be a sushi chef. God I miss flawless sushi prepared by a master. My amateur attempts are no match for those supremely crafted mouthfuls made by someone who’s been honing their skills with balletic repetition their whole professional life. But before we spirit away to sit in a restaurant with nine other people and leave this period behind, ask yourself: have you fed your sourdough starter, your scoby? Burped your newly jarred ferments? Eaten through the last of the greens from the past week’s vegetable box? In my profession, some have been secretly loving this enforced period of isolation. Many of us rarely get to cook at home for and with our families, we reserve that privilege for our patrons. As our plans were all halted, we sat first twiddling our thumbs then joined in to the newly re-established love of home cooking. We baked, then we fermented and rendered, decorated pretty focaccias with gardenscapes complete with capsicum butterflies. Some of us livestreamed it to give friends and followers a way of joining in. We continued to connect to our communities this way, while championing local providores, farmers and artisans. Sharing our resources so that they too may survive this bleak economic period. It’s been enlightening to watch the younger generation take part too. My 11-year-old daughter has been gleefully experimenting with baking and pasta making. My nine-year-old son, not to be outdone, has been tinkering with what he has called ‘gender neutral’ ice blocks. What a guy, he’s not defined by the flavours that are typically assigned to being “girly” or “boyish”. Growing up in a restaurant family, it took a major life event for my mother to down tools to be home with us on a Friday or weekend night. Cooking and eating dinner together as a family was virtually an anomaly. On a health level, I’ve eaten better than I have in years, and that’s saying a lot. We tend to cook more healthfully for ourselves and our family, perhaps after the initial period of comforting eating, I’ve noticed a trend sliding back to more wholefood conscientiousness. Already I have spoken to three prominent chefs who have vowed to maintain their home cooking regularly. Chef David Thompson, perhaps one of the busiest jet-setting chefs and restaurateurs I know, has relished this enforced stay-at-home period. He has masterminded and refined his readymade curry paste line, which will soon be available for purchase to home cooks worldwide. The entire range from massaman to green curry paste sounds absolutely divine. These will give everybody a leg up on producing restaurant-quality curries at home. But for now, while we have the time still, pull out your mortar and pestle. Homemade curry paste is much easier than you think. It can be used in lots of different dishes, cooked with a variety of methods. For example, you can quickly make an excellent stir fry using lard to cook out the curry paste, add a bit of protein, mushroom or eggplants and some aromatics such as Thai basil and freshly torn Makrut lime leaves and minimal seasoning such as fish sauce, oyster sauce – voilà, you have a wonderful dinner within 10 minutes. It can be portioned, frozen and later reconstituted to make a 20-minute curry with coconut cream and fresh ingredients for when you are again time poor. Making curry paste from scratch will not only yield a freshly aromatic result, you will also get sense of having had a workout-meditative session at the same time. Pound that baby for a good while. It takes longer than you think to get it to paste consistency. I hear you ask, why can’t I use a blender? Well you can, but it just won’t be as delightful – a blender will cut and shred the ingredients up finely, but when you pound it together it ruptures more cells to release the aromatics completely. By pounding you end up with less oxidated paste, that will keep longer and cook up better. Besides, I have found that pounding away with the mortar and pestle is an excellent way of exorcising the frustration of not having access to dine-in premium sushi. 10 dry long red chillies, soaked in water for 20 minutes, roughly chopped5 red birds eye chillies, coarsely chopped1 tsp salt1 tbs fresh galangal, coarsely chopped2 stalks of lemongrass, white hearts only, cut into 1cm pieces3 red shallots, peeled and roughly chopped10-15 cloves of garlic, depending on the size1 tbs shrimp paste2 coriander roots, chopped roughly10 whole white peppers, freshly toasted1 Makrut lime rind, finely chopped (you can also use a zester to grate)1 tsp cumin, freshly toasted and ground1 tsp coriander seeds, freshly toasted and ground In order of pliability – from hardest to softest – pound the ingredients using a mortar and pestle and long handled spoon. Start with the rehydrated long red chillies, red birds eye chillies and salt until smooth and well combined. Then incorporate all the other ingredients, one at a time, and pound until each ingredient is fully blended. Make sure they are combined before adding the next ingredient. Do this with everything except the shrimp paste, then pound until smooth, scraping down the contents with the spoon as you go. Lastly add the shrimp paste and pound until it all looks like one pliable paste, then refrigerate to rest. After it has chilled, batch it up into portions and freeze what you won’t use quickly – putting your paste into a large holed ice cube tray is a great hack.