‘We haven’t got enough control rods, that’s the problem.” Mr Z was trying to explain why our conversations just fizz, repetitively, getting more and more aerated about the same subject. I think, in the future, I am going to divide the box sets into ones that we are allowed to use for analogies and ones that we aren’t. Sure, make a metaphor out of Normal People, no problem. Loads of things are a bit like Marianne’s earrings. Chernobyl is a hard no: we just don’t understand nuclear power well enough. But hear the man out: “If you don’t have the control rods in the water …” “You’re sure it was water? I thought it was uranium …” “Whatever, you can’t control the fusion …” “Fusion, or fission?” “If you don’t have CONTROL RODS.” Are the control rods other people? Or are they theatres, cinemas, spoken-word events and the whole cornucopia of the cultural world? They are basically everything interesting that happens externally, without which conversation pings off the walls, like a rat that has been given ecstasy for research purposes. Control rods are the couple you went out for a pizza with, where one ordered a vegetarian one and the other ordered chorizo, only when the pizzas arrived, the chorizo was more appetising and the veggie-orderer just swiped it, and you happily kill an hour trying to place that on the spectrum of good and evil. Or the guy with one leg, who has a brandy every night outside a Portuguese cafe, and always looks incredibly happy, as if life has treated him really well. He’s a control rod. A film that wasn’t as good as everyone else said it was – sure, you can talk about TV if you like, or books, but part of the interest was always at the meta-level, beyond the artefact itself. What were the people who went to it trying to say about themselves, and what did it mean that they reacted to it the way they did? A minuscule breach of etiquette on a bus, a homeless guy who asks your name and says his sister is also called Zoe, and then you ask his name, and it turns out to be the same as your dad’s (Mark). These are the control rods of relationship fusion (or fission). Friendships are suffering the same vacuum right now: I don’t think I have ever asked so many people, so often, how they feel about things. How are you feeling about lockdown? How are you feeling about your family? Are you worried about your parents? How are you feeling about your sourdough? How are you feeling about the job that you’ve been made redundant from/furloughed from/realised wasn’t a real job after having attempted to do it from home? How are you feeling about your unprecedented and entirely unnecessary levels of fitness? We never used to talk about feelings; we used to talk about weird stuff that had happened. I have been reading so much complicated theorising about why Zoom is tiring. It’s some combination of tech (the refresh rate of the video feed leaves all the work for your brain to do to make sense of an often senseless image) and psyche (the dissonance between being with the person, and yet not with the person, heaps yet more unwanted work upon your poor noggin). I have something to add to this analysis: it’s exhausting, trying to do intimacy from a standing start. I don’t want to talk about how I feel, I want to bitch about other people. (I make an honourable exception for one friend: she tells me what she has bought online, and asks whether she should send it back. Currently, she has a wetsuit that is too small and two leftwing tea towels. I told her to keep all these items. And now, look, I am bitching about her, so we’re both happy.) Other people have found solace in the natural world. For me, this lacks the element of surprise. Ah, look; a heron, in our garden, trying to eat fish out of the pond. Oh my; a fox, also in the garden, trying to eat the rabbit. There are two cats fighting in a tree. When are you going to reverse my expectation, animals? Don’t get me started on plants. The children can still suck an argument out of their thumbs. Through two floors, I could hear the 10-year-old and one of the 12-year-olds fighting about whether dog years were a thing. “There is no dog sun,” said TJ, “so there is no such thing as a dog year.” H hit back. “If a 12-year-old died, that would be a tragedy. If you died, today, everybody – not me, I’d be pleased – everybody else would be devastated. It’s not sad when a 12-year-old dog dies because that dog is actually [unspeakably long pause – I’ll tell you what she hasn’t been doing, which is times tables] 84.” It is so perfect, I can hardly breathe; nobody can win, so the argument will never end. It is as if they have discovered perpetual motion. If they could only do it without hitting each other, it would be like watching an executive toy. • Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnist