Visual artists are struggling to produce work and concentrate on projects along with the rest of the population, the Turner prize-winning sculptor Dame Rachel Whiteread has said. Even though artists often worked alone in their studios, the lockdown was taking a heavy toll financially and creatively, she said. Whiteread is supporting a fund created by Artangel giving £5,000 to emerging artists, as well as mentoring, to help provide them with “thinking time” to develop ideas over the next six months. It is an important initiative, says Whiteread. “Artists are finding it very difficult to work. It’s partly financial but it also difficult to know what to work for because everything has closed down and you’re not quite sure what’s happening with shows and galleries and anything that is happening in the future. “This gives hope. It’s not just about money, it is someone putting faith in you in these incredibly uncertain times.” Whiteread was helped early in her career by Artangel when it commissioned her work House, a concrete cast of an entire East End house that led to her winning the Turner prize in 1993. She is now one of Britain’s most respected and successful artists, but is also finding the lockdown difficult. “Everybody is just feeling in limbo. I’m trying to work and I’ve got the money and resources to do that, but trying to do big projects or stuff for the future … it just feels really difficult,” she said. “All of the things that make us human have been taken away from us, things like choice and decision … it takes its toll. It is hard to concentrate. Just going out for a meal or going to the cinema or seeing a show, the interruptions and accompaniments to your day are gone. Everything feels like groundhog day.” Thethinking time initiative will benefit 20 artists who work across mediums including performance, poetry, choreography, music, video and installation. They include Dominique White, Oona Doherty and Abi Palmer, whose work Crip Casino – an interactive gambling arcade parodying the wellness industry – was shown at Tate Modern, Somerset House and the Wellcome Collection. The Artangel co-director James Lingwood said it was a particularly difficult time for emerging artists. “They are the ones who survive in the gig economy. They have ways of supporting themselves to make work and that has seized up completely. “It’s tough for all artists, but the ones struggling the most are the ones who just don’t have any support structure or galleries or agents around them.” The money has come from the Freelands Foundation and an Artists for Artangel fund, created in 2018 through the sale of works by artists including Whiteread.