The task set for artists in the Homemakers series was to create works in isolation for an audience in isolation. It is not the first initiative of its kind; there is a growing body of work exploring the drama, or malaise, of being cooped up alone. So it is all the more surprising that the first films in this ongoing series commissioned by Home in Manchester look and feel so original. A Small Gathering is made up of three short films in which everyday objects synonymous with the Covid-19 pandemic, from toilet roll and antibacterial spray to perennial cups of tea, are woven into stories about paranoid, hostile and hallucinatory states of mind in imaginative and witty ways. The stories are frightening and funny in equal measure, careering from realism into a stylised and surreal world of black comedy, gothic horror and fantasy. They are playful from the start, calling themselves “a triptych of shorts served two metres apart” and using techniques from silent films to capture an overt theatricality on film. But for all their whimsy, the surreal and absurdist elements resonate with the strangeness of lockdown: its emotional disorientations and the unpinning of the old, fixed realities. Created by Ad Infinitum, they are non-verbal, accompanied by Sam Halmarack’s mood-setting sound design and artfully mimed by actors. Nothing is quite what it seems: the ordinary ritual of hand-washing becomes a sexual act as a bar of lathered soap slips between gripping fists in “Mr Pink”. It is created by Nir Paldi and George Mann, and performed by Paldi whose character – part seaside entertainer, part artiste – finds himself marooned indoors, washing his hands in a grunting frenzy and veering from cute comic mime to flashes of imagined violence or fear. Toilet rolls take on ominous overtones in “Rewilding”, directed and performed by Deb Pugh and featuring a nervy character preparing to venture out of her home, disinfectant spray in hand. A tea party for dolls is animated by demon possession in “Cynthia’s Party”, directed and performed by Charlotte Dubery, in which a circle of sinister-looking dolls turn on their owner with the schlocky melodrama of a B-movie. Like “Mr Pink”, this last film is concerned with performance and Dubery’s character resembles a music-hall entertainer in spangly socks and glittery shoes who has no audience to entertain. Bryony Kimmings’ 15-minute film, “I am falling in love with you and it’s making me do stupid things,” features another flamboyant unravelling. Performed by Kimmings and edited by Will Duke, it takes place in the space of a single night in which Kimmings’ character make a series of video calls in the hope of connecting romantically: “I hope you remember me … Sorry I never emailed you. I did want to but got embarrassed.” That first message is followed by another with a glass of wine in hand: “I notice you haven’t messaged me back.” The next 10 calls go through the full revolution of an imaginary relationship, from a first-date dinner to drunken clubbing, pillow talk and separation, complete with accusations of betrayal and smeared mascara. A high point comes with Tom Parkinson’s bubble-gum pop song sung by Kimmings and accompanied by computerised visual effects so that it looks and sounds like a retro pop video. If this is an audacious show of seduction, femininity is part of the performance: Kimmings’ character dresses as different kinds of women in order to allure, from demure girlfriend to drunken party girl and we know little of who she is beneath the identities she assumes in her elaborate game of dress-up. It might amount to a painful picture of sexual desperation but we begin to suspect, in the final twist, that the performance of sexiness is orchestrated for this character’s own amusement. Just like the ailing performers in A Small Gathering, she needs an audience, however virtual, and her admirers serve that purpose. Other works in the series so far include Homelands by Plaster Cast Theatre, in which contributors are posted a short story that invites a written response, and Tell Me by Chris Thorpe and Yusra Wasarma, a question and answer game played by two people that tests the extent of their intimacy. Available until 31 December. Further works released later this year. homemcr.org/homemakers