Alice dyes her hair blue and has an “active, app-based sex life with married men from outlying commuter towns”. This is not how heroines in young adult novels usually describe themselves, but then Alice is no ordinary heroine. She’s a 17-year-old pupil at an elite girls’ school, “an angry child’s crayon sketch of a human girl” whose self-harming is a cry of rage against what she perceives as a cosmic injustice: “Some lazy angel, desperate for a fag break, scribbled the wrong gender on my destiny forms.” Before long, author Juno Dawson has whisked her heroine down a rabbit hole for an adventure that is both a retelling of Alice in Wonderland and an investigation of what might constitute reality in a society where money, power and celebrity are swept up in an ever crazier whirl of gossip, cocaine and cosmetics. But the central question of Wonderland is sane and sober, echoing that of Lewis Carroll’s original: “Who in the world am I? Ah, that’s the great puzzle.” Nestling on a sofa in her living room with Prince, her sleepy chihuahua, Dawson looks like she knows exactly who she is, but the author is all too aware of what it’s like to be a victim of that lazy angel. Like her Alice, Dawson is transgender. But while Alice has transitioned by the time she starts secondary school, it wasn’t until Dawson was a well-known author in her 30s (crowned Queen of Teen in a reader-led YA prize) that she felt ready to take the plunge, changing from James to Juno. She came out publicly in 2015 and, three years later, created her first transgender character: Kendall, a gentle anorexic, in what was to become her most successful novel, Clean. Kendall was a minor character, but Alice commands her own story. It was during an Australian book tour for Clean that the idea of appropriating Alice in Wonderland popped up. “There was this exhibition in Melbourne about visual representations of Alice,” says Dawson, speaking via Google Hangouts. “I realised we have a globally agreed idea of what this character looked like. I began to wonder what I could bring to the table. There’ve been Japanese Alices and black Alices. Would people accept her if she was trans? I thought, ‘Wouldn’t it just be superfun to do it my way?” Though the novel is freestanding, it’s part of “a loose trilogy” with Clean and 2019’s Meat Market, both of which are set in rarefied circles defined by glamour and wealth. Meat Market tackles the fashion trade, while Clean is set in an elite rehab centre, where a group of moneyed misfits grapple with the fallout from privileged lives, all very different from Dawson’s own childhood. “I grew up in a council house near Bradford watching TV serials like Beverly Hills 90210 and, later on, Gossip Girl,” say s the 38-year-old. “It seemed as if drama was a thing rich people had. Our dramas were much more mundane – my mum walking out on my dad – whereas these people were having poisoning-your-spouse dramas.” Wonderland is hinged around a weekend-long, invitation-only house party that is reached by secret invitation through the cellar of a club. At this club, a murderous Queen of Hearts (AKA Paisley Hart, poisonous ringleader of St Agnes girls’ school) rules over a trippy “court” of half-recognisable Carrollian archetypes. Alice is shadowed by a mysterious character in a cat hoodie, while the Tweedle twins are social media influencers with an abusive sexual interest in transgender girls. For those who think a YA label is akin to a PG film rating, the novel’s explicitness might seem startling. The story feels its way around the differences between the male and female orgasm, and is unflinching in its approach to date rape – the bewildering moment when consent is breached. “The twins press against me,” Dawson writes, “their bodies hard and wet. Firm hands grab at my breasts, pull on my nipples. If it was right, would there be so many questions, so many wasps at the picnic?” Asked if she gets any pushback, Dawson breaks into an ironic chuckle. Her 2014 self-help manual, This Book Is Gay, was once challenged by an Alaskan parent who discovered it in a children’s section of the local library. “But if anyone thinks teens aren’t experimenting with drugs and looking at porn, all that stuff, they’re kidding themselves.” Market research for Clean revealed that many of the most enthusiastic readers of YA fiction are in their 20s anyway, suggesting it is less a safety zone than a space where young people go to have their concerns reflected back to them. Dawson isn’t alone in using this space to explore gender and sexuality. She recently gathered several of her LGBTQ+ peers together for a short-story anthology, Proud, which has just been judged book of the year in the Visionary Honours for diverse and underrepresented voices. Wonderland is also a wake-up call to anyone who believes gender reassignment might be a happy-ever-after. Alice has recently returned to school after three months in hospital following a suicide attempt. “While I’m delighted with my perky little boobs,” she says, “I was profoundly disappointed that my urge to cut myself didn’t vanish with the first milligram of oestrogen to pass my lips.” Her problems, Dawson points out, are those of all too many young women. “When I’m at the Hay book festival or at Yale, these teenagers come into my signing queues and they are scarred. It must be talked about because it permanently affects girls.” In her autobiographical book The Gender Games, published in 2017, Dawson described a lifestyle in which sexual risk-taking became a damaging form of self abuse. “Some people take scissors to their skin and some choose terrible men,” she tells me. “I was on top of my drinking and I never cut myself, but throughout my 20s I engaged in these awful relationships. I really put myself at risk, when I really just wanted people to like me.” The Tweedle twins’ prurient fascination with Alice is a reflection of the author’s own experience, which culminated in a “slightly sordid” dalliance with an unnamed Premier League footballer. “What do you get the millionaire 22-year-old who has everything?” she wrote. “Apparently this is where I come in.” Dawson recalls it all now with a shrug. “As a young trans woman doing internet dating, you’re going to attract heterosexual men, when all they are really interested in is that you’re a very specific body type.” It was not OK for a boy to like the Spice Girls as much as I did – but I couldn’t keep it in The Gender Games traced Dawson’s dysphoria back to her early childhood in the Yorkshire town of Bingley, “famous as the birthplace of the Diamant thermal underwear empire”. Her mother worked for the Bradford and Bingley building society while her father was a travelling salesman for Cadbury. They divorced when she was seven. “Barbie, Girls World Styling Heads and My Little Ponies were my catnip,” she recalled. She would steal her sister’s comics and amuse herself by writing stories about characters she cut out of her mum’s home-shopping catalogues. Then she discovered the Spice Girls in 1996 and had her “true female awakening”. She says: “It was not OK for a boy to like the Spice Girls as much as I did, but I couldn’t keep it in. In fact, the day I first told anyone I thought I was gay was the day I bought the single Stop in 1998.” At Bingley Grammar School (“a grammar school in name only”) she was bullied into conforming to male stereotypes with the result that, while compensating by overperforming academically, “by the time I was a teenager, I felt almost entirely like I’d failed at being human”. Whereas Alice has landed at St Agnes through the fluke of having a bestselling crime-writer for a mother, a scholarship paid for Dawson to join a stage school. She was the first in her family to go on to higher education, landing a place at Bangor university in north Wales, where she studied psychology, dabbled in acting and music reviewing, and decided that fame might be the answer. She auditioned for Pop Idol, The X Factor and Big Brother (twice) before realising that “fame is Diet Love. It tastes like love and looks like love but there’s no real love in it.” After starring as the straight, male, American romantic lead in “an Edinburgh fringe disaster”, she decided that the life of a jobbing actor was not her bag either, so settled down to a career as a primary school teacher. For seven years she lived a double life, teaching by day and pursuing a wild, app-based sex life by night. It wasn’t until she started interviewing people for This Book is Gay that she “began to join the dots”. She came out in an interview with the news website Buzzfeed the day after Germaine Greer declared on Newsnight that “transgender women are not women” – and two years later took revenge by pulling out of a book festival in protest at the inclusion of Greer. Although she is a fearless champion of trans rights, she is sympathetic towards those who are less courageous, saying: “Look what happened to poor Lucy Meadows, who was a primary teacher like me. She was hounded until she killed herself.” Her pre-Juno life is present in the exotic tattoos that cavort up her arms. “Had I known I was going to transition, would I have had quite so many?” she muses. “You’d be surprised how badly tattoos can clash with a wedding dress.” It’s a reminder that the coronavirus lockdown has not only laid waste to the launch schedule for Wonderland, but has forced the postponement of her wedding to Max Gallant, originally scheduled for June. “It was sad because I was due to have my final dress fitting the following week,” she says. “But we said to each other very early on that it’s about the marriage not the wedding.” Today, Dawson combines writing a novel a year with what she calls “my hyphens”. These include screenwriting (she has five TV projects in development), a lifestyle podcast based on questions raised by Sex and the City’s Carrie Bradshaw, and a cult cabaret night, Club Silencio, which takes place four times a year in a former sex dungeon beneath a railway arch in Brighton. Her social circle ranges from her “straight, white fiance”, with whom she bought a house in West Sussex last year, to a WhatsApp group of young trans women who – like Alice – were able to transition before going through a male puberty. “Do I envy them? Of course. I was absolutely a product of Section 28, which became law the year I went to primary school and was revoked the year I went to university.” Introduced by Margaret Thatcher in 1988, Section 28 barred the “promotion” of homosexuality in schools “so there was nobody talking about what it was like to be a queer person”. There’s a telling scene in Wonderland when Alice finds herself in the bathroom with a gaggle of coke-sniffing flower girls. “Did you have a sex change?” they chorus. “Do you sit down when you pee?’, ‘Do you think trans people should have a special toilet?’ ‘Do you think rapists might pretend to be trans to rape people in toilets?” Alice is not playing. “I add one question of my own,” she says, wearily. “Um … can I just use the toilet, please?” Such questions are the curse of transgender life – and are one of the reasons why Dawson has taken to describing herself as queer. “However banal my life is,” she says, “it’s always going to encompass that otherness because of my gender. Unless I try to pass myself off as cisgender, I’m always going to be on the outside.” • Wonderland is published on 28 May by Quercus.