Anna Richardson, dressed in white, shiny dark fringe, peering through the screen of the conference call, reminds me of a wartime poster of a Wren: wholesome but foxy, competent but human, the exact sort of person you want in a national crisis. My dog is in the frame, being an idiot. “If my staffie wasn’t out on a walk, she’d be doing exactly the same thing,” says Richardson. I find this difficult to believe, since my dog is trying to eat a knife, and who else would keep a dog like that? But I have this warm glow of feeling accepted; throughout Richardson’s TV career – she describes it as “factual entertainment” – you can see this coming off everyone she talks to. We’re discussing her new show, The Fantastical Factory of Curious Craft, which arrives at a bizarrely apposite time. The concept is that Keith Lemon sets a challenge to some regular people, who happen to be excellent crafters. They might have four hours to create a carnival headdress, for example, which has to have at least four articulated elements. Then in the second part, a celebrity arrives with a peculiar need, perhaps a feature for their garden. And at the end, one person will be chosen to make the garden feature. “It’s similar to Bake Off,” Richardson agrees – of course I’ve brought up Bake Off, since her partner, Sue Perkins, presented it for seven series – “in that you don’t have to be a baker or interested in food to get caught up in the storylines. You’re seeing ordinary people with an extraordinary passion. Making puppets, or making art out of tin cans.” If I had described that to you three months ago, admit it, you would have been bemused; now, as we all roam about our houses thinking incessantly about tin cans, the idea seems prophetic. Richardson, 49, made her name presenting diet shows – Supersize vs Superskinny, You Are What You Eat, Secret Eaters – before segueing into sex shows – The Sex Education Show, Naked Attraction (a dating show in which the contestants choose from potential dates whose naked bodies are gradually revealed). The one through-line is that these are all shows that live and die by the personality of the presenter – much more so than competition shows, which have their own dramatic engine. In the hands of someone inane or overexcitable, or inhibited, or trying too hard, any one of them would be unbearable. Richardson is open, curious, empathetic and has a residual journalistic tendency (she worked in TV production before she became a presenter) to drop in relevant statistics. Describing her lockdown life – “Basically, lockdown is just like being at boarding school. You’re allowed out for some sports, you have enforced activity, then you go to bed. I went to boarding school. So what’s not to love?” – she can see a lot of upside. She’s getting fitter. She’s looking after herself. “I’m not drinking. Whereas for most people, well, alcohol sales have gone up 20%.” While still presenting TV, four years ago she retrained as a cognitive hypnotherapist, inspired by her encounter with Marisa Peer on Supersize vs Superskinny. “I was tasked with the challenge of losing weight, and one of the diets was hypnosis. I remember very clearly standing outside Marisa’s house with the crew, going: ‘This is going to be absolute rubbish. Tosh.’” Within two months, she had lost 2st. “On the back of that, I thought: ‘Bloody hell. If you can garner that power, you can unblock all the things that are stopping you.’” I raise an eyebrow, here – I can’t help myself – wondering whether she was all that overweight to begin with. “If you talk about addictions, whereas some people smoke, drink, take drugs, have sex, my problem has always been addictive eating. So my weight has always gone up and down quite a lot. I was never obese, but I’ve always struggled with eating.” The operative technique was timeline regression, finding buried memories through hypnosis; it was thus she discovered that her comfort eating dated back to when she was four, and her mother had a dicey childbirth experience having her brother. “When Marisa took me back, it was like seeing a film of my life. I had never thought about it until that point. Most of your problems stem from the ages of four to 10. So the idea in cognitive hypnotherapy is that you rewind all the way back to that key moment where the problem began. Your subconscious is only there to protect you. “If you tell it: ‘You don’t need to protect me any more, it’s the past,’ your subconscious will go: ‘OK, fine.’” She makes it sound simple without being breezy. “The backstory to all this is, within my family, there’s a lot of anxiety. There’s suicide in my family as well, which is obviously devastating. So we are slightly crippled by anxiety issues, which I’ve suffered as well. I’ve had to take three months off work, on the point of having a breakdown.” Now qualified as a hypnotherapist herself, Richardson doesn’t see patients. Instead she set up MindBox, a website offering online therapy and video tutorials. “Anxiety has gone up threefold while people are in lockdown. Insomnia has gone up. Now more than ever we need to understand that we can harness our own minds to alleviate this horrible situation.” It is a struggle to remember what used to count as controversial, in the days before everything was so dramatic, but casting back, all of Richardson’s shows about sex did arouse some vague disapprobation. As she puts it: “People did get on their high horse and say: ‘Well, it’s just an excuse to look at cocks and fannies, isn’t it?’” Disapproval doesn’t touch her at all. “I’m nearly 50, I don’t really care what people think of me. I know I’m a really good person. I can defend any show that I’ve made, I can defend it with integrity.” Yet she has a lot of courage besides the insouciance, which long predates being nearly 50. In 2003, she brought a case against Arnold Schwarzenegger – just in a legal sense, against the #MeToo backdrop we now have, it’s really interesting. She had said that he groped her during an interview some years beforehand, his campaign manager dismissed her as a liar during the 2006 California gubernatorial election; she brought not a harassment case but a defamation case against Schwarzenegger and his team, which he settled out of court. “Of course I was scared, the very first letter I had from his lawyer ended: ‘Proceed at your peril.’ It wasn’t that I knew that I was going to win, it was a fundamental wrong that needed to be righted.” As deep as that unwavering sense of rectitude is her steady resistance to getting bounced into anything. Although she got together with Perkins six years ago – having separated from the director Charles Martin after 18 years – “I have never ever called myself bisexual,” she says, a choice that goes against the broad, though flexible consensus that if everyone repudiates all labels, lesbianism and bisexuality get erased. “I don’t label myself as straight, lesbian, bisexual, bicurious, I’m just me, I just happened to fall in love with a woman.” She really doesn’t care what people think, she says. The truth is a bit more subtle than that – she doesn’t care what the casual observer thinks, because the hard conversations have already happened. “My dad was a very senior member of the Church of England. It’s quite a big deal, to say to your family: ‘By the way, I’m now living with a woman.’” She’s careful, though, to represent the other perspective – “I massively respect the struggle, because it is a political struggle. I can support it without having to wear a T-shirt saying: ‘I’m a lesbian’. Where do you draw the line with that? Should I be wearing a T-shirt saying: ‘I’ve had a breakdown’?” On paper, Richardson sounds much more trenchant than in person, where the dominant mood is curiosity, and differences clearly delight her. The sexual openness of the young – “the idea that you would take a snap of your tits, and just show it to people; it’s so alien to our generation” – the existence of people who can make a two-metre furry cat within four hours, and more to the point, want to – she holds all these encounters, anodyne and painful, funny and not funny, up to the light, and finds the fascination in them. She could do a show about competitive topiary, and it would probably work. In the meantime, we have The Fantastical Factory of Curious Craft, and in the kingdom of the weird, this weird idea is king.