Manchester United have an agreement in place to sign Sunderland teenager Joe Hugill. The 16-year-old striker is set to join the United academy next season, should the move receive Premier League ratification. Hugill, who has been playing up to under-23 level with Sunderland, had reportedly attracted interest from Arsenal, Tottenham, Wolves and Leeds. United also have an agreement in place for Czech goalkeeper Radek Vitek of Sigma Olomouc to join as a scholar next season. Meanwhile in Scotland, Steven Gerrard has said he will not put pressure on the Rangers board over his transfer plans, amid the growing financial uncertainty,but he insists the directors are as ambitious and hungry for success as him. Gerrard hopes to strengthen his squad after Rangers’ title challenge fell away after New Year before they exited the Scottish Cup against Hearts. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/05/04-59256-gnl.fw.200504.jf.France33Germanyb.mp3 Rangers made a loss of £11.3m in the 2018-19 campaign and were expected to need £10m of funding from shareholders and other investors to see them through the season before the coronavirus pandemic, which is impacting heavily on the finances of all clubs. However, Gerrard is talking to sporting director, Ross Wilson, about transfer plans several times a day and is working hard to identify targets. “We have to see how it all plays out,” Gerrard told talkSPORT. “I’m in daily contact with the board and they are as hungry and as ambitious as I am. “But one thing is for sure, there will be no pressure from my point of view. I certainly respect the situation we are in. It is a very unique and strange time. From a football point of view, I’m watching the media in the north and south and finances are going to be affected so I appreciate that and respect that. “But one thing I can say is that from the top of the club to the bottom we are all as ambitious and hungry to keep trying to move things forward and improve because it’s the only way we can find success.”