At first glance, Brassic (Sky One) looks as if it might have been the first quarantine comedy. The second series begins with Vinnie (Joseph Gilgun) skulking around the fictional Lancashire town of Hawley in full DIY hazmat get-up, with his hood up over a hat, a scarf pulled over his face, and sunglasses, despite the weather being a near-permanent state of grey drizzle. It even goes a bit Tiger King, when a robbery takes an unexpected feline turn. But Brassic is only accidentally of the moment: there’s far too much non-social-distancing going on, for a start. It was filmed last year, while the first series was airing, and it became Sky’s biggest original comedy in years. That’s no surprise. It had an easy appeal and a raucous sense of humour, with real heart behind the madcap antics. Fans will recall that it ended with Vinnie faking his own suicide and staging an elaborate funeral in order to escape the gangsters threatening to hunt him down and dismember him. Or as he puts it: “I’m in disguise, cos someone’s trying to chop me dick off.” Inevitably, his cover is blown – Hawley is a small town and moving to a nearby farm is not exactly fleeing to a desert island. And so the capers begin again. There’s a long, cinematic chase through the streets, done Hollywood-style, via the north-west – wheelie bins as decoys and a pause for Vinnie to pinch a chip off Sheila’s plate as he runs through her kitchen. Eventually he retreats to the shack on Jim’s farm where he has been holed up for the past few months, looking after the plants. “I’ve been in a weed bunker now for three months, pissing in bottles,” he tells his not terribly attentive doctor, played by Dominic West, a reliably brilliant presence. Even though West’s appearance in this opener is tragically brief, it does involve him acting out the role of an emotional support animal, so Bafta, you know where to send it. One of Brassic’s strengths was the way in which it portrayed Vinnie’s bipolar disorder, with sensitivity, but also by mining it for the kind of laughs it could only get away with because of Gilgun’s own experiences. He has said that parts of the show were loosely based on his life, but if that is still the case then … well. This time, the town’s resident strip club, the Rat & Cutter, is looking for new management. If Vinnie and the gang can get £10,000 together in a week, the lease will be signed over to them then and there. Erin (Michelle Keegan) has finished her business course and sees an opportunity to apply her skills locally. There’s just the matter of raising the cash, fast. Naturally, the gang decides to rob a circus. (I do wonder if filming at a circus is the televisual equivalent of indie film directorial debuts, which almost always feature a scene shot underwater.) The mechanisms grow increasingly complicated, pulling in a clown (a wonderfully dour John Thomson doing the full Mr Cellophane), a magic trick and the use of pizza slices as an offensive weapon. No matter how contrived, these schemes turn out to be a hoot, Ocean’s Eleven crossed with Shameless, never lacking a snappy quip; at one point, Vinnie is forced to talk his way out of a tricky situation with a knife-thrower by dismantling the knife-thrower’s innate sexist stereotyping. For all of its cosy misdemeanours – they are essentially harmless, and you are almost always on the side of the nice criminals, not the mean ones – it’s really still a showcase for Gilgun’s performance as Vinnie. Being the absent-ish father of Erin’s son Tyler has damaged his relationship with best friend and straight man Dylan, who starts the episode turning his back on the life of crime, but is quickly drawn back into it, because the promise of robbing a circus to fund a strip club promises a touch more excitement than a plumbing qualification. (No offence to plumbers; not everyone would enjoy bartering with lions to make a dishonest living.) Brassic’s charms are not for everyone. It’s crude and lewd. But the delicate love between Erin, Dylan and Vinnie made for a stealthily sweet backbone in the first series. There isn’t much evidence of that in the opening episode, which leans more towards its zanier side, and less towards its honesty, but there’s plenty of time for that yet. If Vinnie can keep himself in one piece, that is. I’m not entirely sure Sheila will preserve his cover, if he keeps pinching food from her plate like that.