TV’s chief satirist returns in our time of crisis to poke yet more fun at the ever-spiralling news cycle and our addiction to its unravelling. In this one-off, his first since 2016’s Wipe, Brooker enlists his usual team of Philomena Cunk (Diane Morgan) and Barry Shitpeas (Al Campbell) to unpick the rolling coverage of the coronavirus pandemic, as well as analysing some of the shows we have been watching alongside it. Here’s hoping for a spotlight on the continuation of “live” TV via video calls. Ammar Kalia What was supposed to be a new series of arts magazine Front Row Late mutated into this showcase for culture in a time of crisis, hosted from the classics don’s Oxford home. After previously examining how literature can comfort and inspire in volatile times, this week she turns her attention to music. Graeme Virtue Spring has still sprung on Jimmy Doherty’s Suffolk farm where across 280 acres of park and woodland, animals from pigs to camels and meerkats gambol and frolic, untroubled by holidaying families. Join the little crew who looks out for them in these extraordinary circumstances. Ali Catterall Our celebrity retirees are settling into their second week in Puducherry in India, as John and Susie serve up a Tamil feast – although they can’t seem to get their heads round serving it on banana leaves – and Chuckle Brother Paul decides to try driving on the notoriously chaotic Indian roads. AK We meet a lively bunch of singletons this week as the Italian hotel hosts more hopefuls. Jonathan is a musician in search of spiritual healing. Paul sells penile implants for a living. How will blunt scouser Stacey react? And will Reece and Chelsea, who have both found their lack of height to be an issue, find a connection? Phil Harrison Vice travels to Alaska to meet two of the “Fairbanks Four”, a group of teens who were convicted of a brutal murder in the town in 1997. After 18 years, the Fairbanks Four were set free, but the state has refused to acknowledge any wrongdoing. We see how the pair are coping. AK Mud (Jeff Nichols, 2012), 6.15pm, Film4Like a latterday Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer, 14-year-old Ellis (Tye Sheridan) and Neckbone (Jacob Lofland) like to mess around on the river, the Mississippi – where they discover a boat in a tree and the enigmatic fugitive, Mud (Matthew McConaughey). It’s a rich mix of thriller and rite-of-passage movie from Jeff Nichols. Paul Howlett 