Impartiality is a concept that is frequently lauded but rarely defined. It has long been hailed as a sacred guiding principle behind news reporting for the BBC. Impartiality is extolled not simply as a gold standard, but a religion. “The BBC is committed to achieving due impartiality in all its output,” declare the corporation’s editorial guidelines. The problem with impartiality as a standard for journalism is not simply that it eludes precise definition: hoisting it as your only standard sets a trap that is easily exploited by bad-faith critics who regard the reporting of unwelcome facts as self-evident proof of bias. What would constitute an “impartial” account of the government’s response to this pandemic? Does it mean that every report of Britain’s “world-beating” death toll must be accompanied by a reminder that ministers insist it is too soon to judge their record? Would it have been “partisan” to double-check Matt Hancock’s maths when he falsely claimed the government had achieved its testing target at the end of April? Unwelcome challenges to the BBC’s “impartiality” are inevitable. The test of the corporation’s leaders is how ably they deflect and manage it. A month ago, Kamal Ahmed, the editorial director of BBC News, sent an email to senior BBC editors responsible for the corporation’s political coverage. Referring to a study by the Reuters Institute into media coverage of the pandemic, Ahmed noted “strong support for the BBC”, though warned of political polarisation among the audience. “May have an impact on our impartiality and trust scores if we appear either too soft on the government or too condemnatory,” wrote Ahmed. “That delicate middle ground is where we need to be.” But this is nobody’s definition of “impartiality”: the term may in fact be meaningless, but it definitely does not mean “halfway between the government and its critics”. Indeed, if you were a government minister, you would be profoundly reassured by Ahmed’s directions. After all, Britain has the highest death toll in Europe. According to new analysis by the Financial Times, Britain has the second-highest excess death rate on Earth, after Spain. It would be journalistic malpractice to relay these facts without the context that helps explain how we have fared so badly: both the government’s very late imposition of lockdown and its failure to place a  cordon sanitaire around care homes. Which brings us to the furore over Newsnight presenter Emily Maitlis. In her now famous opening salvo in Tuesday night’s broadcast, she declared: “Dominic Cummings broke the rules – the country can see that and it’s shocked the government cannot. The longer ministers and the prime minister tell us he worked within them, the more the angry response to this scandal is likely to be … He made those who struggled to keep to the rules feel like fools, and has allowed many more to assume they can now flout them.” This may not be “impartial” – but it does faithfully reflect a wide public consensus: more than two thirds agree Cummings broke the rules, including most Conservative and leave supporters. Public anger is reflected in collapsing ratings for the Conservatives and Boris Johnson. Yet Downing Street complained directly to BBC top brass – which rushed out a statement chastising Maitlis for failing “our standards of due impartiality”. It is highly unusual for such an adjudication to be so swiftly delivered. Some of the Newsnight team are incandescent. “When faced with a very clear choice between yielding to government pressure or serving viewers by telling them the truth, BBC management, shamefully, chose the former,” says one Newsnight source. “BBC bosses believe this helps preserve the organisation. All it will really do is sign its death warrant.” Impartiality is an absurd standard for journalism, which aspires to describe the world in a way that corresponds to reality – not in a way that finds a happy middle ground between competing perceptions of a given matter. If the heavens open and I declare it is raining, and you claim it is not, an argument between us is unlikely to illuminate the situation for viewers wanting to know the weather. It is difficult not to look at the Maitlis saga and refer back to the Ahmed email: while facts may have underpinned her introduction, they were sufficiently damning to look “too condemnatory”. In response to my question, a BBC spokesperson said the email had “no bearing” on yesterday’s statement on Newsnight, and that their news editorial guidelines “make clear our commitment to impartiality, establishing the truth, and providing fair and accurate coverage”, and they “reviewed Newsnight against these principles, and not as a result of any political pressure”. But the BBC’s position seems to suggest that it doesn’t matter if No 10 insistence that Cummings did not break the rules is at odds with the views of the rest of the country, a significant chunk of the parliamentary Conservative party, Durham police or any commonsense reading of the rules. Does anyone truly believe that if someone else had been the subject of an unflattering Newsnight introduction, and they had phoned the BBC’s editors to complain, such a ruling would have been issued within hours? If impartiality is your stated aim, it is those with the greatest power and influence who are able to claim there have been breaches and to demand they are rectified. The government controls the BBC’s funding taps and renews its annual charter. As a result, the BBC will always be bogged down in futile debates about impartiality – when the real standard of journalism should be independence. • Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist