Known during her lifetime as the apprentice and lover of surrealist photographer Man Ray, as well as one of 1920s New York’s most sought-after models, Lee Miller has since been re-evaluated as a pioneering artist in her own right. In this fascinating one-off doc, the likes of war photographer Lynsey Addario and model Karen Elson examine Miller’s legacy as a photojournalist and incisive artist whose work was largely only discovered by her son after her death in 1977. Ammar Kalia This week, the eternally wandering Portillo finds himself in Hue, the former demilitarised zone that once separated North and South Vietnam. It contains a few stories, the most striking of which is the factory that once made uniforms for the Viet Cong but now supplies sportswear. Phil Harrison Receptionist Noel is rushed off his feet and covered in sick, but that doesn’t stop Connie ordering him to sign for her dry cleaning. But his instincts are razor-sharp when he spots a problem with one of the patients. Weaker-stomached viewers might want to skip one gruesome moment in A&E, though. Hannah Verdier The multinational oil corporations are on the prowl in this Norwegian drama charting the changing fortunes of the town of Stavanger. Set in 1969, this eight-part drama opens on Phillips Petroleum hoping to strike it big in the small town, while oil-rig diver Christian Nyman’s future hangs in the balance. AK This documentary tells the lesser-known story of cult leader Charles Manson’s aspirations to become a musician in 1960s Los Angeles. We witness how Manson managed to access the upper echelons of the industry and befriend a Beach Boy before descending into violent obsession. AK This documentary proceeds on the assumption that Prince Charles will one day be king: what, seasoned royal-watchers ask, will he be like on the throne, and how has his mother influenced his future ruling style? The commentators also recap Charles’s life, and his relationship with the Queen. Jack Seale Jason Bourne, 9pm, Film 4 After the misbegotten The Bourne Legacy, Matt Damon’s formerly amnesiac government assassin makes a satisfyingly bone-crunching return, with Paul Greengrass again directing. The plot has Tommy Lee Jones’s cynical CIA boss setting Vincent Cassel’s killer on Bourne in a chunky bout of brutal combat. Paul Howlett