New measures to close the New York subway for nightly coronavirus cleaning will have “devastating” consequences for the thousands of homeless people who regularly sleep there, experts have warned. Starting on Wednesday, for the first time in its history the usually 24-hour service will shut down every night between 1am and 5am to be disinfected in a bid to improve travel conditions for essential workers during the Covid-19 outbreak. But homelessness groups and charities said the move will have “counterproductive and harmful” impacts for those who seek safety and shelter in subway trains and stations – forcing them on to the streets or into the city’s shelters, where more than 700 people have tested positive for coronavirus in recent weeks. “It’s actually extraordinarily counterproductive and harmful,” said Giselle Routhier, policy director at Coalition for the Homeless, which works with 3,500 people in New York every day. “What’s happening is that large groups of police officers are gathering at the end of the [subway] line, telling people to move, forcing people often to the streets, offering them access to congregate shelters which many are rightfully refusing to enter because of the safety issues and not actually offering real solutions to help people access a safer space.” New York’s governor, Andrew Cuomo, who recently referred to a picture of homeless people on the subway as “disgusting” and “disrespectful to the essential workers”, made the announcement about closures last week amid concerns about conditions on the subway. More homeless people are thought to be seeking shelter on trains, while passenger numbers have dropped by 92%. Routhier said the new policy will encourage a “more punitive approach”, leaving homeless people vulnerable to the elements and potentially the criminal justice system. Conditions for New York’s homeless are already “dire”, she added, especially with many of the city’s cafes, restaurants, public bathrooms, gyms and food banks that many rely on for hygiene and nourishment closed. Demand for Coalition for the Homeless’s mobile food programme has doubled on some nights. Meanwhile, the virus is spreading in the city’s shelters – which many homeless people already feared for safety reasons before the outbreak. As of Tuesday, there had been 829 positive cases – 705 of which were in shelters – and 65 deaths. Routhier believes the true number of cases could be higher. “I don’t know that there’s really a precedent in our lifetime,” she said. “What we’re seeing now is a devastating event that is continuing to go on and on.” Currently, 62,679 people are living in New York’s shelters, but this does not include the thousands living on the city’s streets and subway – a number which experts say is growing as the economic impact of the pandemic takes hold. Joshua Goldfein, an attorney at the Legal Aid Society and a member of its Homeless Rights Project, said all homeless people should be offered hotel rooms. “We have tens of thousands of empty hotel rooms in New York City right now, and rates that those hotels are asking for those rooms are much lower than they were before this, and Fema [Federal Emergency Management Agency] is going to pay for that, so it would be very simple to move people into hotel rooms, to offer case management services onsite.” The city said it is using hotels, but that it is prioritising relocating older people and single adults “based on risk” from larger shelters. So far, they said about 7,000 people have been moved to hotels from shelters, with plans for 1,000 more “each week as needed”. Under the new subway plan, more than 100 outreach workers will be deployed to 30 high-priority stations to “engage” homeless people when it closes about services, assess them for symptoms and connect them to care, isolation or shelter. For essential workers, there will be extra buses between 1am and 5am and an “essential connector” programme of free cabs. New York’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, has said the closures will enable the city to help people more effectively. But Josh Dean, executive director of the street homelessness organisation Human.nyc, said it will put many on the streets – potentially in an unfamiliar area. He also fears it will breach trust and damage existing relationships between homeless people and social workers. “This is going to be a tragedy,” he said. “Tonight [Tuesday] at the same time 2,000 homeless folks or more are going to be thrown out of the train and into the streets … The impact of that is really going to be devastating.” In recent days he said he has already witnessed police ordering homeless people to get off trains at end of the line stations at night. He added: “They even forced a man with one shoe out into the rain one night. So it’s a pretty brutal and cruel operation.” In collaboration with other organisations, Human.nyc has raised more than $63,000 for its #homelesscantstayhome campaign which has so far housed 27 people in hotels. Anthony Williams, 57, who has been homeless on and off for decades, had been sleeping on the subway for the last two and a half years until he got a room in a hotel through the campaign three days ago. He said: “Now that Covid-19 exists and they’re shutting it [the subway] down it leaves a void. Where do people go to find their safety, to sleep?” He predicts some people will sleep in the day on the subway and walk the streets at night or try to hide in abandoned train stations or tunnels. But, he said, they will not go in shelters – both because of coronavirus and, like him, have negative past experiences. He said he found the new police approach “intimidating” and “aggressive”. Kelly Doran, an emergency physician and faculty member in the departments of emergency medicine and population health at NYU School of Medicine, said homeless people are especially vulnerable to Covid-19. Premature ageing and higher rates of illnesses such as uncontrolled hypertension, diabetes and obesity combined with racial disparities, she added, are “compounding together to make this population at particular risk”. If homeless people are not offered their own rooms, she said infection will continue. “Essentially they’re just displacing somebody from one bad setting to another bad setting is not decreasing risk of contracting coronavirus.” The Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) said all passengers will have to leave trains and stations and there will be shuttle buses to transport homeless people. It said police will continue to work with them to connect homeless people to “the medical care and social services they need and deserve”. A New York police department (NYPD) spokesperson said officers are patrolling the subways with nurses and that “homelessness is not a crime”. But they added: “Without a doubt, disruptive passengers are more visible now and burglaries are up. We are working hard to address both these issues.” Isaac McGinn, a spokesman for the city’s social and homeless services departments, said they are “adapting and responding to meet need at a scale and speed never before seen, as we have in our pandemic response since this crisis began” and that they are in “regular conversations” with Fema. Fema said it has conditionally approved New York state’s request for “non-congregate sheltering assistance”. New York state did not respond to requests for comment.