Screwing up was never an option. My parents instilled a strong work ethic in me, both coming from working-class backgrounds. I spent my childhood in Cardiff working hard, getting good GCSEs and then going to Oxford University. I think that’s why we all struggled with my sexuality through that time: we worried that it risked everything. A lot happened when I was 12. I was hit by a car, realised I was gay and my aunt died during childbirth leaving behind three young children. Like every teenager I thought I knew how to cope when I didn’t. I only started being kinder to myself in my 30s. Oxford made me less studious. I found other girls who liked girls, cheap alcohol on tap and the freedom to smoke out of my bedroom window. Give me an audience of 5,000 and I’ll make a speech that connects with every single person, but I find intimate, casual conversations in small groups difficult. I’m the introvert who finds small talk excruciating. It is bollocks that women only succeed if they adhere to a soft idea of femininity. While climbing the ranks at Stonewall I was told that I should become more “feminine”. I cut my hair shorter and bought some beautiful new ties. I used to think equality progressed in a linear fashion, but it goes in fits and starts. Our own anxiety is so intrinsically linked to how we feel about others that it’s rarely a one-directional journey. Trans women are women, trans men are men and non-binary people are valid. The ease with which we dehumanise them is terrifying. I receive more hateful abuse from people who take issue with this than I’ve ever had from homophobes. Aged only 40 and unequivocally a dyke, finding myself a baroness in the House of Lords is unexpected. It was a big decision to accept, but I see it as my duty. Receiving letters addressed to “Baroness Hunt of Bethnal Green” does tickle me. I spent a long time being angry with organised religion, but I believe in God. Catholicism can be a leveller: the church thinks we’re all sinners, so LGBTQ+ people don’t rate as highly on their hit list. If you can give up smoking, you can do anything. It took me five years. Whenever I think I can’t do something, I remember: I quit. I still dream about smoking, though, and if the world was ending, I’d grab a packet of cigarettes. The Book of Queer Prophets: 24 Writers on Sexuality and Religion, edited by Ruth Hunt (William Collins, £14.99) is available from 28 May for £13.04 at guardianbookshop.com