The US supreme court may be the highest in the land, but because of the small number of cases it hears each year, justice usually does not get that far. Final rulings in the vast majority of federal lawsuits are issued one tier lower, in the 13 appeals courts spread across the country. And this is now where key policy questions increasingly land, because partisanship has slowed legislative dealmaking in the United States in recent years. It is in these appeals courts where judges serving lifetime appointments have extraordinary power over issues as public as the climate crisis and as private as the right to choose. That longer-term trend has converged with a much more recent development: Donald Trump’s appointment of a record number of appeals court judges installed with unprecedented speed, as part of a grand project coordinated with conservative legal activists to remake the federal bench for generations to come. Nearly 30% of the 179 active circuit court judges are now Trump appointees. Owing to this extraordinary push, the ideological makeup of the courts has slowly tipped in a conservative direction. Since 2017, three of the courts have “flipped” from a majority of judges appointed by a Democratic president to a Republican-appointment majority. The US court of appeals for the eleventh circuit, which oversees cases in Florida, Alabama and Georgia, has gone from an 8-3 majority of judges appointed by Democrats, with one vacancy, to a 7-5 majority of judges appointed by Republicans. Elsewhere, Trump has “flipped” the second and third Circuits, and he has effectively flipped a fourth court, the ninth circuit, some analysts think. “I still like to think there’s a bottom line for even conservative Trump appointees on the court of appeals, that there’s a line there that they won’t cross over, that we’ll remain a country of laws and not men,” said Sheldon Goldman, a professor of political science at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst who focuses on the federal bench. “But who knows?” Together the ninth, eleventh and fifth circuit courts decide thousands of cases a year with broad repercussions for daily life in America. Here’s a look at how the three courts are changing under Trump. Florida, Georgia, Alabama Key issue: Who gets to vote Floridians struck a historic blow in favor of universal suffrage in the 2018 midterm elections, passing a constitutional amendment that restored the right to vote to felons who had completed their sentences. With a 30-point margin of victory, the will of the voters was unambiguous. But the reality of voting in Florida, a key presidential swing state, has been slow to change. Last May, the Republican-controlled legislature passed a law curtailing the right of felons to vote who owe money from legal penalties, significantly rolling back the 2018 referendum result. In reply, would-be voters sued the Republican governor, and now voting rights in Florida are in a very different place from where they seemed to be in November 2018. Instead of being before the electorate, the issue is before the federal courts, which means it is in the hands of judges appointed by Trump. In a ruling expected in the coming months, Trump’s judges could strip the right to vote from the 1.5 million people who had it restored in the 2018 referendum, in defiance of the popular will, potentially swaying the results of the November 2020 election, in a swing state that Trump needs to hold in order to return to the White House. “We had fears about what these jurists would do when they got on the bench, just from their records,” said Marge Baker, executive vice-president of People for the American Way (PFAW), which maintains a tracking tool of Trump’s judges called Confirmed Judges, Confirmed Fears. “This administration more than any has really been putting movement ideologues on the bench who have an agenda. And once we got far enough into the administration, we realized that the judges about whom we had fears were issuing decisions that were highly problematic.” Rulings by circuit courts, which average about 13 active judges each, are typically issued by randomly selected three-judge panels, meaning that the overall makeup of the court does not directly come into play in every ruling. Over time, however, the composite ideological orientation of a court comes through. And Trump’s judges on the eleventh circuit have shown what critics see as a hostility to a central issue for the state of Florida and the country: voting rights. The legal team representing voters in the Florida felony disenfranchisement case claims in part that the state law was passed with racial and discriminatory intent in violation of the constitution. “This issue of felony disenfranchisement is a really important issue in the United States,” said Sean Morales-Doyle, a Brennan Center lawyer who is litigating the case. “Florida’s voters came forward and really made clear that they rejected this, that this wasn’t a policy that voters on any part of the political spectrum believe in. And then we promptly saw the Florida legislature attempt to undo that.” California, Oregon, Washington, Alaska, Hawaii, Montana, Idaho, Nevada, Arizona Key issue: Immigration Since Trump became president, the US court of appeals for the ninth circuit has gone from an 18-7 majority of active judges appointed by Democrats, with four vacancies, to a much narrower 16-13 majority of judges appointed by Democrats. But the court’s senior judges, who carry about half the caseload of active judges, also issue rulings – and at the senior level, Republican appointees now outnumber Democratic appointees 10-3. “Maybe it’s already flipped in some ways,” said Carl Tobias, a professor at Richmond School of Law specializing in federal judicial selection, of the ninth circuit. Whatever the balance on the bench, activists express concern about decisions coming down from the court, historically one of the most progressive in the country. Trump judges on the ninth circuit have been especially abrasive in immigration cases, denying spousal visas in violation of long precedent and dismissing asylum claims, including in a case where the plaintiff had evidence of murders of multiple family members in his home country. In one dissent, a Trump-appointed judge supported a Trump proclamation banning entry to any would-be immigrant who could not prove either possession of health insurance or an ability to pay for healthcare. The judge ruled that the government would “suffer immediate, irreparable harm” unless the health insurance screen was allowed to stand, quoting Trump on the “financial and public health burdens that the uninsured can impose”. Russell Wheeler, a visiting fellow at the Brookings Institution who analyzes the shifting makeup of federal courts under Trump, said the ninth circuit had undergone “a big change” and noted that the outsized caseload of the circuit, the biggest in the country covering 60 million people, often required visiting judges to fill in. Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi Key issue: healthcare Since Trump became president, the US court of appeals for the fifth circuit has gone from a 9-5 majority of active judges appointed by Republicans, with three vacancies, to an 11-5 majority of judges appointed by Republicans, with one vacancy. Trump judges on the circuit have boosted key administration projects, especially on immigration, greenlighting $3.6bn in spending on the border wall and taking a chilly view of asylum claims. They have issued rulings inimical to employment equality and fair housing claims, and protected law enforcement from liability for excessive use of force. In a case with ominous resonance under the coronavirus pandemic, the court has defended objections on religious grounds to immunizations. “It’s worth pointing out that four of the courts, the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth, had Republican-appointed majorities when Trump took office,” said Wheeler. “So he has perhaps strengthened the Republican-appointee majority on those courts by putting younger and perhaps ideologically more committed judges in the place of older Republicans.”