David Hunter (If we follow Boris Johnson’s advice, coronavirus will spread, 11 May) highlights the danger of a partial return to work before a programme of “test, trace, isolate” is in place. He rightly identifies the government’s decision not to tap into unused capacity in local councils but fails to examine why. They have established a parallel central system which bypasses local public health, local councils and GPs. Testing centres (which are often difficult to access), three super-labs (still experiencing “teething problems”) and a contact tracing app of doubtful efficacy are all divorced from local control. Control – and, presumably, a lot of public money – has been handed to Deloitte and private outsourcing companies with dubious records. An ideological commitment to private rather than public services is the real story behind the failure to institute an effective “test, trace, isolate” programme. The government must account for this misuse of public money when experienced public health capacity goes unused.Professor Emeritus Nick SpencerLeamington Spa, Warwickshire • In support of the call to put openness at the very heart of the government’s Covid-19 response (Transparency is key in a crisis – so why isn’t the British government being straight with us?, 13 May), and in light of the earlier award of a £133m contract to produce testing kits to a commercial company without any competitive bidding process, can someone tell me how much the British taxpayer is paying Boots to set up and resource new drive-through testing stations for the virus? An advert on the company’s website said it was looking for 1,000 current staff and volunteers to work at least 32 hours a week as Covid-19 swab testers across the UK. Local recruitment websites are also now carrying ads for volunteers for this scheme. But unless Boots is offering its services to the government for free, how can it be expecting anyone to do such vital work without being paid for it? And will the Boots UK CEO, Sebastian James (a former Bullingdon Club member alongside Boris Johnson), be volunteering on the frontline? Instead of working with private companies that appear willing to use volunteers for profit, the government should be expanding the UK’s testing and tracing capacity by recruiting thousands of people through the NHS and local health authorities. And they should be paid a proper salary.Dr Ian DavisGairloch, Wester Ross• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters