Who is the so-called bubble policy for, exactly? I first heard about it when it floated out of Belgium a couple of weeks ago. The idea is that the end of lockdown would start with everyone being allowed to socialise once a week, in groups of up to 10 (although it would always have to be the same group). This is separate, by the way, to the idea that burst, rather surprisingly, out of Switzerland a week later – that since children under 10 were not considered infectious, adults should be allowed to hug them. Brilliant idea. You could just park a nine-year-old in the street, and everyone would hug it. “But what if they don’t want to be hugged?” said my niece in horror, and I was all: “Chill, you’re 12.” The Belgian idea, on the other hand, sounded genuinely mad. Until, that is, it turned out that, after it was pre-briefed, or semi-briefed, to the media, it is also to be our own government’s bright idea. I am way past the point of being able to tell which rumour is true. But it seems safest to assume that the worst possible thing is the one that will happen, so we could soon need to start arranging ourselves in units of 10. I was talking to a friend about it (honestly, I was not sizing her up, but since you mention it, at a family size of three, with good age-compatibility across the generations, they wouldn’t be a bad fit if they lived in the same town). “I’d have to have my own family in the group,” she said. I thought about this for a bit. I would happily gatecrash her wider family. But why’s that her choice? “I’d never make anyone’s 10,” she said. “Of course you would.” “I wouldn’t. Nobody ever calls me.” “I’m calling you right now.” A pause. I pressed on: “You can be in my 10.” A really long pause. “Wait,” I said. “You don’t want to be in my 10?” Another goddamn pause! “I can’t believe you! You’re not worried about rejection at all. You’re worried that you won’t be in with the in-crowd!” “I can’t help it. I am what I am.” So how might it work? If you were single, you would be powerfully aware that you are an odd number, so you would be thrashing around for another, indispensable single person to attach yourself to. Your whole life would turn into that painful, endgame phase in a game of musical chairs. If you were a couple without children, perhaps you might know four similar couples, who you are both equally fond of, and perhaps they might all like each other as much as you like them. And perhaps you might have tested these propositions by holidaying with one another in the past, which only deepened your mutual affections. Perhaps you are not real people at all; you are the brainchild of a junior scriptwriting collective, and you live in Netflixania, and one of you is neurotic and another is kooky, but that definitely doesn’t annoy anybody. Add children and you are starting off as a unit of at least three; you probably only have room for one other household, maximum two. This looming decision-making reminds me of Brexit circa 2018, the effort of compromise driving everyone toward their least-preferred option. It’s all about the maths. Or the physics, I can’t remember which. I have a lot of buried referendum trauma. “There’s no democratic way of doing this,” says my Mr, authoritatively . What happens when we exhaust democracy in our house is known as Dictator for the Day. It’s a parenting thing for siblings who can’t get on. You stop trying to make them agree on a dinner menu, or the order in which they are to have a bath; you just make one of them dictator, on the understanding that one of the others will be dictator the next day. The kids just use it as cover to persecute one another (“But that’s what a dictator would do”; “The dictator is a metaphor”; “If you were being metaphorical, you should have said”). But my Mr and I use it quite a lot between ourselves when we can’t agree on a film. Obviously, because we’re adults, we can never remember who was dictator the last time round, so we always end up watching The Long Good Friday. But it wouldn’t work in the bubble context, because it would be Dictator for an Unknown Number of Months. Is there even a point in forcing the decision? We could just wait to see who chooses us to be in their group. And it might be nobody, because we are quite wearing to be around, what with all the sporadic, metaphorical totalitarianism. I could see by my Mr’s eyebrows that he was giving up on the bubble. “You know what I like?” he said. “I like a Zoom.” “You hate a Zoom.” “It’s a totally different experience of friendship. Nobody talks over each other …” “Nobody talks, everyone just asks questions. It’s like being friends with a pub quiz machine.” “Ah, the quizzes. I love a Zoom quiz.” “Sincerely, you hate a Zoom quiz.” “Remember that time your brother photographed mainstream chocolate bars in cross section and we had to guess which ones they were?” “I do remember. One of them was a fish finger. You said it was immoral.” Having to chat on a sub-optimal platform is hardly the cruellest adjustment of the age. But I dearly want to hug my friends – all of them, non-hierarchically and in no particular order, totally unpoliced and uninhibited – a limitless number of times. “What you need,” said my beloved, “is 10 under-10s.”