John Harris rightly points out that the need for a universal basic income is increasingly compelling (Why universal basic income could help us fight the next wave of economic shocks, 3 May). A problem that has dogged UBI is that it is perceived as a state handout and raises questions of how it will be paid for. But there is a morally just means of financing a basic income for all. Land is a gift of nature (the commons), which over the course of history has been appropriated into private ownership by the ruling minorities. Ownership of such a vital resource bestows on the rentier class owners enormous wealth, power and social advantage, to the disadvantage of the dispossessed majority. This unjust situation could be partly redressed through restoring the principle of the commons and imposing a rental charge on landholders (similar to a land value tax), with the revenue used to finance a UBI.John StoneThames Ditton, Surrey • John Harris makes a strong case for a UBI. His rejection of two key concerns, though, is perhaps too quick. He writes that the government’s munificent response shows that “radical spending plans are surely not the political taboo they once were”. But a Conservative party previously wedded to austerity might be looking to cut rather than expand public spending in the future. Second, he rightly says that a UBI can be easily combined with universal basic services. But trade-offs are likely to remain. For example, the government might place greater priority on health spending or ensuring everyone has access to the internet at home (to support school pupils or allow more employees to work from home).Dr Rajiv PrabhakarThe Open University, Milton Keynes • John Harris’s promotion of a UBI appears to have one key flaw symptomatic of the radical politics that has spawned the concept: it is not universal. It is more properly called national basic income. A universal application of NBIs (ie beyond where it has been invented – rich countries) cannot claim to be radical. NBIs would vary immensely across the world, thereby consolidating the unequal exchange embedded in trade. The promoters of NBIs under the guise of UBI will likely be drinking coffee and tea that is easily afforded because of the low wages paid to workers in poorer countries. And of course, they can buy more toys for their children at Christmas courtesy of poorly paid Chinese labour. So the UBI is a plan to help poor people in rich countries without regard to poor people in poor countries. Can radical ever be national?Peter TaylorTynemouth, Tyne and Wear • John Harris is right that a UBI must become part of how society will work in future. It was Labour policy to at least trial the idea until recently. Unfortunately, when the lockdown was announced, the view was expressed that it wasn’t the time to think about it, but it would be something to consider once measures were relaxed. That appears to be the place where most of the government’s thinking currently is, so hopefully Labour will now make UBI part of its lockdown exit plans. Given that despite the Tories’ shambolic handling of the crisis, Labour is still nearly 20 points behind in the polls, so announcing something to address the concerns of the have-nots might help.Keith FlettTottenham, London