Footy next month, anyone? When Gillon McLachlan spoke of an “endorsed pathway” on Saturday – quite possibly the perkiest two words the AFL chief executive has uttered for weeks – he effectively sounded a bugle that called to arms all 18 clubs, and with them legions of supporters who feared round one would be the beginning and the end of the 2020 premiership season. Now, hope has made way for a sense of realism that the show will in fact go on. The AFL has played a smart game during the coronavirus crisis. True, hindsight will suggest pulling stumps prior to the commencement of the season might have been a more prudent course of action. But while starting the campaign only to pause it before the opening round had ended appeared muddled in its execution, the topography of the time was just that: confusing, changing by the hour. Since then, the AFL has not really put a foot wrong. Granted, it is easy to be patient when the cupboard isn’t bare. To help weather the Covid-19 storm, the AFL has had assets up its sleeve, a future fund worth $120m and half a billion in bank-supplied credit. So while the cash-strapped NRL has been rabid in its push to resume competition, the AFL has allowed events to take their natural course before making its move. It is a luxury that granted it a high ground of sorts. Where the NRL invited censure for its plans to resume when public restrictions were still broadly in place, the AFL stayed comfortably out of the headlines. Not that one can imagine the ARLC chairman, Peter V’landys, giving a jot about who might be winning the popularity contest. Indeed, in some ways, the AFL is indebted to the NRL’s bulldozer tactics. By announcing a 28 May return, largely without the buy-in of health authorities or governments, the NRL hastened talk of logistics and health protocols that otherwise might have been some time coming. It got Scott Morrison talking sport. Annastacia Palaszczuk, the Queensland premier who barely weeks ago was considered a stumbling block in the NRL’s roadmap, got on board and rubber-stamped the NRL proposal when opening borders last week. And now, with pathways endorsed, the AFL is in the process of showing its hand. McLachlan has already briefed clubs about a probable return to playing in June, with specifics about dates, competition structure and biosecurity measures to be announced once the national cabinet has reviewed restrictions on Friday. With interstate travel now on the table, the AFL’s initial plan to play out the season in hubs seems less likely. “There is now optionality for us in what lies ahead,” McLachlan said. “It remains early days, but the fly in, fly out possibility would have advantage.” Keeping everyone happy, however, is proving to be another challenge altogether. Although outdoor gatherings of up to 10 people are now permitted in most states, the AFL last week decreed that no club would be allowed to train in groups larger than two until the Victorian government followed suit. Although the move was generally accepted, it reignited the old debate about an apparent pro-Victoria bias at AFL headquarters. “I sort of get where the AFL’s coming from,” the Port Adelaide midfielder Tom Rockliff told the ABC. “The ability for us to train in groups would have been handy but as we know the AFL makes the rules and it’s generally got a bias towards Victorian teams.” Rockliff’s teammate Travis Boak added: “I think some things certainly need to change to make sure interstate clubs are looked after a little bit better. The biggest thing that’s been talked about is the games the Victorian clubs have at home at the MCG, the big run they have. The amount of travel [that] interstate clubs have becomes pretty taxing, and I think that needs to be looked at a little bit more.” Even the AFL’s plan for a three-week pre-season has been called into question. When clubs are allowed to train in groups of 10, this will see them progress to level B restrictions: skills and fitness work, but with no physical contact. Full training and competition can only commence once the government allows athletes to progress to level C. “You are going to get athletes who are sore and you will lose guys,” said the Collingwood coach Nathan Buckley, who feels three weeks is insufficient. “If time allows, and I think it does, I think a couple of weeks at that level B and three at level C. If it came in at level C straight away, then three weeks, four weeks might be enough but I believe slowly ramping it up, or more gradually ramping it up, is going to be important to look after the players and still get the product out at the end.” And then, of course, there is the playing group itself. The oblivious element in both the AFL and NRL has already shown it is quite capable of scuppering best-laid plans and placing the recovery effort in jeopardy. To a man, they will have to do all that’s required to get the show back on the road and keep it there. There will be no leeway, no room for lapses of judgment. McLachlan is well placed to bring footy back next month, but everything will need to fall neatly in place at a time when tomorrow is a long way away.