Rosie Mullender Fri 29 May 2020 11.54 BST


Last modified on Sun 31 May 2020 12.24 BST For David Abrahamovitch, founder of cult coffee brand Grind, the decision to close his London-based food, coffee and cocktail bars was a painful one – and the decision to reopen one branch as a takeaway outlet on 20 May took even more careful planning. Nearly a quarter of employees across Britain have been furloughed, with 6.3m jobs put on hold since the wage subsidy scheme was launched on 20 April. These workers have been receiving 80% of their salary, up to £2,500 a month, to stay at home and keep safe. But now lockdown is beginning to ease, and some of us who can’t work from home are returning, businesses such as Grind are working hard to keep staff and customers safe. Abrahamovitch’s business journey started in 2011, when he inherited his father’s company. “I was 25 when I sadly lost my dad and inherited the family’s mobile phone business,” he says. “I had to decide what to do next – are we going to continue, are we going to close? I’d spent a lot of time in the shop as a teenager, helping out behind the counter, so it was very sentimental for me. I decided I wanted to keep the building and turn it into some kind of meeting place.” Converting the Old Street premises into a coffee shop, Abrahamovitch set about growing his business based on the cafes he’d visited on his travels. “I’d seen the independent cafe scene in other countries, and back then it just didn’t feel like it had been fully translated to the UK,” he says. “I wanted to recreate that Australian-style flat-white culture, with high-quality coffee beans, the best equipment, and amazing baristas who serve cups of coffee somewhere fun, lively and energetic. And I wanted to mix that with what the coffee chains do so well: good hygiene, mobile ordering and payment options and, most importantly, speedy service. A year later, we added cocktails when we realised our coffee made amazing espresso martinis!” Over the next nine years Abrahamovitch rolled his business out, spreading to 11 locations with 300 members of staff, serving sit-down breakfasts, lunch and dinner alongside coffee and cocktails. Grind also has an online business selling compostable coffee pods in refillable tins. When coronavirus reached the UK, Abrahamovitch’s business was sent into turmoil. “I’ve lived and bled this company for almost 10 years, and built it piece by piece, so finally getting to the point where we have tens of thousands of customers each week, then suddenly having to close was awful,” he says. “I remember the week of lockdown vividly. For a couple of weeks beforehand, we’d already seen sales start to fall away. We monitor sales to the hour, so when things start to drop off, you really notice it. “Then, when Boris Johnson told people they shouldn’t visit restaurants and bars, it was clear to us it was time to close. We shut all our stores, keeping just three open for takeaway to serve the local community for a few more days. When full lockdown was announced, we decided to close completely to protect our staff.” In the weeks since lockdown began, significantly more has been learned about the spread of Covid-19, and on 10 May the government announced certain businesses could reopen, with stringent safety rules in place. Guidance on how bosses can protect their workers, and how staff can safely travel into work, was drawn up. So now, companies such as Grind are taking tentative steps towards getting back to business, and on 20 May, its Greenwich outlet reopened its doors for grab-and-go coffees. “There’s a long way to go before we’re fully open again, but it felt like the right time to start making some first steps,” says Abrahamovitch. “It seems like we’ve been on the same journey as everyone else, from not really understanding this thing to the fear peaking when Boris Johnson was admitted to intensive care, to the latest research showing us that we can operate in a safe way. While the only way to completely eradicate [Covid-19] might be for us all to stay at home forever, that’s just not practical. But you have to mitigate the risks at the maximum level you can.” Since plans to reopen were made, the safety of both staff and customers has been paramount. Grind works with a food hygiene company that has helped Abrahamovitch stay on top of the new government guidelines on safety and hygiene. “I think we’re all in a testing phase and figuring this out at the moment, but we’ve taken the steps we think are sensible without filling the place with yellow tape,” he says. “Only a couple of people are allowed inside the shop at any one time. Staff wear gloves, and at the tills there are big plastic screens separating them from customers – we haven’t made the wearing of masks mandatory, but they’re available if staff would like to use one. “We also have signs in the windows asking people to observe social distancing, stickers on the floor indicating what a two-metre gap looks like, and a hand sanitising station. It’s slightly odd having these things everywhere, but it seems to be working so far. I think people have got used to that kind of process in the last few weeks.” As well as coffee, the store is selling fresh bread, eggs and avocados, in lieu of breakfast. “We weren’t selling those things before, but we have great suppliers who make amazing bread and send us amazing eggs,” he says. “If we can help them and sell a few more products ourselves too, it makes sense. When you’ve suddenly got a daily bread delivery, it feels like you’re getting the wheels turning again.” Abrahamovitch took the individual needs of his staff into careful consideration, making decisions based on the government’s advice, along with his own sense of duty to worried workers. On reopening Greenwich Grind, he took the simple step of asking which of his staff would be keen to return to work. “Everyone who wanted to be furloughed has been furloughed,” he says. “We haven’t laid anyone off as a result of this crisis, which helps me sleep better at night. Of those who volunteered to come back to Greenwich Grind, we selected those who live very close to the store, so there’s no need for them to get public transport into work. Lots of our staff walk or cycle in anyway, so if someone wants to come back, and lives close to a store we’re reopening, that’s a good fit.” Abrahamovitch hopes these measures will prove successful, and will lay the foundations for further, tentative reopenings. “We’re certainly expecting to learn a lot from this reopening,” he says. “At a lot of our sites, social distancing isn’t actually the biggest issue – for example, our London Bridge site relies on customers who work in the offices in the area, and the tourists who come to visit Borough Market at the weekend. Until they’re back, it’s going to be hard for us to reopen, but I hope to reopen one or two more branches in the next couple of weeks.” Abrahamovitch’s customers and staff are especially pleased by this step on the way to resuming business. “One of my staff texted me on the first day of reopening and said: ‘I’m so happy to be back and not just sitting in my living room. It’s been amazing.’ So that was pretty nice,” he says. “Our customers are thrilled, too – I was there the day before we opened, checking the safety measures for myself, and people were knocking on the door hoping to get inside early. “For me, as a customer, every time a place reopens I’m really happy. I think: ‘Great, I’ve got somewhere else to go, different people to meet, some different walls to look at.’ It’s definitely the same for our customers. They’re very pleased to have us back.” This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All in, all together is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic.