“They say on a clear day you can see the Kremlin from here,” quipped the dog walker who had paused momentarily as he crossed the moor back towards home. The friendly passerby was clearly exaggerating but the views from Holcombe Hill are certainly far reaching. Below, nearly 3 million people are spread out across the Manchester conurbation and beyond, with the tallest buildings clearly definable on the city’s rapidly changing skyline. The hill, immediately overlooking the village of Holcombe and Ramsbottom town centre, is dominated by the 39 metre (128ft) Peel Monument, a grade II listed building opened in 1852 in tribute to the locally born Tory prime minister Sir Robert Peel. Despite being close to the Lancashire border, Holcombe Village, Holcombe Hill and the Peel Monument are all in Bury metropolitan borough, part of Greater Manchester, not Lancashire. The Peel Tower catching the last of the sunshine, Easter week. You might wonder about he significance of the red chair. It was simply that I took a shot on my first visit then it was in a different place the next six or so times I went. It seemed to have plenty of unseen adventures. The office chair in use in the sunshine, and after a night out perhaps. The office chair, cyclist passing by. I spoke to many of the passersby on the Hill, for whom it has been a sustained place of relaxation, exercise, or contemplation, especially in these times of lockdown due to the coronavirus. Geoffrey Jackson, whom I photographed with Margaret, his wife, told me: “We’ve lived nearby for 58 years. We try and come up to the Tower frequently but, now we’re in our 80s, not as often as we’d like.” “We have the richness of the countryside but the real richness of the area is the people. The difference here is that people speak to you. We haven’t lost that necessity that people need people and this virus has highlighted that. It’s important that we realise how important love is. Love isn’t just something sentimental, it binds us together no matter who you are. There’s plenty of that love here.” A walker out on Holcombe Hill. The early evening sunlight illuminates a footpath fence on the gentle lower slopes of the hill. Cottongrass in the April sunshine. A winged visitor to the hill. A runner approaching the summit as he takes his permitted daily exercise. John Allerton, mountainer, said; “I go up the hill every afternoon when we’re at home. It’s just a wonderful asset to have so near to so many people, which is why it’s so popular I suppose. It’s great on a day like today. The views are fantastic and now that it’s dry underfoot, there are footpaths all over the place. I’ve been a mountaineer all my life and this is as good as it gets.” Rick Gilpin, out running on the moor with his whippet, Esther: “Holcombe Hill is the usual place where I go to exercise, unwind and reflect. Whether it be running or walking with Esther or out on my bike. Wind, rain or sun nothing quite reminds me of who I am than being out on the hill.” Zippy, George, Bungle, Tom and Jerry, are five alpacas owned by Jane Unsworth who live on the slopes of the hill. Jane said; “I’ve lived in Bury all my life and always wanted a plot of land. Just over a year ago it came up for sale and we were lucky to buy it so we’re living our dream. We’ve got our animals on here, the alpacas, the sheep, and we’ve just had 15 lambs born successfully. It’s absolutely amazing.” “The hill has always been a focal point in the area. We used to come up here when I was at school and then later with my friends and it’s a pleasure to know that I’ve got a piece of land near Holcombe Hill.” Lleyn ewes with their newborn lambs on Palm Sunday morning. “It’s our paradise. With all the coronavirus and everything that’s going on, this is our little escape that we can come to twice or three times a day. It just gives you that bit of freedom to come out, enjoy the fresh air and admire the views.”