My sister is a junior doctor in a big hospital. I don’t have much to say about how work has been for her during the coronavirus pandemic, because she tells me nothing about it. Or, to be more specific, she tells me things are “fine”. This is how things are with us. I’ve always held out my problems for all to see, dumping them on friends and any poor sod who happens to sit next to me on the train, like a dog presenting its latest kill from the garden. But my sister operates in a lower key, as my parents and I discovered when she casually mentioned one night in her early 20s that she had been held up at gunpoint a year or so ago. She hadn’t thought to tell any of us at the time, because she didn’t want to worry people and, honestly, she was fine. So I don’t hear much about the goings on at hospital from her, but I don’t really have to: I read about them in my newspaper every morning. Even aside from the whole global plague situation, which would be a big enough portion on any doctor’s plate, there are the now notoriously dwindling supplies of personal protective equipment, or PPE. I’d previously thought PPE was merely an acronym for Politics, Philosophy and Economics, one of those weird Oxford degrees studied by people who fantasise about running Britain one day. And perhaps that’s what the people who run Britain thought, too, because they were rather cavalier about our supplies: we don’t need any more PPE – we’re already chock-full of those degrees! Except it turns out the other kind is quite useful and the government missed not one, not two, but three chances to bulk-buy it for healthcare workers. As a result, while EU doctors were getting £1.3bn of PPE this month, NHS staff were being told to make do with aprons and snorkel masks. As I write, at least 100 NHS healthcare workers have died from coronavirus. By the time you read this, it will be more. Doctors are now forced to make an impossible decision: continue doing their job and risk infecting themselves and their families, or walk away from their patients and colleagues. This is not a choice those of us who are related to healthcare workers can make for them, as much as we would like to. So what do we do, aside from lying awake at 3am, wide-eyed with the effort of trying not to think about worst-case scenarios? There are the rainbow paintings, of course, which my children duly made in the early days of lockdown and we hung in the front window, their aunt’s name written in the sky. And there’s the clapping – oh, the clapping. The first two weeks I enjoyed it, for the collective experience and the chance to check my neighbours are all OK. But as the news from hospitals has worsened, it has felt increasingly and pointlessly performative, something we all do because we don’t know what the hell else to do. Maybe there is something more we can do, besides tweeting photos of ourselves applauding on our front steps. Wide awake at night, I often think of certain women, such as Rose Gentle and Susan Smith. You may not recognise their names, but they were a frequent presence in the media in the early years of this century. They lost sons in the Iraq war because, they said, the Ministry of Defence had failed to provide the British army with sufficient equipment. The Chilcot report later backed them up, saying that the armed forces had been put in danger due to “wholly inadequate” preparation, and the families successfully sued the MoD. Is that where all this will end? Because anyone with a brain can see that this is a scandal unfolding in real time, and that where the government neglected one public sector, it is now neglecting another. Some 179 British servicemen were killed in the invasion of Iraq; we have already lost more than half that in the NHS – and doctors, unlike soldiers, are not called upon to risk death to do their job. Already the letters pages of newspapers are filled with messages from desperate families, terrified for relatives who went into healthcare in order to help others. And it’s up to the families – us, me – to speak for them, given that NHS workers are being warned by their employers not to speak to the media. And so we stay at home, full of anxiety, knowing that whatever fears we have are nothing compared with what our relatives are going through on their daily rounds in hospital. We read the newspapers, and in our heads we are being ever so brave, proud of the risks our closest family members are taking. But in our hearts we desperately try to shut out the truth, and momentarily kid ourselves into believing our sisters, brothers, parents, children when they tell us that, honestly, everything’s fine.