The list of recent donors reads like an Irish phone book. Aisling Ní Chuimín, Shane Ó Leary, Sean Gibbons, Kevin Boyle, Kevin Keane, Clare Quinn, Eamonn McDonald, on and on down a GoFundMe page that by Friday had raised $3.15m of a $5m goal. The individual amounts are not remarkable – $10, $20, $30, some exceeding $100 – but the story behind the donations stretches back two centuries and encompasses a singular act of generosity that forged a bond between Native Americans and Ireland, a bond now renewed in the coronavirus era. In 1847 the Choctaw nation set aside its own impoverishment and suffering to make a $170 donation to victims of the Irish famine. The tribe had suffered grievously during its Trail of Tears, a forced relocation to Oklahoma, and empathised with Irish people enduring misery and starvation more than 4,000 miles away. The generosity left a lasting mark on Ireland, which remembers it through art and commemorations. Now Irish people are reciprocating by donating to a fund for Navajo and Hopi communities hit by Covid-19. “A beautiful act of solidarity from our friends in Ireland, who remember the kindness shown to them by our Choctaw brothers and sisters, who sent them aid during the great potato famine in 1847. Thank you so much, Ireland!!!” wrote Ethel Branch, one of the fund organisers. “The favour is returned through generous donations from the Irish people to the Navajo Nation during our time of crisis. Thank you, Ireland, for showing solidarity and being here for us,” wrote Vanessa Tully, another organiser. Adversity often brings out the best in people, the Choctaw tribe said in a statement. “We are gratified – and perhaps not at all surprised – to learn of the assistance our special friends, the Irish, are giving to the Navajo and Hopi nations. Our word for their selfless act is ‘iyyikowa’ – it means serving those in need.” The Choctaw and Irish had become kindred spirits since the potato famine, the tribe said. “We hope the Irish, Navajo and Hopi peoples develop lasting friendships, as we have. Sharing our cultures makes the world grow smaller.” The donations will help supply food, water and medical supplies for vulnerable families, many of whom have diabetes and other diseases. The Navajo nation has the highest per-capita Covid-19 infection rate after New York and New Jersey. Its rural territory stretches 27,000 sq miles across Arizona, New Mexico and Utah and surrounds the Hopi reservation. As of Thursday there were 2,757 confirmed cases. The official death toll was 88 but actual fatalities are likely to be much higher because the sickest patients are transferred to state hospitals. The virus has spread rapidly even though the tribal government was among the first to issue a stay-at-home order, lock down schools and business. On Wednesday the Nation received its portion, around $600m, of federal coronavirus relief funding, six weeks after it was promised and only after suing the federal government over who was eligible for the money. The GoFundMe appeal’s original goal of $2m was increased after Irish people discovered the appeal via social media and swiftly swelled donations from the US and elsewhere. Ireland has never forgotten the Choctaws’ generosity. The tribe had endured a forced 600-mile trek that left thousands dead from hunger, cold and disease, and then impoverishment in Oklahoma, yet somehow rustled up $170 – which today translates to $5,350 – to help the Irish. About 1 million Irish people died of hunger or disease from 1845 to 1849, and another million emigrated. In 1995 Mary Robinson, Ireland’s then president, visited Oklahoma to thank the Choctaws, a pilgrimage repeated by Leo Varadkar, the taoiseach, in 2018. An outdoor sculpture titled the Kindred Spirits in Midleton, county Cork, commemorates the link between Ireland and Native Americans. Stainless steel in the form of eagle feathers form a circle, representing a gift of a bowl of food.