Nicola Benedetti’s Virtual SessionsStar violinist Nicola Benedetti’s mass online tutorials, for players of every age and level, culminate in a grand finale performance of the Fantasia on a Theme by Thomas Tallis by Vaughan Williams, with Karina Canellakis conducting. Today at 4pm on Nicola Benedetti’s YouTube channel; details at benedettifoundation.org Fiona Maddocks Yayoi Kusama/ Damien Hirst: Dots v SpotsIn this engaging opener of the London Art Salon’s fourth series of online lectures, art historian Marie-Anne Mancio explores the cross-connections between pairs of artists, here focusing on painted discs as very differently deployed by these two contemporary art stars. Tuesday, 6pm, via Zoom; tickets £10 from eventbrite.co.uk Laura Cumming The Beauty of Diagrams: Vitruvian ManBeautiful art-science crossover programme in which mathematician Marcus du Sautoy considers Leonardo’s great drawing of the wheeling man, a Renaissance masterpiece centring on Vitruvius’s ideas about proportions that still puzzle scholars today. Tomorrow, BBC Four, 7.30pm, then on BBC iPlayer. LC Doc’n Roll TVDoc’n Roll, purveyors of underground music documentaries, go indoors with a pay-to-view streaming service. Films on Basquiat, the Melvins and Gil Scott-Heron are just a fraction of the offering. docnrollfestival.com Kitty Empire Chloe x HalleUngodly Hour, their second album, hints that these young Beyoncé mentorees are all grown up – but their latest TikTok dance craze keeps the under-21s on side too. Out Friday. KE This HouseTimely transmission of James (The Quiz) Graham’s vivid play about Westminster politics, set in 1974 and filmed live at the National Theatre in 2013. Directed by Jeremy Herrin, the cast includes Phil Daniels, Reece Dinsdale and Charles Edwards. Streaming until Thursday on the National’s YouTube channel. Susannah Clapp Love Letters at HomeA touring interactive performance during a time of social distancing? Impossible! Not for theatre companies Fuel and Uninvited Guests. Their two-hander is part wedding reception, part radio request show. Book a free place in advance and you’re invited to send in a music request and a dedication to someone you love. Via Zoom you then join the celebration – which centres around a particular venue (from Bristol to Melbourne to Mexico City) at a set time – and become part of a unique community in real-time and online space. Until 26 June; see fueltheatre.com for details. Clare Brennan Michael Clark’s to a simple, rock ‘n’ roll… songClark’s wonderfully stylish and deeply cheering to a simple, rock ‘n’ roll… song, with a soundtrack consisting of Patti Smith, Erik Satie and David Bowie, and choreography that shows the choreographer has lost none of his ability to create punchy, perfect abstract dance. This filmed version of the Barbican’s 2017 production is available for a month on BBC iPlayer. Sarah Crompton Guest of HonourDavid Thewlis is a restaurant inspector on a peculiar revenge mission – among other subplots – in the latest oddball, structurally complex melodrama from Canadian auteur Atom Egoyan. On Curzon Home Cinema from Friday. Guy Lodge Gina Brillon: The Floor Is LavaNew York-born Puerto Rican comedian Gina Brillon discusses her childhood, culture, dating and her midwestern husband in this third standup special. Premiering on Amazon Prime on Thursday. Kadish Morris This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.