Covid-19: which celebrity is annoying you the most? Ever since the world went pretty much into lockdown in March, we have been offered an embarrassment of riches. And yes, it truly is an embarrassment. Whether it is Ellen DeGeneres joking that being trapped in one of her many multimillion dollar mansions was “like being in prison”, or Justin Bieber sighing that it was similarly tough being in his mansion, “but obviously, you know, we’ve worked hard for where we’re at, so it’s like, we can’t feel bad”, or of course Gal Gadot’s gruesome all-star medley of Imagine, we have not been left short of examples of “the talent” seeming to be completely tone deaf. When Madonna intoned, from a bath strewn with petals, that this strand of coronavirus was “the great equaliser”, it turned out she was quite right. Yes, we replied straight back, you’re all equally irritating. The speed of the spread of Covid-19 has been one of the most astonishing things about it; the rate at which it emerged and upended all of our lives. It is no surprise, then, that it should affect celebrity culture in the same way. The pace at which artists of every kind responded to the crisis, mostly through their own social media channels, was only equalled by the ferocity with which the public clapped back as they exposed new depths of narcissism and privilege. “Celebrity Culture is Burning,” screeched the New York Times a few weeks ago; “There Is No Good Celebrity Content Right Now,” decreed Vanity Fair. Before we go further, it must be said that we are loving some stars more than ever in this crisis: whether that is Tom Hanks and his wife Rita Wilson, diagnosed with the virus early and handling their predicament with good grace (or, more to the point, communicating that good grace well, too); or Meera Syal and Naughty Boy, who have used their platform to broadcast health advice to the British BAME community, which seems to be disproportionately affected by the crisis; or John Krasinski, who created a “good news” YouTube show, offering a virtual prom for high schoolers deprived of the real thing, and helping healthcare workers get tickets for their favourite baseball team. A kind of rigorously selfless approach seems to have defined the efforts of those who are coming out of this well (it helps, of course, if you already liked them in the first place). When, on Instagram Live (the stars’ favourite recourse to publicity in these times), Rihanna was asked yet again where her latest album is, she snapped back that she was busy “trying to save the world” – after all, she has, among other things, donated bucketloads of money. Now, if some other celebrity had said that, we might not have been so forgiving. Yet people seem to have liked the comment; for one thing, that’s how we like RiRi to talk, and, for another, unlike those stars who mostly seemed to have just been lecturing us from a (suitable) distance, there is the sense that she really is trying to save the world . Often, though, a simmering annoyance is defining many people’s engagement with the biggest entertainers. And if you stop and think about it, there is a thudding inevitability to it. Not only are we, the public, cooped up at home, glued to our smartphones, with fewer places to vent our frustrations, but they, the stars, are as well. People who positively thrive off gaining our attention – who make a living both financially and emotionally from it – have had their means of doing so drastically reduced. Because it is vital to point out that the showbiz economy has been decimated: no TV shows or films being made, no plays staged, no festivals all summer, no “events” that even that brightest new strand of celebrity, the influencer, can “influence” from. Whether you are dealing in old-school showbiz entertainment or very new-school social media performance, your stage has been shut down. And so it is that many have thrown themselves at their own phones, their last remaining medium, with a desperate fervour – and often equally desperate results. The ones who have most galled people – eg Sam Smith vlogging about having a “quarantine meltdown” from their mansion – have done so for a couple of reasons, diagnoses Chris Rojek, professor of sociology at City University, London, and author of an academic study of celebrity. If we now live in a world where celebrities are rated more than politicians – and can indeed take politicians’ jobs – it’s because they feel more “real”, says Rojek. Over the last century, stars became more and more intimate-seeming as they entered our homes via first the radio, then television and then, latterly, the internet. Indeed, the creation of Twitter, Facebook and Instagram has just accelerated the trend where celebs appear to us every single day, telling us stories about their lives and helping us make sense of ours. So, when all is well, they can project a profitable relatability. The intended effect is that “you can trust these people and what they say, because they seem more on your side than a politician,” says Rojek. We are in this together, we will get through it together. Let’s imagine together. Sing with us ❤ All love to you, from me and my dear friends. #WeAreOne ....... #KristenWiig #JamieDornan @labrinth @james_marsden @sarahkatesilverman @eddiebenjamin @jimmyfallon @natalieportman @zoeisabellakravitz @siamusic @reallyndacarter @amyadams @leslieodomjr @pascalispunk @chrisodowd @hotpatooties #WillFerrell @markruffalo @norahjones @ashleybenson @kaiagerber @caradelevingne @anniemumolo @princesstagramslam A post shared by  Gal Gadot (@gal_gadot) on Mar 18, 2020 at 4:49pm PDT In the 21st century, it is hard to overestimate how far we’ve come in using celebrities to make sense of the world. They have inserted themselves in pretty much every facet of existence, from how to bake muffins to navigating war zones, and this is now broadly accepted as the norm. Again, this isn’t necessarily sinister: Tom Hanks’s Covid-19 diagnosis is credited with helping many Americans take the virus seriously (unlike, say, their president). When assorted superstars transmit messages from their mega-compounds in the countryside, they are reminding us that they are “untouchable”, says Rojek. “Here you are, saying: ‘We’re all in this together,’ but you’re actually underlining the fact that an enormous gulf separates celebrities from ordinary people.” It is true that one of the fun side-effects of this crisis has been gaining ever more insight into celebrities’ home lives, but the gawping has often turned sour. The funny thing is, though, we always knew this gulf existed. We did not need Covid-19 to get a peek into Ellen DeGeneres’s or the Beckhams’ mansions; we had had plenty of peeks already, as they invited us (at well-curated moments) into their own houses. The greatest stars of the 2010s, the Kardashian clan, built their behemoth brand round a show set for the most part in their airy LA homes. So why are we finding this so grating now? It could be that, before, we liked to think we could aspire to that lifestyle, somehow. Even a tiny unconscious part of you might still believe you could live like Kendall Jenner. Now, locked at home and with diminished income, the gap seems concrete and unbridgeable. Also, says Rojek, it might not just be a simple frustration that these people are far more privileged than us. “I think one of the factors that is different about the virus is the sense that celebrities are appearing to the audience as irrelevant. The cure now lies with medical staff and with scientists and politicians. It’s becoming apparent, in a crisis like this, that whatever gestures celebrities have made, they’re as helpless as the ordinary person.” Naturally, this is not a sexy look. Funnily enough, so far it seems like the best way for an entertainer to handle the current crisis is just to, well, entertain. Whether it’s Florence Pugh cooking up a storm in her kitchen on her Instastories, or a whole galaxy of singers just sticking to their day job, singing, in Lady Gaga’s Together at Home concert, we are mostly appreciative of good, old-fashioned distraction. In today’s cluttered celebrity landscape, it comes as a kind of relief. One of the most dominant stories being told in this Covid-19 era is that it could lead us back to a kind of simplification, or detox, and this applies to showbiz, too; there seems to be a persistent hope this pandemic may yet sort the celebrity wheat from the sublebrity chaff. It is an impression that is reinforced when I speak to one senior showbiz publicist in London, who looks after a handful of old-school megastars. “Eurgh! Influencers!” he cries. If coronavirus does us one favour, he suggests, it would be to flatten the curve of the influencer boom. He may get his wish: there have been reports of influencers struggling to make ends meet, the events they post their missives from having all now evaporated. The publicist isn’t too sympathetic. “I think that proper celebrities – ie people that are talented and creative – might enjoy this time,” he says. “They’ll write a brilliant book or a brilliant song. But ‘celebrities’ in the modern sense of the word are gonna shrink, aren’t they?” Certainly, it’s true that for those who once motored on, constantly producing cosily banal content every day for content’s sake, the machine has started to splutter. Instead, the publicist believes that all this will usher in a more austere take on celebrity culture. “I saw something the other day where someone wrote: ‘Why don’t we fill the Strictly lineup with health workers and real life?’ Although I don’t think they’ll do that, I do think there’ll be a shift away from the sort of champagne-lifestyle celebrity.” And yet … will there be? Coronavirus is unprecedented, and it is too early to grasp its effects on the celebrity ecosystem. For instance, the publicist thinks that many stars have already stopped keeping their PR teams on retainers; will they go back to them? Can gossip sites such as TMZ subsist on just reporting on celebrities’ Instastories in lockdown? Still, it would be naive to hope that it will somehow undo the total dominance over our culture that celebrities have achieved throughout the 20th century and into the 21st. Yes, we may gripe and grouch and push back, chew them up and turn them into memes, but are we any less dependent on them? And, frankly, in a culture that looks set to be stripped back for months to come, what other options for entertainment do we have? Perhaps we need to be more honest with ourselves as to what we want from our stars. We may chuckle at their desperate need for approval but it works both ways, says Rojek. “I don’t think that celebrities are going to go away because what we will need from them is that feeling of grounding, that somebody understands us,” he says. If Covid-19 reveals the extent of our celebrity culture addiction, it doesn’t yet offer us a way to wean ourselves off it. Honestly, imagine a world where your day was not brightened by Gal Gadot having Kristen Wiig mutter some John Lennon at you in a wide-brimmed fedora. No, really – can you?