The National Theatre has warned it will have to make significant numbers of staff redundant unless it receives additional financial support from the government. The announcement came on the same day British theatre was described as being on the “brink of total collapse”. The cuts could amount to 30% of the theatre’s staff being made redundant, it is understood. On Thursday, the National Theatre confirmed that without more financial aid there would be redundancies because it had lost more than 75% of its income as a result of the impact of the Covid-19 crisis. The NT’s joint chief executives, Lisa Burger and Rufus Norris, said: “Over half our annual expenditure is on people, and while in the short term we have used our limited cash reserves and support from the UK government’s coronavirus job retention scheme [CJRS], a significant financial gap remains. We are calling for additional urgent government support for the theatre sector, including the NT, to mitigate the loss of vital talent and infrastructure.” Philippa Childs, the head of the Bectu union, which represents workers in the media and entertainment industries, said the NT’s warning was premature and that it was trying to “pre-empt” the government’s future plans for the CJRS. “This is devastating news for all staff at the National Theatre and the wider theatre industry,” she said. “Bectu believes that this decision is premature and the NT should continue to use the CJRS rather than pre-empting further decisions regarding the scheme from the chancellor.” Childs called for the government to provide clarity on how the CJRS would operate in the future to “stop employers taking such serious decisions”. The NT’s warning comes a few weeks after Norris said the institution was “haemorrhaging” money. “I’m a natural optimist and I’m concerned because I don’t feel optimistic,” he told the Guardian in late April. “Unless there is a real and concerted drive to uphold the cultural industries in this country, it will be devastating. There is no point pretending otherwise.” Looming large-scale redundancies at the UK’s national theatre will send another bleak message to an industry described as being “on the brink of total collapse” and “obliteration” by a leading West End producer. In an article for the Daily Telegraph, Sonia Friedman said that without an “urgent government rescue package” 70% of British performing arts companies would be out of business before the end of 2020. “All the performing arts – theatre, dance, opera, comedy, theatre in education, Christmas pantomime, community shows – are facing the real possibility of complete obliteration. I know it sounds melodramatic. It beggars belief – but it is a statement of fact,” wrote the producer, whose hits include The Book of Mormon and Harry Potter and the Cursed Child. The NT’s warning is the latest coronavirus-related threat to theatre. On Wednesday, Edinburgh’s Royal Lyceum announced it was going into “hibernation”, with all staff being notified their jobs were at risk. That decision followed the news that Nuffield Southampton and Southport theatres were both entering into administration because of the impact of Covid-19. The Royal & Derngate in Northampton and Shakespeare’s Globe in London have both warned they would not survive without additional support, and the Old Vic’s artistic director, Matthew Warchus, said his theatre was in a “seriously perilous” financial situation because of the pandemic. Warchus added that the CJRS, which has been extended until October, was preventing the Old Vic from “falling to pieces” but – because many theatres do not expect to reopen until 2021 at the earliest – additional support would be required.