Bryce Cartwright has been granted a medical exemption for the flu vaccination and given the green light to play the rest of the 2020 NRL season once it resumes. On Thursday evening the Gold Coast Titans player was given 11th-hour clearance from the Queensland government to avoid the shot, freeing him up to join his teammates in training on Monday. Brian Kelly, a second Titans player who had refused to get the shot, received the vaccine earlier in the day before a club-imposed deadline expired. “Bryce Cartwright provided the club with medical documentation seeking an exemption from the influenza vaccine protocol,” a club statement read. “This was subsequently passed on to Queensland’s chief medical officer Jeannette Young for review. “Dr Young has granted Cartwright an exemption based on medical grounds. Cartwright is now eligible to return to training with the playing squad in preparation for the season restart.” The pair were given until Thursday to inform the Titans if they would accept a formal request to take the needle in response to the Queensland government’s strict no jab, no play stance. Cartwright was reportedly facing a $450,000 salary hit if he was stood down by the club for refusing the shot on non-medical grounds. The avenue is at odds with his previously-stated moral opposition to the vaccine. It was a viewpoint shared by wife Shanelle, who questioned on social media on Thursday afternoon why Cartwright’s NRL colleagues weren’t supporting him. While it clears every Queensland-based NRL player to train and play in the state, it is understood there are still six NRL players yet to receive the flu shot on non-medical grounds. Canberra trio Josh Papalii, Joe Tapine and Sia Soliola, Manly’s Dylan Walker and Addin Fonua-Blake and Canterbury’s Sione Katoa are the others who would be able to train and play in NSW and ACT, but not Queensland. The NRL is scheduled to restart on May 28, more than two months after it was suspended due to the coronavirus pandemic. On Thursday Brisbane coach Anthony Seibold said it would be unfair and that the NRL would be “kidding themselves” to cave to the minority and make the three Queensland clubs travel for “home” games in NSW. Titans CEO Steve Mitchell has also opposed a shift away from their home ground, with the next two weeks of the draw set to be announced on Friday.