Television programmes take ages to make. Anyone unfamiliar with the process, who spends a day on location, comes away astonished (and probably a bit frustrated) at how laborious and time consuming it all is. They are even more astonished, months later when the programme is broadcast, to see hours or even days of filming boiled down to just a few minutes of screen time. After filming, comes weeks of editing and, once finished, it must then wait to be allotted a precious slot in the busy schedules. One consequence of all this is that the world that appears on television is that of the recent past. Most documentaries on air now were filmed during 2019. Normally, this time lag is imperceptible and inconsequential. In these abnormal times, however, it is difficult not to notice when a programme was made before Covid-19 and lockdown. Later this month, the third series of A House Through Time, a history programme that I present, starts its broadcast run on BBC Two. It explores three centuries of history through the stories of the people who have lived in a single house in Bristol; from the Georgian merchant who built it to the present owners. Filmed last summer and autumn, the series has itself become an artefact from another age, one in which we could film bustling crowds in the narrow streets of Bristol’s old city and in the busy waterfront bars. A world with no face masks, no painted NHS rainbows in windows and no lines on pavements to keep us two metres apart. Each scene that could not now be filmed, each handshake with an interviewee, is, unintentionally, a little reminder of how much our lives have contracted. As well as a social history, the series is a celebration of British cities – previously, Liverpool and Newcastle. Footfall at local archives increased as people began to dig into the histories of their own homes. The Liverpool and Newcastle houses – the stars of the show – became minor tourist attractions. This time it all feels very different. It has been eight weeks since I set foot in the city centre; just two miles from my home and visible from my living room For the people of Bristol, my adopted hometown, it is going to be more subdued and even surreal. The images of their beautiful city, filmed amid the long shadows of August and September, will remind them of what no one has now seen for two months; what normality used to look like. Elderly Bristolians, the people with the longest memories and the deepest connections to the city, will see streets they have known for a lifetime, and that have suddenly been placed out of bounds. It has been eight weeks since I set foot in the city centre; just two miles from my home and visible from my living room windows. In normal times, I’d be preoccupied with the slices of history we uncover. Instead, I now see them refracted through the current crisis. Storylines have suddenly acquired new and unintended connotations. One story takes us into the Victorian underworld of fake medicines, which were pedalled to desperate people in newspaper small ads, back when only the rich could afford to see a doctor. With a church in London recently found selling “divine cleansing oils” as a fake Covid cure, and with the president of the United States promoting unproven therapies and suggesting people consider injecting disinfectant, the gulf between the desperate measures our ancestors were driven to and what we presumed were our safe, stable 21st-century lives, starts to collapse. Just as stories within a television series can suddenly be seen afresh, in light of the current crisis, so too can our relationship with television itself. Until recently, public service broadcasting was regularly dismissed as an anachronism. The days when a national broadcaster could bring us together around a shared event or experience were said to be long gone. Just three months ago, “what’s the point of the BBC” was a politically loaded question. Now, with audiences for the BBC’s 6pm news hitting 20 million, and millions of children and parents turning to the corporation’s new home schooling services, it has increasingly become a redundant question. It is not just that the BBC and the other public service broadcasters are having a “good pandemic”, it is also that the underlying philosophy, the belief that television can be delivered as a public service rather than a commercial product, has been revitalised. Neoliberal-inspired politics dismissed public service broadcasting as inefficient, lumbering and crowding out enterprise Not that long ago it was an idea few thought to question. Between 1939 and 1967, the BBC’s main national radio station, today’s Radio 4, was known as the Home Service. At the end of its last day on air on 29 September 1967, with the rebrand due to take place the next morning, announcer David Dunhill described “home” and “service” as “two of the best words in the British language”. That sounds quaint today largely because, for decades, neoliberal-inspired politics dismissed public service broadcasting as inefficient and lumbering, accusing it of crowding out private enterprise. When lockdown began, many presumed that audiences would drift away from public service television and seek out box-set escapism on streaming services. While subscriptions to the streamers have increased, the bigger story has been a rediscovery of television as a shared national experience. Not only are news programmes attracting record audiences, programmes that instead of providing escape from the crisis are open about the limitations social distancing places on them, have been unexpected hits. Audiences, it appears, are rather fond of the improvisational, make-do-and-mend style adopted by programmes such as Mary Beard’s Lockdown Culture, which is partly made from the classicist’s own home. These improvised lockdown programmes make up for being a bit rough at the edges by offering us vicarious peaks inside the homes of presenters, interviewees and celebrities. This has been a dismal year for making predictions. Yet it does seem reasonable to predict that, once some sort of end to this crisis comes, the case for broadcasting as a national service will be difficult to dismiss. If the prime minister does accept that “there really is such a thing as society”, the next logical step is to properly value the institutions and the ideas that bind society together. •David Olusoga is an Observer columnist