Rapper and comic Dave Burd, AKA Lil Dicky, brings this lightly fictionalised version of his own haphazard career to the small screen, starring as the titular wannabe artist, finding online fame from a YouTube rap video about his “lil dicky” and now struggling to make it in the industry. Playing like a locker-room version of Donald Glover’s Atlanta, this opening double bill sees Dave try to convince the rapper YG to feature him on a track during a chance encounter in a recording studio, and then giving his first ever live performance. Ammar Kalia Hot on the heels of Quiz, the coughing major drama that transported us back to the halcyon days of ITV’s flagship show, Jeremy Clarkson’s incarnation of Millionaire returns to screens. Less drama guaranteed but, as that programme showed, there is a strange allure to the high-stakes game. Hannah J Davies Keith Lemon and Anna Richardson front this new addition to the well-worn TV genre of twee reality competitions, judging the crafting skills of four hopefuls each episode before letting them loose on a celebrity commission. Tonight, the crafters have to impress Eamonn Holmes. AK The concluding episode of Chris Packham’s often revelatory series explores human attempts to understand and protect primates. It is utterly fascinating: for example, a study of chimpanzees’ body language has identified and decoded more than 80 distinct gestures. Phil Harrison Levison Wood begins a new odyssey, travelling on foot across Botswana alongside herds of migrating elephants. That’s more of a source of perilous tension than it sounds: Wood wants to find a group to shadow, but in an era of rampant poaching, elephants can quickly turn on you. Jack Seale Comic Romesh Ranganathan brings a new series of his topical focus-group chatshow, this time filmed from the safety of his garage via video link. With the news in seemingly constant chaos, his group of 25 members of the public promise to bring some light relief to world events with their often hilarious opinions. AK The Last of the Mohicans, 9pm, Paramount Network Daniel Day-Lewis takes to the woods with his musket to inhabit the role of Hawkeye, pale-faced hero of James Fenimore Cooper’s leatherstocking tale. It’s done on an epic scale: blood-curdling action set in towering North American landscapes, with Day-Lewis the romantic hero. Paul Howlett