Sign up for the Week in Patriarchy, a newsletter​ on feminism and sexism sent every Saturday. Isaac Newton is widely considered to have had a very productive plague. During two years of social distancing on a farm he came up with important new mathematical insights and started formulating his theory of gravity. My own quarantine experience has largely consisted of attempting to complete Netflix. However, last week I decided to channel Newton and conduct some scientific experiments of my own. I stood in my local New York park counting passers-by to see if there were any gender differences in mask-wearing. Please don’t judge me: at least I didn’t spend my spare time starting a podcast. The results of my study, A Sociological Park-Based Meta-Analysis of Gendered Mask Habits (due to be published in the Journal of Arwa’s Thoughts) were unequivocal. Men were just as likely to wear masks as women. In face-coverings, at least, we had achieved gender equality! It is with a great deal of disappointment, then, that I must announce that my findings have been refuted by a rather more robust study. A new survey of 2,459 people living in the US has found that men are less likely to don face masks because they believe wearing one is “shameful,” “a sign of weakness,” and “not cool.” The survey, conducted by American and British researchers, also found that men are less likely to believe they’ll be significantly impacted by Covid-19 than women. Which is ironic, because there is a huge amount of evidence showing that men are much more likely to die from coronavirus. Researchers are still trying to figure out whether this is due to biology or behaviour. Interestingly, the study found gender differences in intentions to wear a face covering basically disappeared in places were masks were made mandatory. In other words: men need to be forced to wear masks more than women do. You’re obliged to wear face coverings whenever you can’t socially distance in New York, which explains why I didn’t notice any gender differences in my own study. So I won’t give up hope of a Nobel prize for science quite yet. The fact that a significant number of men (including Donald Trump) think masks make them look weak is yet another reminder of how damaging gender stereotypes are. The pressure to seem tough doesn’t just prevent men from wearing masks, it prevents them from expressing their emotions and seeking help for mental health problems. It’s one reason that men are 3.5 times more likely to die from suicide than women. Reluctance to show any sign of weakness also factors into why men don’t go to the doctor as much as women do and why they’re less likely to adopt preventative health measures. Toxic masculinity kills. Masks aren’t particularly fun to wear, but they work. One recent research paper found that if 80% of Americans wore masks, Covid-19 infections rates would drop to approximately one twelfth the number of infections. So if you’re a dude who is still fretting about face coverings I encourage you to think: What Would Newton Do? I’m pretty sure he would wear a mask. A group of barbaric cowards entered a maternity hospital in Kabul “with the purpose of killing mothers in cold blood,” the charity Médecins Sans Frontières has said. 24 people, mainly new mothers, died in the attack. 18 babies were left motherless. It’s still not clear who is responsible but it is tragically apparent that two decades of war in Afghanistan has not done much for women’s rights. As a CNN op-ed by Anushay Hossain notes, the US government has long exploited the plight of Afghan women to win the PR battle for the war. Thanks to US intervention, Laura Bush said in 2001, Afghan women were “no longer imprisoned in their homes.” But, says Hossain: “Here we are, almost two decades later, with Afghan women and their babies being slaughtered. If they’re not safe in maternity wards, how safe are they in their homes, or anywhere in the country?” Aimee Stephens died at home on Tuesday after suffering complications of kidney disease; her wife was by her side. Stephens was fired from her job in 2013 after telling her boss she was transgender. She sued for sex discrimination and the case became the first major transgender rights case to receive a hearing at the supreme court. A verdict on whether federal civil rights law protects transgender people is expected in June. There’s been a lot of discussion about how female leaders seem to be doing a far better job of curbing coronavirus than the world’s “strongmen”. One of these women is KK Shailaja, the health minister of the Indian state of Kerala. Shailaja’s calm preparations are being hailed as the reason the state of 35 million people has only lost four to the virus. This is the first time since 1948 that the female unemployment rate in America has reached double digits, according to the National Women’s Law Center. The economic crisis brought on by the coronavirus is hitting women, particularly women of colour, the hardest. Women accounted for 55% of the 20.5 million jobs lost in April. Eight current and former Google employees told NBC News that the tech giant has drastically scaled back internal diversity and inclusion training programs over the last two years. “One of the major motivations … is that the company doesn’t want to be seen as anti-conservative,” one employee said. “It does not want to invite lawsuits or claims by right-wing white employees about Google discriminating against them.” Nice to know where Google’s priorities are, eh? Some French people have been saying “le Covid”, greatly distressing the Académie Française. The language body recently declared that “the use of the feminine gender would be preferable and it may not be too late to return the acronym to its proper gender.” Thank God for that, then.