In the sample clues below, the links take you to little explainers from our For Beginners series. Here’s where we look at the puzzles where the solvers are given – as well as wordplay and definition in every clue, and the helpful crossing letters – the additional help of a theme. Boatman, as we discussed when we interviewed him here, never passes up an opportunity for theming and so this spoonerism … 4d/24ac Spooner says cad’s loud music is why he can’t start his book (7,5)[ wordplay: spoonerism of expression meaning ‘cad’s loud music’ ][ spoonerism of ‘blighter’s rock’ ][ definition: why he can’t start his book ] … for WRITER’S BLOCK is part of a puzzle full of references to writers and writing. Try it! Meanwhile Julius in the Financial Times shows us that a theme can be as plain as the word CHICKEN and still offer plenty of spice, such as in the clue … 23d Tango on drugs, showing a bit of leg? (5)[ wordplay: what ‘tango’ represents in Nato alphabet + synonym for ‘on drugs’ ][ T + HIGH ][ definition: a bit of leg ] … for THIGH, which sits in the grid alongside DRUMSTICK, MARSALA, LIVERS and others (with CHICKEN itself pleasingly at the top, next door to TICKER). Now, we’re looking at themes rather than topical clues to avoid being another depressing part of the news media – but I’ve encountered my first acknowledgment in daily cryptics of the big story and it’s … not depressing. It’s from Gila – who set one of our American-style puzzles – in the Independent: 10ac Lockdown enforcer endlessly complained, unfortunately (9)[ wordplay: anagram (‘unfortunately’) of COMPLAINED without its last letter (‘endlessly’) ][ anagram of COMPLAINE ][ definition: lockdown enforcer ] So we have POLICEMAN. And the solution has been published for the first puzzle I’ve seen that’s entirely themed on the only current event. There’s no link, as it’s print-only, so all I can do is point you at solvers’ blog Fifteen Squared and remind seasoned solvers that it’s always worth obtaining the i paper on a Saturday for the Inquisitor. Beginners: there are some abbreviations that come up in crosswords that you might need a friend or family member to explain. (We looked at some last week.) For example, the Moonlight Sonata might be listed as “Opus 27, No 2”, from the Latin for “work” – or even as “Op 27”. And so “work” in a clue often indicates an OP in the answer. Here comes an example. After I solved this fine clue from Brummie … 12ac Equivalent of work pressure, love (4)[ wordplay: abbrev. indicating musical ‘work’ + abbrev. for ‘pressure’ + ‘love’ in the tennis sense ][ OP + P + O ][ definition: equivalent ] … I of course pondered how “oppo” can mean both a friend (opposite number) and an enemy (opponent). Then I reflected on how, some time ago, we talked about other words which can mean their own opposite: When you dust something, are you adding (sugary) dust to it or removing (skin-flake-y) dust from it? Or both? (But why would you do both?) I then asked you for your favourite contranyms … and shamefully never followed up on it. Let’s fix that. Crosser was “bemused by the contradictory meanings of the verb to sanction: ‘to give official approval for’ and ‘to impose a penalty on’”. Gingerlarouge said: “I like bound as in moving, ‘bound towards somewhere’, and bound as in tied up, and therefore unable to move.” Other examples in English: “oversight” and “fast”; in other languages “teilen” and “esperar” … and then reader Bat020 raised the bar unsustainably high: There’s an infamous philosophical contranym: Hegel’s use of the German word Aufheben – which means both ‘to raise up’ and ‘to cancel’ – to describe the transition from one dialectical stage to the next. Cue 200 years of arguments as to how best to translate this. So, what word with contradictory meanings shall we use for our next challenge? Readers have noted that some recent competitions have used words with letters that take considerably more time to find a decent clue for. With that in mind: reader, how would you clue QUIDDITY? Thanks for your clues for NITTY-GRITTY. If you came in early, the whole discussion is well worth revisiting. This is undoubtedly an unlovely collection of letters, but as with BUMPTIOUS, it produced gems, such as Dunnart’s “Lousy set of nuts and bolts” and Tony Collman’s “The actual mechanics of witty rhymes”. PeterMooreFuller went for the seldom-spotted rhyming double carrollism in “‘Reality is never witty,’ / L Carroll may have cried, / ‘And I say that’s the greatest pity!’ the Dean himself replied”, yet the audacity award has to go to Schroduck for “‘You’re listening to the boy from the big bad city’ rapped without remixing Beats In’l echo of boogie-dub rhyme – what’s that rhyme?” The runners-up are Porcia’s compound anagram “Sadly regretting tiny yet forbidding Greene novel The Heart of the Matter” and Croquem’s “The quintessence of Itchy & Scratchy”; the winner is Mahashivaratri’s seasonally poignant “Tit trying to fly with tiny wings shows heart”. Kludos to Mahashivaratri. Please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition, and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics, below. Nominated by the setter Nutmeg is this clue: Sales of toilet rolls to self-isolate? (7) It’s certainly unusual in that you need to consider what, involving a kind of “rolling”, connects “sales of toilet” to “to self-isolate”. Nutmeg came across it in the splendid crossword magazine Magpie and Magpie nabob Simon Anthony tells me: “It’s by someone called Stephen Knight. Someone linked it to us on our Twitter (@crypticcracking).” The first time Nutmeg came across this kind of clue, she says, she was flummoxed enough to need the crossing letters and the clue itself remains one of her all-time favourites from the Times. I won’t give the answer to either; teasing hints welcome in the comments – as well as a source if you have it – for: One is so tired of editors (7) See you next week. Here’s a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs