The highways connecting India’s overcrowded cities to the villages had not seen anything like it since the time of partition 73 years ago. Hundreds of thousands of workers were on the move, walking back to their villages with their possessions bundled on their heads. On 24 March, India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi ordered a nationwide 21-day lockdown to contain the coronavirus pandemic. States sealed their borders, and transport came to a halt. With no trains or buses to take them home, India’s rural-to-urban migrant population, estimated at a staggering 120 million, took to the roads. On 5 April a statement from the home ministry said 1.25 million people moving between states had been put up in camps and shelters. The rest started walking. With their jobs in cities lost overnight, and no clear social welfare package, hunger is a more real threat to these millions of people than a pandemic. “Everyone is talking about migrants – those who started walking back to their villages,” said Anshu Gupta, founder of Goonj, a Delhi-based charity. “There are also people who reached their villages, people who were stuck in the cities, and the millions already living in the villages. They are all in distress.” The lockdown was announced without a clear plan for the consequences and Indian civil society stepped in immediately. With 92 partner NGOs, Goonj started work in 18 states. By 20 April, field teams had delivered rations to 17,700 families, and 16,600kg of rice, flour, lentils, potatoes and oil and 77,800 ready-to-eat meals to community kitchens. They had also produced 42,800 face masks and 24,900 sanitary pads. Mahatma Gandhi Seva Ashram-Ekta Parishad is doing the same in 39 districts across 10 states. In Madhya Pradesh alone, they say, 99,225 migrants have returned home, comprising daily wage workers, landless farmers and tribals. Thousands of workers and volunteers are feeding migrant labourers and maintaining community kitchens, as well as distributing masks and soap and protective equipment for frontline health workers. An India Today analysis established that in 13 states and union territories, NGOs are outperforming state governments in feeding people. It found that in states like Kerala, which has been praised for its response to Covid-19, and Telangana, “all meals were exclusively provided by NGOs during the lockdown, while in states such as Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Mizoram, NGOs provided 92.8%, 91.7% and 88.5% of all the meals, respectively”. Days after the lockdown was imposed, the finance ministry announced a relief package of Rs 1.7 lakh crore (£18bn). This included food, grains and cooking gas, but there was no roadmap for how this aid would reach people. Cash transfers of Rs 500 a month were announced for women with bank accounts under the government’s Jan Dhan scheme. An itemised analysis by IndiaSpend concluded that the financial package announced by the central government is not all additional funding for Covid-19, but a reallocation and often, reiteration, of existing budgets. Some state governments announced cash transfers, while Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh announced money for destitute women. But the chances of people ever seeing the money or provisions allocated to them are remote. “Even if the money has come into their bank account in the city, how do they access that now, in the village?” asks Gupta. The inadequacy of the state’s preparedness to tackle this crisis has led to local and central governments scrambling to build relations with civil society to deliver relief, a relationship that has been compromised over the past five years. Between 2014 and 2020, the Indian government cancelled the licenses of over 20,000 NGOs to receive foreign funds under the Foreign Contributions Regulatory Act. NGOs have been demonised, especially those working on human rights issues. Their bank accounts have been frozen, their staff have been harassed, and their intent has been questioned. Now, as the state grapples with a response to Covid-19, the government think-tank NITI Aayog has requested that more than 92,000 NGOs help the government fight the pandemic. Gupta is unequivocal: “Civil society – NGOs and ordinary Indians – are fully taking care of the hunger problem.” The sooner this government starts to see civil society as allies in fair and foul weather, the better – particularly for India’s poorest and most vulnerable people over the next few, very difficult months. Bharati Ramachandran runs Barapani, a communications agency based in Bangalore, India that works with NGOs across South Asia and Africa