Workers at a New Jersey nursing home ravaged by coronavirus have described a culture of silence, gross inaction from management and a desperate lack of protective equipment that has put them and their families in harm’s way and made it largely impossible to protect their patients from the outbreak. AristaCare at Cedar Oaks, a long term 230-bed care facility, had seen 106 confirmed coronavirus cases and 29 deaths reported as of last week. It’s one of 508 long term care facilities with outbreaks in New Jersey alone. According to a list collected by the Washington Post, around 1,350 nursing homes nationwide have reported Covid-19 cases, though the newspaper admits this is an undercount. Covid-19 has killed thousands in nursing homes across the country. Yet healthcare professionals who were already overworked have agreed to longer hours and have continually put themselves in danger to care for their patients. A pattern has emerged across America: workers on the frontlines – primarily people of color and immigrants – have been abandoned with insufficient PPE. Nurses and nursing assistants, meanwhile, are terrified that if they blow the whistle, they’ll lose their jobs. AristaCare staff largely spoke to the Guardian on the condition of anonymity for fear of consequences at work. Some have contracted Covid-19, and all described insufficient, inadequate or irregular provision of personal protective equipment (PPE) as they interact directly with residents, endangering everyone involved. Amid the pandemic, AristaCare did limit visitation and mandated screenings at the door for anyone entering the facility. But inside, the situation devolved quickly, staff say. One worker watched as roommates infected one another and died from the virus, and alleged that management acted too late. She said one resident only moved floors recently, despite showing signs of Covid-19 weeks before. “They’re trying to clean it up now for it to look good,” she said. “But we already lost a lot of residents.” The worker has somehow managed to stay healthy, even as her colleagues fall ill. She gets home, goes immediately to her basement, takes a shower, puts her clothes in the sink and uses Lysol on her coat and shoes. “I’m very concerned,” she said. Sherry-Ann Ramkaran, a certified nursing assistant, and another employee, both of whom were sick, said that early into the public health crisis they had been directed not to wear masks around the patients in their care. One of them said she was told it would make the residents feel bad. “Bottom line is, I know I contracted the virus there, at work,” the woman said. Ramkaran had been performing mandatory temperature checks and asking questions of everyone coming in and out of the home before she started running a fever in late March and later tested positive for Covid-19. “I was the first case in my house, first one to get sick,” Ramkaran said. “And I passed it along to my family, which is not a good gift to give.” AristaCare at Cedar Oaks did not return multiple requests for comment. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has released guidance for nursing homes and long-term care facilities recommending that available face masks be reserved for healthcare personnel, who should also be reminded not to come in if they’re sick and educated about their facility’s new policies. Workers at AristaCare, however, described flimsy, cheap masks they were originally provided as PPE. They said some people had come into work sick, and one nurse had even been given a hard time for reporting her symptoms, her colleague said. Ever-changing guidance from the CDC was posted around the facility, but staff were never privy to any real knowledge, beyond basic reviews of hand-washing practices, about protocols during the pandemic, some said. In the absence of leadership, workers chronicled a piecemeal game of telephone, where information about how to handle the outbreak came mostly from news outlets and each other. “They didn’t prepare us for any of this. They didn’t come and say, ‘oh, you know, so-and-so is going on, and we all need to be prepared and be extra careful,’” said Ramkaran. “They didn’t give us any kind of notice.” As some workers call out tired, sick or afraid, others now have to shoulder an even heavier load in an industry already infamous for chronic understaffing. At AristaCare at Cedar Oaks, nurses have sometimes watched over 32 or even 64 patients – not necessarily a dramatic increase compared to before the pandemic, but a distribution one nurse nevertheless called “impossible”. A different employee said she had clocked in for nonstop, back-to-back shifts over a two-week period. “I hope that there is a real awareness that we owe them more than to name them as heroes, and that we have an obligation to see them as workers without whose work, whose labor, we wouldn’t be able to survive this pandemic,” said Milly Silva, an executive vice president at 1199SEIU, the country’s largest healthcare union. Ramkaran thought her Covid symptoms were simply exhaustion; at one point, she worked around 90 hours in just over a week. New Jersey nursing homes are primarily staffed by immigrant women whose situation Silva said reflects a larger conversation around immigrant labor in the US. The caregivers are deemed essential, she said, but they’re simultaneously not seen as the “full human being” that they are. Ramkaran has been ill since 24 March, but AristaCare has only paid her 37 hours of sick leave, despite her being a 10-year veteran with the company. She feels certain she contracted the disease while at work, a possibility her human resources contact initially dismissed. “When they told me I didn’t get the virus at the job, I was really disappointed and hurt,” Ramkaran said. Because she had taken on extra shifts, the only places she spent time before showing Covid symptoms were at AristaCare and home, she said. As Ramkaran’s family members cared for her, they too got sick, and both her asthmatic daughter and husband with respiratory and heart problems have tested positive for Covid-19. Her husband required two hospital visits as his oxygen levels dropped. “I can’t wait for this to be over,” she said.