Papua New Guinea police have arrested former prime minister Peter O’Neill over the alleged purchase of generators from Israel without parliamentary approval. O’Neill was arrested on Saturday at the main airport of Port Moresby, PNG’s capital, after returning from Australia, and brought in for questioning, assistant crimes commissioner Hodges Ette said in a statement. The assistant police commissioner’s statement said O’Neill was accused of directing the 50m kina ($14m) payment for two generators from Israel without following the country’s public financial management law, without parliamentary approval and without putting the sale to tender. The statement gave no further details about the generators or the identity of the alleged seller. The statement cited evidence of “misappropriation, abuse of office and official corruption”. On Sunday afternoon O’Neill blamed the current prime minister, James Marape, for the purchase. O’Neill said the generators were bought to fix “longstanding” blackout issues in Port Moresby and Lae, and that Marape, then finance minister, authorised the exemption from proper procurement processes and approving the non-tender contract. “We all know that this highly politicised case has been influenced and pushed by dark and shadowy figures behind the scenes wanting to force an arrest,” O’Neill said in a statement. “If police are truly independent, they should also charge Marape for not following process.” In response Marape said finance ministers “are always amongst the last in the chain of the approval process”. “I will offer my statements as witness of state, just like I am doing for the UBS saga and I would like to inform the country that never will I use the office of PM to stop or encourage police from doing their constitutional duties,” Marape said. In the lengthy statement O’Neill said it was important to note “that there is no charge or claim against me that suggests any personal benefit whatsoever”, and he looked forward to his day in court. “I also want to highlight that in contrast to these dark figures and the politicians that control them, I commend the other members of the police who have discharged their duties professionally while under very difficult political pressure.” O’Neill quit as prime minister in May last year after seven years in the job amid a wave of discontent over a perceived lack of wealth flowing from major resource projects. His term was dogged by controversy, including an unrelated arrest warrant for him in relation to a long-running anti-corruption taskforce inquiry. O’Neill fought against it and over the course of several years took court action to have the warrant stayed, disbanded the taskforce, and fired senior figures who had been involved in the process, including an attorney general and a police commissioner. The commissioner’s statement on Saturday said O’Neill would be allowed bail, and because he had just arrived from Australia he was expected to be quarantined at his own residence for 14 days, under protocols to prevent the spread of Covid-19. O’Neill had been the subject of an arrest warrant in Papua New Guinea since October on suspicion of “official corruption”, although officials in the country did not disclose what he was wanted for.