Jorge Luis Borges always imagined paradise “will be a kind of library”. For New Yorkers under lockdown, the sounds of the New York Public Library – rustles, taps, coughs, an echoing voice – are proving to be, if not paradise, then at least some kind of balm. Around 200,000 people have streamed the album of “audio landscapes” evoking the sounds of the city released by the NYPL earlier this week. Intended to transport listeners “to the daily urban orchestra they look forward to hearing again soon”, the NYPL’s Missing Sounds of New York ranges from a dance performance on the subway to rush-hour traffic, and the relative peace of a not entirely quiet library. Mentioned by governor Andrew Cuomo as one of his “deep breath moments”, the immersive album has been “popular, and impacting New Yorkers exactly as we hoped it would”, said Carrie Welch, the library’s chief of external relations. “So many New Yorkers have shared that the experience of listening has been emotional and poignant and cathartic,” she said, “allowing them to sleep or provoking memories of times in their lives or just reminding them of the city they know and love.” I’m not surprised it’s been a hit. Libraries are currently closed all around the world, and, while demand for ebook loans is booming, there’s far more to a library than just borrowing books. There’s the hallowed sense of being surrounded by learning, the peaceful community of being around other readers and the pervasive smell of books. While that scent might be hard to recreate – “A combination of grassy notes with a tang of acids and a hint of vanilla over an underlying mustiness,” according to experts – the virtual tours collected by Atlas Obscura can offer some of the delights we’ve all been missing. So I’m planning a virtual trip this weekend to Klementinum library in Prague, which with some justification describes itself as the world’s most beautiful. Its 360-degree tour – those globes! that ceiling! those ancient books! – coupled with the NYPL’s library soundtrack, a jar of grass clippings and a bottle of vanilla essence, might just be able to persuade me that I’m back among the stacks.