Visitors have flocked to beauty spots across England, despite some local authorities urging people to stay away on the first weekend since coronavirus lockdown measures were partially eased in England. The Derbyshire Dales had issued a warning to tourists to not visit but said that hotspots in the area were busy, despite most facilities including toilets remaining closed. The council said this had resulted in some people using the street to relieve themselves. On Saturday evening, the council tweeted: We appealed to visitors to stay away but our usual hotspots are busy. We also made it clear most facilities - including toilets - remain closed.Sadly we're getting reports of people using streets as a toilet. Don't.#RespectProtect our communities pic.twitter.com/XszWWktzjI Good weather drew many people to their favourite beauty spots after the UK government allowed unlimited travel for outdoor exercise or sunbathing. Elsewhere, on Saturday morning the Peak District national park called for the public not to travel to the area as car parks started filling up. The park authority said the Langsett area at its north-eastern edge was “extremely busy” on Saturday morning, making physical distancing difficult. Visitors flocked there despite people being asked to “think carefully” before visiting national parks and beaches. Royal Greenwich council in London similarly asked people to stay away from the area so residents could get around safely: We know it's beautiful, but please don't come to Greenwich for a day trip. Local residents still need to be able to get around here safely and extra visitors make social distancing very difficult. That's why the foot tunnel is closed until 10pm on Sunday. pic.twitter.com/4xBXotQM0L Birmingham Live reported that car parks at the city’s biggest park were packed. Couples, dog walkers, cyclists, joggers and young families were pictured enjoying the fresh air in the park as police officers in a marked car patrolled the area. In Wales, where the stricter stay-at-home rules remain in force, visitors travelled to tourist destinations from England. Police forces across Wales have continued to patrol beaches, coastal areas, and other public spaces, with the weather forecast to be sunny, and have also been conducting checks on motorists. In Pembrokeshire, Dyfed-Powys traffic officers stopped a rented white Transit van from Bristol. “The three occupants stated they were going to the beach, there was also camping equipment within the vehicle,” the force said. “All three reported for non-essential travel, vehicle turned around.” Meanwhile, a black Nissan Navara was stopped at Llanteg, having travelled 200 miles from Wokingham in Berkshire. Police said: “The occupants were unable to account for their reasons for travel. Vehicle turned around accordingly, both occupants reported.” South Wales police arrested a motorist who was allegedly caught speeding at 140mph on the M4 at Bridgend and then provided a positive test for cannabis. Where members of the public refuse to listen to advice, officers can issue penalty notices of £60, which will rise to £120 if they have previously received a fixed penalty notice under the same regulations. In some parts of England, tourism chiefs cautiously opened their doors to visitors at some other national parks and beaches, but warned that people may be turned away if hotspots become too busy. The South Downs national park, on the south coast of England, said people could enjoy its rolling hills and chalk cliffs but that they must “observe the three Rs by exercising restraint, responsibility and respect”. It urged people to avoid the popular hotspots and to stay two metres away from anyone not in the same household. The National Trust, which oversees 500 historic houses, castles, parks and gardens in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, and nearly 800 miles of coastline, is preparing to reopen its larger car parks in England next week after opening more than 250 smaller ones since Wednesday.