The more than 2 million people who have been “shielding” from Covid-19 in England because they are deemed to be clinically extremely vulnerable will be allowed to spend time outdoors from Monday for the first time in 10 weeks. Boris Johnson praised their resilience as their particular lockdown measures are set to be eased. The communities secretary, Robert Jenrick, will confirm the move on Sunday. The 2.2 million clinically extremely vulnerable people will be able to go outside with members of their household from Monday, while continuing to follow physical distancing guidelines. Those who live alone can meet outside with one other person from another household. Reviews of the shielding guidance are expected to be made at regular points in the coming weeks. Johnson said: “I want to thank everyone who has followed the shielding guidance – it is because of your patience and sacrifice that thousands of lives have been saved. I do not underestimate just how difficult it has been for you, staying at home for the last 10 weeks, and I want to pay tribute to your resilience. “I also want to recognise the hundreds of thousands of extraordinary volunteers who have supported you in shielding.” Jenrick said: “Those shielding from coronavirus have made huge sacrifices over recent months to protect both themselves and the NHS – they deserve our thanks and our support for their efforts. “Incidence rates of coronavirus are now significantly lower than before these measures were put in place. “That’s why we are focused on finding the right balance between continuing to protect those at the greatest clinical risk, whilst easing restrictions on their daily lives to make the difficult situation more bearable – particularly enabling the contact with loved ones they and we all seek.” Steven McIntosh, director of policy at Macmillan Cancer Support, called the move a “step forward for people who are most vulnerable to coronavirus, a group who have felt left behind and forgotten as lockdown eases”. But he added: “The government also hasn’t yet delivered its commitment to provide greater help to this extremely vulnerable group, and Macmillan has heard from people living with cancer that existing ‘shielding’ support isn’t getting through. “So the government must now set out how they will guarantee the needs of the most vulnerable and isolated are met.” And Phil Anderson, head of policy at the MS Society, said people would want to hear the scientific evidence behind the decision. He said: “Over 130,000 people live with MS in the UK and thousands of them have been left feeling forgotten after months of shielding. While for some it may be a relief that this relaxation is happening in England others have been left feeling confused. “We’re extremely concerned this news has come out of the blue – people who are extremely vulnerable will rightly want to hear a lot more about the scientific evidence showing this will be safe for them. “If the government is serious about supporting vulnerable people who are shielding they need more than just the ability to go outside. Crucially, we want to see better mental health support for everyone who needs it.” Those shielding remain at risk, however, and the government said they should only leave the house once a day, should not go to work or the shops, and should avoid crowded places where they cannot physically distance. Support provided to those with serious medical complications, such as the delivery of food, medicines and phone calls, will continue.