Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: China recorded no new confirmed Covid-19 cases on the mainland for 22 May, the first time it had seen no daily rise since the pandemic began in the central city of Wuhan late last year. It has seen a sharp fall in locally transmitted cases since March as major restrictions on people movement helped it to take control of the epidemic in many parts of the country. According to researchers at Johns Hopkins University, at least 5,211,172 people have become infected, while at least 338,225 have died around the world. The figures, which are based on official releases and media reports, are likely to significantly underestimate the true scale of the pandemic. Donald Trump declared churches, mosques and synagogues “essential services” and threatened to override governors who refuse to reopen them this weekend – a power he does not possess. “The governors need to do the right thing and allow these very important essential places of faith to open right now. For this weekend. If they don’t do it, I will override the governors. In America we need more prayer, not less,” Trump said at a two-minute press conference without taking questions from media. Mexico has recorded another single-day record for Covid-19 deaths, with 62,527 total cases since the pandemic began. On Friday the health ministry said 479 more deaths had been recorded, along with 2,960 new infections. The previous daily peak of 424 fatalities was reported by authorities on 20 May. There have been 6,989 deaths in total. Indonesians are turning to smugglers and bogus travel documents to get around bans on an annual end-of-Ramadan exodus that could send coronavirus cases skyrocketing in the world’s biggest Muslim majority nation, AFP reports. Thousands are using any trick in the book to reach their home towns in time for celebrations at the end of Islam’s holy fasting month this weekend, a festival known as Eid al-Fitr. In the UK, Boris Johnson’s key adviser Dominic Cummings is facing calls to resign after police spoke to him about breaching the government’s lockdown rules. He was seen in Durham, 264 miles from his London home, despite having had symptoms of coronavirus. Officers approached him days after he was seen rushing out of Downing Street when the prime minister tested positive for the virus at the end of March, a joint investigation by the Guardian and the Mirror found. In Australia, thousands of people in Sydney have had their vehicles sanitised for free in a trial launched and funded by the state government in April. Point-to-point vehicles were eligible, including all taxis, ride share and hire vehicles. The trial included disinfecting outside and inside door handles, boot handle, window controls, the steering wheel, and other areas. It is not a car wash service. Spot cleaning in between sanitisation is also required by drivers.