Shaw and Smith Sauvignon Blanc, Adelaide Hills, Australia 2019 (£14.95, slurp.co.uk) With most of us living out most of our lives in the virtual world at the moment, it’s not surprising that a lot of wine buying has migrated online, too. Depending on which statistical data gatherer you believe, sales of alcohol online were up by as much as 50% in the first weeks of the crisis v “normal” times. A lot of those sales went through the virtual tills of the supermarkets, of course. But the online wine specialists have been benefiting, too. If you’re looking to dip a toe into online wine buying for the first time, many retailers are offering discounted mixed cases to get you started. Slurp.co.uk, for example, has a 10-bottle “Indulge in Isolation” case, which at £120 works out as a £50 discount. There are some nice wines in there, although, personally, I’d rather go à la carte on slurp’s extensive list, filling a case with bottles such as Shaw and Smith’s superbly zingy, pristine sauvignon. De Martino Viejas Tinajas Cinsault, Itata, Chile 2018 (£14.95, virginwines.co.uk) One mixed case that I do like the look of is Virgin Wine’s selection of contemporary German bottles, which, includes pinot blanc and pinot noir as well as a scintillating example of the country’s most famous grape variety, Gunderloch Fritz’s Riesling, Rheinhessen 2017 (a bottle of which is £14.99 on its own; The Best of Modern Germany case of 12 bottles is £140). You could also include any of those Germans in a mixed case with a wine such as the gorgeously light, rosehippy-red fruited, clay amphora-made Viejas Tinajas from Chile. Meanwhile, the UK’s oldest wine retailer, and one of the first to make a success of online, Berry Bros & Rudd, has a tempting 12 for £200 mix and match offer of 30 smart bottles, which is pretty good value for wines from the likes of De Martino, the Loire’s Vincent Carême, Beaujolais’ Julien Sunier and the Douro’s Quinta de la Rosa. The Society’s White Burgundy 2018 (£9.95, thewinesociety.com) With its stores closed to the public for the “foreseeable future”, Majestic has become a de-facto online retailer, although to speed up delivery it recommends you email the local branch with your order rather than going through the website checkout. As ever, it’s best to buy by the case of six bottles to get the best prices, with the fabulously dull and officious–sounding Agenda Manager’s Choice, Dão 2017 actually being a wonderfully balanced, fragrant and textured red for £7.99 (or £9.99 if bought on its own). Another top online retailer, The Wine Society, closed down at the beginning of the lockdown as it looked to find a way to guarantee its delivery and warehouse staff. It’s back working again, but, only to existing members, many of them Observer readers who know the value to be found in wines such as the Society’s genteel, orchard-fruity own-label chardonnay. Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach