Coronavirus cases in Belgium continued to fall amid a simmering political row over nurses’ pay and conditions after hospital staff turned their backs on the prime minister during a weekend hospital visit. Nurses protesting over wages, staff numbers and a government decree that makes it possible for them to be forced to come to work turned away from the official motorcade when prime minister Sophie Wilmès visited the Saint Pierre hospital in Brussels on Saturday. “Politics constantly turns its back on our appeals for help,” one anonymous nurse told the Francophone state broadcaster RTBF. “The teams are understaffed and the burnout rates show it. We are asking for our work to be valued and for more staff on our teams.” The silent protest – images of which went around the world – came amid a continuing fall in coronavirus cases in Belgium. A spokesperson for the national crisis centre said on Monday that the numbers remained “favourable”. Daily admissions to hospital in the last 24-hour reporting period have fallen to 43, compared to more than 600 a day at the peak of the crisis in late March. A spokesperson for Wilmès said she had spoken to representatives from the protesting staff for 40 minutes during her visit. “I think that there will be an ‘after Covid,’” Wilmès said. “No one can claim not to have understood nor felt the distress of nursing personnel, which was already there before the crisis, which has aggravated difficulties.” But the temperature rose again on Sunday when Marie-Christine Marghem, a government minister and member of the prime minister’s MR party, wrote on Facebook that the protest was “ridiculous” and participants were acting like “children who couldn’t get what they wanted”. Wilmès took charge of a minority government in March, after coronavirus forced Belgium’s warring parties to a truce, following 15 months of stalemate since the previous government collapsed in December 2018. She has said she hopes “a real government” will be in place in September, once emergency powers granted to tackle coronavirus expire. During the first 12 days of April Belgium saw the highest level of excess deaths since the second world war, researchers from the Free University of Brussels (VUB) told the Flemish state broadcast VRT. Belgium has recorded 55,559 cases and 9,080 deaths from coronavirus, giving the country of 11.5 million people – on paper – one of the highest per-capita death rates in the world. Belgium scientists have defended their approach as more accurate than other countries. Since the start of the outbreak, Belgium has counted all deaths in care homes in the official total. More than three quarters of deaths in care homes (77%) are unconfirmed cases of Covid-19, prompting politicians to fear the country is over-counting the mortality rate and damaging the country’s reputation. Prof Patrick Deboosere of the Free University of Brussels (VRB) told VRT that coronavirus mortality figures for Belgium have been “pretty accurate” while other countries may have been underestimating their death toll: “Many countries will probably have to adjust their figures in the future.” The VUB study on excess mortality showed reduced mortality among 25-44 year-olds and the 45–64 group in some Belgian regions, a result the researchers attributed to a fall in road traffic accidents. However the researchers fear that some working-age adults who have had coronavirus may suffer long-term damage to their lungs.