Since taking office in March, Slovenia’s rightwing prime minister, Janez Janša, has been busy on Twitter. He has called critical journalists liars and “presstitutes”, and said the director general of the World Health Organization (WHO) should resign. On Wednesday, he retweeted an article suggesting press freedom advocates who had raised alarm about his actions had been using cocaine. Janša, who has a Trump-like tendency to fire off inflammatory tweets and is a close ally of the far-right Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, took office after the country’s previous prime minister, Marjan Šarec, resigned, hoping for early elections. Janša was able to form a coalition with his Slovenian Democratic party and three other parties. In its first weeks, the government’s attention has been largely focused on the response to coronavirus, and Slovenia has so far managed to keep numbers of infections and deaths low. However, critics fear Janša, like his mentor Orbán, wants to use the coronavirus crisis for political advantage. He will also be able to act as an additional voice of support inside the EU for Orbán and the Polish government, who want to ensure the union does not lecture member states on democracy and rule of law. Slovenia will hold the rotating EU presidency next year. The 61-year-old Janša has made a very similar political journey to Orbán, starting out three decades ago as a pro-democracy fighter and gradually shifting further right over the years, picking up anti-migration and climate sceptic rhetoric along the way. Janša’s political campaigns have used xenophobia, Islamophobia and hate speech, said Boris Vezjak, a professor at the University of Maribor in Slovenia. Like Orbán, he has been accused of backing cronyism and corruption. In 2013 he was sentenced to two years in prison for bribery, but his conviction was annulled by the constitutional court because of a lack of direct evidence and he was released after six months in jail. He denied all accusations. Janša, who has had two brief previous spells as prime minister, is backed by a television network funded by Hungarian figures close to Orbán, and the network’s former director Aleš Hojs has been made Janša’s new interior minister. “Like Orbán, he is good at distracting from the abuse of resources with anti-Brussels and anti-migrant rhetoric,” said Florian Bieber, a regional expert at the University of Graz. “He is also very thin-skinned.” Janša has picked up on some of Trump’s talking points around the coronavirus, including calling for the resignation of the WHO director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. Like Trump, he has also made vitriolic attacks on critical journalists, accusing public television of “spreading lies”. When in opposition, in 2016, he accused two female journalists of being “washed-up prostitutes”. Since taking office in March, Janša has attacked the investigative journalist Blaž Zgaga, who criticised some government measures taken over coronavirus as unlawful. An official government account retweeted a claim that the journalist was an “escaped psychiatric patient” and said he was suffering from “Covid-Marx/Lenin”. Zgaga said the attacks had led to a wave of hate mail and threats. “I have been under police protection before, I have been smeared before, but I have never experienced anything like this,” he said. A consortium of press freedom associations, including Reporters without Borders, wrote an an open letter to Věra Jourová, the EU commission’s vice-president for values and transparency, calling on her to take up the matter with the Slovenian government. It chronicled the series of smears on Zgaga and said “we fear for his life after supporters of the Slovenian government declared him an enemy of the state”. “No hate, no threats, no personal attacks. Contact taken with Slovenia to discuss situation,” Jourová wrote on Twitter last week. Janša does not appear to be taking the rebuke seriously. “No single figure in Slovenian history has done more to discredit the journo community than this liar,” he wrote in response. Rights activists also say there are worrying signals about the new government’s post-coronavirus agenda. Last Tuesday, parliament passed a law that removes the rights of most NGOs to take part in environmental assessments of infrastructure projects. Billed as a way to help kickstart the economy post-coronavirus, NGOs in Ljubljana, the capital, say it will allow the government to plough ahead on controversial construction projects without taking environmental concerns into consideration. A restraining factor on Janša is likely to be that he has to govern in coalition, and with an electorate that has traditionally veered centre left, this will make it harder to attempt to redraw the county’s political scene. “Janša is ready to go as far as Orbán, no doubt about it, but luckily the opposition is still strong and maybe also the coalition will not be willing to support him until the end,” said Vezjak.