This past weekend was supposed to be graduation for many Americans in the class of 2020, and to mark the occasion, several celebrities delivered virtual commencement addresses, including former president Barack Obama – though Obama’s address turned out to be “less of a graduation speech and more the world’s loudest subtweet,” said Trevor Noah on the Daily Show. Obama throws subtle shade at Trump in his commencement address and sets off a 5-alarm outrage fire at Fox News. pic.twitter.com/MHMHKxd6Qd The former president commiserated with the younger generation on realizing adults do not have it all figured out, and added: “Doing what feels good – what’s convenient, what’s easy – that’s how little kids think. Unfortunately, a lot of so-called grownups, including some with fancy titles and important jobs, still think that way, which is why things are so screwed up.” The target of that message was pretty clear, said Noah, but still, “it’s funny how Obama hides his insults, almost like he doesn’t want to get in trouble with Michelle for going low.” Subtle or not, Obama’s remarks “set off a five-alarm outrage fire over at Fox News,” with talking heads predictably calling it improper and lacking decorum; one host said the speech demonstrated how Obama is “not all that articulate”. “Look, there’s no denying Obama went out of his way to diss Trump in his speech,” Noah concluded. “But I genuinely find it hilarious that Fox News – Fox News – is going to spend all day being offended about how a former president doesn’t have decorum when the current president literally interrupted a pandemic briefing to remind everybody how he boned models.” “Just when you think things can’t get any weirder, Trump cranks it up to 11 and then swallows the knob,” said Stephen Colbert of Trump’s claim at an event earlier in the day with restaurant owners that he is taking hydroxychloroquine. The anti-malarial drug is not proven to treat coronavirus and has serious, potentially lethal side-effects, though that hasn’t stopped the president from touting the drug publicly, which prompted a whistleblower complaint last week from former health and human services official Dr Rick Bright. When asked on Monday about what research he has that hydroxychloroquine is a preventative wonder drug, Trump “cited the New England Journal of I heard it from a guy”, Colbert continued. Or, to quote the president: “Here’s my evidence: I get a lot of positive calls about it.” “For the sake of his children, I hope he’s not getting a lot of positive calls about Clorox,” added Colbert. “It was such a shocking statement that even Fox News had to clap back,” with host Neil Cavuto telling viewers: “It will kill you. I cannot stress enough: this will kill you.” “I’m not a doctor, but the newsman says it’s deadly so I hope I’m not surprising anyone when I say: Mr President, don’t take it,” Colbert said. In other tentatively good news, a potential coronavirus vaccine by the company Moderna has shown promising early results on a human trial of eight people. The news caused Wall Street to shoot up 900 points on Monday, even though on Friday, at an event to generate hope for finding a vaccine, Trump dismissed the importance of vaccines since the coronavirus “problem” will eventually “just go away”. Such a statement, said Colbert, is “like standing up at your wedding and saying, ‘I am so excited to spend the rest of my life with you, Cindy, but also living alone is super cool. At some point, like so many other women, you will go away.’” And on Late Night, Seth Meyers tallied some grim pandemic statistics: the US now accounts for 30% of the world’s coronavirus cases, with 36 million people out of work; last week, the Fed reported that 40% of households making less than $40,000 a year lost a job in March. “Or, as the president put it last week: ‘We have met the moment, and we have prevailed,’” said Meyers. Trump later walked back his “prevailed” comments, claiming they only applied to testing, but still – “we have not prevailed on testing,” Meyers said. “I mean, it’s good that we’re ramping up testing now, but we needed it three months ago. Bragging about testing now is like showing up to a house that already burned down and offering to water the grass.” Meyers rattled off a list of countries that have flattened their coronavirus curves more than the US without the same level of economic devastation, such as Germany, Bhutan and Andorra. “Now, obviously, there are lots of factors, and those countries are all very different,” Meyers said, “but at least some of those countries have made strides in part due to a national strategy of widespread testing, tracing the contacts of positive cases and isolating those cases. “Meanwhile, our president doesn’t even think testing works.” Meyers also touched on Obama’s virtual commencement address/Trump subtweet over the weekend: “It’s both revealing and depressing that when Obama talks about grownups behaving like little children, we all know exactly who he’s talking about,” he said. “I mean, there’s no mystery. Even Trump knows.”