When I started this column in February there was no Covid-19. We know now there was, but it wasn’t yet our daily reality. I am a fiction writer, an Ivy League adjunct professor, a mother to two kids. I was meant to write about all the ways there was no longer space for people like me to make a stable living; all the ways this country’s lack of safety net – it’s merciless adherence to late capitalism, the gig economy, the broken healthcare system – were grinding so many of us down. I wrote, both before and after Covid-19, about my lack of health insurance. I might also have written about our lack of dental insurance, the pain I feel and have for years, each time I chew. I was meant to write about perception versus reality in what I do professionally. The owner of the New York restaurant Prune, Gabrielle Hamilton, wrote an essay about this recently – describing how, for so long, so many of us have been pretending that we were or were about to “make it”. We had checked all or most of the boxes we were told to check in our professions, even as our lives remained in constant states of anxiety and fear. Work – the ability not only to get it and to do it but to not ever stop it – is the attribute that is perhaps flaunted and celebrated most of all. One of the reasons many of us don’t share the ways we do not have enough money is, I would argue, because we’re ashamed to say we’re struggling. We’ve internalized that our suffering is our fault – that it is because we must not be working hard enough. I wanted to write about the pervasiveness of this feeling that there are no longer avenues to stability, because I wanted there to be less shame around it. I wanted to explore the ways that, in entrenched and fundamental ways, our struggles were more systemic than just us. In her essay, Hamilton speaks of talking to others she also thought of as successful who were actually just performing success the same way she did. Hearing them say now that they were one bad week or month from going under before Covid-19 shocked her. She discovered that, in fact, the lot of it has been a ruse for a while. It’s not just shame that keeps us quiet either. We keep our “failures” close to us because we know, especially in the markets that both Hamilton and I work in – art, books, restaurants – it’s so much about appearance. Is that book or that chef, that artist important? Why should anyone pay for her rent, her studio, her tour? Our pretending we’re not drowning is the proof we have that we might still be worth saving. Our performing stability is one of the few ways that we hope we might navigate the narrow avenues that might still get us out. A thing, though, about perpetuating misperceptions, about pretending – because you’re busy surviving, because you can’t stop playing the rigged game on the off-chance somehow that you might outsmart it, because you can’t help but feel like your circumstances must somehow be your fault – is that it makes it that much harder for any individual within the group to tell the truth. In the last installment of this column, I wrote about individual imagination. I wrote that our lives have not been working for a long time and much of that was a direct result of choices we made – I am individually responsible for choosing to be a writer, I am individually responsible for choosing to have kids. I might be able to abscond to rural Maine if we can’t afford our rent in the midst of this crisis. We might be able to find a way to stay put. But that does nothing for the other individuals across this country, who, through no fault of their own, find themselves with no safety valve. Individual shame and an individual desire to succeed in ruthless systems has kept many of us quiet about this country’s failures. They’re now so blatantly apparent. One of the things I hope this crisis makes space for is more of us acknowledging and saying out loud that our losses and our failures aren’t our individual faults. I hope we might begin to say out loud all the ways the system has failed us. To admit as a group that we are being slaughtered and exploited, that our bodies are overworked and undervalued, it takes the onus off of any one of us. It can and should make us feel less shame and less fear.