Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The number of people known to have died since the pandemic began has reached at least 286,330, according to researchers at Johns Hopkins University. They say at least 4,177,584 people are known to have been infected. The figures are likely to significantly underestimate the true scale of the pandemic. In the country so often cited as a beacon of success in tackling the coronavirus, 64 cases have now been connected to a cluster in Seoul’s nightclub district that was visited on 1 May by a man in his late 20s before he tested positive for the virus, Yonhap reported. Since mid April, the country had been adding fewer than 15 cases per day, including some days when there were no domestic infections. China reported zero new domestic coronavirus infections on Tuesday, after two consecutive days of double-digit increases fuelled fears of a second wave of infections. A new cluster reappeared over the weekend in the city of Wuhan, where the pandemic first emerged, while the northeastern city of Shulan was placed under lockdown Sunday after another outbreak emerged. On Monday, China’s National Health Commission reported 17 new cases, five of them in Wuhan. Seven of the new cases were imported. Between 11 March and 2 May, about 24,000 more people died in the city than researchers would ordinarily expect during that time period, a report by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. That’s about 5,300 more deaths than were blamed on the coronavirus in official tallies during those weeks. The New York Times reported that Dr Anthony Fauci, the leading US expert on infectious diseases and a key member of the White House coronavirus taskforce, will on Tuesday tell the US senate that reopening the economy early risks “needless suffering and death”. The president was criticised for telling an Asian-American journalist to direct her questions on the US’s epidemic to China, instead of to him. Trump insisted he would have answered the question the same way regardless of who had asked it. Trump refused to take further questions and abruptly ended the press conference. CNN’s influential chief media correspondent, Brian Stelter, said Trump’s actions had “racist overtones”. Trump also declared victory over the “invisible enemy” as US deaths pass 80,000. The White House has directed staff working in the West Wing to wear masks. The World Health Organization says “extreme vigilance” is needed as countries begin to exit lockdowns imposed to curb the virus’ spread. The warning comes after Germany reported an acceleration in new infections after easing its lockdown, and South Korea, another country that succeeded in limiting infections, saw a new outbreak in nightclubs. Once Australia removes most social distancing restrictions by July, its economy will be boosted by AU$9.4bn (US$6.15bn) each month, Treasurer Josh Frydenberg will say on Tuesday in a speech updating lawmakers on his budget planning. The temporary reopening marks another step in the government’s plans to ease restrictions that aimed to contain the spread of the new coronavirus, the official IRIB news agency reported. Mosques will only be open for three days commemorating specific nights for the holy month of Ramadan and it was unclear whether they would stay open, according to the Fars news agency.