You can see, if you squint a bit, the logic. It goes roughly: we need a hit! A palpable hit! One of those failsafe ones where we tweak a format, change the subject, everybody flocks to it, but nobody can sue us. What do people like that’s not cakes or quilts or pottery or invisible repairs carried out on precious family artefacts with skill whose delicacy is outdone only by the love with which it is exercised? Flowers? Yes, but that’s gardening. Gardening’s been done. Something that involves flowers that isn’t gardening? Yes! A few more meetings and brainstorming sessions and lo! The Big Flower Fight is born. Netflix’s non-parochial answer to The Great British Bake Off, The Great British Sewing Bee, Pottery Throwdown, The Repair Shop and any and all other iterations of hour-long programmes designed to snag the heart and imagination, deliver comfort and inspiration, and generally warm the intragenerational cockles. The only problem is that The Big Flower Fight is about making giant floral sculptures and the making of giant floral sculptures is not a Thing. By which I mean, it is not – by and large – a thing people hanker to do. It is not a thing, like baking or dressmaking or pottery making, that people wish they could find the time to indulge in. It is not a thing that you come across in the normal run of things that sparks a brief but genuine yearning that could then be fanned into the flame of desire for mastery. I can’t even think offhand where you might reliably run into one – on a carnival float? The entrance to a posh summer show? An extremely effortful and overpriced Valentine’s Day venue? Whatever the occasion, I just cannot envisage the mass reaction being a sigh of delight and a murmured longing: “I wish … I wish I could do that!” It is on such longings that the likes of Bake Off survive and thrive. Our common hopes and dreams are bodied forth in patisserie, patchwork or pots. Our emotional investment accrues in watching intimate acts of creation and self-expression. Not in the assembly of giant steel-framed, moss-stuffed floral insects, as the opening episode of The Big Flower Fight requires. Nor in the recreation of mammoths and other gigantic beasts out of grasses, nor in the making of scaled-up sea creatures out of coastal plants, as later episodes depict. Bake Off and its ilk transmute basic ingredients and materials into something better. The travel of Flower Fight is in the opposite direction. Watching the innumerable contestants (the producers can’t even be bothered to show us all of them in the opening episode) descend like a plague of locusts on the nursery provided for the show and denude it of its naturally beautiful stock, then force the plants and flowers into unnatural forms to far less beautiful effect is more depressing than uplifting. It’s sometimes actively painful. The presenters don’t seem convinced by the endeavour, either. Vic Reeves is nominally one of them, but seems to have rolled in for about two minutes of filming, gasped out a few lines and then headed home. The other – Natasia Demetriou, a fine comic actor – is around more, but looks desperately trapped and unhappy throughout. You feel for her deeply. The resident judge under the specially constructed giant dome housing the project is Kristen Griffith-VanderYacht (a designer from Detroit and “florist to the stars”) who, like any conscientious American, flogs himself nearly to death trying to inject some energy, pace and general enthusiasm into the whole thing. He is joined by a different specialist judge every week who are presumably hired for their particular field of botanical and/or design expertise (the opener has Humaira Ikram from the KLC School of Design, and she looks maybe a stamen’s breadth happier to be there than Demetriou) but, as the camera cannot cut away fast enough whenever any one of them mentions a plant name or threatens to disseminate any other tiny morsel of knowledge gleaned from their years of experience, it is hard to be certain. There are eight pairs of contestants – some florists, some artists, some gardeners and one self-taught “plant coach” – who hail mostly from England and Brooklyn (for, one suspects, recruitment budget reasons). They all seem perfectly nice, but they are simply too many. We meet barely half of them in the first episode, although the exits of the losers at the end of each of the episodes will eventually whittle things down to more manageable proportions. Look, if giant flower installations are your dream – have at it. I hope there are many more of you out there than I ever suspected, and that all the gerberas made into butterfly wings did not suffer in vain. But it smells off to me.