Sunday’s presidential election in Poland had a record low turnout of 0%. The vote was not officially cancelled but polling stations stayed closed, leading to a strange ghost election after weeks of legal wrangling over whether or not it should go ahead. The ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party, which has been accused of rolling back democratic norms in recent years, tried to hold the election despite the challenges of voting in times of Covid-19. The PiS-allied incumbent, Andrzej Duda, was the firm favourite to win, and the opposition accused the government of trying to push through the vote now to make it easier for him to win in the first round. Up until Wednesday evening, the government insisted a postal vote would go ahead. “The polling station is closed, which means someone cancelled the election. But it’s unclear who did or on what basis,” said Tomasz Trela, a leftist MP, after turning up at a school that usually functions as a polling station on Sunday. Opposition candidates believe Duda might have been more vulnerable in a later election, when the economic fallout of coronavirus restrictions is more apparent, and also complained that restrictions on movement meant campaigning was impossible. They wanted the government to declare a state of emergency or a state of natural disaster, both of which would have automatically postponed the election, but the government, which is informally controlled by the PiS party leader, Jarosław Kaczyński, refused to do so, saying the coronavirus situation was not serious enough to warrant it. The decision opened up a rift in the ruling coalition between PiS and one of its smaller governing partners. Poland, like most central European countries, has kept its coronavirus figures lower than western neighbours, partly through an early lockdown that is now being gradually eased. So far there have been about 16,000 confirmed cases and 800 deaths in the country, which has a population of 38 million. The run-up to the election was chaotic, with ballots printed before there was a legal basis for holding a postal election, and no clarity on whether hundreds of thousands of Poles abroad would be able to vote. Until a few days before, it was unclear whether the vote would proceed. “It turns out that reality is not as flexible as Jarosław Kaczyński’s mind,” said Szymon Hołownia, one of the opposition candidates, in a press conference on Monday. The national electoral commission set a deadline of two weeks to fix the date of a new election, which should be within 60 days of the announcement. There is likely to be continued wrangling over the legal basis for changing the election date, and over whether the new election will be conducted entirely by post or will feature voting in person. The head of the electoral commission, Sylwester Marciniak, said he hoped for a breakthrough that would allow for a vote that would be “fully democratic, transparent and fair”.