Shortly after the imposition of lockdown, I came across a team of workers painting red lines all the way down Ridley Road. They started at dusk and had to work through the night to complete the task. I was intrigued by the addition to the street iconography and developed the idea of making portraits to include both masks and these new lines of separation. Most of the people I approached were keen to be photographed, feeling that they wanted to advocate mask wearing. They had widely different reasons for choosing to wear a mask. Some felt they were protecting others – some were fearful of contracting the virus themselves. Masks can signify many things today: anxiety, isolation, social responsibility, fear or safety. In our “new normal” this material barrier has become a unifier, holding us together. Halima Salvador, catering assistant “It’s been really hard as we can’t see our families or socialise anymore. I can’t go to doctor’s appointments and I have been trying for a baby so it has put everything on halt. We can’t do the necessary appointments as the hospitals are telling us not to come in. So life has been pushed back. Going to do your grocery shopping takes all day, there are long queues. I hate wearing a mask. I feel like I can’t breathe with it on but it is part of my identity now, and when I walk down the street my friends don’t recognise me. I’m taking each day as it comes. We just have to be thankful and know these times will pass.” Mohammed Patel, retired motor mechanic and volunteer homeless healthcare advocate”I am disabled with many health issues, so I am terrified of this virus. It has also made me much more isolated because I cannot see the friends and neighbours who usually give me support. I try to be positive but it is hard living in fear. Covid-19 has shone a true light on what this government and its austerity measures have done. We, the disabled people are seen as scroungers living off the state and treated as second-class citizens. Thousands of lives have been lost due to what I believe is purposeful neglect. I use this high-end mask when I go out shopping for food. It will stop anything, both viruses and bacteria. It was £79, which is expensive for me.” Xiang Zheng and Afzal Iqbal, office administrator and minicab driver Xiang: “I have been working from home for one month already. We go out and walk on the streets for exercise and to buy food. We have lots of face masks and anti-bacterial wipes we use when we do go out.” Iqbal: “It’s been hard for me because as a minicab driver I don’t have any work right now. I take people to and from airports. It’s a confined place in a mini cab so it’s not safe right now. I have applied for other jobs like parcel delivery and I’m hoping for a new job soon. We can’t pay all the bills, so we’ve had to ask our landlady to reduce the rent. Hopefully we’ll get back to normal soon. This virus is airborne; small particles can fly 2 metres away. Masks act as a barrier to stop these particles, so they are a good thing to protect ourselves and others.” Oksana Yemelyanova, psychiatrist “I spent three weeks of this lockdown at home after having mild symptoms. But my illness only lasted for a week. It’s been in quite an interesting time for me staying indoors. I completed one of my paintings. I rehearsed a few musical pieces. I’ve had the chance to read more about medicine, which is very important for my professional development. I’m getting ready for my annual appraisal. Despite the first week when I was unwell, the rest of the time had been brilliant. WhatsApp, Skype and Messenger help me communicate with the whole world and my relationships with relatives in Russia, Spain in Latvia have improved. We are now more connected. Every cloud has a silver lining.” Melissa Turner, beauty therapist and student “So many businesses have closed down and many people now have to incorporate work into home life, and that is hard.  I am still continuing with my course but it’s different with everything having moved online. With so much shut down it’s harder to get deliveries of the equipment I need to continue my studies so that’s slowed things down for me. I’m still learning how I can work from home. Wearing a mask is my small part in how I think I can help this situation move along faster. It’s more hygienic for you and everyone you come into contact with.” Helbing Cabral De Almada, retired “This situation is really hard for me because I’m an outgoing person; I like to be outside so staying home every day is hard. Wearing a mask is not easy but it’s for our own good. I go on walks sometimes and to get food but that’s it. At home I live with my daughter and my partner. We’re all self-isolating together.” Anis Rahnn, civil enforcement officer “I feel that it’s very risky to come out to work, but I have to do it. I understand that not everyone is comfortable with wearing a mask because it’s not normal. But we have to do it, it’s very important. I personally feel like this country is not strict enough, I think things should be more like they are in Bangladesh where there are military conditions and the army is on the streets. Then maybe this situation would end sooner and less people would be dying.” Ambia Rahman and Khalisur Rahman, housewife and retired chef Ambia Rahman: “This situation stops you from doing anything. We’ve been spending time inside the house and we live with our two grown-up children so it feels crowded. You feel like you want to go out, but you know you can’t. I have a garden and I feel lucky about that. Sometimes my husband and I go for a walk. I feel if people are wearing masks it’s OK but there are so many people that are not wearing any sort of mask.  They need to be cautious so this can end faster.” Loriane ‘Dempsey’ Dunkley–Clark, retired dress designer “I’m retired and I live alone, so it’s not so easy. I love my home and I am fortunate to have a lovely space with a garden where I spend a lot of time. But I have noticed myself sometimes feeling depressed. I have to make sure I go out for a walk every day. It has made me more thoughtful and sometimes a bit unhappy. I have the radio on constantly and the news. I don’t have a television, thank God. If I still had it I’d probably just be staring at it all through the night.” Marco Darmanin, cleaner at Ridley Villas hostel for the homeless “I feel like I’m managing to handle this situation but its still very sad. Work has been good. We have a lovely team and we take care of each other and the residents, it’s all love and respect. That’s what makes this situation easier, even though you’re aware of what’s going on with people dying. But we’re all still going with a positive attitude. I wear a mask when I go outside, I find it a little harder to breathe but it’s manageable. It’s different but once you get used to that’s it. Humans are very adaptable.” Julliet Makhapila, community educator and poet “It’s terrible to see that so many people are losing their lives through this pandemic. It makes you realise life is short. But it is also a good reminder that we are all connected to each other. We need to learn to share more in this world. The little things in life are the most beautiful of all: smiling every day and loving our neighbours. Covid-19 also reminds us that social inequality is very real. I am constantly worried about shops closing or not having any food. Today was my first time wearing a mask. I think if you have a good quality mask it tricks your mind into thinking you’re going to be OK. I don’t believe it really makes a difference and l think the biggest practice is having good hygiene. AI worry that masks could bring about more crime, because it conceals people’s identities. But I understand we need to follow guidelines given by our government.” Fatima Farif, student “This situation now is difficult, I miss being outside and exploring London. I’m studying business and accounting and the course has moved online. It’s not been too bad but I miss going to campus. I take wearing a mask outside very seriously because I have a condition called sickle cell anaemia, which means that I am part of the vulnerable group. Because of this I have been really worried about going outside. I go out only to buy food and nothing else.” Hamed Ali, care worker “I work in Dalston, Monday to Friday. It has been hard because there are fewer carers working. I feel very worried about going outside sometimes. I wear a mask because I feel that anxiety, I don’t like it but I have no choice. I need to protect myself and others.” Alessandro Merlo and Aldo Gianola, photographer and psychology student Merlo: “The start of this lockdown was very anxiety inducing, I couldn’t do anything. Since then I’ve been trying to spend my time creatively. It’s put everything to a halt with Aldo too. He’s been studying and doing his exams from home. We’re Italian so we were concerned early on about the virus as we have family in Italy. I am someone who likes to dress up and wear clothing as a form of expression. I resisted wearing a mask but reading articles and speaking to Asian friends made me realise it was ridiculous to not wear a mask because it stops the spread. I also think it signals to others that you’re looking after them” Manny Wongkaew, creative director, stylist and lecturer at University of the Arts London “I was always out and come home just to sleep. Now I am home all the time and it has opened me up to my local community. I have been walking on the canal as my daily exercise.Life is much simpler. I’m a creative director/stylist and I teach. The classroom is now online. This can be an exciting opportunity for engaging and sharing ideas, but it is also hard. When the lockdown happened I was in the middle of house moving, but my landlord said I could stay on.  I support wearing masks to protect myself and protect people in our community.” This work was originally commissioned by Cortona on the Move, international festival of visual narrative in partnership with Intesa Sanpaolo, for The Covid-19 Visual Project. A Time of Distance and can be viewed in full at covid19visualproject.org, an ongoing permanent archive of the coronavirus pandemic and its impact on people’s lives around the globe. The online platform, launched on 11 May 2020, will continue to grow until a vaccine or a cure is found.