Well, it’s clear what we have to do then: go outside, but don’t go outside, start to socialise again but not with more than one person and not at a distance of less than two metres, and go to work but don’t go to work, and don’t go on the bus if you have to go to work, but if you do go to work don’t get the bus, please, and if you have to work (and you can! And should! But don’t) then drive yourself there. Fines will be increased for rule-breaking. Nobody on Earth has any idea what the rules actually are. Just know that fines are looming, somehow, for something. So to clarify: work is bad, buses are bad, rules are bad, work is good, rules don’t exist, fines are everywhere, fines are nowhere, disorder reigns. The overwhelming response to Boris Johnson’s Sunday night address was “sorry, what?”. Thankfully, on Monday the government issued more clarified guidance about wearing face coverings in public and doing your laundry more regularly. But it must be said, a lot of it still lives in a netherzone of “potentially” and “not always possibles”. The significant question is whether all this has finally pushed the pandemic strategy over into the container marked “shitshow” or not? Because I have this recurring fear that, somehow, history is going to remember Johnson heroically, as a brave patriot dragging this country out of the pandemic by the scruff of its ruddy neck, and that anyone who survives the next year in Britain will speak of him as such, glad enough to do it simply in exchange for not being dead. This is more a plea to the historians reading back about this moment among the strewn remains of Britain in 80 or 90 years’ time: no, genuinely, please believe me. He messed this up. From start to finish, he messed this all up. So to Sunday, and The Great Obfuscation. The thing is, we had a clear public health message that, beyond the odd VE Day conga, broadly worked to keep us indoors: “Stay home, protect the NHS, save lives.” But you’ve noticed it over the past couple of weeks, a rustle on the wind, a groundswell of cabin fever: people demanding lockdown be eased because they are bored of looking after their own children and want to buy compost again. Changing the message to the chewed-up meaninglessness of “Stay alert, control the virus, save lives” just takes the onus off “staying home”, and the “staying home” bit felt quite vital. Remember when coronavirus loomed and Italy was being held up as the anti-example of how bad a pandemic could get, and we were told: “It’s fine to go to Cheltenham so long as you sing God Save the Queen while you wash your hands there”? Impossibly, it seems like our messaging has gone backwards from that. Johnson’s Sunday night address started fairly well, to be fair to him, before he introduced the threat-level graphic stolen from the Nando’s peri-peri sauce-meter and started sketching a rough idea, with a logo of a ticket and a takeaway frappuccino cup, that we might be able to go to the cinema again in July. (Angela Merkel, whose country is the leading light of European public health management right now, would have probably considered a July-time cinema trip when she was cautiously relaxing lockdown measures to be “ein bit much”.) In among the meaningless graphics and the complete obliteration of clarity, he did manage to pay lip service to the most significant agitators of lockdown: people who say “freedom!” a lot, people who say “the economy!” a lot, and builders, who as best I can tell, have been working throughout the lockdown anyway. Stay alert, then. Are you alert right now? I’m coiled like a spring that doesn’t know which way to bounce. Because Sunday night’s address gave us two concepts entirely at odds with each other: the first, that we have slowly wrested control of the virus and turned down the infamous R, but need to be constantly wary of a dreadful second wave; and, also, a deliberate opening of a void-sized grey area in government guidance, giving the public a far looser idea of what they are and are allowed to do, which means that the infamous R will obviously increase in a few weeks. All this means that – when we do suffer a second wave – the government can just pull out a photograph of me legally sunbathing in a park and say, “it’s his fault”. It does seem odd that Britain has now cleaved into two half-Britains. In one corner are those fearful that a new and unclear loosening of the regulatory structure means employers can rush service-facing workers back into employment despite it being dangerous for them to do so, the same people who have been worried for weeks about the nation’s supply of PPE. In the other corner: people who really want to go the garden centre again. And the garden centre lot are winning. In a fascinating article over the weekend, the New York Times theorised that pandemics end one of two ways: medically, with a vaccine or plummeting death rate, or socially, when the wave of panic and fear over the disease starts to wane. We’ve been in lockdown for a measly little seven weeks, we’ve got the highest death toll in Europe, and already we’re unafraid enough of the pandemic to demand our legal right to go to Homebase again. I hope history doesn’t laugh at us for this. • Joel Golby is the author of Brilliant, Brilliant, Brilliant Brilliant Brilliant