If you come to The Eddy (Netflix) with hopes for a reprise of its executive producer and lead director Damien Chazelle’s Oscar-winning La La Land, you should set them quietly aside. Look elsewhere for your sunlit musical romcom needs, and save his new eight-part series for your darker moods. The Eddy is set in Paris. Not in the city’s sparkling centre but in the grittier, graffitied margins. The title takes its name from the jazz club owned and run by virtuosic jazz pianist Elliot (André Holland) who fled New York for Europe when his young son died, and his friend Farid (Tahar Rahim), whose ebullience and optimism are in stark contrast to his withdrawn and wounded friend. It’s a world of hustlers and immigrants, united by their ability to come together and make music – if not quite enough money. There are glimpses of hope, when respected managers appear at the back of the audience to cast an appraising eye on the talent but it never amounts to anything more than a word of encouragement or an exhortation for Elliot to get up on stage himself and return to what he does best. His club is struggling. Bands play to half-empty rooms and Elliot has added another complication to his business venture by having – and breaking off – a relationship Maja (Joanna Kulig), the singer of the best band they host. Feelings twang like a untuned double bass and although Farid does his best to restore harmony, the musicians and everyone else are unsettled and frustratingly – sometimes literally – out of sync with each other. To this mess is added Elliot’s rebellious teenage daughter Julie (Amandla Stenberg) who arrives from New York to spend some time with her dear old dad, and possibly to escape her drug habit and her stepfather. The only remotely happy character is Farid, a devoted husband and father whose tender, sexy relationship with his wife (Amira, played by Leïla Bekhti) springs to life beautifully in just a handful of scenes. So it is of a piece with this unrelievedly sombre and melancholic series that Farid is soon killed. He had borrowed money from criminal gangs to try to save the Eddy from financial ruin. In a way, the plan works – at least temporarily – as the club fills with gawkers and ghouls eager to spend an evening at a murder scene. Each episode centres on a different character and their more-or-less bedevilled backgrounds, involving drug abuse, poverty and various forms of chaos that the semi-itinerant musician is susceptible to. The Eddy sustains them – it is a place of relative calm (at least for those not charged with keeping it afloat) where they can rest and gather themselves to create a few minutes of magic on stage before the current of life snatches them away again. There is little narrative light or air let into its eight hours. What it has instead is large pauses to let the cast – who are almost all accomplished musicians or singers, many in their first acting roles – play full jazz numbers. All the tunes are original (written by Glen Ballard and Randy Kerber), and the performance and rehearsal scenes dominate; they are filmed at such length and in such loving detail that it is obvious where the creator’s heart and interest lies. Chazelle may only have directed the first two episodes, but he sets the tone. And the sessions are brilliant. But they don’t serve the slow, slight plot and for anyone whose interests lie more in the drama than the music, these extended interludes may well tip the balance into outright tedium. Call it the Treme trap. The script, by Bafta-award winning Jack Thorne (This Is England, National Treasure, the recent adaptation of His Dark Materials and much outstanding else besides) is not one that shines, though it does dip in and out of multiple languages, and give a great sense of the deeper bond among the people who end up in the Eddy together, even as they struggle and clash on the surface. True jazz fans may find it the perfect riff on the basic gangster plot. The rest of us, perhaps, not so much.