André Sills makes his opening speech with his face projected on to a classical bust. In glacial greys, he holds a steady expression as he scorns the “dissentious rogues” of the common people. This is Coriolanus as Romanesque statue. It’s the kind of hi-tech game – simple, playful and slickly achieved – you expect of Québécois director Robert Lepage, here working with Ontario’s Stratford festival. It’s also right for Shakespeare’s most marble-like hero, an unyielding patrician warrior, who sees compromise as weakness and negotiation an insult to his superior nature. He’s an easy man to be impressed by and an impossible man to like. Sills, when we see him in the flesh, plays this austere fighting machine with an alpha male authority. By rights we should side with Stephen Ouimette and Tom Rooney as the people’s tribunes, but next to this broad-shouldered absolutist, they are weaselly middle managers, speaking truth but lacking flair. So low is their charisma that even the waiters ignore them. By contrast, Sills dominates the stage as a leader with no instinct for forbearance. He looks ready to burst out of his shirt like the Incredible Hulk, hungering for battle as if nothing else had value. After one conflict is over, he judders like a punch-drunk boxer; it could be post-traumatic stress disorder or a last moment of orgiastic frenzy for a man whose sexuality is sublimated by war. His relationship with Graham Abbey as archenemy Aufidius is laced with the kind of homoeroticism you see between Sandra Oh and Jodie Comer in Killing Eve. Only a magnificent Lucy Peacock as Volumnia can silence him. She manages to make her monstrous motherly ambition seem a reasonable preoccupation for the glamorous woman about town. She has enough political nous to know when her son has gone too far and the nerve to tell him. Excellently filmed by Barry Avrich, Lepage’s witty production is all sliding widescreen oblongs, his setting a modern-day world of radio phone-ins, WhatsApp exchanges and wine bar meetings. In our era of absolutist leaders, it captures the tension between a despotism that is streamlined but inhumane and a democracy that is messy but fair. •Available online until 21 May.