Forced Entertainment’s latest project mines chaotic humour from lockdown melancholy. A bingeable three-part improvisation recorded on Zoom, End Meeting for All is one of the strangest and most entertaining video calls you’ll have during isolation. Each single-take instalment runs for 25 minutes, with six performers framed in neat rows. Robin Arthur, Tim Etchells, Richard Lowdon, Claire Marshall, Cathy Naden and Terry O’Connor lean in close, the wrinkles and crinkles of their faces and fingertips in hazy focus. Over the three episodes, they play with the craziness that comes from one-too-many Zoom calls – the talking over each other, repetitions, ugly angles and crap connection. They stop listening, wander away, get a delivery, take a phone call. One of them constantly refills her glass with gin. But this is more than a neat parody. In a state of wired exhaustion, the participants map out the slow chaos of our new normal. As with most of Forced Entertainment’s work, there is no narrative, but the gradual repetitions and breakdowns create a layered understanding of isolation. The first episode lays out the confusion of lockdown, the desire to listen and the frustration of not being heard. The second feels almost funereal, while the toll of long-term quarantine really hits in the third. Soft and hopeful, Etchells describes going to have a cup of tea with his dad when all of this is over. It feels so cruel that such a simple desire is so far out of reach. Against the intense sense of unending loneliness, each of the three pieces is filled with brilliant humour. These performers are natural jokers, and they evoke easy laughter from the inane conversations that arise when everyone can only half-hear each other and they’re only half-listening anyway. Forced Entertainment are known for the length of their performances, which sometimes go on for six hours or more. In this dead-end time we’re experiencing where stillness reigns, I wish End Meeting for All had been one of those. These sad, locked-up clowns are bewitching; I could have watched for hours more. • Available to view until the end of June.