For readers of eight-plus this month, The List of Things that Will Not Change (Andersen) from the Newbery-winning author Rebecca Stead follows Bea, a girl adapting to life with separated parents, as her dad prepares to marry his boyfriend, Jesse. Bea is excited about acquiring a new sister, Sonia, but will Sonia be as keen? As Bea contends with guilt and anxiety and learns to cope with change, family love remains a constant in this beautifully constructed, deceptively simple story. Second in Sharna Jackson’s murder mystery series set on the Tri estate, and featuring black detective sisters Nik and Norva, Mic Drop (Knights Of) begins with the fatal fall of pop star TrojKat from a tower roof. Kat had moved a long way from her roots on the estate, and global superstardom was just around the corner – but can Nik and Norva figure out who had reason to contrive an “accident”? Offering emotional impact as well as an intriguing, intricate puzzle, Jackson’s writing is original and vivid. Fantasy fans should snap up Jenni Spangler’s superlative debut, The Vanishing Trick (Simon & Schuster). The orphaned Leander leads a precarious existence as a pickpocket until he crosses paths with the unscrupulous Madame Pinchbeck. Bound to her service, Leander, Charlotte and Felix must act as the stars of Pinchbeck’s seances, trapped by objects that hold part of their souls, and into which they vanish when commanded. Will they ever be free of their fearsome mistress, or be reunited with their loved ones? Atmospheric and transporting, with illustrations by Chris Mould, this is a delectably spooky Victorian adventure. From Alex Gino, author of George, comes the sequel Rick (Scholastic). As middle school and puberty begin, Rick is keen to befriend Melissa, whom he previously knew as George, but Rick’s best friend, Jeff, is violently homophobic and transphobic. This exploration of feelings, change, courage and acceptance is a rare and essential addition to books for this age group. For seven-plus, an indomitable young activist is here to make a change in Hope Jones Saves the World (Andersen) by Josh Lacey, illustrated by Beatriz Castro. Via funny, believable blog posts, Hope narrates the progress of her anti-plastic struggle, with protests outside the local supermarket, attempts to get her grumpy neighbour recycling and missteps along the way. Lacey’s focus on small gains and collective action makes for a lively and heartening read. A gorgeous and informative paean to plants, I Ate Sunshine for Breakfast (Flying Eye) by Michael Holland and Philip Giordano will suit five-plus readers with its colourful graphic illustrations and well-judged text, guiding the reader through what plants need to thrive, how they adapt to adversity and the myriad ways in which we depend on them, with simple but exciting projects to try at home. Deliciously silly, with hilarious catchphrases, Joanna Nadin’s The Worst Class in the World (Bloomsbury), illustrated with grubby glee by Rikin Parekh, is a great cheer-up book. According to headteacher Mrs Bottomley-Blunt, 4B are the rottenest of eggs – when will they win a prize like 4A? But somehow the shambolic crew always muddle through, even though Mr Nidgett keeps threatening to leave teaching and become a lion-tamer. In picture books, Sarah McIntyre returns with Don’t Call Me Grumpycorn! (Scholastic), in which Unicorn takes to space in search of the world’s most fabulous planet. Resplendent in firework colours, this is enormous fun to read aloud, with a gentle but clear message about the importance of friendship. Friendship is also the focus of I’m Sticking With You (S&S) by Smriti Halls and Steve Small. A galumphing bear always helps out his squirrel best friend, with mixed consequences – until Squirrel tells Bear he’d like some space. Deftly humorous images and warmly rhyming text make for a lovely book to cuddle up with. Finally, from Jackie Morris and James Mayhew, Mrs Noah’s Garden (Otter-Barry) is an exquisitely hopeful account of what might have happened when the ark touched land. Mayhew’s glorious collaged artwork combines with Morris’s restrained text to show how bare rock and sparse vegetation can become a flourishing garden, nurturing new life of all kinds. Camp by Lev Rosen, Penguin, £7.99Randy has loved Camp Outland, a summer haven for LGBTQ+ kids, for years. This time, though, things will be different; abandoning his beloved musicals and makeup, Randy has reinvented himself as butch, muscular Del, determined to win the heart of Hudson, who dates only “masc” boys. But is his transformation worth it – and what will happen when Hudson discovers the truth? Blissfully comic (and explicit) utopian queer romance. Clap When You Land by Elizabeth Acevedo, Hot Key, £7.99When Camino hears that her father’s flight has gone down en route to the Dominican Republic, neither she nor Yahaira expect to discover that they are sisters. In her trademark taut, intensely evocative poetry, Carnegie-winning Acevedo tells a moving story of different lives inextricably intertwined, and of grief, bitterness and renewal, in a new verse novel that is as transporting and powerful as The Poet X. The Colours that Blind by Rutendo Tavengerwei, Hot Key, £7.99In this story of present-day Zimbabwe and conflict-riven Rhodesia, talented swimmer Tumi is mistrusted for his albinism; his own uncle even connives at his kidnap. Sent to stay with his grandmother Thandiwe, Tumi mistrusts her in turn – until reading her story helps him understand what they share. Tragedy, hatred and atrocity are shown with unflinching directness, but Tavengerwei’s second novel is also an eloquent plea for acceptance and reconciliation. Hideous Beauty by William Hussey, Usborne, £7.99Dylan is afraid to come out until flamboyant, magnificent Ellis arrives at school. When they are outed via social media, he’s proud to acknowledge his sexuality and his beloved boyfriend. But suddenly, tragedy strikes. Grieving and shocked, Dylan is determined to investigate, no matter what uncomfortable truths he uncovers. Almost unbearably poignant, this tender evocation of first love and loss is also warm, funny and profoundly thought-provoking.