A property development company behind some of London’s most prestigious developments has told staff they could be asked to return to the office, even if they can do their job from home. Galliard Homes, which describes itself as London’s leading property developer, sent a memo to staff outlining the conditions under which it intends to resume operations as lockdown restrictions begin to ease. The Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) document also includes a section under the heading: “Why am I being told to return to the office when the guidance is still clearly if you can work from home, do so?” The response contained in the FAQ is that government guidance “specifically references easing the burden on public transport”. “If you are able to work from home, you may be permitted to do so to limit the usage of public transport. This will be determined by your line manager in conjunction with HR.” It adds that staff could be requested to return to the office if they can’t work from home but also if “your presence is deemed necessary to facilitate the effective return to normal business operations”. Government guidance states: “You should work from home unless it is impossible for you to do so.” The guidance is not limited to those who use public transport. People working on construction sites and in manufacturing are included among those who can return to work. While Galliard does have staff in such roles, the memo does not appear to be limited to people who can only do their job on site. A Galliard staff member, whose employment status the Guardian has verified, said the instructions included head office staff. The employee said they had raised concerns with the company’s HR department. In a series of statements, Galliard Homes said it was taking the utmost care of its staff and appeared to suggest, incorrectly, that the Guardian may have sent the email to HR. A spokesman for Galliard Homes said: “Your understanding is factually incorrect. We have received two emails from a single anonymous email address but suspected that was possibly a journalist seeking out a story where there is none – your inquiry now reinforces that suspicion. There is no story.” In a second statement the company said: “FAQs issued to staff provide information to Galliard staff; no Galliard employee has raised an interpretation as you are dishonestly asserting. “In fact, some colleagues are certainly not returning to work in the office environment because Galliard cares and looks after our people. “The specific reasons discussed and the individuals accommodated are none of your business – and if you state that any person or persons have requested and/or been denied such humanity then you are lying because you know we have confirmed it to be false. “We have since discovered that the originating IP address of the two anonymous emails the company received, which uses the same language as your correspondence, has a history of being reported elsewhere as a source of trolling.” The company did not address the substance of the guidelines contained in its FAQ document. Andy McDonald, Labour’s shadow secretary for employment rights, said any confusion over when staff should return to work was down to “mixed messaging from the government”. He said the guidance “fails to make existing health and safety law clear, including that no employee should be pressured to work if they reasonably fear their health is at risk. “Without clarity and an enforceable plan for a safe return to workplaces, the health of workers and their families will continue to be put in danger.” Gail Cartmail, assistant general secretary of the United trade union, said government guidelines stated that “those who can work from home should work from home”. “To suggest this is solely about whether or not you use public transport is a complete nonsense. “This flawed advice highlights the critical role that unions play in placing checks on employers who are unwilling to toe public health guidelines.” Essex-based Galliard Homes is majority owned by its co-founder Stephen Conway, 72, named in this month’s Sunday Times Rich List as the 319th richest person in the UK, along with his family. His net worth increased by £75m to £413m thanks in part to a strong year for Galliard Homes, which has overseen London developments including Butler’s Wharf and the old County Hall. Profits for the last financial year rose to nearly £62m on revenues of £368m.