Here we go again. Facebook, a tech company that suffers from the delusion that it’s a nation state, has had another go at pretending that it is one. Originally, you will recall, it was going to create a global currency called Libra and in effect become shadow banker to the world. Strangely, a world that normally seems hypnotised by Facebook turned out to be distinctly unimpressed by that idea; after all, who would trust Facebook with money? So the project is effectively evaporating into something that looks a bit like PayPal, which is not quite what Facebook’s supreme leader, Mark Zuckerberg, had in mind. Nothing daunted, though, Zuck has had another hubristic idea. On the grounds that Facebook is the world’s largest information-exchange autocracy (population 2.6 billion) he thinks that it should have its own supreme court. (Yes, that’s the expression he originally used: later, wiser councils – possibly a guy called Nick Clegg – persuaded him that that might be just a tad presumptuous.) So it’s now just an “oversight board for content decisions”, complete with its own charter and a 40-strong board of big shots who will, it seems, have the power “to reverse Facebook’s decisions about whether to allow or remove certain posts on the platform”. Sounds impressive, doesn’t it? But it looks rather less so when you realise what it will actually be doing. It’s actually a board for locking the stable door after the horses have bolted. Let us call the Facebook oversight board by its initials: FOB. The names of 20 of the 40 aforementioned big shots have just been announced. The big puzzle at the moment is why some apparently sane people with reputations to lose would have chained themselves to this particular catherine wheel. Apart from anything else, they have committed themselves to endorsing Zuckerberg’s overweening vanity about the central importance of Facebook to the world. One big surprise (for me, anyway) was that Alan Rusbridger, the former editor of the Guardian, should have lent his name and reputation to this circus. In an essay on Medium he’s offered a less than convincing justification. “In the eyes of some,” he writes, “the oversight board is one of the most significant projects of the digital age, ‘a pivotal moment’ in the words of Evelyn Douek, a young scholar at Harvard, ‘when new constitutional forms can emerge that will shape the future of online discourse.’” “Others are unconvinced,” continues Rusbridger. “Some, inevitably, will see it as a fig leaf.” Facebook is not a public body: it's a powerful and rich global corporation with no democratic legitimacy I’m in the fig leaf camp, but even those like the aforementioned Douek – who evidently takes the FOB seriously – seem to have serious doubts about its viability. The most important question, she writes, is about the FOB’s jurisdiction, which of Facebook’s decisions the board will be able to review. “The board’s ‘bylaws’ contemplate a potentially vast jurisdiction, including the power to hear disputes about groups, pages, events, ads and fact-checking,” says Douek. “But the bylaws only promise this jurisdiction at some unspecified time ‘in the future’ and initially the board’s jurisdiction is limited to referrals from Facebook and ‘content that has been removed for violations of content policies’ from Facebook or Instagram.” Which neatly dodges the problem that many of the issues with Facebook’s content moderation decisions stem not from stuff that is taken down, but the crap that the company allows to remain on its platform. The most puzzling aspect of this whole shebang, though, is its sheer, pretentious effrontery. Facebook is not a public body: it’s a powerful and rich global corporation with no democratic legitimacy. Not only that, but its toxic business model has done a great deal in the last decade to undermine democratic institutions and practices, not to mention enabling a spot or two of ethnic cleansing and genocide It’s as if Exxon had decided to set up a “supreme court” to adjudicate on its decisions to open or close oil refineries and the level of CO2 emissions it would allow in the current year. This is part of a wider and disturbing trend – the ceding of authority by territorial sovereigns such as courts and legislatures to “functional sovereigns” such as Amazon, Google and Facebook. Institutions like the FOB play the same role in this transition as the supposed Potemkin villages of old – impressive facades designed to hide an undesirable fact or condition – in this case the inexorable rise to power of tech corporations. 1. Sure, the velociraptors are still on the loose, but that’s no reason not to reopen Jurassic Park. A wonderful satire by Carlos Greaves on the McSweeney’s site. 2. How big tech plans to profit from the pandemic. A powerful blast in the Guardian by activist and author Naomi Klein. 3. “Between solitude and loneliness.” A lovely 2016 essay by the poet Donald Hall from the New Yorker.