There’s nothing like a global pandemic when you want to slip a contentious planning application in under the radar. As all attention is focused on Covid-19, plans have been submitted for a gargantuan new arena, conference centre and hotel complex on the banks of the River Tyne, which could change the face of Newcastle-Gateshead for ever. The timing is striking. Just as the future of conferences and other mass events is being called into question, the developers are pressing ahead with one of the biggest people magnets the north-east has ever seen. Billed as bringing “another landmark destination” to Gateshead Quays, the £260m project will occupy one of the most prominent sites in the region, slap bang between the Sage concert venue and the Baltic Centre for Contemporary Art. Designed by arena specialist HOK, with AHR architects, the scheme is set to bring a 12,500-seat arena, 300-room hotel and three vast exhibition halls to the 10-acre waterside site, along with shops and restaurants, all packed inside a crumpled mishmash of competing structures. It looks like the compromised result of design-by-committee, employing a plethora of materials and awkward angles in a vain attempt to break up the lumpen mass. Public reaction has been caustic. “They’re proposing to build something from scratch that looks like the result of multiple awkward extensions to a 1970s shopping centre,” commented one Twitter user. Another was more damning: “What is this bollocks – Dignitas North East?” The project is all the more disappointing given the time it has taken to get this far. For almost two decades, the heart of Gateshead’s waterfront has been scarred by a great windswept wasteland. On one side stands the Sage, a divisive building – variously compared to a metallic peanut and a swollen slug – but one that seems to unite all opinions with its world-class acoustics. It was designed by Norman Foster in the early 2000s, at around the same time that he was conjuring vanity monuments for central Asian autocrats, and it has always seemed cast adrift, marooned up a slope on the edge of a car park. Across the other side of the windswept tarmac expanse, down several flights of stairs, across a road and down yet more steps, stands the Baltic, a 1950s flour mill transformed into a gallery in the Tate Modern mould, opened in 2002. Together with the winking Millennium Bridge, which cleverly pivots to let boat traffic through, these projects were an impressive symbol of Gateshead’s culture-led regeneration programme during the New Labour years – only let down by the great unplanned mess between them. “We always held it up as an example for our students,” says Mark Tewdwr-Jones, professor of town planning at Newcastle University, “of how not to do planning. That site has been a cause célèbre for planning disasters.” While the Newcastle side of the river was subject to a Terry Farrell masterplan, led by the former Tyne & Wear Development Corporation in the 1990s, the Gateshead side never had an overarching idea in place. John Devlin, Gateshead council’s development director at the time, says the Sage and Baltic were conceived as “anchor tenants” that would then encourage private development for the space in between. In 2004, Taylor Woodrow built an S-shaped flank of cheap-looking apartment blocks that loom immediately behind the Baltic, but their plans to continue across the rest of the site ran out of steam. Other proposals came and went over the years, but nothing stuck. “We could never make it stack up,” says Peter Udall, director of economy, innovation and growth at Gateshead council. “We have long had the ambition for a conference centre on this site, but we could never find the right operator. This is about the third attempt to get something that works.” Following an open OJEU tender process, developer Ask Real Estate and German investment manager Patrizia were selected to work with the council to bring forward plans for the site. As the duo behind Manchester’s uninspiring First Street development, where the cut-price arts venue Home is hemmed in by a tacky hotel and offices, it is not an auspicious choice. “It was going to be a rather safe mixed-use development with offices and hotels,” says Udall, “but then SMG [an arena-operating firm, now known as ASM Global] came on board and it became far more ambitious.” ASM currently operates the Utilita arena (formerly the Metro Radio arena) across the river in Newcastle and intends to shift its operations to the new complex in 2023, if the project goes ahead. The resulting design betrays the piecemeal nature of its evolution, with AHR architects in charge of the boxy hotel and HOK attempting to cram the rest of the facilities on the steeply sloping site, linked by a clumsy series of terraces and steps. In an attempt not to drown out the “iconic” status of its illustrious neighbours, the architects have resorted to a language of banal blocks, jazzed up in places with jaunty angles and faceted rooftops, wrapped in a busy palette of brick, slate, concrete, glass, Corten steel and expanded metal mesh – the latter material listed as “to disguise”, as if in the hope that people might not notice the hulking great pile. In the planning application, the architects describe how brick is used to “draw on the industrial heritage of the site” while the roof of the squat river-facing block has a “sawtooth movement leading to a gradual crescendo” towards the Sage. “The organisation and massing of the large scale components has been carefully curated to complement the immediate context and neighbouring buildings,” they continue, in garbled platitudes. “The expression of the buildings take visitors on a cognitive journey through the site and give clues to the usage and communicates to the visitor at each interface.” By attempting to be both landmark building and background filler, the only journey the architects offer is a one-way ticket to cognitive dissonance. The council is in a bind. While the Sage, the Baltic and the Millennium Bridge were all the result of international design competitions, and led by the council, for this project it has handed over control to the private sector, with predictable results. “The process is very different,” says Udall. “We were the client for the other three projects and were a lot more involved in the detail of the brief. With the arena and conference centre, we feel we can still maintain our influence, but the choice of architect is up to Ask and Patrizia.” Why not insist on an architectural competition, given it is such a prominent site? The complex will be centre stage in views from the Tyne Bridge, and confront anyone looking across the river from Newcastle for generations. “I think we’d have lost the developer if we had insisted on going down the competition route,” says Udall. “It’s such a massive building with so many commercial constraints for the operator. A grain of sand can derail this kind of project.” In the calibre of its design, the proposals sadly call to mind the Trinity Square development nearby. Once home to Owen Luder’s brutalist car park, featured in the 1971 film Get Carter, it was demolished to make way for a comically bad Tesco with student flats on top, shortlisted for the Carbuncle Cup in 2014. As Owen Hatherley wrote at the time: “With this demolition, we’re exchanging architecture as a physical experience for buildings as a mute, grinning, lobotomised accompaniment to consumerism.” It is true that development economics in Gateshead are not comparable to London or Manchester. The town centre is full of vacant retail units, while half of the population has a total household income of under £30,000. The local authority clearly has more urgent priorities. But that’s no excuse to see the waterfront desecrated with such mediocre fare. Enjoying the rare position of being a major landowner, and having a recent history of commissioning brave buildings for the arts, Gateshead council must have the confidence to insist on better.