Troy Deeney was one of several Watford players who chose not to take part in small-group training on Wednesday, the day after three members of the club’s playing and coaching staff, including the centre-back Aidy Mariappa, were found to have tested positive for Covid-19. Four groups of players, each of no more than five, trained at the club’s Hertfordshire base on Wednesday. Excluding Mariappa, who is isolating for seven days and will be retested before returning to training, Gerard Deulofeu, who moved into his physiotherapist’s house in Spain before that country imposed its lockdown in an effort to accelerate his recovery from a serious knee injury, and those on loan when league football was paused the club has 26 senior professionals, including three goalkeepers. Those who chose not to come were given details of the exercises their teammates were being put through and asked to do them alone. They are under no pressure to come to the training ground before they are comfortable to do so. Watford have been one of the most outspoken clubs regarding plans to restart the Premier League in June. Deeney said on Sunday that he would not participate in group training and over the weekend the manager, Nigel Pearson, raised concerns about a coronavirus-related death in the league. Earlier on Wednesday Mariappa revealed he was the Watford player who tested positive for coronavirus. Two members of staff at the club also returned positive results. Mariappa said he was asymptomatic and had not breached any guidelines. “Ever since I got my positive result back on Tuesday, I’ve been scratching my head to try to work out how I might have got coronavirus,” the defender told the Telegraph. “It was a big surprise because I haven’t really left the house, apart from some exercise and the odd walk with the kids. I’ve mainly just been homeschooling and keeping fit. “My lifestyle is very quiet, certainly no parties or going out or anything, so I really don’t know how I got it. Like most people, we’ve been having more deliveries of food and things, so maybe that’s one way, and my partner has been to the supermarket a few times.” Watford have been one of the most outspoken clubs regarding plans to restart the Premier League in June. Deeney, had said he would not participate and the manager, Nigel Pearson, raised concerns about a coronavirus-related death in the league. Watford said all three club members would isolate for seven days before being tested again, in line with Premier League guidelines. This week Deeney said he had raised questions at a meeting involving the league and captains and had not been satisfied it was safe to train. “We’re due back in this week; I’ve said I’m not going,” he told Eddie Hearn and Tony Bellew on their Talk the Talk YouTube show. “Within the meeting I asked very simple questions. For Black, Asian and mixed ethnicities they are four times more likely to get the illness and twice as likely to have long-lasting illness. Is there any additional screening? Heart stuff, to see if anyone has a problem? “I feel that should be addressed. I can’t get a haircut until mid-July but I can go and get in a box with 19 people and jump for a header? I don’t know how that works. No one could answer the questions – not because they didn’t want to, because they didn’t have the information. I just said: ‘If you don’t know the information, why would I put myself at risk?’” Pearson told the Times in an article published last Saturday: “God forbid we have a fatality. People are closing their eyes to the threat. Yes, we would like to restart it but it’s got to be safe. We should be cautious. To ignore possibilities is foolhardy. It’s about safeguarding people’s health.” Premier League protocols have been drawn up in consultation with the government and health officials. Covid-19 tests were conducted on 748 players and staff at 19 clubs on Sunday and Monday and the 20th club completed testing on Tuesday. Burnley’s assistant manager, Ian Woan, is the only other person identified as having returned a positive result. Full, anonymised details will be in the results from a second round of testing, due to be published on Saturday.