Dear Sir, the evidence is building from all sides. After the sharpest monthly increase in unemployment in April on record, school and university leavers face the toughest labour market this summer for 75 years. Already, 30% of university students have either lost their job or offer of a job. Moreover, young people in work are disproportionally suffering from redundancy or the requirement to work shorter working hours: one in three is receiving less pay than they were in January. Generation “Covid”, through no fault of their own, face having their lives altered as no other generation since the war, with scars that will last their entire lives. Our national conversation must now incorporate how we act to turn this looming disaster into an opportunity. In that spirit we propose the establishment of a National Youth Corps that should be able to guarantee at least the minimum wage in a wide variety of work and training opportunities for all those between 16 and 25 who apply. It should extend until the end of 2021. Via the Youth Corps, the government will in effect be offering the guarantee of work to our young people at a pivotal moment in their lives. The Youth Corps should be sufficiently flexible to allow employers (and institutions) to offer a top-up wage for particular skills if they choose. A core part of the plan is to involve young people at a senior level at all stages of the design and implementation and ongoing management. Crucially, it will also embed Britain’s most ambitious ever mentoring capability. Through personal, one-to-one mentoring, Youth Corps members will be guided and supported to acquire the knowledge, networks, skills, experience and confidence they need to succeed in this “new normal”. The Youth Corps offer, including its mentoring, will thus ensure that young people from the most disadvantaged backgrounds are able fully to participate and benefit from the scheme. British-based employers should pledge a range of job offers depending on their financial circumstances, with the option to opt out if in significant economic difficulty. The proposals should include those from local government, the NHS, cultural and sporting projects, green initiatives, apprenticeships, managing the Covid-19 crisis, infrastructure improvements, vocational training, voluntary organisations, community leadership academies and innovation initiatives, including those associated with the industrial strategy. Third sector organisations that specialise in working with young people will be eligible for tailored investment to enable them to build capacity to participate in the programme. The offers of work tasks and projects will be posted to a digital work hub to ensure common standards and protocol. The offers will then be distributed to local National Youth Corps centres and made available via an app to individuals who can match the offer to their skills and wishes. The UK government should announce its intent to create the Youth Corps along with the necessary funding as soon as possible. Time is of the essence. The programme must go live before the end of the school and university year in July. Given the success of GoodSam, the expectation should be that up to a million 16- to 25-year-olds will apply to be part of the scheme. We, the undersigned, who have experience of working with young people, volunteer to be part of a task force ready to work with the government to design and launch the programme. We are entirely open about how this proposal could be turned into reality, and to what degree it can build on existing initiatives – but we do know that our young urgently deserve a national response. The Youth Corps has the potential to be a crucial building block in getting the whole of Britain back to work, both in providing opportunities for young people at a crucial moment in their lives and in creating an army of workers who can help propel a faster economic recovery than would otherwise be the case. It is a moral and economic imperative. Yours faithfully, Rushanara Ali, MP Co-founder and Chair of UpRising and One Million Mentors Sarah Atkinson, Social Mobility Foundation Richard Brabner, UPP Foundation John Craven, upReach Roger Harding, Reclaim Will Hutton, Hertford College, University of Oxford Kirsty McHugh, Mayor’s Fund for London Steve Moffitt, Create Jobs Julie Sneddon, Working Options in Education Kerry O’Brien, Young Urban Arts Foundation Anand Shukla, Brightside Chris Wright, Catch22 If you are interested in being part of the Youth Corps, please go to change.org/youthcorps