I’ve lost track of the schedule. According to my diary, I am on holiday. I’ve drawn a long arrow across the whole week, surmounted by widely spaced letters: M A L L O R C A. And yet here I am, standing at the kitchen window with a coffee and a straggly lockdown beard, watching a crow the size of a jack russell harass the tortoise. The tortoise is sitting on the grass eating half an apple, an activity the crow seems determined to disrupt: it’s hopping from left to right over the tortoise’s back. I have never witnessed this sort of confrontation before, and it’s hard to tell who has the advantage. I’m not even certain it’s about the apple. The crow steps up its threat level, closing in on the tortoise’s left flank. I think: I should probably do something about this. I also think: that is a very big crow. My wife walks into the kitchen with a shoe in each hand. “What are you looking at?” she says. “I’m not sure,” I say. “I think it might be a fable.” Finally, I kick the back door open so hard that it shudders, and march across the damp grass. The crow lifts off, flapping in a lazy circle and landing in the branch of a tree above me. It tilts its head to fix me with a stare that says: I can wait. “Me, too,” I say. “I’m here all week.” Back in the kitchen, my wife is pulling on her shoes. “So,” I say. “What’s the plan?” She pauses slightly before answering, to give me some time to realise my mistake. “Well,” she says. “I’m going to walk the dog, then I’m going to queue for food, and then I’m going to drop the food off at my dad’s, and then I’m going to pick up his prescriptions, and then I’ve actually got some work to do. What about you?” “Dunno,” I say. “I might scrape my table legs.” I am referring to the stripping and eventual repainting of a topless cast-iron garden table, a project of some 15 years’ standing, recently revived. “Fine,” she says. “How’s your other project going?” She is referring to my long-term goal to get the birds of the air to land on me, as if I were St Francis of Assisi. This involves sitting very still in the garden for long periods, with a crossword puzzle and a little pile of seed on each knee. “No real progress,” I say. “The birds of the air don’t seem that interested.” I turn to see the crow actually pecking the tortoise’s shell, as if trying to open a coconut. “You bastard,” I say. I step back out the door, pull off one of my flip-flops and skim it with tremendous force. It misses the crow by a foot, and sails across the garden to scythe the top off one of my broad bean plants. “I might leave you to your business,” my wife says, standing up. After another coffee, I drag my table legs into the sun and sit down with a scraper. At first I went at the old paint with a wire brush on the end of an electric drill, but I’m wary of using power tools outside when the whole neighbourhood is working from home. I don’t have to imagine the confrontations; I hear them every day, echoing over the back fences. The work is tedious, but contemplative. It gives me a chance to imagine a better future, of long and lazy lunches in the garden, with other people. So, my friends will ask as I refill their glasses, did you manage to accomplish anything during lockdown? And I will say: just this. And I will reach out both arms, and the birds of the air will fly from all across Acton to land on them, lining up from shoulder to fingertip – robins, finches, wrens, parakeets – and they will not flinch when I bend my arm to point and say: also, I restored that table.