No. The government’s advice is very specific and more limited than that in many other countries. It says people should use a homemade face covering – not a bought mask – in enclosed places where it is hard to keep two metres away from others, such as on public transport or in certain shops. But they are not going to be mandated for general use by anyone leaving the house, nor are they recommended for exercising, schools, offices or other workplaces. His statement echoes guidance given by Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister of Scotland, two weeks ago when she recommended the Scottish public wear face masks in enclosed spaces where physical distancing is difficult. The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, said there is not “strong enough evidence” to advise people to wear face coverings in public in Wales. There is clear anxiety that such advice would lead to a run on the sort of masks that are needed by health and care workers. That is one of the reasons the World Health Organization does not recommend the use of masks. There have been shortages of surgical masks and respirators around the world, including in the UK. The Department of Health and Social Care recommends people should use a scarf or make their own mask from an old T-shirt. The other concern from some scientists is that people will become over-confident if they wear one and assume they don’t need to keep their distance from others or wash their hands. The evidence shows it doesn’t protect the person wearing it because viral particles flying through the air at speed can go through it. But it can help protect other people from you if you are infected. The covering can reduce the droplets carrying the virus that you expel from your mouth and nose when coughing, sneezing or speaking. That means there is less chance the droplets will reach someone nearby or fall on to a surface like a door handle or rail that somebody else may touch before putting their hand to their face. Yes – provided you wash it after every use in case it is covered in virus. That means it’s important also to be careful when taking it off, so that any virus particles on it do not transfer to your face, and to wash your hands afterwards. You should also not touch it while you are wearing it, the government says, “to avoid hand to mask transmission of the virus”. The government advice is that children under two should not have their faces covered, for fear of restricting their breathing. Children of primary age – so under 11 – should also not wear face coverings unless they are being supervised. They are not recommended for schools. People with respiratory conditions, such as asthma, should not wear them. No. In Spain, for instance, masks are required for anybody leaving their home and are handed out at stations. France has just made them compulsory. In a number of Asian countries with low infection rates, such as Singapore and South Korea, masks have been worn universally. The new UK policy is a halfway house and couched as advice that the public can choose to follow or disregard.