Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: According to researchers at Johns Hopkins University, at least 4,222,968 people around the world are known to have contracted the virus, while at least 287,809 have died since the pandemic began. The numbers, which are based on official and media reports, are likely to be significant underestimates due to suspected under-reporting and differing recording and testing regimes. The Office for National Statistics says 35,044 deaths involving Covid-19 have been registered in England and Wales up to 9 May. Adding the latest figures for Scotland and Northern Ireland and more up-to-date records from the four nations, the total official UK death toll now stands at 40,496. The number of cases diagnosed in Spain in one day falls to its lowest level in more than two months. The health ministry identifies 594 new cases, bringing the total since the country’s epidemic began to 228,030. The number of fatalities related to the disease rises by 176 to 26,920. The World Health Organization says some treatments appear to be limiting the severity or length of illness caused by Covid-19 and that it is focusing on learning more about four or five of the most promising ones. “We do have some treatments that seem to be, in very early studies, limiting the severity or the length of the illness, but we do not have anything that can kill or stop the virus,” its spokeswoman Margaret Harris says. Dmitry Peskov, the Russian government’s spokesman, is admitted to hospital with Covid-19, according to local media reports. “Yes, I got sick, I’m being treated,” Peskov is quoted as saying. He is at least the second person in Vladimir Putin’s administration to test positive. People in the eastern Mediterranean country are told to stay at home for four days after an increase in infections followed an easing of restrictions. Lebanese health authorities have officially announced 870 cases of Covid-19, including 11 newly detected on Tuesday, and 26 deaths. The UK is in effect in the midst of a recession, its chancellor says. Rishi Sunak tells the BBC: “We already know that many people have lost their jobs and it breaks my heart. We’ve seen what’s happening with universal credit claims already. This is not something that we’re going to wait to see; it’s already happening.” In technical terms at least, the country cannot officially be termed as being in recession until later this year, because the determination is made retrospectively after two successive quarters of negative growth. Anthony Fauci, the US government’s top public health expert, warns that official figures are underestimating the death toll in the US and that “the consequences could be really serious” if the country relaxes safeguards too abruptly. Fauci delivered testimony to the Senate on Tuesday as the US president, Donald Trump, encouraged businesses to reopen. For the first time Covid-19 has been confirmed in a crowded civilian protection camp in South Sudan’s capital, Juba, the United Nations says. It is a worrying development in a country that is one of the world’s least prepared for the virus’s potential spread.