Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: According to researchers at Johns Hopkins University, at least 323,286 people are known to have died from Covid-19 while at least 4,897,567 are confirmed as having been infected since the outbreak began. The figures, which are based on official and media reports, are likely to significantly underestimate the scale of the pandemic due to differing testing and statistical recording regimes, as well as suspected undercounting. The US President told reporters at a cabinet meeting that the high number of cases in the US – far higher than any other country – is a “badge of honour”, because it means the US is testing the most. Trump told reporters: “You know when you say that we lead in cases, that’s because we have more testing than anybody else.” He said he looks at the number “in a certain respect, as being a good thing because it means our testing is much better.” UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres said Wednesday that the developed world could learn lessons from the preventative measures taken by many African countries to stem the spread of the coronavirus. There have been fewer than 3,000 Covid-19 deaths from 88,000 cases of the disease registered throughout the African continent, relatively low numbers compared to over 320,000 deaths worldwide. Brazil has confirmed a record 17,408 cases in the last 24 hours and a record 1,179 deaths. The country now has 271,628 confirmed cases of coronavirus and 17,971 people have died. Hospital officials say more than 85% of intensive care beds in the states of Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo are full. Coronavirus shutdowns around the world could undo three years of gains in alleviating poverty, the president of the World Bank has said. David Malpass said that up to 60 million people could be pushed below the poverty line, according to World Bank estimates, as the global economy shrinks by around 5%. Trump claimed a recent United States study indicating hydroxychloroquine was not an effective coronavirus treatment was a “Trump enemy statement”. “If you look at the one survey, the only bad survey, they were giving it to people that were in very bad shape,” Trump said. “They were very old. Almost dead. It was a Trump enemy statement.” There have only been limited studies on the drug in relation to Covid-19 so far. New Zealand’s prime minister Jacinda Ardern has suggested employers to consider a four-day working week and other flexible working options as a way to boost tourism and help employees address persistent work/life balance issues. In a Facebook live video Ardern said people had suggested everything from the shorter work week to more public holidays as a means to stimulate the economy and encourage domestic tourism, while the borders remain closed to foreign nationals. South Korean high schools opened on Wednesday for the first time since the pandemic began, with mask-wearing seniors returning to class in the vanguard of a phased plan to reopen all schools under strict protocols to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus. The beginning of the spring semester has been postponed several times since March as South Korea battled the first large coronavirus outbreak outside China, with classes held online. China’s biggest political event of the year opens Friday after months of delay over coronavirus fears, with President Xi Jinping determined to project strength and control over the outbreak despite international criticism and a wounded economy. The annual gatherings have been occasions for the Communist Party to tout its achievements, set the country’s economic agenda and consolidate Xi’s power, but this year’s congress comes on the back of the biggest challenge of Xi’s political life, with a virus that has killed thousands of people, paralysed the world’s second-biggest economy and sparked a bout of online criticism of the government. Member states have backed a resolution strongly supportive of the World Health Organization, after Donald Trump issued a fresh broadside against the UN body, giving it 30 days to make unspecified reforms or lose out on US funding. None of the WHO’s 194 member states raised objections to the resolution brought by the EU on behalf of more than 100 countries. The resolution backs the WHO’s leadership and said there needed to be an investigation into the global response to the coronavirus pandemic.