Scott Morrison and the chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, have laid out a three-step plan to reopen Australia after the coronavirus crisis. Morrison said he hoped step three could be achieved in July, but it would be up to each state and territory when they moved from one step to the next. Here are some of the areas that will be opened up at each stage, according to the plan: Step one will see us connecting with more friends and family, and see businesses, educational campuses and sporting facilities start to reopen. Restrictions on gatherings will be relaxed, allowing for: Non-work gatherings of up to 10 people in public Up to five visitors to your home Up to 10 guests at a wedding, in addition to the couple and the celebrant Up to 20 mourners allowed at a funeral if indoors, and 30 if outdoors Religious gatherings with up to 10 attendees Employees should continue to work from home if it is suitable for them and their employer, though all businesses should develop a Covid-safe plan to prepare for staff returning to the workplace. Step one will see a number of businesses reopen their doors. Retail stores will reopen, and auctions and open homes proceed with up to 10 people. Cafes and restaurants will be allowed to seat 10 patrons at a time, as long as they follow the four square metres per person rule. Hairdressers and barber shops can also open, but must record customers’ contact details, presumably enable contact tracing if necessary. Food courts will stay closed for any seated patrons. Also to remain closed: gyms, indoor movie theatres, stadiums, galleries, museums, zoos, pubs, clubs, gaming venues, strip clubs and brothels, as well as beauty therapy and massage therapy venues, saunas and tattoo parlours. Step one will also see children back in classrooms and in playgrounds in their communities, and universities and technical colleges increasing face-to-face teaching where possible. Some sporting facilities will be made available once again. Indoor gyms will stay closed, but up to 10 people at a time will be able to: Use community centres, outdoor gyms, playgrounds, and skate parks Take part in outdoor organised sport, like golf and boot camps. While interstate borders will most likely remain closed to tourists, intrastate travel to regional areas for recreation should start back up. Hostels and hotels will be open for accommodation, but caravan parks and camping grounds could remain closed to tourists in some states and territories. Step two looks very similar to step one, just with double the number of people allowed to gather in most circumstances. Larger non-work gatherings of up to 20 people will start to take place. There is no mention as to whether the number of visitors to your home will also go up, but states and territories may increase gathering sizes at their discretion. Auctions, open homes, cafes, and restaurants will continue to operate, this time with up to 20 people. Weddings and religious gatherings may have up to 20 attendees, and funerals up to 50 mourners. Beauty therapy and massage therapy venues, and tattoo parlours will be allowed to open up to 20 clients at time, as long as they record all contact details, and up to 20 people will be allowed to take part in all outdoor sports. Pools will open, with restrictions. Cinemas, galleries, stadiums, and zoos will be allowed to have up to 20 patrons, but pubs, clubs, casinos and night clubs will have to remain closed. In terms of travel, caravan and camping grounds can fully open. There is no promise that recreational interstate travel will resume, but the framework suggests this may be considered by each state and territory depending on their individual situations. Morrison said that step three would “become clearer as we move through the first two steps”. But, as it stands, step three could see life returning somewhat to normal, with non-work gatherings of up to 100 people allowed, and even larger considered. Restaurants, cafes, foodcourts, auctions and open houses, movie theatres and other entertainment facilities, weddings and funerals will all be allowed to host up to 100 people. However, the framework does stipulate that cafes, restaurants, and foodcourts must still follow the rule of four square metres per person indoors. Pubs, clubs, and possibly gaming venues will be allowed to reopen. By this point in time, Morrison also said he hopes “most workers … will be back in the workplace.” The biggest changes could be in terms of travel, though. The framework says interstate travel should resume, but Morrison stressed that this will be up to the states and territories. The government will also consider cross-Tasman, Pacific Island and international student travel.