The Harley Davidsons roar to life once more as the second season of this Sons of Anarchy spin-off begins. Ezekiel spent the first series proving his worth as a new prospect in the Mayans Motorcycle Club, in the process revealing the traumatic fact of his family having been killed by cartel violence. In tonight’s double-bill opener, Ezekiel picks up crucial information about the identity of his mother’s murderer and runs into trouble with a rival biker gang, the Swole Boys, who try to claim the highway as their own. Ammar Kalia Cults generally provide compelling material for documentary makers and this investigation into Australia’s The Family is no exception. In 1987, a teenage girl escaped from a compound and the subsequent police raid to rescue her siblings uncovered all manner of strangeness. But what became of the cult’s leader? Phil Harrison As Eve investigates the recent “pitchforking” of her husband, Villanelle gets the work promotion she’s been angling for, only it doesn’t quite live up to expectations. Much more satisfying is her reunion with Konstantin’s smart-mouthed daughter, Irina. Now here’s a double act with real potential. Ellen E Jones As Levison Wood continues to shadow migratory elephants in Botswana, this leg of the journey focuses on a dry stretch where access to water is key. But the best moments are the incidental detours: this week, to places where the conflict between nature and humanity is marked. Jack Seale Dave Burd continues his absurd and often hilarious take on the rap industry, starring as the lightly fictionalised version of his hip-hop alter ego Lil Dicky. With an opening slot for Meek Mill on the cards, Dave has to find a hype man to bring the onstage energy before exorcising past demons in Philadelphia. AK As part of the BBC’s dance season comes this performance of choreographer Crystal Pite’s dramatisation of a Gogol story. Part theatre and part dance, it is an engrossing exploration of Gogol’s world of dictatorship, one that increasingly falls apart as the show goes on and the dancers’ bodies clash with one another. AK The Madness of King George, 6.50pm, Film4 Alan Bennett’s accomplished reworking of his stage play about the woes of George III, directed by Nicholas Hytner, is both a handsome historical drama and a moving study of the man inside the ermine. Nigel Hawthorne’s George is magnificent, nursed by his loving Queen Charlotte (Helen Mirren). Paul Howlett