Currently 1.6 million homeowners are not paying their mortgages after taking a “payment holiday” at the start of the coronavirus crisis. But the three-month break from payments – typically worth £755 a month – will come to an end much sooner than this crisis. What next? Boris Johnson will set out Britain’s lockdown exit strategy this weekend. We’re told its sunbathing and picnics straightaway, maybe schools and cafes opening by the end of June, and pubs and restaurants by the end of August – so long as social distancing is maintained. Try choreographing that in a Friday night bar. The reality is that hotels, pubs, cinemas, restaurants, conference centres, music venues, gyms and all the trades that supply them are unlikely to return to anywhere near normal ahead of next year. Add to that the collapse in the aviation industry – employment in whole towns such as Crawley, near Gatwick, is being wiped out – and it’s pretty inevitable that millions of people will remain out of work throughout this year. The Bank of England is projecting a 14% dive in GDP and a doubling in unemployment, much, but not all of it, reversed next year. The current mortgage payment-holiday sticking plaster isn’t enough. When, from June, the three-month period arranged by borrowers and their banks expires (and the chancellor also begins to unwind the furlough scheme) huge numbers of householders will still need help. And there’s no word from government yet about what, if anything, comes next. Here are a few ideas kicking around the mortgage industry which the chancellor could consider: Banks would automatically have to grant an extension, with no impact on the borrower’s credit record. But banks are likely to bridle at this; while 1.6m home loans on holiday may seem relatively manageable in a country of 27 million households, by value they add up to about 20% of their total mortgage book. Half a year without any income from one-fifth of their loans won’t push any bank or building society into insolvency, but may present serious financing issues for some. This is the more likely option. The banks, to their credit, put the new payment holiday systems in place extraordinarily rapidly (funny the things Britain is good at – payment systems rather than virus testing or PPE production). Privately, they believe that a not insignificant number applied for a payment holiday as a “nice to have” rather than a necessity. If they are to prolong the current holidays, the banks want to be much more selective about who they give it to. The crisis has revealed to the middle classes how threadbare Britain’s welfare system really is. If you are unemployed and applying for universal credit, you can’t access mortgage support until you have been claiming benefits and not earning for nine months. The calculation of the benefit is, inevitably, absurdly complicated. And it’s not even really a benefit – it’s a loan that accrues interest and has to be paid back. The designers of the system evidently never envisaged the enormous, if temporary, dislocation brought on by a pandemic. UK Finance, the group that represents the banks, told me they are “carefully considering options for those who may need further support at the end of the three-month payment holiday period”. Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, may want to give them a bit of a hard nudge. We are going to need something more robust in place in weeks, not months. Meanwhile the forgotten millions in this story are tenants in the private rented sector. Economically, this crisis is devastating the young, many of whom were working in low-paid jobs in the hospitality and services sector. When the furlough scheme ends and the temporary ban on evictions lapses, the prospects for many in their 20s and 30s is grim. There are payment holidays for mortgage holders and landlords, loans for businesses, bailouts for big firms, but for tenants, almost nothing. Youth unemployment is often the most intractable problem after a recession, and we are at risk of throwing a whole generation on the economic scrapheap.