I was lucky enough to be at the Royal Festival Hall in 1981 for what turned out to be the last concert Carlos Kleiber conducted in London. It was an experience I’ve never forgotten, with some of the most thrilling music-making I’ve ever heard. Some of that excitement is rekindled from what I’ve found of Kleiber preserved on YouTube. His career in the concert hall and opera house is charted in several documentaries, the best of which is probably the German-made (with English subtitles) Traces to Nowhere, which includes interviews with many of his close friends and colleagues. But it’s the live performances that testify to Kleiber’s greatness more eloquently than any reminiscences. As well as revealing the extraordinary mixture of charm and rigour that characterised his rehearsals as much as his concerts, the YouTube videos also add significantly to his slim discography. There’s Beethoven, an irrepressibly lithe account of the Fourth Symphony with the Concertgebouw Orchestra; Mozart’s Symphony No 36, and an astonishingly passionate performance of Brahms’s Second Symphony, both with the Vienna Philharmonic. But most tantalising of all is a sound-only recording of a thrilling performance of Mahler’s Das Lied von der Erde from 1967, with the Vienna Symphony Orchestra, and Christa Ludwig and Waldemar Kmentt as the soloists. It was the only occasion when he conducted any Mahler. One wonders what he might have done with the Fifth and Sixth Symphonies, but then “what ifs?” are part of the Kleiber allure. There’s plenty more Mahler to be found on the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra’s website. This month in Amsterdam the orchestra should have been hosting a Mahler festival, 100 years after it presented the very first, which was conducted by Willem Mengelberg. The symphonies (and Das Lied von der Erde) were to be shared this time between four orchestras that Mahler himself conducted, but the festival’s online equivalent features just the RCO. Recorded at performances between 2010 and 2016, the cycle is shared between seven conductors, including three of the orchestra’s former chiefs – Bernard Haitink, Mariss Jansons and Daniele Gatti. Jansons’ spacious, almost sacramental Third Symphony and his majestic Eighth, as well as Haitink’s typically unswerving Ninth, are especially worth catching. Among the deluge of streamed opera, the Berlin Komische Oper’s site, with its mix of standard rep and less fashionable operetta, is well worth exploring. As a sucker for Tchaikovsky’s best-known opera, I was inevitably drawn to Barrie Kosky’s pared down production of Eugene Onegin – with Asmik Grigorian transfixing as Tatyana, it makes a wonderful antidote to the Netherlands Opera version I wrote about a few weeks ago. My pick for the week ahead While British opera companies generally lag far behind their continental European counterparts in making past productions available online, the Grange festival is doing its bit, streaming three of its shows during what should have been this summer’s programme. It launches on 24 May with Handel’s Agrippina; Bernstein’s Candide (from 5 June, in a concert performance) and Le Nozze di Figaro (12 July) follow. And for two weeks from 16 May the Bavarian State Opera is streaming Nigel Lowery’s production of Gluck’s Orphée et Eurydice from 1993, in memory of its former intendant Sir Peter Jonas (general director of English National Opera during its “powerhouse” years), who died last month.