Donald Trump and his “space poodle”, Mike Pence, were in Florida on Wednesday for the Nasa/SpaceX launch, reported Jimmy Kimmel from home in Los Angeles. The launch, which would have marked the first time a private company sent astronauts into orbit, had to be scrubbed due to weather, and “people online are blaming the president for jinxing this thing because he showed up to see it”, said Kimmel. “Just like he jinxed Alabama by showing up to their home game, or how he’s jinxed everything he’s ever touched.” Kimmel also touched on Trump’s escalation with Twitter after the company factchecked his misleading tweets on mail-in voting as a widespread cause of voter fraud (there is no evidence to support this, and many states with Republican governors have used mail-in voting for years). The company tagged his tweets as “potentially misleading” this week with a “get the facts about mail-in ballots” link to articles disproving Trump’s claim. “Do we really need Twitter to tell us our fake president tweets fake things? Is that their job?” Kimmel wondered. This, predictably, did not go over well with Trump, who tweeted that Twitter factcheckers were “fake news”. “If Twitter had a sense of humor, they would’ve labeled that tweet as misleading too,” Kimmel joked. “I guess it was only a matter of time until Donald Trump would be in a Twitter feud with Twitter,” Kimmel continued. “But this new kick he’s on, this trying to stop voting by mail, is actually very scary because it’s pretty clear he’s setting the stage to claim he was cheated if he loses the election, which could potentially result in real violence in this country.” To “help him push our democracy to the edge of a cliff”, his adviser Kellyanne Conway told reporters on Wednesday that “people are very proud to wait in line” and compared it to waiting in line for Georgetown cupcakes for an hour. “She won big points with President Sprinkles on that one,” said Kimmel. “Voting in person and cupcakes? That’s as close to a threesome as he gets nowadays: vote, or diabetes.”