Every Saturday evening, a suburban street in Greater Manchester bears witness to a peculiar sight: at the first-floor bay window of a 1930s semi, top-hatted heads bow over a platter of Victoria sponge slices, silhouetted against the sepia light of a gasoline lamp. Eavesdroppers might even catch the strains of Gilbert and Sullivan issuing from an 1890s gramophone as Michael Koropisz, a 24-year-old portrait artist who goes about his daily life as if he’s a well-to-do Briton of the 1890s, stages a tea party for fellow Victorian enthusiasts. “We do get children pointing and laughing, and passersby taking selfies in front of us,” says Koropisz, who wears a top hat and 120-year-old frock coat, and adheres to a “pious” code of conduct. I wouldn’t recommend trying to get into a taxi in a top hat and frock coat Koropisz, who also eschews television and any “music that post-dates 1900”, hosts these Saturday-night tea parties in his bedroom at his parents’ house, which is fitted out with replica cornicing and ceiling roses, a grandfather clock, an upright ebony piano and a bureau for the ink stand and quill that replaced his laptop when his historical enthusiasm became a lifestyle in 2017. His dad Bob, a plasterer, helped with the wood- panelling and classical dentils, with the refit costing £8,000. “My parents are Ukrainian and a bit bemused by my choices, but they’re very supportive,” explains Koropisz. “I just think that when all the cornicing and arches and aesthetic stuff went away the best of society went with it,” he explains, adding that he takes his behavioural lead from Victorian etiquette books. Koropisz is one of a growing number of Britons seeking to embrace a lifestyle based on a past era – nostalgia enthusiasts who see more value in the past than the present and choose to dress, eat and behave to suit. In her work on cultural nostalgia, US academic Barbara B Stern differentiates between two brands of nostalgia: “historical nostalgia”, which expresses a desire to retreat from contemporary life into a distant past viewed as superior to the present; and “personal nostalgia”, which recollects a (largely fictionalised) home of one’s childhood as a font of warmth, security and love. “Nostalgia has a number of psychological functions,” explains Tim Wildschut, a professor of psychology at the University of Southampton who studies personal nostalgia. “It gives meaning and connectedness, and makes sense of our own identity through time as well as offering us escape from the troubles of the present.” Nostalgia, he says, is exerting a particularly powerful pull now, in a moment of national crisis that calls to mind the Second World War years, which are popularly presented as the embodiment of gumption and community spirit. “Our research shows that loneliness and social isolation trigger nostalgia. Nostalgia, in turn, increases perceived social connectedness and support. Viewed in this way, nostalgia offsets the negative effects of loneliness.” Living history offers a dual pay-off, forming our self-hood as it swaddles us in the psychological comfort blanket of an imagined past. Britons have long enjoyed vintage dress-up: 50s teddy boys based their style on Edwardian street gangs; men born long after D-Day still gather to reenact the battles of both world wars. What’s new are people who, like Koropisz, commit to living their lives as if the intervening 40, 50 or 130 years never happened – as well as the communities that have grown around vintage lifestyles. The latter include online interest groups, such as the #tradwife movement; weekends themed for everything from 50s dancing to the lifestyle of the world wars and subsequent years (the War and Peace Revival attracted 50,000 attendees for its fourth outing in 2019); and the grand Victorian balls that are the highlight of Koropisz’s year. While the scene has been emergent since the turn of the millennium, the 2012 Golden Jubilee supercharged British nostalgia for the 1950s, says Dr Stella Sims, who wrote her cultural studies doctorate on this wave of “retromania”. “In the early 2010s you got this surge of interest in 1950s fashion and pastimes, from knitting to partner-dancing, cupcake baking and the WI,” she says. “Then the World War One centennial, from 2014-2018, also fed into this.” For University of Sussex historian Claire Langhamer, the nostalgia for 20th century lifestyles, in particular, can be put down to a cultural appetite for escapism. “With everything that’s going on at the moment, from the climate to Brexit and now Covid-19, it’s no wonder there’s this urge to retreat to an era when the future seemed to be about progress and optimism, rather than environmental and political collapse,” she says, adding that living historians’ fetishistic focus on domestic arrangements is telling. “When you have no hope of affording your own home it’s seductive, isn’t it, to hark back to eras when home ownership was an ordinary expectation?” The domestic retreat demanded by the coronavirus lockdown, she adds, has served to heighten people’s focus on domestic aesthetics and routines. The living history scene has its celebrities: period tailor Zack Pinsent (@pinsent_tailoring) commands 355,000 followers on Instagram, Georgian enthusiast Kitty Pridden (@18thCent_Kitty) feeds 6,000 Twitter followers close-ups of powdered wigs and court dress; and Dean Turner and Linda Easton have achieved social media fame with their 1940s aesthetic, house and garden. “It’s the community that I like,” says Estelle Bilson, 41, a technical designer who shares her love of 1970s living with Stephen De Sarasola and their son, and bases her style on a Good Life-era Penelope Keith. “A woman in the States recently sent me a frosted Christmas bauble because she knows it’s the era I’m into, but we’ve never met.” The family enjoy Angel Delight and “hilariously phallic” Fanny Craddock banana candles in their “pretty orangey” dining room, surrounded by teak G-Plan furniture, wicker hanging baskets, JH Lynch portraits and a sunburst rug. When Bilson recently bagged a 70s bathroom suite for £9.99 on eBay, De Sarasola, a sound engineer, demurred: “I told her straight out: it’s shit-brown.” De Sarasola also takes exception to the peacock TV light and tiger’s head planters which sit, grimacing, in the dining room. “I prefer a 70s look that’s a bit more Sly and the Family Stone and less – I don’t know – Elvis,” he explains. Bilson takes pleasure in the fact that the family’s lifestyle is eco by default, “There’s nothing bought new in the house, apart from mattresses, so we have a naturally low carbon footprint,” she says, adding that, for many living historians, sustainability is part of the attraction. “Analogue technology is also much easier to fix,” she says. When asked about the motivations that led to her retro immersion, Bilson’s answer is straight out of Wildschut’s personal nostalgia playbook. “My earliest memory is from 1980, when my family was flooded out of our bungalow and re-homed in a council house without our Bauhaus long chair and lovely cabinets,” she explains. “It was pretty traumatic. I think I’m just trying to recreate that lost home.” Lisa Lane, 54, and her fiancé Peter Baker, 62, met as DJs on the vintage weekender scene. The couple bonded over their shared passion for the mid-20th century and recently moved to a 1929 three-bed semi which they are restoring to a 1930s look, ripping out the UPVC windows and replacing them with wooden windows with art deco motifs, and painting the exterior a lively primrose offset by black gloss. The couple regularly invite neighbours round for a sit-down tea of meat and two veg plus apple pie or steamed pudding, and Lane, who runs vintage shop the Source Pot in Wigan, has noticed an improvement in her health since she switched to a midcentury diet. “It’s simple, wholesome stuff like the food you used to eat as a kid before you ran out to play,” she explains. “Nothing fussy or flown in.” When it comes to a yearning for the social mores of times gone by, there’s an obvious rub. Stern speaks of the dark side of nostalgia – its tendency to naturalise colonialism and the (supposedly vanished) days of male supremacy, and “make domination appear innocent and pure”. Social psychologist Dr Sandra Wheatley speaks of the problematic elisions in the idea of a “retreat to the comforts of grandma’s apron”. She asks: “Where’s grandma’s lived experience in all this? What if her life was actually quite grim, cooking meals from scratch in a cold kitchen…? What if she’d have killed for a microwave?” Ernie Samat, 54, graduated to vintage living through the war reenactment scene, where he dressed as a Second World War RAF officer, to his current civilian style: three-piece tweeds, with a silk handkerchief (“strictly top left pocket”) and brogues. The look is based on photographs of Samat’s socialite grandparents in 1930s Singapore. “They dressed so elegantly,” he explains, “it’s sad I never really got to know them.” Samat has stripped the fireplace in his Wanstead sitting room back to its Arts and Crafts surround and installed a chaise longue and period display cabinets. Decor, however, is an ongoing compromise with his partner Lorraine Wood, 61: “She’s not into living in a museum, so I only get a few rooms where I can express myself.” For Samat, his involvement in the vintage scene is a tribute to the Commonwealth citizens who are airbrushed out of history: “It’s a complex story that isn’t really told, of attachment to a motherland that in many ways rejects you.” Bristol-based Mick Sinclair, 53, admits his favoured vintage incarnation as a wartime contraband-pedalling spiv might play into the hands of outdated social attitudes which, he says, are sadly prevalent on the wartime vintage scene: “Brexit hasn’t helped with that.” But he points out that the UK scene doesn’t have the same association with rightwing politics seen in the similar “tradlife” movement in the US, which shades into surrenderism (it advocates the “traditional” submission of wives to their husbands) and white supremacy. Sinclair also experimented with military wear before settling upon a 40s three-piece suit, trilby and pipe. “My parents were upright Jamaicans who raised me properly and taught me respect,” he says of his London childhood. “The way I see it, everything went a bit south with the 1960s, when the railways were closed and all that.” There is a tension in the vintage-living world between era purists, who live their favoured period down to the fashions and decor of a designated year, and adherents with a more free-wheeling attitude to authenticity. Era-trolls stalking social media to pile on to inaccuracies in diet and dress are a growing problem. Turner and Easton recently came offline for a period after suffering a spate of trolling at the hands of an incensed historian. Samat speaks of middle-aged men on the reenactment scene being upbraided for wearing replica uniforms meant for lithe 20-something paratroopers. “Often people just think that I want to put women back into the kitchen,” Koropisz says of the criticism he typically faces. “Which I don’t, for the record.” Sims says that critics who argue that these impulses are de facto reactionary are missing much of the subculture’s subtlety. “It’s easy to scoff at the idea of these throwbacks who have no idea how repressive it was to be a 1950s housewife,” she says. “But many of the people I interviewed [for her PhD] talked about the inspirational socialism of the postwar era: the founding of the NHS, for example, or the pursuit of the common good.” Bilson, for her part, strives to resist golden ageism about the decade that produced Thatcherism and the three-day week, and refuses to give herself a hard time about cherry-picking the best of the 70s. She, like most living historians, has held on to her mobile phone. Koropisz’s vintage Victorian bicycle was recently stolen, so he’s reluctantly travelling by car until a longed-for horse and carriage is within financial reach. “I wouldn’t recommend trying to get into a taxi wearing a top hat and frock coat,” he says. “Basically, you have to almost fully undress.” The idea that any era was purely “of itself” is, of course, nonsense anyway, as historian Claire Langhamer points out. “History is messy and midcentury houses were full of all sorts of things from other periods,” she says. “So living historians who pick and choose their favourite bits of the 40s and 50s are perfectly in keeping.” In Laura Wade’s 2019 Olivier award-winning play, Home, I’m Darling, protagonist Judy becomes disillusioned by her office job and takes voluntary redundancy to devote herself to living like a 1950s housewife. We meet Judy dressed in a frilly apron and pearls, slicing the top off her husband’s breakfast egg before she waves him goodbye at the door with a perfect smile. It’s Judy’s mother Fran, a battle-scarred second-wave feminist, who brings a dose of reality to this honeyed fiction. “The 50s were dull, cold and grey with bomb holes still around, and your husband had a legal right to fuck you,” she scoffs. “This is a cartoon.” The tension between fantasy and reality can serve another purpose for retromaniacs, says Sims. “If they think about it, most people don’t want to live the social conditions, or hardships of the 1950s,” she says. “Immersion in history can be a way of realising how much we have to be thankful for in the here and now.”