The Ultimate Fighting Championship has withdrawn a bout from Saturday’s card in Jacksonville after middleweight Ronaldo ‘J’acare’ Souza and two of his cornermen tested positive for coronavirus, the mixed martial arts promotion said. Brazilian-born Souza was supposed to fight American Uriah Hall at UFC 249, which was originally scheduled for 18 April in New York but postponed because of the coronavirus outbreak. “UFC’s medical team examined Souza and his two cornermen and found them to be currently asymptomatic, or not exhibiting the common symptoms of Covid-19,” UFC said in a statement. “All three men have left the host hotel and will be self-isolating off premises, where UFC’s medical team will monitor their conditions remotely and will provide assistance with any necessary treatment.” Hall took to Twitter shortly after Friday’s news to wish Souza well. @JacareMMA Brother I know it sucks I’m sorry you have to go through this I am beyond devastated for the missed opportunity I wish you nothing but recovery for you and your family. UFC 249 will be broadcast on pay-per-view TV but no fans will be in attendance at VyStar Veterans Memorial Arena because of the Covid-19 pandemic. Fighters taking part in Saturday’s event were tested for the coronavirus on arrival in Florida, and many of the 24 fighters have been isolating in their rooms as they prepared for their bouts. “There have been no other positive Covid-19 tests reported from the remaining athletes participating in UFC 249,” the UFC statement added. “Saturday’s UFC 249 card ... will proceed as scheduled with 11 bouts.” An interim lightweight title fight between Tony Ferguson and Justin Gaethje tops the bill. UFC president Dana White, who has been adamant in his desire to soldier on amid the pandemic, sought to offer reassurance after the announcement. “We administered 1,200 tests this week, on 300 people,” White told ESPN. “It’s not unexpected one person would test positive. The system works. And what’s good about this, is now we know Jacare tested positive, he’s doing what he needs to do and we’re in a position to help him if he needs it.”