Countries are taking urgent steps to avoid a damaging second wave of Covid-19 infections, stepping up mass testing programmes and announcing strict quarantines on incoming travellers in a bid to keep the virus under control. China, Singapore and Denmark were among countries to announce substantial expansions of their testing regimes, with the Chinese city of Wuhan, the original centre of the pandemic, saying it planned to test all 11 million residents. Officials were ordered to submit urgent plans to test all Wuhan’s inhabitants after authorities reported six new cases in a residential compound, the first cluster of new Covid-19 infections since the city reopened on 8 April after 76 days of strict lockdown. Epidemics of infectious diseases behave in different ways but the 1918 influenza pandemic that killed more than 50 million people is regarded as a key example of a pandemic that occurred in multiple waves, with the latter more severe than the first. It has been replicated – albeit more mildly – in subsequent flu pandemics. How and why multiple-wave outbreaks occur, and how subsequent waves of infection can be prevented, has become a staple of epidemiological modelling studies and pandemic preparation, which have looked at everything from social behaviour and health policy to vaccination and the buildup of community immunity, also known as herd immunity. This is being watched very carefully. Without a vaccine, and with no widespread immunity to the new disease, one alarm is being sounded by the experience of Singapore, which has seen a sudden resurgence in infections despite being lauded for its early handling of the outbreak. Although Singapore instituted a strong contact tracing system for its general population, the disease re-emerged in cramped dormitory accommodation used by thousands of foreign workers with inadequate hygiene facilities and shared canteens. Singapore’s experience, although very specific, has demonstrated the ability of the disease to come back strongly in places where people are in close proximity and its ability to exploit any weakness in public health regimes set up to counter it. Conventional wisdom among scientists suggests second waves of resistant infections occur after the capacity for treatment and isolation becomes exhausted. In this case the concern is that the social and political consensus supporting lockdowns is being overtaken by public frustration and the urgent need to reopen economies. The threat declines when susceptibility of the population to the disease falls below a certain threshold or when widespread vaccination becomes available. In general terms the ratio of susceptible and immune individuals in a population at the end of one wave determines the potential magnitude of a subsequent wave. The worry right now is that with a vaccine still months away, and the real rate of infection only being guessed at, populations worldwide remain highly vulnerable to both resurgence and subsequent waves. Peter Beaumont China reported no new domestic infections on Tuesday, after two consecutive days of double-digit increases fuelled fears of a second wave, with the north-eastern city of Shulan placed under lockdown on Sunday after another outbreak emerged there. Singapore also said it aimed to test all 323,000 migrant workers living in cramped, often unsanitary dormitories that have become a hotbed of infections in recent weeks, accounting for the vast majority of the city-state’s total of 24,671 cases. “The taskforce has drawn up a plan to allow migrant workers residing in the dormitories ... to be progressively cleared so they can be safely returned to work when the time comes,” said Singapore’s health minister, Gan Kim Yong, adding that infections in the dormitories had “stabilised”. Some businesses, such as hairdressers, laundry services and pet suppliers, re-opened on Tuesday, but most workplaces and schools remain closed and dining at restaurants is banned under Singapore’s virus measures due to run until 1 June. A similar problem may have emerged in Germany, where four municipalities are trying to contain new outbreaks of more than 50 new infections for every 100,000 inhabitants within seven days – the threshold for a local return to lockdowns announced by the chancellor, Angela Merkel, last week. Abattoirs and food-processing plants in Lower Saxony, Schleswig Holstein, North-Rhine Westphalia and Baden-Württemberg have been identified as the centres of the outbreaks and could be responsible for the recent increase in Germany’s R-number to above 1, the country’s disease control agency, the Robert Koch Institute, said. Health authorities believe that while the virus may not have spread in the processing plants themselves, it may have found fertile ground in the overcrowded housing units shared by mainly eastern European contract workers. Germany announced on Tuesday its weekly test capacity was now at 838,000. Meanwhile Denmark, one of the first EU states to start easing its lockdown, said the number of new infections had fallen steadily despite primary schools and some businesses reopening last month, with the country’s R-number, which indicates how many people each carrier of the virus infects, falling to 0.7 from 0.9. The state epidemiologist, Kare Molbak, said no country had yet seen “an actual second wave”, just a slight increase in R-numbers, adding that with “the knowledge that we have today, I find it very unlikely that we’ll see a second wave”. However, the prime minister, Mette Frederiksen, announced a “significant increase” in testing for phase 2 of the country’s exit from lockdown, which began on Monday. “If it takes off again we need to know fast, trace effectively, and isolate the sick so we can break the infection chains without having to close down society again,” she said. With France and Britain preparing to announce quarantines, Spain said on Tuesday that from Friday 15 May all new arrivals would be isolated for two weeks to help prevent infections being imported, with new arrivals allowed out only to buy food or medicine, seek medical attention, or on emergency grounds. Exemptions will be made for cross-border workers, transport workers and health professionals, the government said, but the measure, which will last as long as the current state of emergency is maintained, will apparently apply to Spaniards returning from overseas. The announcement came as 51% of the population adjusts to the second phase of Spain’s exit from lockdown. Outside Madrid and Barcelona, people are now able to congregate in groups of up to 10, shop in small stores and order a drink or a meal on terraces outside bars and restaurants for the first time since 14 March. At the crack of dawn every day, “wet markets” in China and across Asia come to life, with stall owners touting their wares, such as fresh meat, fish, fruit and vegetables, herbs and spices in an open-air setting. The sights and sounds of the wet market form part of the rich tapestry of community life, where local people buy affordable food, or just go for a stroll and meet their neighbours for a chat. While supermarkets selling chilled or frozen meats are increasingly popular in Asia, older shoppers generally prefer buying freshly slaughtered meat for daily consumption, believing it produces flavour in dishes and soup that is superior to frozen meat. “Wet markets”, where water is sloshed on produce to keep it cool and fresh, may be considered unsanitary by western standards. But most do not trade in exotic or wild animals and should not be confused with “wildlife markets” – now the focus of vociferous calls for global bans. The Wuhan South China seafood market, suspected to be a primary source for spreading Covid-19 in late 2019, had a wild animal section where live and slaughtered species were for sale, including snakes, beavers, badgers, civet cats, foxes, peacocks and porcupines among other animals. Verna Yu In France, Parisians have been banned from drinking alcohol on the banks of the canal Saint-Martin and river Seine after police were forced to disperse crowds just hours after the end of the eight week lockdown on Monday night. The government also refused a request from the city’s mayor to reopen parks and squares. Bars, restaurants, hairdressers and beauty parlours in Italy are to be allowed to reopen from 18 May, earlier than originally planned, after pressure from regional leaders to be allowed to establish their own reopening plan. All will have to implement distancing and hygiene measures, with restaurants required to keep 4 metres between diners. The European commission is set to recommend a three-phase approach to reopening borders that brings together member states with “similar overall risk profiles”, according to a leaked version of a document due to be released on Wednesday. But it remains unclear whether the EU will back “tourism corridors”, or bilateral deals to open to each other’s tourists. In Russia, which has recorded more than 230,000 infections, the world’s second highest tally, containment measures in parts of the country were lifted in many parts of the country but remained in force in Moscow, although 500,000 construction and factory workers went back to their jobs on Tuesday. Dmitry Peskov, the spokesman for the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and the Kremlin, confirmed that he had been infected with Covid-19 and was being treated in hospital. Peskov is the second person in Putin’s administration to test positive. The coronavirus has infected 4.2 million people worldwide and killed nearly 287,000, according to the Johns Hopkins University tracker. The World Health Organization said it had “positive data” on some treatments that seem to be limiting the severity or length of the disease, and was focusing on learning more about four or five of them.