Ole Gunnar Solskjær believes Paul Pogba and Marcus Rashford will be ready to play when the Premier League resumes given each has impressed in training after returning from injury. Manchester United began working at their Carrington base last week. Pogba’s ankle problem and Rashford’s back injury had ruled them out since late December and mid-January, respectively, but each are now fit. “They’re looking good, they’ve joined training now and they’ve done everything the other boys have been doing,” Solskjaer told manutd.com. “No reaction so far, touch wood. When we get started it looks like we can have a full squad to choose from.” The manager is content with how his players had been working individually at home during lockdown. His squad are working in small groups, though the expectation is that this restriction could be eased next week after the government reviews the conditions it is imposing. Solskjær said: “I think when we start training in full groups we will need a bit of time to gel again but they’re mentally ready and physically they look OK too. That’s what you do when you’re a footballer, you just want to play football. The first step has been coming together, obviously in small groups, but they’ve enjoyed that. “The players have been looking after themselves. They’ve done well. Charlie [Owen] the fitness coach, Kieran [McKenna], Michael [Carrick] and Martyn [Pert] have been on to them all the time. They’ve not had many days off. There have been video calls and in the last couple of weeks they’ve been stepping it up. Now we’ve proved we can do this safely we can move to the next step. It’s been really enjoyable being on the training ground again. “Everyone’s looking sharp, everyone’s been in with a good mood and we’ve been splitting up in groups, so [working in] fours and fives together, and they’ve really done well. So far it’s been good.” Solskjær is also hopeful Odion Ighalo will stay at Old Trafford beyond his current loan terms, despite resistance from the striker’s parent club, Shanghai Shenhua, to such a move. “The loan deal went until the end of May now, so obviously he’s supposed to be going back,” Solskjær said. “We’re in dialogue. They’ve been great towards us - his club - and allowed him to play for his dream club. “It’s been a dream for him and hopefully he can finish off what he started, hopefully with a trophy for us. At the moment, nothing has been agreed. Their [Chinese] league is going to get started soon so we’re just waiting to see.”