Transport for London has said it is facing a £3bn finance gap this year owing to the coronavirus pandemic, suggesting it may need more cash from the government despite securing a £1.6bn bailout on Thursday. TfL, which agreed the bailout deal to keep the business running until October, has reported a 90% fall in income as journeys on public transport in London have dried up during the nationwide lockdown. TfL said a financial forecast, assuming the prioritisation of essential services and activities, predicted a £1.9bn funding gap in the half-year to the end of October that would widen to £3bn in the full-year to the end of March 2021. Under the terms of the government funding package agreed with the Department for Transport, TfL will be able to draw down to £1.9bn. The funding requirement will be under review until 17 October and the government said passengers would face higher fares. The initial £1.6bn agreement comprises a £1.1bn cash grant and another £505m in loans. TfL said on Friday: “In recognition that the current circumstances are likely to present ongoing financial challenges, a combination of future measures from TfL, Greater London Authority and the government will be implemented to enable TfL to maintain essential services and deliver a revised balanced budget over the remainder of the financial year.” Lockdown measures have resulted in a 95% fall in journeys on the underground and an 85% fall in journeys on London buses, said TfL. “It is expected that the recovery will take some time and that passenger income will continue to be severely impaired after the strict response measures are gradually eased,” it added. On Thursday, the transport minister, Grant Shapps, said passengers would eventually need to pay higher fares to help finance TfL. He said the government did not want a situation whereby people outside London were “unfairly carrying the burden, by which I mean, sadly, fares do end having to rise with inflation”. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, earlier threatened to cut tube and bus services unless the government stepped in with a grant, after the capital’s transport authority burned through £1bn of its cash buffers.