Tributes from former first families have rolled in after the death from Covid-19 of Wilson Jerman, a former White House butler who was a fixture in Washington under 11 presidents. Jerman, who was 91, started working as a cleaner under Dwight Eisenhower and retired as an elevator operator during the presidency of Barack Obama. “With his kindness and care, Wilson Jerman helped make the White House a home for decades of first families, including ours,” said Michelle Obama. “His service to others his willingness to go above and beyond for the country he loved and all those whose lives he touched is a legacy worthy of his generous spirit.” Wilson Roosevelt Jerman, former White House butler who served through 11 presidencies, dies of COVID-19 https://t.co/7pCdTAUNuj pic.twitter.com/b6JhNPB85g Jerman became a White House butler under John Kennedy, a role that JFK’s wife, Jackie, was instrumental in landing for him, his oldest granddaughter, Jamila Garrett, told the local Fox news channel in Washington. “Jerman served as a White House butler across 11 presidencies and made generations of first families feel at home, including ours,” wrote Hillary Clinton. “Our warmest condolences to his loved ones.” George W Bush and first lady Laura Bush said Jerman was a lovely man. “He was the first person we saw in the morning when we left the residence and the last person we saw each night when we returned,” the Bushes said in a statement to NBC News. Desiree Barnes, who worked in the Obama administration, said Jerman treated the staff kindly. She recalled that when she worked as an intern he would get her a meal if she had not eaten and that he even called her during a particularly rough snowstorm to make sure she was OK. “It did not matter political party, he was there to serve,” Barnes said. “He had been there on some of the hardest days for a lot of presidents … Imagine being there when President Kennedy was assassinated and having to receive the first lady at the time. So he was a really empathetic man. He just was a great listener.”