Zoe Ball’s BBC Radio 2 show has lost 1 million weekly listeners since she replaced Chris Evans as presenter of the UK’s most popular breakfast show. Ball, who admitted in a recent interview that losing listeners is something she “takes completely to heart”, has seen her audience decline dramatically since Evans’ departure. He broadcast his final show on Christmas Eve 2018, and is now at Virgin Radio. Ball drew an average of 8.1 million weekly listeners to her breakfast show in the first quarter of this year, compared with the 9.1 million listeners Evans attracted in the final quarter of 2018. In an interview with Lauren Laverne on BBC Radio 4’s Desert Island Discs in February, Ball admitted that she takes the issue personally. “You kind of pretend it is not, but then the listening figures come in and your face is ‘on the tin’, so I do take it completely to heart.” Evans’ rival digital-only Virgin Radio show has grown to attract more listeners than Ball has lost, 1.12m, according to the latest official quarterly radio listening figures from the industry body Rajar, published on Thursday. While overall, BBC Radio 2 lost a small number of listeners quarter on quarter, to 14.3 million, the station has also lost a million listeners during the past year. BBC Radio 4’s Today programme also suffered an audience decline, with 191,000 fewer listeners in the first three months of this year compared with the final quarter of 2019. The morning show drew 6.97 million listeners a week, according to its latest figures, down on 7.17 million. The show had added hundreds of thousands of listeners in the last quarter of 2019, helped by interest in the general election campaign. The first-quarter figures do not show the impact of the coronavirus lockdown, which began in the last week of March. Rajar’s second-quarter figures would show the dramatic impact on listening with the nation confined to their homes. However, the body says it will not publish a full set of new figures as the virus has affected its ability to gather survey data. The first-quarter figures did show BBC Radio 1 managing to fight back against a long decline in listeners, as younger audiences gravitated towards other formats such as streaming services. The station increased its audience by more than 100,000 a week to 8.9 million at the end of March. The BBC says Radio 1 still remains relevant to a youth audience in the digital age, with 24 being the most common age of a listener. It pointed out that its YouTube and Vevo channels attracted more than 2 million views a day. “Radio is such an important part of British life,” said Aled Haydn Jones, head of programmes for BBC Radio 1. “We are able to be creative in the ways we innovate for our audience, wherever they may be.” In the commercial sector, at the talk radio station LBC, audience numbers rose 2.2% to 2.78 million, which the station said represented a 47-year high, although its London audience fell by 6.2% quarter on quarter. The figures also show the increasing popularity of online listening, most notably on smart speakers such as Amazon Alexa and Google Home. Online listening stood at 14% of all listening in the first quarter, some 138 million hours. This represented a rise of more than a fifth year on year.