Based on Wally Lamb’s bestselling 1998 novel of the same name, this atmospheric adaptation stars Mark Ruffalo as identical twins Dominick and Thomas Birdsey. Directed by Derek Cianfrance (The Place Beyond the Pines), it follows the story of Dominick, who is coping with a failed marriage and an ailing mother while looking after Thomas, who has paranoid schizophrenia. It is a traumatic and twisty tale packed with formidable performances from Ruffalo, Melissa Leo as his mother and Archie Panjabi as his therapist. Ammar Kalia Fictional father and son Ricky Tomlinson and Ralf Little journey around northern England for six weeks in this charming new series. In this first outing, they hit Blackpool (“The Vegas of the north, although instead of Frank Sinatra, it’s Jimmy Cricket and the Krankies”). Ali Catterall A two-part deep-dive into the US’s 43rd president, George W Bush, covering his wayward youth and unconventional route to the White House following the heavily contested 2000 election. Now viewed by some in a more palatable light in the wake of Trump’s election, his legacy is examined. AK A new term has started at Trinity College Dublin, where young lovers Connell and Marianne find themselves drawn together again. The power balance has shifted since their school days and the electric performances of Paul Mescal and Daisy Edgar-Jones really start to crackle. Ellen E Jones It is week four of the gruelling military reality show and the remaining seven celebs are being pushed to their limits. The punishing tasks on offer include immersions in ice-cold water and a crawl along a rope 60 metres above the ground, which leaves Strictly dancer Brendan Cole shaking from fear. But it is the race across the mountainous Scottish terrain that brings them all close to the edge. AK Hank Azaria’s US baseball commissioner Jim Brockmire returns for a fourth and final season of slightly melancholy comedy. The show feels oddly prescient, set in 2030 in the aftermath of catastrophe. Nonetheless, Jim is mainly struggling with personal issues revolving round his daughter Beth, who is drifting away. Phil Harrison The Long Memory (Robert Hamer, 1953), 11am, Film4A tense, downbeat 1953 drama from Robert Hamer, the director of the effervescent Kind Hearts and Coronets. It is the story of John Mills’s convict, released after 12 years in prison for a murder he didn’t commit. He shuts himself away on a barge, plotting revenge, befriended only by a young Eva Bergh. Paul Howlett