Seeing this makes me feel proud of what we have in the UK. Without the NHS, we would be in serious trouble in normal times, let alone during this pandemic. I have friends who are working in the NHS, in the care sector and as key workers. They are working seriously hard in difficult circumstances to make our lives the best they can be. It also makes me proud of the people in my borough. They are pulling together, using their skills and doing their bit to check on each other and help out in these strange times. Whether it’s amazing artwork like this, online quizzes, DJ sets, online advice for business, craft making or calling up lonely people for a chat, they are all pulling their weight through tough times. This piece of work stands out and really brightens up the street. I witnessed the artist finishing the piece and people who were out on their daily walk were saying how great it was. It’s a conversation piece and makes people smile when they walk past. Jimmy Lee, Dagenham In these difficult times street art is a great way to connect and express the way we are feeling. Vic Brown, Tamworth This curious glittery sign appeared on the street overnight and made me stop, smile and take a photo. I was pleased to see that there’s no shortage of creativity despite everything else that’s going on. Ben Park, Ealing in London This made me happy. It was great to see something someone has made just to share and spread cheer. Simon Doughty, Desborough My partner works in our local hospital and it made her day when our next door neighbour painted her back wall in a such a glittery fashion. Ashley Woodfall, Boscombe My wife Mel is an artist. She took the side of our house as a canvas. This is her with our daughter. She’s now encouraged all her friends to stop by when they are on their allotted exercise, take a photo and send it to her. She is then going to create a collage of the photos. Seeing this makes me feel proud. Kevin Chappell, Wirral. Seeing the message to care workers filled me with both happiness and sadness. Happiness to know that someone has created this to acknowledge and thank those who strive everyday to care for our loved ones. Sadness that these amazing people have for so long been overlooked and undervalued. Tracy Wilson, South Norwood in London A few weeks ago the council painted social distancing markers on the promenade. They were a bit utilitarian. A few days later someone gave the little people faces and personalities. When I first saw them, they made me laugh. I look forward to seeing them every day on my daily walk. Jacquie, Worthing. Every time I walk past this house it makes me smile as they have obviously put a lot of effort into sending a message of support to our NHS. As I was taking a photo this morning, one of the housemates was leaving and chatted about ordering the chalks from Amazon and spreading a little joy in the world. Great stuff. Peter Spark, Oxford I walk past this while taking my daughter to school. It had been vandalised for years until our local community group commissioned a local artist to create a design as a tribute to our key workers. I find it uplifting and love the fact that it’s something the whole community can appreciate. Angie Talbot, Leeds These sign paintings have been accumulating over the past months. They have become a landmark in our area. The route is a main road between two major hospitals so ambulances pass by regularly. I like it because it is representing something we all want to say. With all the museums closed, it feels like art has found a way to come out into public space and remind us all why we need it here – and more than ever at this time. Asif Khan, Hackney in London I saw this on the front of a closed down takeaway restaurant. I love the bright colours and the sentiment. Annie Willetts, Sydenham in London I took this on the last weekend before lockdown in Manchester. I have not been in the city centre since, sticking to my local area. It makes me sad for all the amazing small businesses in this city, but hopeful that they will survive and be thriving again soon. Elizabeth Relins, Manchester I run on the cycle path a couple of times most weeks. There is a long hoarding separating the path from a brownfield building site and it is constantly changing and evolving with artwork, ranging from some pretty crappy tags to some terrific pieces. This comes somewhere in the middle. I love how it has taken the Corona logo and made it into something more menacing and timely. I also like the “please wash your hands” strap along the top. I don’t know how long it will last, but it’s there for now. Kate Matheson, Bristol We saw this piece of street art just before the lockdown measures were put in place. It is a striking and skilful design. When we saw the work it seemed very prescient. At the time people were stockpiling toilet paper and the art work satirically incorporates a loo roll instead of a dot on the “i” in “virus”. While humorous, the work was an ominous indication of the effect the virus was going to have in the weeks to come. Michael Mulvihill, Gateshead Hackney Wick is alive with street art. Every day you turn a corner and something new grabs your eye. This piece appeared early on in the crisis. To me it captures the public’s mood to the Covid-19 crisis – NHS, masks, loo roll, don’t panic. Jacqueline Bruce, Bow in London Our pedestrian tunnel had been a tagging magnet for a long time. The interior was greatly helped a few years ago when someone painted individual bricks in a myriad of different shades, making the wonderful rainbow that appeared overnight on 8 April all the more perfect. Our local social media has been abuzz with how uplifting it is and how emotional people feel travelling through it. We’re all hoping it will be preserved post lockdown. Helen Wade, Hove I know my friends are missing being at school and that the teachers are missing us too, so I wanted to use my art as a voice to acknowledge that. The crossing at my school, Comberton Village College in Cambridge, felt like the perfect place to make an artwork. Rowan Briggs Smith, Cambridge This series of posters is outside a cafe in the Cathays area of Cardiff. It’s an image of hope and sustenance that helps me remember that these dark days will soon be over. Steven Irwin, Cardiff