I’m here with my husband. We’ve got Netflix, thank god, so we binge. I adore Call My Agent, which is the French one about a Parisian talent agent who handles all the top French stars who appear as barmy parallel versions of themselves. It’s utterly gripping, completely charming and at the same time your French gets better. We’re up-to-date on Homeland. I’m biting my fingernails watching Carrie getting thinner and more anxious. We’re on the final series of Breaking Bad. Walter has got a cold look in his eye. I’m thinking, “Jesse, what’s going to happen?” Gogglebox, I adore. Not the celebrity one. I much prefer – she says patronisingly – the “ordinary” members of the public. I’d be hopeless. I watch TV in silence. Even I don’t want to hear what I’m saying. My short film for Compassion in World Farming – Dear Humans – just won the People’s Choice award at the Charity Film awards. It says: don’t keep any animal in cages, which coincides so with this nightmare pandemic that seems to have spread from the wet markets in China and the disgraceful way we treat animals. When the great cloud has lifted, I hope we’ll remember what goes around comes around. I did catch a bit of Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie on telly the other day, which was heaven, just to see a bit of our beloved June Whitfield. My god, it had a cast list to shame. For feelgood movies, I love Local Hero, Shakespeare in Love and Paddington 2. Paddington 2 was just delightful. Did I play Kurtan’s nan in This Country? No. I haven’t seen that, I’m afraid. You know that thing where people have weird things put over their head and sing? People thought I was one of them. It’s never me, darling. I did Celebrity Bake Off but I never do any baking – I prefer crisps – so my baking was very poor. Paul Hollywood spat out my cake, the poor dear. If you can’t do something, what’s the point in making the gorgeous British public watch you not being able to do it? I wouldn’t do Strictly. I’m 112, so I’d probably get voted off straight away and then cry for weeks. • Dear Humans is available to watch here.