I love theatre. I love the people, the community, the buzz. But the future of this industry is under threat – a pain felt most deeply by the people who make it a fabulous business. On 16 March, London’s West End closed its doors. Regional tours followed suit shortly afterwards, leaving actors, musicians, technical, wardrobe, wigs and front-of-house staff unemployed overnight. Performers and musicians couldn’t be furloughed because they’re technically self-employed, despite many of them being contracted well into 2021. Of course, that was OK because of chancellor Rishi Sunak’s self-employment income support scheme (SEISS). Or was it? Unfortunately, for the thousands of people employed in the theatre industry, there were so many gaps to fall through. The help for self-employed people only lasts until the end of May, while the furlough scheme extends until October. Show business is notoriously unpredictable; there is no job security, so if you earned more than £50,000 in profits each year over the past three years but haven’t been able to find work since, you are not eligible for the grant. Imagine if you’d just landed yourself the role of a lifetime and moved to London to pursue your dream. Perhaps you took out a six- or 12-month lease on a property, knowing you were contracted for the duration of the tenure, despite not earning anywhere near this amount last year. The hundreds of graduates fresh out of training, many with massive student debt, who have been working in the industry since last summer are also not eligible for the scheme as they haven’t yet had the chance to file a tax return. And another group who won’t benefit, despite paying their taxes, are people who trade as limited liability companies. It’s not that these people don’t want to work, are shielding, or taking an extended break during the pandemic. It’s that there are no jobs in the industry they’re employed in. What we all hoped might happen – SEISS until May, ready for a triumphant reopening of the West End in June, with all regions following shortly afterwards – has turned out to not be so simple. What happens after the end of May, both for those lucky enough to have claimed SEISS, and for those who fell through the gaps? These are real people with mortgages, rent, bills, children, elderly relatives. We’ve all accepted that theatre will be one of the last industries to regain some semblance of “normality”, so why can’t the government accept that the people who have fallen through the gaps need ongoing help? Many members of the theatre industry applied for universal credit only to be told they did not qualify. Every supermarket around London now has its own ensemble cast of temporary staff consisting of the hardworking, versatile people of the theatre industry – but these jobs won’t be here forever. And not everyone is able to get a temporary job. The government must act now to preserve the arts and help the amazing network of people that make the industry as spectacular as it is. Better schemes are possible. The Spanish government recently announced it would be introducing a universal basic income. And in the Netherlands and France, theatre professionals can rely on an established social security system that ensures artists still get paid between jobs – coronavirus or no coronavirus. What if the next Elaine Paige or Michael Ball has just had their first professional job cut short by the pandemic, and is financially unable to continue in the industry? The lack of support for people working in this industry sends a signal the government thinks that such occupations are merely a paid hobby, that people can rely on savings, or get a “proper” job until they’re “fortunate” enough to pick up where they left off. When I was employed by British Airways, belonging to Unite the Union was a saving grace. Amid the economic uncertainty caused by coronavirus, unions have greater power to hold industries and government to account. I recently spoke to Paul Fleming, who is a candidate to be the general secretary of Equity, the trade union for creative practitioners, and is currently the central London theatres organiser. “Thanks to strong unions, our members have organised good agreements to put the industry on pause; we’re ready to reopen when it’s safe and practical. But without guaranteed income for all our industry’s freelancers, a whole workforce is threatened with being washed away – the most under-represented artists first,” he told me. The best thing you can do in these uncertain times is join a union but don’t just take our word for it, listen to @amyhart1707 and couple up with @unitetheunion ❤️Join at https://t.co/oW2ogon4TL @LoveIsland #LoveIsland pic.twitter.com/TYN2sOT541 “With no unions on the government’s reopening task force, and just days to go until SEISS ends, the government risks telling artists and audiences that they don’t care about theatre’s economic and social importance.” As a whole, the arts and culture industry brings £10.8bn to the economy every year – not to mention every pre- and post-theatre dinner, every quick glass of wine in a pub before a show, every train, plane and bus ticket, every hotel stay. The true contribution of theatreland to local economies is incalculable. For every £1 invested in the arts by the government, the industry returns £5. This is our hour of need. At a moment like this, we need the arts more than ever. • Amy Hart is a former cabin crew manager and a 2019 Love Island contestant 