The first bond I formed with a hairdresser was when I was 14. After a few weeks of selling sweets in school and peering through barber-shop windows, I found Neil. I liked his outfit and The Style Council was playing through the speakers. I almost fell asleep while he shampooed my hair. We chatted amiably. It all felt nice and calming, even empowering. Neil almost seemed like a mentor.  He cut my hair once a month from then until I went to university, and the hairdresser’s became a place I would visit to guarantee a boost to my mood. Now in lockdown, I’ve embraced the shapeless mass of hair on my head. What I’ve realised is I don’t actually miss getting my hair cut – I just miss the experience of being at the hairdresser’s. Over my life I’ve only had three regular hairdressers – one for each place I’ve lived. My second was at university where after half a dozen one-cut stands, I found Rik. He wasn’t much like Neil, who’d crack jokes and tell me about mod culture and fashion; he was tame and philosophical. Style wasn’t ever mentioned – he was a barber, not a salon stylist. As the appointments hit double figures, he asked why I always looked half asleep in the chair. I began to open up to him a little about my fatigue, having suffered with a mix of anxiety, insomnia and depression throughout university. For another two years, we both spoke openly about our problems (without oversharing they’re hairdressers not therapists). When I graduated, leaving him was one of the hardest goodbyes I made. Next, I moved to London and found a salon I liked the look of, bouncing between whoever was free, feeling almost satisfied each time. One day a new person called Mikey was available. I checked his Instagram (essential research) and liked his grid and his fashion sense. I booked in for the same day. As I walked in, he said hello and the accent took me back to my hometown in Carmarthen, west Wales. I felt myself unwinding and asked where specifically he was from. It was magic. He grew up half an hour from me, and once worked with my first regular hairdresser, Neil. I could have jumped out of the chair and hugged him. I miss these special connections. I miss the ritual of a haircut. I miss opening the door to soft house music, chatter, the smell of product and the homely warmth of hairdryers. I miss being shampooed most. The ultimate self-care: a combination of head massage and aromatherapy, followed by the cuddle of a hairdryer on the back of my neck. I also miss the precise dexterity of a stylist with their comb, the crisp snip of a well-oiled scissor, the smooth metallic buzz of a barber’s clippers. I miss the strangers hovering around the salon. If you ask anyone where their spiritual home is, many will say the pub. But I don’t long for it. I get deliveries of cans, bottles and mini kegs within a day. I sit on Zoom doing a quiz with mates into the early hours. It’s not the same, but the essence is there. While I can attempt a DIY haircut in lockdown, one thing I can’t mimic is the experience of going to the hairdresser’s. I know this is trivial. My article is unimportant compared with writing about the lives being saved and lost. But I also know that I feel a void in my life – during this crisis it’s the sort of loss that many people will be experiencing of regular comforts and minor interactions in the world outside. I’m restless and existential, I need a platonic touch on the temples and reassurance that I’m functioning okay. My coping device for that and many other things is a visit to the salon – we all will have our own version of this story. I think of the hairdressers, often independent and self-employed, who will be struggling to survive financially during lockdown: I miss them more than anything. • Rhys Thomas is an author. He writes for publications including Vice, Dazed, The Face and Mundial