As the colder weather sets in, so does citrus season, a burst of brightness among darker evenings and cool mornings. You’ve may have noticed neighbourhood trees heavy with fruit, and the gentle scent of orange blossom and lemon oil on the breeze. For Cornersmith’s Alex Elliott-Howery, the beginning of winter signals one thing: lemon season. “My kitchen gets very busy at two times of the year – lemon season and tomato season. Lemon season stretches all throughout winter; but as soon as you notice a massive price drop, that’s when it’s time to go,” says Elliott-Howery. Time to go with what? Preserved lemons, for a start, plus marmalade, pickles, butters, curds, powders, salts and basically any other flavour vehicle you can think of. Elliott-Howery harnesses the fruit’s bittersweet power at both her Annandale cafe and Marrickville picklery cooking school, where she has created entire three-hour class – When Life Gives You Lemons – to foster a new appreciation for the underrated fruit. “Lemons are the best flavour companion in the kitchen – they go with everything. They can get a bit overlooked, as they are so commonplace and cheap, but they have so much hidden value,” she says. “The first thing I teach is that every part can be used – the skin, zest, oils, pips, juice, the insides – they are such a valuable ingredient.” In most parts of Australia, you’ll find three main kinds of lemon. Eureka is the standard, likely to be found at the supermarket, and ideal for preserved lemons or Indian-style pickles, she says. Meyer lemons are more delicate and thin-skinned, with less bitterness and pith, and beloved by bakers for sweet applications. Finally, there’s the gnarly, bumpy bush lemon, which is low on juice but great for salt preserving. “If you can get unwaxed lemons, you’ve hit the jackpot – you’ll never find them at the supermarket,” but lemon trees are common in Australia’s suburban backyards, “so knock on your neighbour’s door,” says Elliott-Howery. “If you can’t get unwaxed but you want to preserve them, pop the lemons in a sink full of warm water with a little bicarb and vinegar, and give them a scrub and a rinse. That will take some of the wax off.” It’s all about tucking your lemons into clever little applications you can use once the seasons is over, and the supermarkets revert back to expensive or overseas-sourced produce. “Before you juice a lemon, you should peel it or zest it first, then store it to last longer. The zest can keep in the fridge for a few days, in the freezer for a few months, or you can put it in the oven to dehydrate and create a lemon powder.” “We put the lemon zest through butter a lot, then cook a piece of fish in it – you really want to extract as much flavour as you can out of the parts that end up in the bin. If you don’t have a lemon on hand, you can still have lemon butter, or strips of zest in the freezer or whatever.” If you want to pair lemon with some other citrus buddies, marmalade is the way to go. “Marmalade uses the citrus skin, it’s what differentiates it to jam – I like to make marmalade when I only have a couples of pieces of citrus because it uses the whole fruit.” Elliott-Howery’s marmalade recipe just calls for 500g of mixed citrus, with a handy choose-your-own-adventure guide to flavour combinations with gentle herbs and spices. Try swirling lashes through lemon drizzle cake, or sticky whisky marmalade brioche pudding for an instant hit of winter warmth. If you have a bit of patience, the ultimate Cornersmith recipe is for preserved lemons (below). “Preserved lemons are the thing you should make, because they are expensive to buy but so easy to do – there’s so much salt in there, nothing can go wrong,” Elliott-Howery says. “People don’t know how to use them, but you can add thin slices [of preserved lemons] to chicken soup, mix with mashed avocado and chilli flavours or in a yoghurt raita with tomato and garlic. It’s great in salad dressings, marinades or potato salad, or you can put it through hummus for a really bright, zesty dip.” Makes 2 x 500g jars 1kg lemons (you may need extra for juicing, if your citrus is dry – the very juicy lemons don’t need any extra juice)150g salt In each jar of preserved lemons (optional):1 bay leaf (or alternatively 1 cinnamon stick and 2 cloves)1 allspice berry5 black peppercorns To sterilise your jars: give your jars and lids a soapy hot wash and a good rinse or put them through the dishwasher. Put jars into a low oven (110C) for 15 minutes. Once the lids are clean, boil them for five minutes in a small saucepan, then let them air dry. Cut fruit into quarters, or halves if very small. Put a tablespoon (20g) of salt into the bottom of each jar. Put a few layers of lemon segments into the jar, pressing down on the skin as you go to release the juices. Sprinkle another layer of salt. Then add another layer of segments. Slide spices into the side of each jar. Repeat the lemon layers and salt sprinkling until the jar is full. Remember to keep pushing down as you go. The fruit needs to be entirely covered in juice. If your fruits haven’t released enough of their own juices, squeeze a few extra lemons or limes and pour the juice over to cover. Leave 1cm of head space between the top of the fruit and the lid. You don’t want the salty fruit touching the top of the lid. Wipe the rim of the jar with a paper towel to remove excess salt. Seal the lid and let the jar sit in a cool dark place for six weeks. You know your lemons are preserved when the salt has completely dissolved into a gel like liquid. Once opened, store in the fridge for up to a year. Recipe extract from Cornersmith: Recipes from the Cafe and Picklery, Alex Elliott Howery and James Grant, Murdoch Books, RRP $49.95