It requires a strange sort of skill to miss a phenomenon such as Twilight. The first instalment of Stephenie Meyer’s young adult series was published in 2005, when I was 15 and ripe for an obsession with vampires and sexual repression. But I had recently fallen in love with a boy who read Douglas Adams and Terry Pratchett, and other funny books by men. I cringe now to think of it, but I followed his taste blindly, parroting his beliefs that Twilight was overrated, problematic rubbish, without reading it for myself. Of course, I came to learn how often all things beloved by teenage girls are dismissed, and I’ve never done it since – still, it took lockdown for me to finally read this contemporary classic. And while it is true Twilight has its issues, the books are addictive; so much so that Meyer’s internet-breaking announcement of a new Twilight book, Midnight Sun, on Monday had me preordering faster than a girl melting under the intense gaze of a sparkly vampire. When the lockdown started, friends and fellow authors Daisy Johnson, Sarvat Hasin and I established a book club to get us through. I despise the phrase “guilty pleasure”, but we wanted a book that was inviting, entertaining, familiar. When I offhandedly mentioned I’d never read Twilight, it was met with shock and indignation. Our reading fate was decided. Seeking companionship for my government-mandated walks, I downloaded the first audiobook, narrated by Ilyana Kadushin, thinking I would consume all 12 hours in manageable chunks. Anyone who has read the four-book saga will know how foolish I was. Bella’s narrative is instantly immersive, capturing the all-consuming concerns of teenage life, albeit in the person of someone seemingly irresistible to all she meets, including the immortally sexy Edward. It is perfect wish-fulfilment, though the sorts of wishes no feminist should ever want granted. Bella trips through the novel as an object of desire, unintentionally becoming the flashpoint that reignites an ancient grudge. But Meyer is a brilliant storyteller, mastering pace, plot and sexual tension. It is erotic in a way Fifty Shades of Grey can only dream of. My 15-year-old self would have loved it, but my 30-year-old self loves it even more. If I’d have read Twilight half a lifetime ago, it would have only confirmed the worst of what I believed about relationships, gender and sexuality. Adams and Pratchett were kinder, more playful teachers. Now, I can plunge headlong into the Twilight books, admiring their strengths and laughing at their faults, alongside four (our number has grown to include my husband and a doctor of literature) of the most precious people in my life. Twilight was never part of my adolescence, but now it is an invaluable part of my lockdown story. Twilight has endured for half my life, so you don’t need me to tell you why there was hysteria when Meyer announced a new title, having previously claimed to have no intention of returning to the franchise. But it is no surprise to me the lure was too strong. Authors live with their characters long beyond the final pages. With legions of readers hungry for more, I am glad Meyer relented. We need joy and escape right now. With Hunger Games author Suzanne Collins also revisiting her own bestselling series with a prequel, The Ballad of Snakes and Songbirds, coming out this month, we have two YA authors indulging the teen fantasies of a generation of twentysomethings, and potentially igniting those of a whole new generation. The decisions to add prequels to these female-led narratives through male characters is especially interesting; I do wonder if we will miss Bella and Katniss, while learning more about the men they love and hate. If you are on the fence, I can absolutely recommend you join the hype. Hopefully the emergence of YA culture as a world-dominating phenomena means people will stop dismissing books enjoyed by teenage girls out of hand. And if you, too, missed out on this epic of the YA canon, Midnight Sun is out in August – there’s still time to get some friends together for a readalong. Kiran Millwood Hargrave is the author of The Mercies and The Girl of Ink and Stars.