The inspiration behind the new novel from the American writer Deb Olin Unferth lies in a sobering investigation she wrote for Harper’s magazine six years ago on the US egg industry, which centred on conditions at a Michigan battery farm. The surprise is that what could have been a grave polemic in the manner of Upton Sinclair’s 1906 novel The Jungle, which lifted the lid on the Chicago meatpacking industry, instead takes the form of a screwball caper that wears its seriousness lightly.The book opens with part-Latina runaway Janey, who, after a bust-up with her mother in New York, finds herself living in Iowa with her estranged father, “a something something for the USDA at a poultry processing plant”, who hooks her up with a job. It’s a bore until Janey notices that her boss, a woman named Cleveland, is violating strict secrecy laws by surreptitiously filming the conditions in which hens are kept – not to mention stealing them to drop off at animal sanctuaries in the dead of night.By degrees, Janey is drawn into an improbably ambitious chicken rescue enterprise led by retired animal liberationists persuaded to take one last job – an undertaking that, as Unferth tells us from the off, will go catastrophically pear-shaped in ways we’re kept guessing about for most of the book. At times the narrative resembles a gonzo documentary voiced by those caught in the fallout from the bungled mission Immersing us in the heady scenes and lingo of activist and agricultural life, Unferth trusts that we’ll catch up. At times the narrative resembles a gonzo documentary voiced by those caught in the fallout of the bungled mission; at other times we stick close to the perspective of the main characters, rooting for them as they get in over their heads. We also get the perspective of a hen, or Bwwaauk, “as she was known to herself”, and the overseeing narrator pops up all the while with wry parentheses to supply a bigger picture, from childhood flashbacks to doomy, proleptic visions of a climate-ravaged apocalypse.Written with vim and wit, Barn 8 is a highly enjoyable treatment of a worthwhile social issue. Part of what makes it so much fun is Unferth’s relentlessly playful manipulation of the material. Turning the story round to present new angles, zooming in and out, she makes the vogue for plain present-tense narration seem austere by comparison. While she’s often very funny, she sidesteps the obvious pitfall of caricaturing the ideologues she’s writing about, even as she lets us laugh. Airing their emotional hangups, Unferth suggests they have complex motives without minimising the force of their beliefs. Nor does the novel proselytise –although it’s enough of an eye-opener to give you pause next time you make an omelette. • Barn 8 by Deb Olin Unferth is published by And Other Stories (£9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15