Salsa macha is a Mexican sauce I am in love with. Garlic is poached gently in oil, followed by peanuts, dried red chillies and sesame seeds. The resulting (highly addictive) oil is drizzled over the hundreds of different seafood tostadas; a dish found up and down the coastline of Baja California. But I think it adds excitement to almost anything it touches, and goodness knows we need a bit of that while we’re all still cooped up at home. This is my hazelnut version, which I think is glorious with asparagus. I burn a little butter to combine with the salsa macha towards the end of this recipe, but you could easily skip that part. Prep 10 minCook 15 minServes 2 300g asparagus4 eggs60g butter1 handful parsley, leaves picked (optional) For the salsa macha5 large garlic cloves, peeled60g hazelnuts40g sesame seeds10g dried red chillies½ tsp caster sugar3 anchovies (optional)300ml flavourless oil (I used groundnut)1 tsp flaky salt Start with the salsa macha. Heat half the oil in a small pan over a very low heat, add the garlic cloves and simmer in the oil until golden – about five minutes. Remove with a slotted spoon into a bowl. Now fry the chillies until gently darkened in colour but not burnt – one to two minutes. Transfer to the bowl, and repeat with the hazelnuts, toasting until they, too, are a pale gold. Remove the nuts, roughly chopping half of them for the garnish, and put the rest in the bowl. Toast the sesame seeds in a dry frying pan. Blitz the sesame seeds and chillies in an upright blender for one minute. Now add the whole hazelnuts, the garlic, sugar and anchovies (if you are using them) and pulse a few times. Add just enough oil to blitz to a rough paste. Add the rest of the oil, including the cooking oil, pulse once more, and taste, adding enough salt so that it tastes rounded and delicious. When you are ready to eat, heat two serving plates. Steam the asparagus for five minutes, then transfer to a griddle and cook over a very high heat until it is beautifully charred and tender. Meanwhile, melt the butter in the same frying pan you used to toast the sesame seeds, heating until it starts to turn deep brown. Transfer to a small bowl and pour in roughly the same amount of the salsa macha (be sure to stir before you add it). Keep this mixture warm. Wipe the pan, then fry the eggs in a little more butter until crisp around the edges. Serve the eggs on top of the grilled asparagus, pour over the sauce, then scatter with the parsley and chopped nuts. You will need lovely bread to mop up the sauce. I use the salsa macha to dress stir-fried rice, pad thai and grilled fish. It is also wonderful with simple picnic lunches involving soft-boiled eggs and avocado.