Belarus will hold a military parade this week to mark the defeat of Nazi Germany, its president has said, despite having one of the worst coronavirus outbreaks in Europe. Alexander Lukashenko said in televised remarks that he did not want to cancel the parade in part because people “would say we were scared”. Russia and other former Soviet countries have cancelled this week’s commemoration to slow the spread of the virus. Last month, more than 10,000 Russian soldiers who took part in rehearsals were quarantined. UK data from the Office for National Statistics has revealed that men are almost twice as likely to die from the disease as women. The trend was first seen in China, where one analysis found a fatality rate of 2.8% in men compared with 1.7% in women. Since then, the pattern has been mirrored in France, Germany, Iran, South Korea and Italy, where men have accounted for 71% of deaths. So why are men more vulnerable? “The honest answer is none of us know what’s causing the difference,” said Prof Sarah Hawkes, director of the UCL Centre for Gender and Global Health. Early on, smoking was suggested as a likely explanation. In China, nearly 50% of men but only about 2% of women smoke, and so underlying differences in lung health were assumed to contribute to the difference. Smoking might also act as an avenue for getting infected in the first place: smokers touch their lips more and may share contaminated cigarettes. Behavioural factors that differ across genders may also have a role. Some studies have shown that men are less likely to wash their hands, less likely to use soap, less likely to seek medical care and more likely to ignore public health advice. These are sweeping generalisations, but across a population could place men at greater risk. However, there is a growing belief among experts that more fundamental biological factors are also at play. While there are higher proportions of male smokers in many countries, the differences are nowhere near as extreme as in China. But men continue to be overrepresented in Covid-19 statistics. Hannah Devlin Science correspondent Belarus has almost 17,500 confirmed cases of coronavirus, giving it one of Europe’s highest per capita infection rates. Lukashenko, president since 1994, has publicly said the danger from the disease was exaggerated and avoided instituting physical distancing guidelines. The country has continued to hold football matches and kept its churches open for Easter services, despite closures throughout the rest of Europe. Volunteers have helped crowdfund necessary PPE as hospital workers have been told to do without. One hundred and three people have died of the disease in the country. Speaking about the parade, Lukashenko said it should not be cancelled because it was “an emotional and a profoundly ideological thing”. “We should remember that some of those people [who fought in the second world war] might have died of viruses or other diseases, but didn’t always feel that, and they died for us, no matter how pompous this might sound,” Lukashenko said in the remarks, which were translated by the Interfax news service. “And just think what people would say. Perhaps they would say it, not immediately, but a day or two days later – but they would say we were scared.” On Monday, Lukashenko also said he planned to hold presidential elections before August. “We have no grounds to delay this election, we cannot do that by constitution,” he said.