Reported cases of domestic violence in Russia have more than doubled during the country’s coronavirus lockdown, according to the Russian human rights commissioner, who painted a different picture to that provided by police data. Complaints and reports made to Russian non-governmental organisations spiked from roughly 6,000 in March to more than 13,000 in April, Tatyana Moskalkova said on Tuesday. “The picture is rather non-optimistic,” the RIA Novosti news agency quoted her as saying. Her statement came a week after Russian police said the number of domestic crimes fell by 13% during the lockdown, compared to the same month last year – a report dismissed by some women’s rights campaigners as inaccurate as many victims do not report domestic abuse to the police. Growing numbers of domestic abuse complaints have been reported all across Europe after governments instituted lockdowns and ordered residents to stay at home, as the frustrations of enforced isolation, often fuelled by increased use of alcohol and dire economic constraints, aggravated existing tensions or triggered new ones. Women and children are usually the victims. In Spain, calls to the helpline for domestic violence victims were up 30.7% between 14 March, when the lockdown was announced, and 15 April in year-on-year terms. In the UK it was found that calls to a national domestic abuse helpline jumped by 49% in early April compared with the average in the same period in previous years. France’s National Federation of Women Solidarity said the hotline they ran had received double to triple the usual daily number of calls since France imposed a lockdown on 17 March. In Greece, where the lockdown started on 23 March, a government helpline received nearly four times as many complaints in April as in March. In many countries government officials are taking steps to address the problem. The French government introduced a text messaging number and a Twitter account victims can reach out to in addition to the usual police number. Moreover, authorities tasked pharmacies and a number of chain supermarkets to arrange points of contact for domestic abuse victims. Britain pledged £76m to help vulnerable children and victims of domestic violence. But rights groups argue that Russia has failed to take any steps to stop domestic violence. The Kremlin imposed a nationwide lockdown in late March. Almost immediately, women’s rights advocates sounded the alarm about a surge of domestic violence cases. In a letter to the government, nine non-governmental organisations asked officials to set up more shelters, instruct police officers about the importance of responding to domestic violence calls and help victims get medical, legal and psychological help. Nothing has been done so far, said Olga Gnezdilova, a lawyer with the Russian Justice Initiative, one of the groups that signed the letter. Domestic violence has been rampant in Russia for years, and so far little political will has been shown to tackle the issue. Despite the fact that, according to police data, up to 40% of all violent crimes are committed within families, in 2017 Vladimir Putin downgraded simple assault against a family member from a criminal offence to a misdemeanour, punishable by a $76 fine. Rights groups argued the move encouraged abusers and made protecting victims even harder.