‘I wanted it to be relatable to any woman who’s ever worked in an office,” says Kitty Green of her new film The Assistant. “Everything in the film has been in the press already. But I wanted to take viewers on an emotional journey, so they could empathise with the character.” The #MeToo saga has been examined to near exhaustion, but The Assistant manages to add something new. Rather than perpetrators or victims, it focuses on a relative bystander: a young office worker at a New York film production company. We follow this character, played by Julia Garner, through her demeaning routine: commuting in before daybreak, photocopying, printing, taking her male co-workers’ lunch orders, clearing up leftover pizza from the meeting room (as the men come in for the next meeting, she is humiliatingly caught with a crust in her mouth). All this is interspersed with moments of everyday sexism and bullying communications from the Weinstein-like boss next door, who is not named or depicted. The Assistant doesn’t amp up the drama or trowel on the message: instead, it shines a cold, clear light on a culture of complicity, silence and misogyny, not to mention the general dehumanising nature of office life. The more real you make it, the more people are forced to interrogate their own role in all this Green’s previous films were documentaries, often centred on women, often stylistically adventurous. But for The Assistant, she opts for an unfussy approach. “In fiction film-making,” she says, “you can use the closeup to amplify micro-aggressions, tiny moments that often get overlooked.” Green still researched her story like a documentary, though, interviewing hundreds of working women worldwide. “The more real you make it, the more people are forced to interrogate their own role in all this.” As well as its relevance to the #MeToo moment, The Assistant is a type of film we’ve been seeing a lot in US cinema lately: one concerned with everyday experience, particularly of those on the lower rungs if not the margins – yet reflective of modern America as a whole. Authentic settings and scenarios are prioritised over exaggerated dramatics or showy technique (if you want an example of the latter in terms of #MeToo, go see Bombshell). Strikingly, many of these films are being made by and/or about women. We’ve had the likes of Debra Granik’s Leave No Trace, about a disturbed survivalist father and his teenage daughter living in the woods; Sean Baker’s The Florida Project, which follows a single mother living hand to mouth in an Orlando motel; Chloé Zhao’s The Rider, about a Dakota rodeo star suffering ahead injury. And then there was Andrea Arnold’s American Honey, in which a teen runaway falls in with a hedonistic bunch; and Andrew Bujalski’s Support the Girls, about female workers banding together at an exploitative sports bar. In Europe, such films would be readily classified as “realism”, in the vein of the neorealist cinema of 1950s Italy or the “social realism” of Ken Loach and Mike Leigh in the UK. But in the US, the idea of realism has never quite taken root. In commercial Hollywood especially, sociopolitical issues must always be refracted through the prism of genre: horror and sci-fi are the popular choices. Escapist cinema will always have its appeal. But perhaps, given America’s current – and worsening – predicament, audiences are now starting to crave films that strive to make sense of the here and now, rather than distract from it. A further sign comes in the form of Eliza Hittman’s Never Rarely Sometimes Always, about to have a streaming release in the UK. It concerns a Pennsylvanian teenager who travels to New York with her cousin to get a termination. As with The Assistant, the drama is low-key, almost documentary-like. There is no speechifying and no sentimentality: the characters don’t learn a redeeming lesson, offer a political insight or bond in a heartwarming way. Instead, we’re faced with the bare, brutal reality of the situation, which is compounded by the fact that these young women have no money, nowhere to stay, and little experience of the world. In 2007, the drama 4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days, told a similar story about a woman seeking an illegal termination in Ceauşescu’s Romania. Modern-day America looks just as grim in Never Rarely Sometimes Always, which won an award at Sundance this year in the category of neorealism. Tellingly, this was a new category at the festival. Could the prevalence of female film-makers have something to do with this wave? Opportunities have improved in recent years, it could be said, resulting in fresh perspectives on both the plight of women and the fragilities of male identity in modern America. It would be wrong, however, to assume that female film-makers naturally lean towards more personal, real-life subjects. A more likely factor, suggests Green, is the industry’s lingering apprehension over women. “They’ll fund us,” she says, “when it’s an area they think we have authority on. If I came to them with a dystopian sci-fi movie, they might not believe I could pull it off. But if I say it’s about a 25-year-old assistant, they might think: ‘Oh, OK, that’s something she might know something about.’” The idea of a socially conscious, class-conscious cinema has always been deeply suspect in America Hardship and poverty often go hand in hand with realism, and not just in front of the camera. One reason Italian neorealism caught on worldwide was because it was cheap to make. Perhaps this is why it never really took root in the US. “The idea of a socially conscious, class-conscious cinema has always been deeply suspect in America,” says Paul Malcolm, film programmer at the UCLA Film and Television Archive. Perhaps, he adds, the US establishment was reluctant to admit to a foreign influence, especially when its focus on societal ills and the plight of the working class came with connotations of socialism and communism. A very slender realist thread does run through US film history, however, says Malcolm, who recently co-curated a film season entitled American Neorealism, Part One (1948 to 1984). This showcased the likes of John Cassavetes’ Shadows (a rough, jazzy race drama shot on the streets of 1950s New York), Jerry Schatzberg’s The Panic in Needle Park (with the young Al Pacino as a 1970s junkie) and Barbara Loden’s Wanda (in which she plays a runaway wife drifting through grimy 1970s Pennsylvania). To these we should add landmark African-American films such as Shirley Clarke’s The Cool World and Charles Burnett’s Killer of Sheep. The neorealist strand also runs through black and minority film-making, from Boyz N the Hood to Fruitvale Station. Part two of UCLA’s film season is on hiatus due to the pandemic, but the list of potential candidates is getting longer by the month. Ironically, economic adversity could actually be a factor in the scarcity of US realism. It often becomes a calling card. Film-makers who have paid their dues and garnered critical acclaim through realist dramas are often tempted to bigger (but not always better) things. It happened to such great Italian neorealists as Vittoria de Sica, Luchino Visconti and Roberto Rossellini. It is also happening to their current US successors. Kelly Reichardt successfully transposed her realist sensibility to such period pieces as Meek’s Cutoff. Her latest, First Cow, may be set in the 1820s, but is no less a tale of graft and survival. On the other hand, Chloé Zhao is currently working on the Marvel movie Eternals, which is unlikely to ever be confused with The Rider. Still, while it marks a defection from the realist camp, the move also signals a big-budget vote of confidence in a rising film-maker. Kitty Green has plans but is not willing to discuss them just yet. Realism always seems to be born out of crisis. In Italy, it grew from the ruins of the second world war. Before that, a realist movement in art developed in the US and elsewhere in the 1930s, in the wake of the Great Depression. In fact, one of the most enduring fruits of social realism in the US was the Farm Security Administration, set up as part of Franklin D Roosevelt’s New Deal in the mid-30s. Its remit was to document the impact of the Depression on rural communities, through photography as well as film. But its images went beyond the merely factual, often achieving the emotional impact of a drama. The prime example is Dorothea Lange’s famous Migrant Mother photograph, which the Library of Congress captioned: “Destitute pea pickers in California. Mother of seven children. Age 32. Nipomo, California.” The photograph has come to encapsulate the whole era not just because it captures what happened but because – given the worry etched across the woman’s face as she holds her young – it also shows how those times felt. To future historians, such films as The Assistant or Never Rarely Sometimes Always could be this image’s 21st-century equivalents. With a new depression looming, there could be more like it to come. If realism is what a crisis calls for, the conditions could hardly be better, which is to say worse. • The Assistant is out now on digital platforms.