Sir Bill Beaumont has vowed to deliver meaningful change after he was re-elected as World Rugby’s chairman for another four years. The former England captain overcame the challenge of Agustín Pichot for rugby union’s top job, winning by 28 votes to 23 against his former vice-chairman. Beaumont must now set to work on guiding the sport through the coronavirus crisis and delivering on his key manifesto pledges, including an aligned global calendar and an overhaul of rugby’s global governance. World Rugby has already provided stricken unions with an £80m rescue package and with the summer tours highly likely to be cancelled, Beaumont must reshape this year’s Test schedule as well as establishing a future calendar that serves both hemispheres. The 68-year-old, who became chairman in 2016, had the unanimous support of the Six Nations – who contributed 18 votes in a weighted and much-criticised electoral system – but Pichot had the full backing of the Sanzaar countries (South Africa, New Zealand, Australia and Argentina), who supported his Nations Championship proposal last year. The Argentinian mounted an energetic leadership bid and gathered considerable late momentum, pitching himself as a revolutionary and pledging reform with Beaumont viewed as the traditionalist. Sources close to Pichot believed the vote was as close as 24-23 in Beaumont’s favour when Japan and Rugby Africa were yet to declare their intentions, but both have backed the incumbent. Bernard Laporte has been elected as vice-chairman and it is thought his political influence was key in helping Beaumont over the line. Thanks to additional support from Rugby Europe, Canada, Samoa, Fiji and the split North American vote, Beaumont has clinched victory, but building bridges with the southern hemisphere will be among his top priorities. “I have a clear mandate to work with Bernard to implement progressive, meaningful and sustainable change,” he said. “As an organisation, we must lead, be transparent, accountable and continue to serve for all. We must be united in our drive to make this great sport even better, simpler, safer and more accessible. We must listen to players, fans, competitions, our unions and regions, and take decisions that are in the best interests of all with our strong values to the fore.” Beaumont has also pledged collaboration with leading clubs after it emerged World Rugby and the Champions Cup organisers were on a collision course over whether Test or domestic rugby would take priority in the autumn, assuming the sport returns then. “Now is not the time for celebration,” he said. “We have work to do. We are tackling Covid-19 and must implement an appropriate return-to-rugby strategy that prioritises player welfare, while optimising any opportunity to return to international rugby this year in full collaboration with club competitions for the good of players, fans and the overall financial health of the sport.” Voting in the election closed on Thursday and the result was initially not due to be announced until the World Rugby council meeting on 12 May. After a clear winner was determined without the need for a second round of voting, both candidates agreed for the result to be announced on Saturday. Pichot was magnanimous in defeat, tweeting: “Congratulations Bill!!! Not this time, thanks to all for the support, from the bottom of my heart.”