Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: African nations are facing a surge of Covid-19 cases with less than one intensive care bed and one ventilator per 100,000 people, a Reuters survey has found. Even in a best-case scenario, the continent could need at least 10 times the numbers it has now as the outbreak peaks, an analysis of researchers’ projections showed. The United Nations has warned that the global pandemic could cause “multiple famines”, as it appealed for a further $4.7bn in funding to help more than 50 vulnerable countries. The comments came as the UN appealed for a further $4.7bn (£3.8bn) in funding for its global humanitarian response plan. Coronavirus cases in India have risen past 50,000 according to the country’s health ministry, with the pace of infection showing no sign of abating. The number of people who have died after contracting Covid-19 in Europe has surpassed 150,000, with most in the UK, Italy, Spain and France, a tally of official figures by the AFP news agency showed. China’s exports saw a shock 3.5% rise in April despite a hit to external demand from the coronavirus pandemic, official figures showed on Thursday. But imports fell 14.2% from a year ago, a steeper drop from last month, according to the Customs Administration. A forecast of analysts by Bloomberg had predicted an 11% dive in exports and a 10% plunge in imports. Mayors in many of the world’s leading cities have warned there can be no return to “business as usual” in the aftermath of the coronavirus crisis if humanity is to escape catastrophic climate breakdown. Poland has postponed Sunday’s presidential election amid the outbreak. The postal-only ballot will now take place “as soon as possible”, but is likely to not happen until at least June. A cabinet minister has confirmed that 400,000 gowns from Turkey to protect medics from coronavirus have been impounded because they were poor quality, but he insisted “strong supplies” were now coming through to the frontline. The personal protective equipment (PPE) from Turkey was heralded by ministers several weeks ago as “a very significant” shipment that would ease a shortage of gowns in the NHS, but the delivery turned into a shambles after it was repeatedly delayed. Now it has emerged the gowns were in fact useless for medical purposes.