Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The World Health Organization says “extreme vigilance” is needed as countries begin to exit lockdowns imposed to curb the virus’ spread. Germany has reported an acceleration in new infections after taking early steps to ease its lockdown. South Korea, another country that succeeded in limiting infections, has seen a new outbreak in nightclubs. Boris Johnson denies reports his senior scientific and medical advisers were not consulted on the much-maligned new messaging attached to his plan to ease the country’s lockdown as he sets out the details in parliament. Amid muddled guidance from ministers on what the new rules actually allow, Johnson insists the public understands his government’s message. And, as the UK’s constituent nations take diverging approaches, he is forced to deny he is acting as the prime minister of England. The Russian president announces an easing of the nationwide lockdown, even as the country sees a record number of new infections. Vladimir Putin says people in some sectors will return to work, though restrictions on public gatherings will remain in place. “We have a long and difficult process ahead of us with no room for mistakes,” he tells Russians. The Cannes film festival appears to halt any plans for a physical edition for 2020, but is aiming to sponsor screenings at other festivals and cinemas of the films that would have been selected for the event. In an interview with Screen, the Cannes artistic director Thierry Frémaux says he “could never have imagined” something like the cancellation of the festival, which was originally due to start tomorrow and was “overcome with a great sense of melancholy and nostalgia”. Men’s blood has higher levels of an enzyme used by the virus to infect cells, the results of a study published in the European Heart Journal show. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is found in the heart, kidneys and other organs. In Covid-19, the respiratory disease caused by the Sars-CoV-2 virus, it is thought to play a role in how the infection progresses into the lungs. The Afghan capital Kabul records its worst day for infections as 161 new cases are reported and the health ministry warns transmission will continue to surge across the country. The total number of confirmed cases in the city, Afghanistan’s worst-affected area, reaches 1,257, with about half of the 325 tests carried out coming back positive on Monday. Saudi-backed authorities in Yemen declare Aden an “infested” city as the number of cases there rises. The Aden-based national coronavirus committee announces 17 new cases; 10 of them in the southern port city. That raises the total count in areas under the Saudi-backed government’s control to 51, with eight deaths. Half a million more people could die from Aids-related illnesses in sub-Saharan Africa if efforts are not made to overcome interruptions to health services as a result of the pandemic, the World Health Organization warns. According to the modelling carried out on behalf of the WHO and UNAids, the disruption to health services could take Aids-related deaths in the next year back to 2008 levels, when it claimed 950,000 lives. The UK government and its national broadcaster, the BBC, are joining forces with the World Health Organization to implement a global information campaign about the pandemic. The “Stop the Spread” campaign, intended to counteract “incorrect and false information” about the virus, will appear across BBC World television channels, websites and apps from this month and throughout June.