Indian government forces have killed a top rebel commander and his aide in disputed Kashmir, and shut down mobile phone and mobile internet services during subsequent anti-India protests. Riyaz Naikoo, 35, was the chief of operations of the region’s largest indigenous rebel group, Hizbul Mujahideen, which has spearheaded an armed rebellion against Indian rule. India’s security officials and some members of the ruling Bharatiya Janata party hailed his death as a major victory, but the killing could spark more unrest. A former maths teacher, Naikoo was one of the region’s most-hunted militants, shooting to prominence after a 2016 uprising that followed the killing of the group’s charismatic leader, Burhan Wani. After Wani’s death, Naikoo helped to breathe new life into the militant movement and unified rebel ranks, which had been divided by splinter factions. Police and army soldiers in armoured vehicles launched an operation in the Awantipora area in southern Kashmir late on Tuesday, using earth movers to dig up patches of land, including a school playground, looking for underground hideouts, residents said. Troops blasted at least two civilian homes with explosives, a common tactic employed by Indian troops in Kashmir. As the government forces began house-to-house searches in the area, they came under gunfire from rebels, police said. Naikoo and another militant were killed in the ensuing firefight, a police official added. Government forces fired bullets, shotgun pellets and teargas at a large anti-India protest which began shortly after the news of the rebel leader’s killing spread. At least a dozen civilians were injured in the clashes, locals and medics said. Authorities did not hand over the bodies of the two killed rebels to their families in line with a new government policy designed to thwart large-scale funerals that had become a norm and a rallying point for anti-India protests. Authorities blocked mobile internet service, a common Indian tactic in the region when such fighting erupts. As the fighting continued and word spread that Naikoo was trapped, they also stopped mobile phone services. With the end of British colonial rule, the Indian subcontinent is partitioned into predominantly Hindu India and mainly Muslim Pakistan. Mass migrations follow, with Hindus and Muslims moving to their country of choice. More than a million people are killed in the communal violence that ensues. India and Pakistan fight their first war over control of Muslim-majority Kashmir, a kingdom ruled by Hindu Maharaja Hari Singh. The war ends in 1948 with a UN brokered ceasefire, leaving Kashmir divided between the nations, with the promise of a referendum to chose which nation its people wish to join. A second war erupts over Kashmir, with India and Pakistan agreeing to a UN-mandated ceasefire the following month. The third war between India and Pakistan is fought in East Pakistan, ending with the creation of independent Bangladesh. India detonates a nuclear device in the first confirmed nuclear test by a non-permanent member of the UN security council. India and Pakistan sign an agreement that neither will attack each other's nuclear installations or facilities; it takes effect in 1991. Armed resistance to Indian rule in Kashmir begins. India says Pakistan supports local fighters with weapons and training, which Pakistan denies, saying it only gives local Kashmiris "moral and diplomatic" support. India detonates five nuclear devices and Pakistan responds by detonating six of its own. International sanctions are imposed against both. India masses troops along its western frontier with Pakistan and the Kashmir boundary after blaming Pakistani insurgents for a deadly attack at the Indian parliament. The standoff ends in October 2002 after international mediation. Suspected rebels sneak into an army base in Indian-controlled Kashmir and kill at least 18 soldiers. Indian forces later attack militant bases in Pakistan-controlled Kashmir. A car bombing of a paramilitary convoy in Indian-controlled Kashmir kills 40 Indian soldiers. Militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed, headquartered in Pakistan, claims responsibility. India blames Pakistan and promises a "crushing response"." India's central government changes part of the Indian constitution and downgrades Jammu and Kashmir from one state to two territories. The changes eliminate Kashmir's right to its own constitution, limit its decision-making power, and allow non-Kashmiri Indians to settle there. Delhi formally revokes Jammu and Kashmir’s constitutional autonomy and splits it into two federal territories. The state’s constitution, as well as its penal code and state flag, was nullified. In 2019, the government imposed a total communication blackout during an unprecedented military crackdown in the strife-torn region. India has stepped up its counterinsurgency operations across Kashmir in recent months during a coronavirus lockdown. Militants have also continued their attacks on government forces and alleged informants. More than two dozen militants and about a dozen Indian troops were killed in April, the most in any month since August 2019, when India revoked the region’s semi-autonomous status and statehood and imposed direct federal rule.