Michael Gove has accused the EU of wanting Britain to “obey the rules of their club” as the government published a draft trade and security treaty lacking any ties to Brussels’ labour and environmental standards or regulations on subsidies. Speaking in the Commons, the cabinet minister said success in the fourth round of the talks starting on 1 June “depends on the EU recognising that the UK is sovereign”, after a notable lack of progress in last week’s talks. The EU’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, welcomed Downing Street’s “transparency” after being blocked by the British government during the recent negotiations from sharing the text with the member states. He also made the point that the bloc had already made its text public “over two months ago”. The last chance to agree an extension to the transition period will come in June. The UK will otherwise leave the customs union and single market at the end of the year. Without a replacement deal, both sides will fall back on the World Trade Organization’s most favoured nation tariffs, which means duties on everyday food items from cheese to beef of more than 40%. A 291-page draft comprehensive free trade agreement is among the multiple papers made public by the government covering everything from aviation and fisheries to social security coordination and law enforcement. Brussels has proposed that the future trade deal commits both sides to “non-regression” from the current EU environmental, labour and social standards, a major sticking point for the negotiations. It is also seeking the full enforcement of the EU’s rules on state aid, limiting the government’s ability to financially support businesses. In response, the draft document published by the UK contains a cut-and-paste from the EU’s trade deal with Canada stating merely that it would be “inappropriate to encourage trade or investment by weakening or reducing the levels of protection” in current labour laws and standards. After 47 years and 30 days it was all over. As the clock struck 11pm on 31 January 2020, the UK was officially divorced from the EU and began trying to carve out a new global role as a sovereign nation. It was a union that got off to a tricky start and continued to be marked by the UK’s sometimes conflicted relationship with its neighbours. The French president, Charles de Gaulle, vetoes Britain’s entry to EEC, accusing the UK of a “deep-seated hostility” towards the European project. With Sir Edward Heath having signed the accession treaty the previous year, the UK enters the EEC in an official ceremony complete with a torch-lit rally, dickie-bowed officials and a procession of political leaders, including former prime ministers Harold Macmillan and Alec Douglas-Home.Lisa O'Carroll The UK decides to stay in the common market after 67% voted "yes". Margaret Thatcher, later to be leader of the Conservative party, campaigned to remain. Margaret Thatcher negotiated what became known as the UK rebate with other EU members after the "iron lady" marched into the former French royal palace at Fontainebleau to demand “our own money back” claiming for every £2 contributed we get only £1 back” despite being one of the “three poorer” members of the community. It was a move that sowed the seeds of Tory Euroscepticism that was to later cause the Brexit schism in the party. Thatcher served notice on the EU community in a defining moment in EU politics in which she questioned the expansionist plans of Jacques Delors, who had remarked that 80% of all decisions on economic and social policy would be made by the European Community within 10 years with a European government in “embryo”. That was a bridge too far for Thatcher. Collapse of Berlin wall and fall of communism in eastern Europe, which would later lead to expansion of EU. Divisions between the UK and the EU deepened with Thatcher telling the Commons in an infamous speech it was ‘no, no, no’ to what she saw as Delors’ continued power grab. Rupert Murdoch’s Sun newspaper ratchets up its opposition to Europe with a two-fingered “Up yours Delors” front page. A collapse in the pound forced prime minister John Major and the then chancellor Norman Lamont to pull the UK out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism. On 1 January, customs checks and duties were removed across the bloc. Thatcher hailed the vision of “a single market without barriers – visible or invisible – giving you direct and unhindered access to the purchasing power of over 300 million of the world’s wealthiest and most prosperous people". Tory rebels vote against the treaty that paved the way for the creation of the European Union. John Major won the vote the following day in a pyrrhic victory. Tony Blair patches up the relationship. Signs up to social charter and workers' rights. Nigel Farage elected an MEP and immediately goes on the offensive in Brussels. “Our interests are best served by not being a member of this club,” he said in his maiden speech. “The level playing field is about as level as the decks of the Titanic after it hit an iceberg.” Chancellor Gordon Brown decides the UK will not join the euro. EU enlarges to to include eight countries of the former eastern bloc including Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic. EU expands again, allowing Romania and Bulgaria into the club. Anti-immigration hysteria seems to take hold with references to “cockroches” by Katie Hopkins in the Sun and tabloid headlines such as “How many more can we take?” and “Calais crisis: send in the dogs”. David Cameron returns with reform package.   Neither the EU or the UK could “waive or otherwise” derogate” from its own laws if the motivation is to win an economic advantage but there is nothing to bind Britain from lowering its standards if it wished to do so. On state aid, a major interest within the EU, the UK’s paper simply affords Brussels the right to “express its concerns” and request consultation. “The responding party shall afford full and sympathetic consideration to that request”, the document says. Explaining the stalemate in the talks, Gove told MPs in the Commons Brussels needed to drop its “ideological fastness” for common ground to be found. He said: “The EU essentially wants us to obey the rules of their club even though we’re no longer members and they want the same access to our fishing grounds as they currently enjoy, while restricting our access to their markets. ‘“To help facilitate discussions in the fourth round and beyond, the government has today published the full draft legal text that we’ve already shared with the commission and which, together with the EU’s draft agreement, have formed the basis of all discussions.” Downing Street has repeatedly emphasised it is proposing a deal based on others signed by the EU such as with Canada and Japan. The UK’s legal text also reveals a series of demands that are not contained in any previous trade agreements, including mutual recognition of automotive type approval to protect the British car industry and of professional qualifications.