Of all of the strange side effects of the pandemic, I suppose the craft boom was inevitable. The mindfulness industry (which goes hand in hand with sewing, knitting and the like) was already thriving before lockdown sent our levels of boredom and anxiety through the roof. Now, we’re seeing something of a craft renaissance: John Lewis’s haberdashery sales have reported an online boost, while Hobbycraft, that stalwart of the craft-industrial complex, has said the number of people visiting its website for crafting ideas has tripled since the lockdown began. For every sourdough starter, there’s also a handmade face mask or a piece of Tiger King-inspired embroidery. It’s not difficult to see why people turn to crafts in times of crisis. During a particularly potent spell of unemployment in my early 20s, I took to making little people out of tampons. It started when, unable to sleep one night, I gathered up all the “crafting” materials I could find in my room (some felt tips and a box of Tampax) and turned five tampons into the Velvet Underground & Nico. This was, it should be said, in the wake of the twee-core explosion of the late 2000s, when doing this sort of thing was considered Zooey Deschanel-esque, and therefore good. My 'painting' looks like something a nursery school teacher would think twice about before sticking up on the classroom wall Until now, this was my last memorable episode of adult crafting. As a mild dyspraxic, I’ve never been particularly good at anything involving fine motor skills. My movements are both frantic and indecisive, like a ham descending a staircase. The idea of me sitting down to embroider is about as reasonable as the idea of Donald Trump sitting down to read Infinite Jest. But here I am holding something called an embroidery hoop. Having watched the same YouTube instructional video three times, I’ve managed to fit said hoop with a piece of fabric bearing an intricate floral template. On opening up my embroidery kit (which, by the way, had a photo of a child on the packaging) I was nearly overcome by panic. The different coloured threads hung next to one another, on the same piece of card. There was a weird clippy tool I’d never seen before. And one brief look at the instructions told me they’d been run (possibly from Mandarin, going by some Chinese characters on the packaging) through Google translate, which only served to exacerbate my confusion. If it weren’t for the glut of calming “how to” videos on embroidery (many of which have been uploaded over the past few weeks) I would’ve been tempted to dump the entire kit in the bin and put the ordeal behind me before it had even started. Admittedly, the first stitch I sew is quite satisfying. I use some of the green thread to make a start on a flower stem, and am frankly awed by my own ability. But before long, it dawns on me just how slow this process is: it has taken me about 15 minutes to do an inch of stem and one tiny leaf. My mind wanders. I’m bored. Had I been born hundreds of years ago, I think to myself, this is probably what I would’ve done (as a lesbian) to avoid contact with my rank, toothless, clap-infested husband. I would’ve sat embroidering poorly by candlelight, thinking impure thoughts about wenches. Maybe this is why lesbians are so into crafting: it’s a throwback to the days when they channelled all the sadness of forbidden desire into quietly subversive needlework. But having decided embroidery is emphatically not for me, I move onto modelling clay. Dyspraxic or not, I loved this stuff as a kid, and have warm memories of making animals, vegetables and minerals that inevitably fell apart in the oven. I roll out some balls and make colourful, abstract models. The polymer clay is satisfying to mould and play with, especially for someone given to nervous fidgeting. But after about 10 minutes, my hands feel dried out and achy, and I’m desperate to scroll Twitter, check the news and go back to my usual soothing activity of watching back-to-back Simpsons episodes. But I will myself to try one last craft. YouTube informs me that, using just cardboard toilet-paper rolls and paint, of which I happen to have both, I can make quite handsome little dandelion prints. Of all crafts I’ve attempted, this seems by far the easiest. You just cut strips into the toilet roll, splay them out and use the end product as a kind of fat paint brush. You’d have to be a mandrill to balls this up. Reader, I balls it up. There’s green and orange paint (the only colours I have) everywhere. My “painting” looks like something a nursery school teacher would think twice about before sticking up on the classroom wall. It’s an unmitigated disaster. I stand up and look at my war zone of a table, strewn with paint, loose pieces of thread and multicoloured clay crumbs. I can’t deal with this right now, I think to myself. I’m too stressed. And for the endless “bits and bobs” that come with crafting, my lockdown household has become all the more claustrophobic. Eleanor Margolis is a columnist for the i newspaper and Diva.