How do you preserve a pandemic? Libraries, museums and historical associations around the world are struggling to survive right now but they’re also asking themselves this critical question. They know future generations will inevitably study Covid-19 – so what are the moments and materials we should capture for people in the future, and how can we capture them? Collecting institutions around Australia have launched a series of projects aimed at creating coronavirus archives, and key to the ongoing efforts are the contributions of the general public. The State Library of Victoria is working to enlist an army of citizen collectors who can help it gather Covid-19 related materials. This is the idea behind Memory Bank: A Collective Isolation Project, the library’s major pandemic archiving project. “A citizen collector really needs to be an anthropologist for the future and to think about the kinds of things that we take for granted that someone in the future may find absolutely fascinating,” says a senior curator, Carolyn Fraser. She lists leaflets, pamphlets and temporary take-out menus as examples of items that the library might be interested in acquiring. In addition to asking people to hold on to pandemic paraphernalia, the library is also releasing a series of weekly prompts which will encourage people to share details about their pandemic lives. The first prompt was “What’s in your fridge or pantry today?” Few of us would think to photograph our fridge or pantry, but knowing what’s in there could be useful for future scholars. “Things like receipts and shopping lists that, within the context of an archive, are really, really telling for people beyond this moment, may seem like rubbish to us now,” Fraser says. Dr Peter Hobbins, a medical historian, is also working to preserve pandemic-related ephemera. He started the #covidstreetarchive, a grassroots project encouraging people to photograph their streets and neighbourhoods, and to share their snaps on social media. The hashtag is filled with images of familiar sites: “closed” signs in shopfronts, empty streets and teddy bears in windows. Street Life, Darling Street, Rozelle, Easter Saturday #covidstreetarchive @statelibrarynsw pic.twitter.com/MoOLTOtKXV “The idea behind the #covidstreetarchive comes out of having been a historian who has studied the 1918-19 influenza pandemic and being aware that there are huge gaps in how we understand what it was like living through that period,” Hobbins says. He notes that our understanding of domestic life and the impact of the 1918 flu on businesses is particularly limited, and he hopes that starting Covid-19 archiving efforts now will help minimise similar gaps for future historians. In many ways, we’re already primed to preserve a pandemic. Smartphones and social media make it easy for us to share details about our daily lives. The New South Wales State Library embarked on a similar project to Hobbins’, asking people to share pictures from self-isolation on social media using the hashtag #NSWathome. By the end of April, thousands of photos had been shared on the hashtag via Instagram and Twitter, from self-isolation dinners and baking projects; home improvement and home-schooling projects; and images of contributors attending Zoom work meetings, workouts and happy hours. Behold. Dracula’s on the Gold Coast. I am one happy librarian to have snapped this while it was still in place. #contemporarycollecting #localstudies #localhistory #covid19australia #covidstreetarchive pic.twitter.com/Yp7RQza8RZ People are also being encouraged to keep a written record. The Diary Files is another of the Covid-19 projects launched by the SLNSW. A collective journalling project, contributors are invited to write and share short reflections on their circumstances. Early contributors include the literary and cultural personalities Tim Ross, Gretel Killeen, Michelle Law, Tony Birch and Wendy Sharpe, giving accounts of their experience during self-isolation. Bruce Baskerville, a historian involved in a similar project at the Centre for Western Australian History, is also encouraging people to keep a record of their thoughts, feelings and observations. “This is creating the archive that historians and researchers will use in the future to see how ordinary people experienced this event,” Baskerville says. Historians and curators involved in collecting efforts acknowledge that they don’t know how future generations will use the archives. Your social media snaps could end up in a museum exhibition; your diary entries could be the basis for a podcast; the teddy bear in your front window could feature in a material history of the pandemic. As Fraser says: “There’s a huge range of possibilities, and probably possibilities that we can’t even imagine right now.”