Cineworld is planning to reopen all its UK cinemas in July as the government eases coronavirus lockdown measures. The world’s second-largest cinema chain, which operates 128 venues in the UK and Ireland, is hoping to reopen in time for Christopher Nolan’s Tenet, scheduled for release on 17 July, followed by the Disney blockbuster Mulan. “Cineworld currently anticipates that government restrictions related to cinemas will be lifted in each of its territories by July,” the company said. “Subject to this and confirmation of the schedule for film releases, Cineworld anticipates the reopening of all of its cinemas in July.” The company, which has 787 venues globally, said reopening cinemas would go hand-in-hand with physical distancing and hygiene rules. “Cineworld has put in place procedures to ensure a safe and enjoyable cinema experience for its employees and customers,” the company said. The news provided cheer for investors after Cineworld, which has furloughed staff, cut its dividend and slashed executive pay. Shares rose as much as 25% in early trading. Cineworld also announced it had secured financial support to allow it to continue to stay afloat even if cinemas were forced to remain closed for the rest of this year. It has secured a deal with lenders to waive a financial covenant test in June, and agreed easier terms for its next deadline in December. It has also agreed an increase of $110m (£90m) on a credit facility, and a further $45m in UK government-backed loans to support large businesses hit by the coronavirus crisis. “Cineworld, as always, greatly believes in the theatrical experience and is fully committed to be the best place to watch a movie,” the company said. “Cineworld is excited by the great movie line-up to follow the reopening of cinemas, starting with the highly anticipated new Chris Nolan movie Tenet and immediately after that with Mulan, a new Disney adventure movie.” Rival Vue, one of Europe’s largest cinema operators, has also said it intends to reopen in July with measures including physically isolating family groups and staggering film times to reduce crowding. Vue has previously said other measures would include controlling entrances and exits and reducing the overall capacity of each film screening. In Berlin, one theatre ripped out many seats to ensure safe distancing between members of the audience. Some cinema operators have installed plastic screens between seats. A small-scale reopening of cinemas in China in mid-March was abruptly halted by the government amid fears of a second wave of coronavirus infections.