Cinema chain Vue will physically isolate family groups and stagger film times as part of social distancing measures to allow it to reopen across the UK in July. Vue, one of the largest cinema operators in Europe, outlined some of the measures following the government’s announcement on Monday that UK cinemas could be allowed to open from 4 July. The chain, which has 91 cinemas in the UK and Ireland, and 228 sites globally, said measures would include using its online booking system to automatically physically isolate family groups and couples, and increase the staggering of screenings to reduce congestion. “We have been liaising closely with authorities across Europe to design operating procedures that can provide the degree of social distancing required and allow an experience for our customers and staff that is as safe as possible,” the company said in a statement. “We look forward to working further with the government and the UK Cinema Association in the coming days to demonstrate the specific steps we will take in the UK, including physically isolating family groups through our online booking systems, staggering film times to maintain social distancing and operate responsibly, and introducing enhanced cleaning and employee-protection protocols.” Vue, which is run by founder Tim Richards, has previously said that other measures would include controlling entrances and exits and reducing the overall capacity of each screening of a film. Richards has said he would like the chain to be up and running before the 17 July release of Christopher Nolan’s Tenet, a $200m film following a time-travelling secret agent trying to stop world war three. The film is one of the remaining tentpole blockbusters whose release has not been delayed by the coronavirus pandemic. UK cinema operators are desperate to reopen as the financial toll from lockdown since mid-March mounts. However, the very nature of movie-going, the shared experience and crowds, makes reopening safely a difficult proposition. A small-scale reopening of cinemas in China in mid-March was abruptly halted by the government amid fears of a second wave of infections. “Big screen entertainment is a force for good in society,” said Vue. “Providing an accessible and controlled way for families to begin to enjoy life outside their homes and we are excited to be able to start planning for a future where we can enjoy movies together again.”