Hong Kong is living through two traumas at once: after nine months of civil unrest – sparked by a now-aborted extradition law – that saw increasing violence from protesters and the police force, the former British colony was hit by the Covid-19 pandemic. The territory has been faring relatively well so far (with 1,041 confirmed cases and four deaths at the time of writing), in large part thanks to the scarring experience of Sars in 2003. This meant that as soon as news of a novel strain of coronavirus in mainland China started to spread, most people decided not to wait for official guidelines and began wearing masks, minimising social outings, and washing hands and homes with increased frequency and thoroughness. The government, on the other hand, prevaricated for reasons that were hardly connected to public health. Back in October 2019, citing colonial-era emergency laws, the authorities banned wearing a mask in public to prevent protesters hiding their identity as they took part in unauthorised marches (or authorised marched that got banned halfway through). But the administration wasn’t willing to budge. It took a few contradictory press briefings before Carrie Lam, Hong Kong’s chief executive, accepted that surgical masks for preventing the spread of the coronavirus would be allowed – while maintaining that they would remain forbidden at protests. To some extent, the pandemic could have given the Hong Kong government the opportunity to reset the clock, concentrate on protecting public health, and move towards social reconciliation. This is not what’s happened. Even as Hong Kong was recording growing numbers of new infections and life was being upended by the pandemic, the police kept making arrests and the courts kept putting activists on trial. Fifteen high-profile activists were arrested in April for illegal assembly in a march that took place last August that saw more than a million people take to the streets. Among them were pro-democracy veterans such as Martin Lee, 81, a senior barrister who co-drafted the Basic Law, Hong Kong’s mini-constitution, and who served as an elected legislator and as one of the founders of the Democratic party; Jimmy Lai, the founder and publisher of pro-democracy newspaper Apple Daily; and Figo Chan, co-convenor of the Civil Human Rights Front, the group that had been leading authorised mass protests throughout 2019. In the same hours, the Liaison Office, Beijing’s highest representative in Hong Kong, decided to make its position in the territory even more openly that of a de facto supervisor of the local administration by announcing that it was not bound by Article 22 of the Basic Law. Article 22 states that no department under the Chinese central and local government may interfere in Hong Kong’s internal affairs. The announcement seemingly undermined some of the main principles under which Hong Kong exists – such as the “one country, two systems” concept and the promise of a high degree of autonomy – but it didn’t provoke street protests: the fear of a spread of coronavirus cases, and the impossibility of organising rallies or meetings, has meant that discontent has migrated online, mostly on social media. Since the end of March, social distancing has been enforced with a provision that forbids groups of more than four people gathering, making demonstrations almost impossible. But as the crackdown continues, an angry emoji can only go so far. Law Man-chung, an anti-government protester, saw his sentence of 200 hours of community service changed to 20 days in prison after the government appealed the original sentence for being “too lenient”. His crime? Trampling and throwing a Chinese flag in the bin. In the same week, a judge expressed sympathy with a man who stabbed two young protesters and a reporter with a meat cleaver. And while the person who carried out the assault received a sentence of less than four years, Edward Leung, 28, a proponent of Hong Kong’s independence, lost his appeal against a six-year jail sentence for throwing bricks at police during a 2016 clash at which police used live rounds. The new round of legal repression comes in between two crucial elections. Last November both the local and central authorities were taken by surprise when the district council elections – normally a minor political event, as district councillors are tasked with taking care of local issues – resulted in 17 out of 18 local councils going to the pro-democracy camp. This watershed moment clearly hasn’t brought about a more open-minded approach towards Hong Kong’s demands: the authorities want to prevent a similar result in this September’s legislative council elections (which are half-returned by universal suffrage). There is speculation that the authorities will disqualify candidates (as has happened before), which wasn’t helped by an official stating this wouldn’t happen, provided candidates “support the [Hong Kong] government”. This was made worse by Carrie Lam’s recent defence of Beijing’s criticism of pan-democracy lawmakers who were “filibustering” in the legislative council to delay a law that would criminalise insulting the Chinese national anthem. Candidates are now expected to show an ever-growing level of loyalty to the symbols of the state and adhere to a vaguely defined sense of patriotism. In the past week, though, protests have returned: they have mostly been taking place in shopping malls, where people can gather less visibly and then start chanting slogans while maintaining the decreed social distancing rules. On 1 May, Labour Day, after the police refused to authorise a traditional rally, a protest inside a mall ended in arrests and the use of pepper spray. The government has shown that it is not interested in reconciliation and even through a pandemic has stuck to its guns, continuing to refer to protesters as “rioters”, no matter what they do. The demand for meaningful democracy is treated like a second virus to be forcibly driven out of Hong Kong. • Ilaria Maria Sala is a writer and journalist based in Hong Kong