How does Sunday start? Before lockdown I’d have a bit of a lie-in after Saturday’s match, then arrive at the Lyon training ground at 10am-ish for breakfast and a warm down. And during lockdown? I’m back at home in Liverpool with my mum, who is a key worker healthcare assistant, enjoying some home comforts and trying to improve my French with Duolingo. I’m not brilliant, but my French teammates have made a big effort to learn more English, so I’m trying to push on. I did try to teach them a few Scouse phrases, but no one understood me. Are you suffering any training withdrawal? I’ve tried yoga, but I’m not very elastic and I keep falling over. I’m staying in shape, though, and posting loads of Instagram videos of my training exercises, which I film in my mum’s front garden. How are you filling that football void? Keepy-uppys and shooting practice in the garden, which my mum isn’t too keen on. She often stands nearby and we’ll chat about her day while I practise. Any guilty pleasures? No one does a better Sunday roast than Mum, and she bakes amazing cookies. I tell her to only bake in batches of six or I’d eat them all. What’s your Sunday culture fix? You won’t find my binge-watching Love Island, that’s for sure. I’m watching Queen of the South right now; next up is The Crown. One thing I’ve started to do more in lockdown is read books. I rarely read before. I’m currently enjoying The Girl Next Door by Phoebe Morgan. Your fantasy Sunday? I’d start with crepes with Nutella, strawberries and blueberries actually. Then I’d watch the midday Premier League match, maybe Liverpool v Man City, then the second game at 4pm (Spurs v Arsenal), and then I’d be up front in the French Cup Final against PSG. It’d be 2-2 with three minutes left, then Parris would drop a shoulder, cut inside and kill it to the top right corner with her right foot: 3-2. Boom! Game over. That’d be the perfect Sunday. When the Sunday whistle blows? I always finish the day speaking to Mum, either in person at home in Liverpool or by Facetime from France. Then I say my prayers and call it a day. Nikita Parris has partnered with UEFA and VISA’s #WePlayStrong #TrainAtHome Youtube weekly tutorial series