So you (along with everyone else in 2020) have decided to diligently feed a sourdough starter, and make your own sourdough bread. The problem? You can’t eat gluten. Fortunately, although there is an element of luck (and a lot of intimidating lingo), creating your own gluten-free sourdough from scratch is a relatively straightforward process. A sourdough starter is essentially wild yeast that you cultivate by mixing together flour and water. Through a daily process of feeding the active culture and discarding the waste product, you create a living, fermented yeast that can be used to make sourdough bread. Think of it as a homemade, wholesome version of packet yeast. Once the starter is fed, and you’re ready to make gluten free sourdough bread, there are a few extra elements you’ll need to consider, but the technique is not unlike the regular variety. Ingredients per feed:25g quinoa flour25g sorghum or brown rice flour50g-75g water (or more to create a thick paste)See ‘starter notes’ below for more details on the flour mix. Day 1 to 3 In the morning, mix together the flours and water in a clean glass vessel. Ensure that there’s enough water to make a paste, even if this means adding more water than specified, gluten-free flours all absorb water differently. Repeat this feeding procedure at night, so you’re feeding the starter twice a day. Day 3 to 4 Ideally, you’ll begin to see some bubbles start to form around this time. This is when I begin the process of discarding around half the starter, once a day. There’s no need to be super precise – eyeballing it is fine. Simply stir the starter and remove half of it from the jar. You can use this ‘discard’ portion to make crackers, pancakes or anything else where you’d regularly use a flour batter. You need to feed your starter every time you discard – this includes when you make a loaf. The discard process removes older starter (and waste product from the fermentation process) and refreshes it with new food. This is super important in keeping your starter healthy. Note that you discard once a day but feed the starter twice a day. Day 4 to 7 Continue with your process of discarding and then feeding. I find the easiest way to do this is to discard in the morning, feed the starter, and then feed it again before bed. There’s no point discarding after feeding – you’ll be wasting fresh flour. You should now be getting some serious action in your starter, depending on the weather. If you’re in winter or a cold kitchen, it may take up to 11 or 12 days. If you get to day 12 without any action, it might be time to admit defeat and start again. Around this stage, your starter might have developed a smell. The smell of rotten eggs or sulphur suggests your starter is on track – the smell will mellow, so don’t panic! The smell of alcohol or nail polish remover suggests your starter is hungry – try feeding it a little more flour and water in each feed. Ideally, your starter will begin a rhythm of rising quite dramatically in the hours after feeding, and then collapsing on itself when it has run out of food. Rubber bands are a great way to track growth, but you can also see where the starter rose to by the remnants on the side of your jar. Good starters have a predictable rise and fall schedule that indicates strength. At its peak, your starter should have a slightly domed top, a little like instant yeast does when you activate it. Other things to look out for in your starter are a thick, paste like consistency and lots of popping air bubbles when you stir it. A spoonful of your starter should feel light and bubbly when you remove it from the jar. These air bubbles indicate that your starter is ready to bake a loaf of bread. Day 7 to 12 onwards Once your starter is bubbly, active and pleasantly mild smelling, you’re ready to bake bread! You will need to continue maintaining your starter by feeding it once a day. Replenish it with a feed after each loaf. If you’re not planning to bake often, you can keep your starter in the fridge (in an airtight container) and feed it once a week. You’ll need to let it come to room temperature and give it a little extra love a day or two before using it. Keep in mind that new starters often take a month or so to develop enough maturity for a great loaf, so be patient. The wait is worth it! There are three areas where gluten-free sourdough differs from a traditional loaf recipe.The prefermentThere are many names for this aspect of sourdough, so I settled on preferment for ease. This is a mixture of sourdough starter and extra flour and water, which is left overnight to ferment. A preferment is important in developing the flavour, texture and overall quality of your gluten-free sourdough. The psyllium husk gelBecause there is no gluten to hold the loaf together – this is where the sourdough deviates from regular bread – we need to replace the gluten with psyllium husk. Psyllium husk gives strength and elasticity to your loaf, which enables it to rise and produce a good crumb. It is also excellent in absorbing liquid, something we use a lot of to counteract the dryness of gluten free flours. Psyllium husk is often marketed and sold as a fibre supplement. It’s generally available at the supermarket, health food stores or chemists. Keep in mind that this recipe uses psyllium husk, not psyllium husk powder. They have very different absorbencies and are not a clean substitute. The flour mixtureFinally, we have the mixture of flours. A mixture of gluten-free flours is necessary to create a lighter, bread-like texture, although I’ve tried to use as few as possible for ease. Once you get the hang of the sourdough, feel free to play around with the flours that best suit you, but keep in mind that they all have different absorbencies and qualities. EquipmentLarge glass or plastic mixing bowlsBoule shaped banneton (bread shaping basket) or a bowl lined with a clean, undyed tea towelBaking paperCling filmLame (scoring blade) or sharp knifeDutch oven (please note that not all dutch ovens are suitable for high oven temperatures) or cast iron skillet and tin foilIce cubes, optional For the preferment (made the night before):125-150g active sourdough starter – 125g for a warm climate or 150g for winter or a more sour loaf (I use 150g)60g white rice flour150g water For the loaf:55g quinoa flour (see ingredient notes)100g sorghum flour75g tapioca flour60g white rice flour1½–2 tsp fine salt, depending on your taste (I use 2 tsp)¼ teaspoon ginger powder (optional, see notes)20g psyllium husk (not psyllium husk powder)250-275g water½ tbsp honey or pure maple syrup½ tsp apple cider vinegar (optional, see notes) To make the preferment Ensure you’re using a starter that has been fed a few hours before you start. It should be on the rise and have a domed top when you measure it into the bowl. To fit this around a normal work schedule (does this exist anymore?) I’d suggest feeding your starter at 5.30pm, and then waiting until bedtime (or the peak of your starter) to make the preferment. Once the starter is ready to go, mix it with the water and then add the flour. Stir until combined and cover with cling film or a wrap. I hate recommending cling film but it does do a good job here. Leave this in a reasonably warm, draft-free place overnight. I use my oven without the light or heat on. To make the bread (the next morning) In a large bowl, combine the flours, salt and ginger powder (if you’re using it). Whisk to combine. In a medium sized mixing bowl, combine the psyllium husk and water and whisk to combine. Allow the mixture to sit until it has gelled up before adding the honey or maple syrup and apple cider vinegar. Add the psyllium husk gel to the preferment, whisking to mix. Add this wet mixture to the flours and use a spoon to combine as much as possible. Once it’s almost mixed, gently squelch the dough through your hands, picking up dry bits of flour as you go. If you’ve weighed everything diligently there shouldn’t be a need for extra water, but you can add 1-2 tbsp if it’s truly necessary. You should be able to pick up the dough and shape it, although depending on how much water you’ve used it might be a little wobbly in your hands. Once the dough is completely mixed through and formed into a rough ball, tip it onto a very lightly (white rice) floured bench. Use your hands to close any seams as much as possible. Make sure the side with no seams is the top of your loaf. When the dough is shaped, very lightly flour your banneton or bowl with white rice flour (this is particularly important if your banneton is new). Place the nice side of the dough (aka the side with no seams) down into the banneton. The base of the loaf (with the seams) should be facing upwards now. Cover the loaf with a lightly oiled shower cap or the cling you used for the preferment. Place this in a plastic bag or airtight container in a warm, draft free place for 2-3 hours, or until it’s a little jiggly – a finger-poke should spring back halfway. In winter, I like to use my oven with just the light turned on to proof my loaves halfway. To bake the loaf An hour or so before baking the loaf, place your Dutch oven in the oven and get the heat up to 250C. Making sure the dutch oven is very hot is integral to getting oven spring. Ensure you’ve checked that your dutch oven is high heat safe, or you might lose a lid handle. When the oven and loaf are both ready, take a medium-length piece of baking paper and lay it on the bench. It needs to be long enough that you can lower the loaf into the dutch oven without burning your arms. In my experience, dropping the loaf into the dutch oven results in a flat and gummy loaf. Invert the loaf onto the centre of the baking paper, leaving the edges for lowering handles. You might need to use your fingers to (very gently) encourage the loaf to detach from the banneton. Don’t use force or you’ll knock the air out of the loaf. Use a lame (sharp scoring blade) or a sharp knife to make a reasonably deep incision in the loaf. Google ‘bread scoring’ for some pattern ideas, or just keep it simple and score straight down the centre. Get all your oven gear ready to work quickly for this next step. Carefully and quickly remove the super hot dutch oven from the oven. Shut the oven door while you work. Take the lid off and quickly lower in the bread. If you’re using an ice cube for extra oven spring, add it now – the ice cube will create steam which will help the bread rise quickly when it first enters the oven. Pop the lid back on and quickly return the dutch oven to the oven. For a dark loaf, keep the oven at 250C. For a lighter loaf, turn it down to 220C. Bake the loaf with the lid on for 40-50 minutes. If you prefer a less caramelised (aka dark) crust, leave the lid on a little longer. Once the time is up, remove the lid and continue to bake your loaf for another 40 or so minutes, or until the crust sounds hollow when you knock on it and is deeply caramelised brown in colour. At a minimum, the loaf should be in the oven for 1 hour 10 minutes. Taking it out earlier will result in a gummy interior. Maximum cooking time is around 1 hour 30 minutes. Once cooked, remove the loaf from the oven and baking paper and place it on a cooling rack. Allow to cool completely (3-4 hours at least) before slicing into it, as slicing too soon can compress all the air in the loaf and result in a gummy loaf. You can store the loaf in a bag or freeze it in slices. It keeps well for a week or so and makes great toast even after it has become a little stale. Because there is a wide array of gluten-free flours, you have a lot of choice in terms of what to feed your starter. Keep in mind a few things if you’d like to experiment with different flours: The quality and flavour of the flour you choose will directly impact the taste of your loaf. Buying a cheap, gritty flour to feed your starter will have a carryon effect in the final bread. Starches such as tapioca or potato starch are not suitable for creating a starter. They will send the yeast into overdrive and become unwieldy. Starters thrive on a wholegrain diet with a higher protein content. I personally like the combination of quinoa flour (which you can grind yourself from quinoa) and sorghum flour for this reason. If sorghum flour isn’t available to you, try brown rice flour. At the moment, I am using a 100% white rice flour feed, which has been working well for me. I like to begin my starter by feeding it the quinoa and sorghum mixture and then transition it to a white rice flour feed once it is mature. You can play around with what works for your budget and tastes. Different gluten-free flours absorb different amounts of water, so depending on the flour used, you might need to add more or less water. There are a lot of different elements to consider and control in creating your starter. These include: Temperature. Starters (and loaves) thrive in warmer temperatures and kitchens. This means that it will take considerably longer to get a starter going in winter or in a cold kitchen. Take this into account when you’re panicking that nothing is happening. I like to turn my oven light on and give my starter a little boost if it’s looking sluggish. Water. In some places the contents of the water can hinder starter growth. If the water quality isn’t great where you are, consider using filtered water as opposed to tap. Your vessel of choice. Starters don’t play nicely with steel, so use a glass jug or jar for your starter. It’s helpful to use a jar you can mark or get a rubber band around – this helps you to visually track the growth and progress of your starter (the best bit!). If you’ve got one, use a wooden spoon to stir your starter when you feed it. Time. New starters can often take a month or so to produce a really good quality loaf. Patience is key! As much as I hate to admit it, starters love consistency. Once you get them going they are pretty difficult to kill, but their baking abilities shine when you follow as regular a feed and discard schedule as possible. The most important ingredient is your sourdough starter, so make sure it’s ready and healthy before you begin baking bread. I have no substitute for psyllium husk in this recipe. It’s quite literally the glue that will hold your bread together – a gluten substitute that happens to absorb a lot of liquid. It can be sold as psyllium husk flakes and/or in the fibre supplement section. It can often be marketed as a product to aid with ‘regularity’. White rice flour and tapioca flour are easily found at a supermarket in Australia. Sorghum and quinoa are less common, but can often be found at health food stores. You can use brown rice flour in place of white, but consider adding a tablespoon or so of extra water to compensate. You can also grind your own quinoa flour from whole white quinoa using a high-speed food processor (I use a Nutribullet). Toasting it is as simple as dry toasting it over a medium flame until golden in colour and fragrant. If you can, try to use a fine, good quality salt as opposed to table salt. Some bakers say that the iodine in table salt can leave a bitter taste in bread. Ginger powder and apple cider vinegar are bread enhancers – think of them like an espresso for yeast. They’re optional though, so don’t rush out to the shops if you don’t have them on hand. I have a behemoth guide to this bread on my website, so if you need further troubleshooting, visit georgeats.com.