The hierarchy of who cares most about lovely little children is confusing. Parents, I would have thought, are up there. Except the bad ones who are not home schooling, have not bought several laptops and are frantically trying to manage working at home, too. Then there are the awful ones who have to go out to work. Do they not care? Some, like me, have sacrificed their children for their political principles and sent their kids to state schools. I always love this phrase: it is wonderful that my children are still alive despite my attempt to serve them up as offerings to the fake household gods of fairness. Then there are the teachers who could be “heroes”, but are reverting to type as some kind of communists as they do not want schools to open just yet. Strangely, they are supported by many doctor heroes, who we presume do care. I heard an interview with a teacher who is also a parent and does not feel safe going back to work. I nearly malfunctioned, because, in the current discourse, this is a category error. Good teacher/bad parent or bad teacher/good parent? Even though I have tried to stay alert, I need some guidelines about who is the enemy of the people now. Gavin Williamson, the education secretary, doing “caring” is alarming enough. “We owe it to the children” to open schools, apparently. Then along comes Michael Gove, who told local authorities unsure about all this: “If you really care about children, you’ll want them to be in schools. You will want them to be learning. You will want them to have new opportunities. So look to your responsibilities.” I can only conclude that I don’t really care about children, then, because, no, I don’t want kids to be in primary school by 1 June. Nor do people in many other parts of the UK, especially where the virus is still to peak. This date is only a target in England, with Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish schools all expected to reopen after the summer holidays. Many teachers are worried not only for themselves, but also for what they might pass on to their families; many parents do not want their children used in an experiment on contagion. As far as we know, children tend not to suffer badly with the virus, while a study in Australia has suggested that they are not significant vectors of infection. But that is one study and “the science” is an ever-expanding, moving body. We do not know enough. We do know, however, that the physical distancing required seems almost impossible with the youngest schoolchildren. Do we pick them up when they fall over? Why can they bring in lunch boxes but not pencil cases? All these details have to be ironed out in very little time. Of course I see that year 6s and primary 7s need to say goodbye to their friends before they move on to secondary school. Of course I see that teachers can identify the most vulnerable kids in reception, year 1 and primary 1. But none of this is to do with education as such. Schools have to be reopened as giant creches to get adults back to work so the economy can go back to “normal”. This is an illusion of control and normality from a government that has failed to care. Education has always been one way in which the elite has bypassed the state. The NHS cannot be bypassed, because private medicine provides few ICUs. Teachers are a far easier group to demonise. Gove was always at war with “the Blob”, egged on by his overextended Spads, such as Henry de Zoete. He got burnt out working for Gove and once tried a week teaching in a primary school: “I realised that I couldn’t do it.” Really? I thought any fool could teach. Reopening schools requires trust between local authorities, teachers and parents, but the government is packed full of those who have systematically undermined that trust and denigrated teaching. Telling people they are safe is not the same as making them feel safe. Now is the time to re-evaluate the ideology that has driven the system. The sudden ditching of exams may have repercussions, but the ease with which it was done could point us in a new direction. We want to get children back to school for their social wellbeing as well as for their consumption of information. Kids miss their friends. We need to ask what education is for. Lockdown has exacerbated every inequality. Richer families spend much more time on schoolwork than poorer ones and are more likely to send their kids back to school. We hold on to the idea that education is the route out of poverty, but school is only one factor in this. The emotional and social development of our children is paramount, not a rushed, unsafe return to constant invigilation. Teachers are not childminders, nor are they risk-averse. You try standing up in front of 30 15-year-olds. As a strategy, alienating “the Blob” is as dumb as comparing the virus to a mugger to be rugby tackled. But what do I know? I have not had the benefit of the most physically distanced form of education – a top boarding school. Strangely, these will not be required to open in two weeks’ time. Suzanne Moore is a Guardian columnist