For more than 30 years, the term “consensus politics” fell out of fashion in Britain. For generations of Conservative politicians schooled in the dogmas of Thatcherism, the phrase came to connote unpleasant images of sandwiches with union leaders in No 10 and weak government. Boris Johnson urgently needs to discover the virtues of consensus-building now, after a chaotic few days of mixed messages and confused assertions. In parliament on Monday, the prime minister rightly said that, in its battle with the coronavirus pandemic, the country had “begun the descent from the peak, but our journey has reached the most perilous moment”. As certain parts of the economy begin to be opened up, the dire risk of a second wave of infections is real. In Germany, which significantly relaxed lockdown measures last week, the reproduction rate of the virus has apparently crept back over the crucial figure of one already. As Sir Keir Starmer told the prime minister, in such precarious circumstances, “clarity and reassurance” from government are vital, as an effort to navigate a new normal is mobilised. Yet Mr Johnson has managed to offer neither. Just as importantly, by alienating institutions and organisations which should be crucial partners in negotiating the road ahead, he has made the collective challenge that much harder. It was wrong that the first minister of Scotland should learn first from a Sunday newspaper that Mr Johnson intended to replace the “stay at home” message with a new injunction to “stay alert”, along with the “emphasis” on encouraging people back to work. Ms Sturgeon swiftly rejected the strategy as “catastrophic” for Scotland given its current rate of viral transmission. Wales too will stick with the previous message and guidance. Andy Burnham, the mayor of Manchester – who has lobbied without success for the English regions to have a presence in Cobra discussions on the crisis – has expressed similar misgivings. A messy, ragged exit from lockdown across the United Kingdom is in no one’s interest, but by acting as he has, Mr Johnson has increased the likelihood of that. The trade unions, having collaborated successfully with the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, in devising the job-retention scheme, must now be wholly included in the back-to-work process. They were blindsided on Sunday evening, when the prime minister seemed to imply that employees not able to work at home might return to factories and construction sites as soon as the following morning. It transpired that the new government guidelines will in fact apply from Wednesday, and to a broader sweep of workplaces, including food production and scientific research centres. But in a 60 page roadmap, published on Monday, there appears to be little concession to union requests for enforceable safety standards. Reassurance over the availability of personal protective equipment at the workplace was inadequate, and there is insufficient clarity for parents with childcare responsibilities, who may now feel pressured to go to work. To a considerable extent, the government appears to be relying on employers to do the right thing. Some employees may choose not to take that risk. The list of concerns goes on. If public transport is the only means to get to work, should an employee take it? Police forces have complained that the sheer fuzziness of the “stay alert” message could make enforcing the new legislation impossible in some circumstances. None of this, of course, is easy. The prime minister is simultaneously confronted with a public health crisis and an unfolding economic disaster which he must address. This is a delicate and dangerous balancing act. But it is not enough to invoke “good solid British common sense”, as the prime minister did on Monday, and hope everything works out. The country needs a post-lockdown strategy it can understand and unite around. So far Mr Johnson has not given it one.