If we have been careful through the week, and it is not the tight end of the month, we buy fish on Friday – a whole bream or a bass – then bake it on a bed of potatoes. It is one of my favourite meals to shop for: the long-winded chat with my fishmonger, followed by the sniffing out of bright eyes, red gills and winking scales; the haggle, slap and wrap. It’s also a favourite meal to prepare. While it bakes in the oven, the sound of the skin tightening and the potatoes crisping travels through the oven door. I pour myself another glass and make the the salsa verde – or green sauce. I have been making salsa verde for years: garlic, capers, anchovies and herbs that are chopped, pounded or blended until they look like grass cuttings, then loosened with olive oil and sharpened with vinegar. While I was aware of the traditional Piedmontese recipe for bagnet verd, which includes breadcrumbs soaked in vinegar (and conscious that others add egg yolks to theirs), I was, until recently, set in my ways, and usually happy with the outcome, give or take the odd dud. Then one Friday, happy with wine, music and that moment, I added a crustless slice of bread crumbled and sprinkled with red wine vinegar to the green rubble. As you can imagine, the addition of breadcrumbs changes the colour, especially if you are doing it by hand, making it like herringbone twill. It also plumps up the consistency, turning it from a grassy, shiny mass to something pudgy, softer. The flavour is also gentler – capers, anchovy and herbs are a forthright, even rude combination, salty and searing – the breadcrumbs soften everything. This is good example of a recipe that is less a recipe, more a Dr Seuss and Sam-I-Am. Do you like green sauce, capers, anchovies? I am pretty sure that I if I laid out the ingredients before you, asked you to taste them all and then combine them according to your taste (which means leaving out any you hate), you would make something better than following the precise set of measurements that suit me. That said, a template can be helpful, so I have included mine. Whether you are making it by hand or using a food processor, the first two steps are the same. Put a handful (30g) of soft white breadcrumbs in a bowl, sprinkle over a little (two tablespoons) of red wine vinegar and leave it to sit for five minutes, then pick the parsley and basil leaves from the stems. For a bowl of salsa, you want two big handfuls of leaves, which for me is about 60g; or two small bunches – one of parsley, one of basil. Having had a moment of ordinary bliss while cooking, I should have known that the meal that followed would not. Too much time in too small a place lately. But even that eruption didn’t completely spoil the goodness of green sauce with fat flakes of fish and slices of potato, half crisp, half soggy. Green sauce keeps well: just cover with a thin layer of olive oil and put a plate over the top and refrigerate. The next day we had the second half of the bowlful with hard-boiled eggs (green eggs) and ham. Again, this is just a template. The capers and anchovies both provide salt, so there is a very good chance you won’t need to add any more. I like my salsa verde to sit on a spoon, pudgy and plump, but others like it liquid enough that it rolls off one, especially if it’s going to be eaten as it is in Piedmonte – to bagnare (wet) boiled meats. Adjust quantities to suit you: taste and taste again. Prep 10 minServes 4 30g soft white breadcrumbs2 tbsp red-wine vinegarA bunch of parsley (about 30g)A bunch of basil (about 30g)1 garlic clove30g capers6 anchovy fillets120ml olive oil Crumble the bread into a bowl, pour over the vinegar and leave to sit for 10 minutes. Pick the parsley and basil leaves from the stems. If you are making the salsa verde by hand, chop the herbs with a sharp knife or mezzaluna. Next, chop the garlic, capers and anchovy together until you have a rough rubble. Lastly, crumble the bread and vinegar. Push all three piles together and chop again, then scrape into a bowl, add a few grinds of pepper and stir in enough olive oil to get a consistency you like. If you are using a food processor, pulse the garlic, capers and anchovy, add the herbs and pulse again to a rough rubble. Add bread, pulse again, and scrape into a bowl. Add a few grinds of pepper and finally stir in the oil.