1) Gianfranco Zola at Chelsea. Zola at Napoli. And more of Zola in Serie A. Gianfranco Zola making life difficult. 👌 Our #OldSkoolSkillSkool feature on Chelsea TV is not to be missed... https://t.co/LSJmrcH0j2 pic.twitter.com/YbUgB1olE4 2) It’s 25 years since promoted Nottingham Forest stormed to a third-place Premier League finish in the 1994-95 season. Stan Collymore’s goals were crucial in Forest winning promotion the previous season, too, as this top 10 Colly-pilation across 1993-95 illustrates. His first goal for Liverpool was a touch special too. Here’s a more in-depth look at that comparatively disappointing spell. 3) It’s 30 years since England’s memorable 1989-90 tour of West Indies. The era of West Indian dominance of the Test arena was drawing to a close but openers Gordon Greenidge and Desmond Haynes raged against the dying of the light – particularly in this first-innings opening stand of 298 in the fifth Test. Viv Richards’ men went on to take the match, sealing a 2-1 series win. Here are Ian Bishop and Courtney Walsh giving brave Robin Smith a fearful working-over in the same game. 4) This being 2020, it is a mere 10 years since England’s best-forgotten 2010 World Cup campaign under Fabio Capello in South Africa. Let’s cast our minds back to that summer, as John Terry tells Capello to pick Joe Cole in a press conference, followed by Eamon Dunphy and Graeme Souness falling out over it all on RTÉ. While we’re on the subject of that infamous pundit panel, let’s have a splash of Johnny Giles v Souness v Dunphy rowing about Arsenal’s spending power or lack thereof. 5) In a parallel dimension, the all-important second legs of the Champions League semis were played this week. We’ve seen Spurs’ comeback in Amsterdam last year from every possible angle, so here’s the immediate aftermath, a tableaux of despair and joy. 🤯 "I've never seen anything like this! Oh my God!" 🤯It wasn't a dream. Tottenham's extraordinary fightback - the latest in an unforgettable Champions League campaign!Relive Spurs' jawdropping night in Amsterdam with #NoFilterUCL. pic.twitter.com/la27iJLJfz On to some forgotten greats: Jari Litmanen conducts the orchestra as Ajax tear Bayern Munich a new one in 1995, Giovane Elber plays a bit of keepy-uppy before putting Madrid to the sword, Gaizka Medieta with a first touch and finish to die for against Barcelona (the same season he did this against them), Oliver Neuville picks out Fabien Barthez’s top corner to take Bayer Leverkusen into the 2002 final, and Kaká lights up Old Trafford five years later. (And not-so-forgotten greats: Ronald Koeman decides he’d like a goal against Porto in 1994, Cristiano Ronaldo bursts the Emirates net in 2009,and Roy Maurice Keane’s finest hour.) Let’s finish this section with a couple of Chelsea-Barcelona classics: the frenzied 2009 meeting and Chelsea’s 2012 revenge mission. 6) The 2020 Giro d’Italia would have started on Saturday so here’s some classic action: Italian icon Marco Pantani attacking Pavel Tonkov and Alex Zülle in 1998. Alberto ‘El Pistolero’ Contador firing shots at the 2015 edition. And Chris Froome blowing the race open – and winning it – on stage 19 in 2018. As a final bonus clip, from the Giro del Trentino (now the Tour of the Alps), here’s Bradley Wiggins trying to throw a bike away in disgust, only to see it park itself neatly against the wall. 1) The prime of Monica Seles, from 1993. 2) A Mike Tyson knockouts showreel. 3) Keeping their cool: the best golf play-off wins. 4) A tribute to Peter Ebdon, who announced his retirement last week. At his most methodical here, taking five minutes to rack up 12 points, and here’s his classic 2002 world final win over Stephen Hendry. And Ebdon the crooner. Last, but by no means least, in split-screen format, here is Ronnie O’Sullivan knocking in a maximum 147 in the time it took Ebdon to amass that 12 break … 5) The hand of Messi: a legend gets away with it. 6) Paul Ereng’s stunning 800m triumph at the 1988 Seoul Olympics. Spotters’ badges: vsbain67, whobroughtoranges, johnx18, M_T_Wallet, LeeWall Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.