When Iain Morris and Damon Beesley, the writers behind the hit schoolboy comedy The Inbetweeners, came up with an idea for a sitcom set in a floundering top-flight football club the inspiration was not, as you might expect, an on-pitch incident but rather a chance meeting on an aeroplane almost a decade previously. “I found myself sitting next to a footballer named Damien Delaney on an 11 and a half hour flight and we had a fascinating conversation about the reality of footballers’ lives,” Morris says of the meeting that sparked the genesis of The First Team, which begins on BBC Two on Thursday. “He said ‘I’m single in London with hours to fill, what do I do with my time?’ and I immediately thought there’s a whole interesting world to be explored. Plus we wanted to write about masculinity and entitlement and it felt like football was one of the last workplaces where you deal with a particular kind of male environment.” The result is a raucous comedy that both lampoons football’s excesses – the rabid ever-complaining fans, over-the-top cars and spotless, barely inhabited mansions – and is surprisingly sympathetic to the three young men (a rising star, a youth academy graduate hoping to break through and a new American transfer not entirely sure why he’s been signed) at its centre. “They’re still idiots like the characters in The Inbetweeners but the difference is that while those characters could say almost anything because nobody cared for these guys, it’s the opposite,” says Beesley. “They’re young men making the sort of mistakes that all young men make but they don’t have the anonymity the rest of us do, so it really is sink or swim.” Aware that the show itself would sink or swim according to how accurate it appeared – “we wanted it to feel authentic as well as funny” – the duo, with the help of Matty Lawrence, the former Millwall and Crystal Palace defender, spoke to everyone from former and current players, “including high-profile internationals”, to club doctors, coaches and press officers, managers, chairmen and CEOs. “We’re not allowed to say exactly who we spoke to in case people presume certain storylines are based on them but Tom Werner, the executive producer of the show, is also the chairman of Liverpool so that’s a fairly big hint,” says Morris. It was the interviews, however, that provided the most insight into the ridiculous side of the beautiful game. “We spoke to one footballer who said that the reason footballers get married early is because kids fill up time,” says Beesley. “Before, when he was single, he hadn’t known what to do with himself but now he had two kids and it was great because he was never bored.” There were darker stories too, particularly from former footballers who were playing “during that sweet spot where the wages were good but the social media wasn’t as prevalent so they could behave like rock stars without getting caught,” says Beesley. Those stories fed into the character of Petey, the club’s aggressive King Lad, played by Theo Barklam-Biggs with all the swagger of a man who has never been told “no”. “He’s an amalgamation of all the monsters we’d heard about from older generations,” adds Morris. And while the crude jokes – from sight gags involving dog poo to a storyline revolving around toilet roll – flow as thick and fast as The Inbetweeners fans would hope for, The First Team’s real strength comes from the warmth of its central relationships. “The difference between this and previous football shows is that they’ve tended to focus on the big explosive moments like winning the league or the cup,” says Morris. “We wanted to shine a light on the small comedies of life instead. It’s not really a show about football so much as a sitcom where the characters are footballers.”