Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: The number of people confirmed to have had coronavirus worldwide has passed 3.5 million, according to Johns Hopkins University data, with deaths nearing a quarter of a million. North America and European countries accounted for most of the new cases reported in recent days, but numbers were rising from smaller bases in Latin America, Africa and Russia. There are currently 3,523,121 confirmed cases of the virus, and 247,752 people have lost their lives in the pandemic so far. An intelligence report by the US Department of Homeland Security, obtained by the Associated Press, claims China covered up the extent of the coronavirus outbreak and how contagious the disease is in order to stock up on the medical supplies needed to respond to it. Chinese leaders intentionally concealed the severity of the pandemic from the world in early January, according to a four-page report dated 1 May. The Trump administration has intensified its criticism of China, with the secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, saying on Sunday that the country was responsible for the spread of disease and must be held accountable. A global alliance of world leaders is expected to pledge to raise an initial $8.2bn (£6.5bn) at a virtual summit on Monday to research and equitably distribute vaccines and therapeutics to help tackle the coronavirus pandemic. It is hoped national research efforts will be streamlined so that vaccines are manufactured quickly for distribution to poorer countries, and not just for the benefit of the wealthy economies that produce them. Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, said on Monday he had decided to extend the country’s national state of emergency to 31 May. Abe would consider lifting the state of emergency without waiting for its 31 May expiration if experts decided it was possible based on detailed analysis of regional infection trends, he said at the start of a meeting of the government’s coronavirus taskforce. Iceland’s secondary schools and universities began reopening on Monday, as the country began easing measures put in place seven weeks ago to curb the spread of the coronavirus. The country, with a population 364,000, has confirmed 1,799 cases of the illness and 10 deaths, but the daily number of new cases has ranged between zero and three since 23 April. The Fina world championships in Fukuoka, Japan, were initially scheduled for the summer of 2021, but will now take place from 13 May 2022 to 29 May 2022. Fina’s president, Dr Julio C Maglione, said in a statement: “At a time of unprecedented uncertainty, Fina hopes the announcement of these dates will allow for some clarity in planning for all concerned.” France said on Sunday that it would not quarantine anyone arriving from the EU, the Schengen area or Britain due to the coronavirus, as it prepares to start easing confinement measures after two months of lockdown. On Saturday, the government had said it would extend the state of emergency to contain the crisis until at least 24 July, and anyone entering France would have to remain in isolation for two weeks. New Zealand has recorded a day of no new cases of Covid-19 for the first time since before the lockdown. It was an “encouraging” result, said Ashley Bloomfield, the director general of health. There have been 1,487 confirmed and probable cases of Covid-19 in New Zealand, with 86% of those affected now recovered. Seven people are still in hospital.