The countdown to the play beginning was on screen rather than from a tinny tannoy. But there was a genuine sense of pre-curtain anticipation, though with shorter queues for drinks and loos, in my solo venue. On Saturday night at 7pm, an obscure 1969 Tom Stoppard TV play, A Separate Peace, was given a live online reading – by, at their separate locations, David Morrissey, Jenna Coleman, Denise Gough, Ed Stoppard and Maggie Service – in the first of a series of one-off shows raising funds for theatre workers unemployed in the pandemic. Some TV charity specials have shown the risk of a good cause excusing bad work. But director Sam Yates and the technical team created a piece that used Zoom technology with ingenuity and even beauty. As in Tom Tykwer’s split-screen film Run Lola Run (1998), the frame was usually quartered, with boxes sometimes left empty, injecting tension about who might turn up there. The actors were wearing black tops against backgrounds that stayed white – except for a lovely graphic effect when the protagonist starts painting his walls – and were framed so their scripts were kept out of view. Old plays take on fresh meanings in new times. Superficially, Stoppard’s plot of a man demanding a hospital bed despite having no illness is spectacularly irrelevant. But lines such as “We have to keep the beds free for people who need them”, written as surreal, now bump into our reality and themes of isolation, medical bafflement, mental illness and the legacy in England of the second world war also gain a coronavirus kick. The actors mined from their lines notes of humour, pain or mystery – suggesting serious work on the script. Scenes between Morrissey’s enigmatic “patient”, Coleman’s loving nurse and Gough’s unnerved doctor particularly achieved dramatic interaction belying the separation between performers. Every aspect of the production exuded the joy of those involved at resuming their suspended professions. Giving a standing ovation alone in front of a laptop felt strange even by the standards of this pandemic, but it was entirely deserved. If, for however long, this is live theatre’s future, then it works triumphantly.