What has happened to Elon Musk? A highlight reel of the billionaire Tesla CEO’s activities since early March includes his pooh-poohing the coronavirus “panic” as “dumb”; keeping his northern California factory open in defiance of local public health orders; falsely asserting that children are “essentially immune” from the virus; providing a giant platform to promoters of an unproven and potentially dangerous treatment; predicting (inaccurately) that the US would have no new cases of Covid-19 by the end of April; attempting to re-open the factory before the end of the local shelter-in-place order; and calling shelter-in-place orders “fascist”. (Let’s not even get into the drama over whether the BiPap machines he donated to some hospitals count as ventilators.) Musk’s dissemination of misinformation about the virus is not without consequences Musk’s dissemination of misinformation about the virus is not without consequences. He has more than 33m followers on Twitter and a fan base that tends to exalt him as a cross between Tony Stark and God. A recent study published as a letter in the Journal of the American Medical Association Internal Medicine linked his tweet about chloroquine, an anti-malaria drug that was subsequently touted as a potential Covid-19 treatment by Donald Trump, to a dramatic surge in online demand for the prescription medication. “They weren’t aware of it, they weren’t interested in it – they were trying to buy it,” John Ayers, a UC San Diego professor of medicine and one of the study’s authors, told the Guardian in an interview. The chloroquine document that Musk shared was an example of what the infectious disease expert Carl Bergstrom has described as quantitative “bullshit” – the use of statistics and data to persuade someone by overwhelming and intimidating them, “without any allegiance to truth or accuracy”. Last week, Musk was apparently taken in by another pair of coronavirus bullshit artists, this time a pair of doctors from Bakersfield, California. Drs Dan Erickson and Artin Massihi held a press conference to promote the idea that Covid-19 is much more widespread and much less deadly than what “ivory tower” figures such as Dr Anthony Fauci have said. “Docs make good points,” Musk tweeted, with a link to a YouTube video of the 50-minute press conference. (YouTube removed the video for spreading misinformation, but not before it received millions of views; one of the doctors has gone on to make appearances on Fox News.) The docs did not make good points. After opening his remarks by defining “science” like a high schooler writing a term paper (“What is science? Essentially, it’s the study of the natural world through experiment, through observation, so that’s what we’re doing”) Erickson presented testing data from the chain of urgent care clinics they own. The clinics have performed 5,213 Covid-19 tests and had 340 positive results, which they claimed means that there is a 6.5% rate of infection in the local population. The pair performed the same math (positive tests divided by total tests) on the statewide numbers of 33,865 positive tests out of 280,900 total, to arrive at a 12% infection rate for the state. From there, they calculated that California has had a total of 4.7m infections and calculated that the death rate for people who contract Covid-19 in California is just 0.03% – much lower than that of the seasonal flu. None of this stands up to scrutiny. In order to assume that the rate of infection amongst a small number of people can apply to the entire population, you have to use a random and representative sample. But the people who are getting tested at urgent care clinics in California are neither random nor representative; they are people with severe symptoms or who are performing certain essential jobs. Figuring out the actual infection rate across the broader population will require careful sampling that avoids this selection bias. The Bakersfield duo used their meaningless numbers to argue that shelter-in-place orders must be lifted – a position that Musk clearly also holds. (In an extraordinary joint statement, the American College of Emergency Physicians and the American Academy of Emergency Medicine “jointly and emphatically condemn[ed]” the pair, and suggested they were “releasing biased, non-peer reviewed data to advance their personal financial interests without regard for the public’s health”.) The issue is not that Musk has staked out a contrarian stance on the coronavirus. There are difficult debates that need to be had over how and when to restart the economy in order to minimize long term economic harms and maximize public health. We can and should have that discussion, and we should do it without impugning the moral character of everyone who argues for a faster loosening of restrictions. But it’s increasingly difficult to take Musk seriously when he makes his argument by cherry-picking numbers or relying on blatant misuse of data. Please, make your case, but make it using real facts, and not by playing fast and loose with numbers in an effort to mislead the public about what is actually happening. Otherwise you look and sound a lot less like the brilliant engineer and entrepreneur, and a lot more like just another used car salesman.