Sebastian Vettel will leave Ferrari at the end of the year after contractnegotiations between the four-times world champion and the team broke down. The 32-year-old’s deal concludes at then end of 2020 and despite both Ferrari and Vettel previously expressing their ambition to extend it, Vettel bluntly stated there was now “no longer a common desire” to work together. Vettel won the world championship four times with Red Bull between 2010 and 2013. He joined Ferrari in 2015, with both parties optimistic he would return their first drivers’ title since 2007. However neither drive nor team has proved able to match the dominance of Mercedes and Lewis Hamilton, failing to really challenge for the title. Vettel insisted the decision had not been motivated by a failure to agree on money but Italy’s Gazzetta dello Sport newspaper recently reported he had been offered only a one-year extension with a salary reduction. The German has been clear in the past for his preference in signing a deal for a three-year period. “The team and I have realised that there is no longer a common desire to stay together beyond the end of this season,” he said. “Financial matters have played no part in this joint decision. That’s not the way I think when it comes to making certain choices and it never will be. “What’s been happening in these past few months has led many of us to reflect on what are our real priorities in life. One needs to use one’s imagination and to adopt a new approach to a situation that has changed. I myself will take the time I need to reflect on what really matters when it comes to my future.” Ferrari have already made a long term commitment to Vettel’s teammate Charles Leclerc with a contract until 2024. They have been open in their belief that Leclerc represents the future for the team. Team principal, Mattia Binotto, stated that Vettel and Ferrari no longer shared objectives. “It was not an easy decision to reach, given Sebastian’s worth as a driver and as a person,” Binotto said. “There was no specific reason that led to this decision, apart from the common and amicable belief that the time had come to go our separate ways in order to reach our respective objectives.” The decision has reopened the drivers’ market, with one of the most sought after seats in F1 now open. Both Renault’s Daniel Ricciardo and McLaren’s Carlos Sainz are out of contract at the end of this year and considered to be potential replacements for Vettel. It also raises once more the possibility that Hamilton, whose contract also concludes this year, could switch to the Scuderia. The British driver, who has won five of his six world titles at Mercedes, has however made clear his intent to stay with his current team. For Vettel the decision may preempt his retirement from the sport. He has few options to continue in a competitive car on the current grid. Mercedes are understood not to be interested in signing him, while Red Bull have said they are satisfied with Max Verstappen as their No 1 driver. There may be options at Renault or McLaren but both teams are firmly in the midfield and as things stand in no position to challenge for wins. Ferrari openly declared Vettel their No 1 driver last season, stating they would favour him over Leclerc, who was in his debut year with the team. However it was the 22-year-old who comprehensively outperformed the German, beating him in points, wins and poles. There had been tension between the pair, including a. prearranged track position agreement falling apart in Russia and a crash in Brazil. Ferrari had already announced that this season the pair would be allowed to race without favouring one over the other. Leclerc insisted their relationship remained amicable. “It’s been a huge honour for me to be your teammate,” he wrote on Twitter. “We’ve had some tense moments on tracks. Some very good ones and some others that didn’t end as we both wanted, but there was always respect, even though it wasn’t perceive this way from the outside.” Formula One has yet to hold a race this season because of the coronavirus outbreak but is still aiming at hosting 15 to 18 meetings. The first round is due to take place in Austria on 5 July, immediately followed by another at the same venue before holding a further double header at Silverstone.