Next is swooping on stores vacated by struggling retailers to create a new chain of upmarket beauty halls in large shopping centres. Next’s chief executive, Simon Wolfson, said on Thursday that the retailer intended to create “a new force in beauty retailing” as it confirmed plans to lease the beauty hall floors of five axed Debenhams stores in malls owned by the property firm Hammerson. Next’s expansion plan is a rare show of confidence at a time when the high street is in crisis due to the coronavirus lockdown. Just last week, Wolfson said Next could record losses this year of £150m – compared with a profit of almost £600m in 2019 – as sales could fall by up to 40%. Next said the retail space would be used to launch a new brand, The Beauty Hall from Next, with a small number of additional sites also under discussion. The retailer already sells hundreds of makeup, perfume and skincare brands including Estée Lauder, Clinique and Emporio Armani on its website. Its specialist beauty site Fabled.com, which it bought from Ocado last year, also has access to premium brands such as Bobbi Brown, Lancôme and Nars. Wolfson said the planned beauty halls would bring “our online business to life through premium store environments in some of the UK’s most important retail locations”. The aim is to open them as soon as possible, once Covid-19 restrictions have been lifted. Debenhams, which is in administration, confirmed the closures on Wednesday, including its stores in the Oracle shopping centre in Reading and Birmingham’s Bullring and Grand Central. Next has signed flexible leases on their beauty hall floors as well as the others stores closing, in Glasgow’s Silverburn mall and Highcross in Leicester. The Debenhams closures affected 1,000 jobs, and Next said it was likely it would be able to offer jobs to some of the affected staff. The deal is also some good news for Hammerson, which like other shopping centre owners has been hard hit by the government order to close non-essential shops. In April it revealed that its rent takings had fallen by two-thirds, and on Wednesday it said its £400m deal to sell seven retail parks to the private equity firm Orion had collapsed. Hammerson’s chief executive, David Atkins, said the Next deal showed how former department stores could be given a fresh lease of life. “This is a really challenging time for all of us, so it’s really encouraging to see strong, innovative brands like Next work with us to plan for the future,” he said. “The Beauty Hall from Next is a great concept and it’s a real vote of confidence in our flagship destinations.”