Perhaps as well-known for his swaggering turn of phrase and on-screen presence as for his boxing prowess, Muhammad Ali’s TV appearances were always an experience to savour while he was in his prime. This feature-length documentary tells Ali’s story through the lens of his many appearances on the US talkshow The Dick Cavett Show, from early coinings of the phrase “float like a butterfly, sting like a bee” to debating his conscientious objection from fighting in the Vietnam war. Ammar Kalia Lycett is fast becoming the millennial Esther Rantzen, fighting for the public’s rights in his unique way. This week, Alison Hammond checks how reliable Trustpilot is and Mark Silcox tests bags for life, while Lycett investigates a paintballing company that doesn’t seem to be playing fair. Fun but useful stuff. Hannah Verdier The cinemas may be closed but Kermode and Mayo return with another guide to the best new (streaming) film and TV releases. As it’s recorded so close to the wire, the choices are only revealed on the night, but there’s sure to be something for even the most jaded binger. Ali Catterall Ken Burns produces this fascinating oral history of the Atlanta-based East Lake Meadows housing projects, which was home to thousands of African Americans from 1970 until it was demolished in the mid-90s. It is an often bleak look at the neglect of vulnerable communities. AK Direct from Jools’s south London studio, another edition of lockdown-friendly performances and maybe a little boogie woogie to lift the spirits. Hugh Laurie shares his love of the blues with help from the Later … archives, and there’s music from multi-instrumentalist Jacob Collier. Hannah J Davies Another chance to watch the entire first season of the cult sketch comedy show starring Fiona Allen, Doon Mackichan and Sally Phillips, running until 2.30am. In this pilot, the trio give their irreverent take on everything from walking the dog to going swimming and attending a spiritual healing. AK Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World (Peter Weir, 2003) 5.30pm, Sky Cinema GreatsPeter Weir crafts a wonderful seagoing adventure out of two novels from Patrick O’Brian’s masterly series. It’s a ripping yarn of Napoleonic war, but the heart of the film is in the friendship between Russell Crowe’s man of action, Captain Jack Aubrey, and Paul Bettany’s man of science, Stephen Maturin. Paul Howlett