Anger is growing over the failure of the government to abolish the surcharge many migrant healthcare workers must pay to access the NHS, after Priti Patel said it was under review three weeks ago. The home secretary had suggested the £400 surcharge, which will rise to £625 a year each from October, was under review, after praising the “immense contribution” of doctors, nurses and carers who came to the UK. However, it has been reported the Home Office never specifically reviewed the charges beyond exempting those whose visas were due to expire before 1 October from that fee and the surcharge on a one-year extraordinary basis. The department faces renewed condemnation for not permanently scrapping the charge after the deaths of several migrant NHS workers during the coronavirus crisis. “We have repeatedly called for the immigration health surcharge to be waived for nursing staff,” a spokesperson from the Royal College of Nursing said. “They are already contributing through taxes and national insurance – to ask them to pay twice is simply wrong. “This charge must be stopped. Following her announcement that the charge was being reviewed, we wrote to the home secretary urging action. We await a response and commitment to act on this.” Dr Chaand Nagpaul, the BMA council chair, told the Independent: “In the last two months, we’ve seen a huge outpouring of support for our frontline staff, including those talented colleagues who have come to work here from overseas. “I’m sure they would be dismayed to find that the government is continuing to penalise them with this absurd fee during the crisis.” Labour shadow health minister, Justin Madders, said the NHS would collapse without overseas staff and that it was “simply unconscionable” for them to be subject to extra charges. “Ministers frequently tell us how proud they are of the incredible effort being made by NHS staff yet when they have the opportunity to do something tangible to demonstrate their appreciation they pull the rug up,” he said. After Patel’s apparent announcement, there were mounting calls for the surcharge to be ditched. It was introduced in 2015 as part of hostile environment laws designed to discourage illegal immigration and combat health tourism. The surcharge must be paid alongside taxes and national insurance contributions. Dr Chandra Kanneganti, the national chair of the British International Doctors Association, said: “We know BAME doctors are disproportionately getting ill. To have to pay for the same service that they are putting their lives at risk for doesn’t seem fair. This charge needs to be scrapped completely for NHS overseas workers.” The Home Office said the surcharge raised about £900m for the NHS between 2015 and 2018-19. During this time the cost has repeatedly risen and healthcare workers have said they struggled to pa the fees. For others, the charges are probably a deterrent to doctors and nurses considering coming to the UK. Patel made the announcement at the daily Downing Street coronavirus briefing earlier this month. She said: “We have a range of measures that are, like most things in government, under review, and we are looking at everything including visas, surcharge … We are looking at everything we can do to continue to support everyone on the frontline in the NHS.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “As the home secretary said, in light of the exceptional circumstances that coronavirus presents, it is right that policies are kept under review. “This includes how the immigration health surcharge applies. For example, the Home Office has already announced free automatic visa extensions for overseas frontline NHS workers who are working to beat the virus, including an exemption from the immigration health surcharge.”