Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include: Spain has recorded its lowest single-day death toll in two months. According to the latest figures from the health ministry, 87 people have died from Covid-19 in the past 24 hours, down from 102 the day before. The country has confirmed 231,350 cases of the virus using PCR tests, and reported 27,650 deaths. Brazil’s health ministry announced 14,919 new cases, taking the country’s total to 233,142, ahead of Spain and Italy, making theirs the fourth largest outbreak in the world. Mainland China reported five new confirmed Covid-19 cases for 16 May, down from eight the previous day, the National Health Commission said in a statement. Two of the five confirmed cases were so-called imported infections, while three were locally transmitted in northeastern Chinese province of Jilin. Japan also confirmed five new cases. Greece is continuing to make headway in its return to normality with the government poised to announce that restaurants and other eateries can now open on 25 May, one week ahead of schedule. Shopping malls and department stores will also be allowed to open tomorrow, two weeks ahead of schedule. By law staff and customers will be obliged to wear face coverings. Four out of five merchants at a major fruit market in Peru have tested positive for coronavirus, revealing shocking levels of infection – and prompting fears that Latin America’s traditional trading centres may have helped spread Covid-19 across the region. Seventy-nine per cent of stall-holders in Lima’s wholesale fruit market tested positive for Covid-19, while spot tests at five other large fresh food markets in the city revealed at least half were carrying the virus. China has asked trading firms and food processors to boost inventories of grains and oilseeds as a possible second wave of coronavirus cases and worsening infection rates elsewhere raise concerns about global supply lines. Both state-run and private grain traders as well as food producers were urged to procure higher volumes of soybeans, soy oil and corn during calls with China’s Ministry of Commerce in recent days, three trade sources told Reuters. Barack Obama attacked the Trump administration’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic during a speech on Saturday. The comments are a rare rebuke of a sitting president from one of his predecessors, and come in the midst of a pandemic that has had devastating and disproportionate effects on communities of colour in the United States.