Kai Havertz showed no signs of ring rust as his two goals for Bayer Leverkusen helped earn a 4-1 win at Werder Bremen. Havertz picked up where he left off before the Bundesliga shutdown by converting two headers in the space of five minutes. The 20-year-old had scored five goals in eight games before the suspension and showed himself to be one of the best young forwards in Europe with a first-half double, while Mitchell Weiser and Kerem Demirbay scored after the break. Theodor Gebre Selassie briefly put Bremen on level terms, but the hiatus does not seem to have helped. They remain second bottom, five points off the relegation play-off spot and heading to drop back to 2. Bundesliga after a one-season spell ended 39 years ago. Havertz had barely been involved when the game burst into life in the 27th minute. Moussa Diaby surged down the right and sent in an inviting cross that Havertz climbed highest to head home. The lead was short-lived as Gebre Selassie flicked home at the near post from a corner to level two minutes later. It was a shame there were no supporters in the stadium to witness what was a first home goal since November, with the Proclaimers’ I’m Gonna Be (500 Miles) blaring out to empty stands. The song had barely stopped by the time Leverkusen had regained their lead. Demirbay floated in an inviting free-kick, with Havertz left unmarked to power home another header for his 12th goal of the season. Bremen needed another quick response and could scarcely have been presented with a better chance six minutes before the break as Leonardo Bittencourt burst through on goal, but he lacked composure and blazed over. Leverkusen extended their lead 15 minutes after the restart as Diaby ran on again, this time on the left, and centred for Weiser, who was unmarked and Bremen were undone by another header. The finishing touch was applied in the 78th minute with the goal of the game. The substitute Karim Bellarabi was unchallenged as he headed towards the box, before sending through a delightful no-look through ball to Demirbay, who did not disappoint with a sumptuous dinked finish. That was the end of the visitors’ fun for the evening as Leverkusen consolidated fifth position, while Bremen were left with one win in 12 games.