“This is gonna go away without a vaccine,” Donald Trump said last week. “It’s gonna go away, and we’re not gonna see it again, hopefully, after a period of time.” Trump’s personal insistence that a vaccine will not be necessary to defeat the coronavirus has prompted US officials to warn that Americans’ access to an eventual vaccine could be slowed – despite the cutting-edge laboratory work happening on American soil. And the Trump administration’s approach to the search for a vaccine has seen it exclude the US government from an accelerating global effort against Covid-19, raising concerns that the endeavor could falter without official US support and leadership. Scientists around the world believe that humanity will achieve multiple effective Covid-19 vaccines in record time. In the wake of multinational fights against Ebola, Zika, HIV and other killers, the global infrastructure for taking on complicated immunization and vaccination projects has never been more robust, and American expertise plays an essential role. But even as research labs based in the United States move candidate vaccines into clinical trials and pharmaceutical companies reorganize US factories to prepare for large-scale production, the US government has turned its back on the global coalition fighting the disease. Unlike Britain, China, Canada, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Japan, numerous African countries, the World Health Organization (WHO), the Gates Foundation and the European commission, the United States did not send representation last week to a virtual global summit that raised more than $8bn for the coronavirus vaccine. Instead, Trump – who for years has spread dangerous lies about vaccination – has tapped his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, and others to lead what looks like a unilateral push for a vaccine that the administration has dubbed “Operation Warp Speed”. The details of Operation Warp Speed have not been announced, but the White House has set a target of having 100m vaccine doses by autumn, a goal a Republican senator called “amazingly ambitious” and that scientists decline to credit. Stephen Morrison, who runs the global health program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, noted that the White House has signaled no plan to join an upcoming virtual global summit on vaccines set for 4 June. “What the United States has chosen in these recent meetings – not to attend, and not to participate – it has chosen instead to begin talking about a sort of go-it-alone approach,” he said. “It seems to be taking an ‘America First’ approach. “The risk is that this type of departure by the US fractures the international efforts and creates tensions and uncertainties and insecurities. That’s the risk. “And if we fracture the ecosystem, does that slow us down? Does it make resolutions that are effective and universal that much more difficult to achieve?” Inside heavily secured laboratories at opposite ends of the state of Pennsylvania, scientists are pursuing two wildly different, and promising, paths that could lead to a coronavirus vaccine. At the Center for Vaccine Research at the University of Pittsburgh, a team led by director Paul Duprex is genetically grafting coronavirus spike proteins on to the measles virus to create a product that could quickly be manufactured in the hundreds of millions of doses from India to Indianapolis. “It’s precisely why we as virologists exist,” said Duprex. “I’ve been teaching students about emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases for years – Ebola, West Nile, avian influenza, measles, mumps and so on. However, when you’re in the middle of a novel virus spreading rapidly from person to person, things are different.” Meanwhile, at the Wistar Institute at the University of Pennsylvania, a team led by David Weiner has used DNA technology to devise a candidate vaccine whose long shelf-life and temperature stability could speed its distribution around the world. The Pittsburgh team is now preparing to test its first human subjects. The Philadelphia team has already administered its candidate vaccine to about 40 people after encouraging results in mice, rabbits, guinea pigs and non-human primates. Hopes for a breakthrough are running high. “This collective body of work, in this set of trials – those give us optimism that we’re likely to see immune responses” in humans from the candidate vaccine, Weiner told the Guardian. His lab expects to publish its first results from the clinical trials in June. While the US government has largely sat out from the global fight, American labs, pharmaceutical companies and US-based foundations are fully engaged in the larger effort, linked with foreign partners in a common pursuit. “This is a truly international problem, an international puzzle that we have to fix,” said Duprex. The coronavirus pandemic presents a quintessential global challenge, experts say. Even a good vaccine might not confer long-term immunity, meaning that the virus will not be defeated anywhere until it is defeated everywhere. “None of us can accept a world in which some people are protected while others are not. Everybody should be protected,” said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director general of the WHO, in a teleconference last week. “None of us are safe until all of us are safe.” In a best-case scenario, a vaccine to protect against coronavirus could begin wide production in the next 12-18 months, scientists say. The WHO lists eight candidate vaccines already in clinical trials – meaning doses are being administered to humans – and 100 more candidates now in the pre-clinical stage. “This is not like Aids or tuberculosis,” said Paul Reider, a renowned research chemist in the pharmaceuticals industry who teaches at Princeton University. “This is an area where numerous vaccines will be successful, and they will be safe and effective.” We’re going to need four or five vaccines that are effective, being produced in all the vaccine factories in the world to get it out there Duprex is working with the Pasteur Institute in Paris and with Themis, a biomedical company based in Austria. Weiner and his team are collaborating with Inovio, a US-based biotechnology company that subcontracts manufacturing to the German-based Richter-Helm BioLogics. Each Pennsylvania project is supported by millions of dollars in grants from the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) foundation, which is headquartered in Oslo, Norway, and backed by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the London-based Wellcome Trust. “Making a vaccine takes time and is not trivial,” said Reider. “We’re going to need four or five vaccines that are effective, being produced in all the vaccine factories in the world to get it out there.” But Trump has attacked key international players in the effort, including the WHO and China, which has four candidate vaccines in clinical trials, compared with the three advanced by companies with ties to the United States. Morrison said Trump appeared to be playing to a domestic political audience by sending a message “that we are taking action on our own, we’re less reliant on others, that we will deliver faster and more furious, than our competition”. “What we’re seeing is the application of that ideological approach to this particular crisis, and putting health security in that spotlight,” Morrison said. “We had not seen that up until now in these terms.” There are ominous indications that the United States has been uniquely bad at flattening the curve of Covid-19 fatalities. The country may also be ill-suited to implementing a new vaccine program, analysts say, owing to the lack of federal standards for vaccination, a broken healthcare system, rampant inequality and a thriving community of vaccination skeptics. It is likely that any vaccine deployed in the United States will have to be rolled out gradually, since 330m doses cannot be produced at once. That warrants forward planning about how to protect vulnerable people, said Paul Delamater, a professor of geography at the Carolina Population Center whose work focuses on gaps in the healthcare system. “The geography of risk for adverse outcomes for coronavirus may be quite variable,” he said. “One question we’re working on: who should get vaccinated first, under what kind of scenarios?” Another question the country can expect to face is how to achieve herd immunity when an unknown number of Americans can be expected to refuse the vaccine. “We’re not sure what hesitancy is going to look like,” said Delamater, noting that the flu vaccine, which is widely available and heavily promoted each year, has only about a 50% uptake rate. “I think that Covid will be different from the flu because there has been such a scare, and people will be tired of social distancing,” he said. “So I do think that uptake will be higher than flu, but … I worry hesitancy could be higher because of the speed at which the vaccine was developed and deployed.” “[Dr Jonas] Salk could never have dreamed of these things, because it really is different, completely,” said Duprex, referring to the celebrated American scientist who developed the polio vaccine in the 1950s. Duprex was contrasting the new style of vaccination, which uses genetic engineering to show the immune system something safe that it perceives as dangerous, and the traditional style, in which attenuated viruses themselves are used to provoke an immune response. Duprex’s lab was one of the first research labs in the country to take delivery of samples of the coronavirus itself. Harvested from a Seattle patient, they arrived on dry ice on Valentine’s Day. Numerous vaccine technologies will be needed to deliver a global solution in time, said Weiner, of the Philadelphia lab. For all his past skepticism of vaccines, Trump has touted a good one coming soon. “We are very confident we are going to have a vaccine by the end of the year,” he told Fox News last weekend. Duprex called that time frame “probably tough”. “Twelve to 18 months is not impossible, but it’s a big big ask, and it depends on everything going perfectly. And you know life, I know science – nothing goes perfectly in life. Nothing goes perfectly in science.” “The idea is definitely aspirational,” said Weiner of the 12-18 month window, “and we should as scientists be as aspirational as possible in this and thinking about breaking down barriers, while maintaining focus on safety.” Duprex mused on the history of US leadership on vaccine research, from Salk to Albert Sabin, who developed the oral polio vaccine. “We have been so instrumental as a country” in the development of vaccines, he said. “It’s weird to have all of that rich history in collaboration in biomedical sciences, and then think, at a moment in time, for reasons that are hard to fathom – that you want to go it alone, with a global problem. “When collaboration is more necessary than ever.”