Isolation has definitely been a test, but I’m really lucky: I’m able to work on new music while quarantined with my best friends in Toluca Lake, Los Angeles. I’ve been super active on Twitter and Instagram, and playing Animal Crossing and Mario Kart with my fans after sharing my Nintendo Switch codes online – it’s really important for me to check in on my fans as I worry about them a lot. They have truly kept me sane, so I’m keeping an eye open for anybody that needs to talk. I’m trying to write as much as I can. I worked nonstop for the last two and a half years, tour after tour, video after video, and everything was moving so fast. This time has forced me to refocus on what I really want to do and push myself as a writer. I think I am over the heartbreak songs and I definitely have a new vibe now, and Malibu is the first taste of it. I asked everybody to send me videos of them dancing to a clip of the song in self-isolation, and to take the beach to their homes; they dressed up in bikinis, made cocktails and got super creative. This video is honestly the cutest thing I have ever seen in my life, I am so blessed to have friends and fans that are down to do stuff like this. Dua Lipa’s Future Nostalgia is probably my favourite album this year. I love her – her aesthetic is really sick. Disco has been on the come-up again for the past few years, and now it is finally hitting its new peak, which is really exciting. People finally want to have fun again! I am so happy that the world has come back around to it. Gwen Stefani’s Love. Angel. Music. Baby. takes me back to when pop music was all I cared about. I would get home from school, head to my room and watch Stefani’s music videos on repeat. She is an example of how you can be cool as fuck but at the same time be glamorous and have all of those pop-star qualities. This album always makes me smile and gives me butterflies. I’ve been listening to it on a loop while playing Animal Crossing, cranking it up really loud and playing online for hours on end. Then I go and make music myself at night – I like to inspire myself during the day, because I’m a night writer. Or I listen to it while going on a scooter ride around my neighbourhood: the one thing that I look forward to in terms of going outside every day, that makes me feel sane. I’ve delved back into Daft Punk’s Discovery, but I love every single album of theirs. They have had a huge influence on me since I was really young: two robots making music is a sick concept. It’s all so dystopian and future-sounding and that’s exactly what this quarantine feels like, a dystopia. I still find myself going back to Thriller, and when I listen to it, I’m like: “How are there this many good songs on any album?” It consists of only nine songs, which is the craziest part about it: every second of it is just quality pop music, and the title track is simply the best of the best. I have always admired Quincy Jones’s production, and this record is the starting point for any pop fan.