Billie Jean King (pictured at Wimbledon in 1975) was one of the most decorated tennis players of her era, winning 12 grand slam singles titles. Yet her career has been defined as much by her achievements off the court as by those on it. A lifelong campaigner for gender equality, she was one of the nine women who, in 1970, formed the Virginia Slams Circuit in protest at the lack of prize money in the women’s game and later became the first president of the newly-formed Women’s Tennis Association. She also swatted aside the former men’s pro Bobby Riggs in the so-called “Battle of the Sexes” – an exhibition contest borne of Riggs’s sexist belief that no female player could defeat him. The match was worth $100,000 to the winner, but, as King said, much more was at stake: “I thought it would set [women] back 50 years if I didn’t win that match – it would ruin the women’s tour and affect all women’s self-esteem.” She duly trounced her opponent in straight sets (6-4, 6-3, 6-3) in front of a global TV audience of almost 100 million. She recently urged other women to live their dreams. Photograph: Gerry Cranham / Offside Words: Jonny Weeks Buy your exclusive print here Price £55 including free delivery (30x40cm print size). PrintsPhotographs are presented on museum-grade, fine-art paper stocks, with archival standards guaranteeing quality for 100-plus years. All editions are printed and quality checked by experts at theprintspace, the UK’s leading photo and fine-art print provider. DeliveryArtworks are dispatched via Royal Mail and delivered within three to five working days. Theprintspace takes great care in packaging your artwork, with a no-quibble satisfaction guarantee should you be unhappy in any way. Global shipping is available. ContactEmail: guardianprintsales@theprintspace.co.uk ___ Cassius Clay predicts the future (above) Maradona, the God of Naples Swimming turn Kelly Holmes’ eye-popping celebration Euphoria at the 1966 World Cup (below) Alex Ferguson’s hairdryer treatment Dog Bites Ball at Italia 90 Cassius Clay training in London Jumping in the Fog at White Hart Lane (below) See the full series here