Congressional investigators in Washington are demanding information about loans and other funds that the Trump Organization has requested from foreign governments, including Britain, in the wake of the coronavirus crisis. The demand for information follows a media report last month that said the Trump Organization was seeking UK and Irish bailout funds to cover wages of employees who had been furloughed from the company’s golf properties in Europe due to the pandemic. In a letter to Eric Trump, the president’s son and vice president of the Trump Organization, Carolyn Maloney, the Democratic chairwoman of the House oversight and reform committee, suggested the decision to seek funding in the UK was problematic and potentially a violation of the US constitution, which calls for a president to have undivided loyalty to the US. The US Congress has already passed legislation prohibiting US taxpayer funds from being used to benefit companies in which Donald Trump holds a stake. “Apart from the grave emoluments clause problems your actions cause in the United States, officials in the United Kingdom have raised serious concerns about using their own taxpayer funds to bail out President Trump’s companies,” Maloney wrote. She pointed to reported remarks by Martin Ford, a councillor in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, where one of Trump’s two Scottish luxury properties is located, who said he did not believe UK taxpayers ought to be helping Trump given the president’s own personal wealth. “The huge tab for this will be borne throughout the whole population through higher taxes,” Ford told Bloomberg News. In her request, Maloney called on Eric Trump to deliver by 21 May “all documents and communications relating to the Trump Organization’s application for any loans or other funds from any domestic or foreign government entity, including the British government”. The congresswoman is also seeking all documents and communications between the Trump Organization and any US federal employees and officials that relate to the novel coronavirus. Bloomberg News reported in April that the Trump Organization was seeking the bailout money to help pay for bartenders, bagpipers, and other employees who have been furloughed. Trump, who still retains a personal stake in the company, owns three golf resorts in the UK and Ireland. The demand for information by the powerful chairwoman of the House oversight committee, which has the power to subpoena documents and investigate “any matter”, does not automatically mean the documents will be delivered to Congress. The Trump administration has refused previous demands for information, in defiance of congressional authority. In a previous statement to USA Today, Eric Trump said the British government’s job retention plan, which allows companies to seek government funds to pay for most of furloughed employees’ salaries, was intended to help the company retain and support its staff. “The job retention plan created by the UK Government has nothing to do with the Trump Organization and does not benefit the business – it is solely about protecting people and their families who would otherwise be out of work,” he said.