Yeah yeah yeah, I know, it’s like we’re living in a Black Mirror episode. We’ve got headless robot dogs patrolling South Korean parks to enforce social distancing, we’re all trapped on social media which is now just a rolling cancellation colosseum where soon each user will have their time of standing before the masses and hearing exactly what everyone thinks of them, and who needs killer bee drones when we have murder hornets. If we have Black Mirror on our news do we really need Black Mirror on our Netflix? The creator himself says no. Charlie Brooker gave an interview to Radio Times saying he doesn’t think audiences would have the stomach for a dystopia right now, as we seem to be living through the beginning stages of societal collapse with our pandemic lockdowns and mass unemployment. But I for one urge our creators to bring on the darkness. During some of the bleakest years of the recent past, with an endless war conducted in multiple countries mostly with drones, a migrant crisis caused by people fleeing war and economic devastation, an economy that benefited the few and left everyone else scrambling to monetize every aspect of their lives they could think of just to survive – “I’m not using this second bedroom/car/blood plasma right now, what if I found a way to charge someone for it” – we somehow got addicted to cutesy pop self-empowerment anthems. We had bright little pop stars, trained from birth to be cheery, professional, and approachable, all vaguely looking the same like they all came out of the same laboratory (or at least the same plastic surgeon’s office), bouncing up and down and singing songs about how great we are all doing. “Cause I’m a champion and you’re gonna hear me roar” and “Cause baby you’re a firework, come on show them what you’re worth” and whatever else. Like ceaseless robotic cheerleaders designed by Lisa Frank, hysterically celebrating us as we grind and hustle our way to poverty and early death. And yes, there was a Black Mirror episode about that, too. I’m not saying pop music was to blame for our inability to notice the game was fixed or to organize and fight against the gig economy and the supreme wealth of our oligarchs and technocrats, but certainly it was an effective means of escapism. Outside was a burning hellscape of environmental collapse and militarized police, but all we had to do to break free from that was put on our headphones or look at our devices and suddenly it was all rainbows and candy colored fantasy. And why not try to escape all of this? But personally, the cognitive dissonance was too harsh. The transition from the horrifying headlines of war and illness and suffering to Taylor Swift in a bathtub filled with jewels was giving me migraines. “Actually, I’m not feeling great about being me,” I whispered back to Swift as I lay in bed in the same clothes I wore on each of the previous three days. “At this rate I’ll never be able to buy a couch that isn’t secondhand let alone diamonds,” I psychically projected toward Ariana Grande. Black Mirror debuted back in 2011 when we were all still very optimistic about the ability for technology to reshape and reconnect the world. Twitter and Facebook being praised for its ability to bring down despotic governments, not undermine democratic elections or facilitate genocide. Instagram was about sharing, not causing depression or fostering suicide cults. These two worlds seemed to converge in 2016 with the release of season three when Netflix went down because a bunch of teenagers – maybe, we have no idea – brought down the internet by hacking wifi-enabled appliances. I was sitting on my couch wondering why I couldn’t load the season premiere, having no idea it was because people didn’t change the passwords on their dishwashers. Because of the work of good journalists and whistleblowers and yes some television programs, we’re all a little more aware of the dark side of our tech-infused world and a little less optimistic that it will solve rather than create problems. We look to our entertainment to do too much for us these days. We look to our television series to provide moral instruction, we argue about whether or not characters are good “role models,” we fight over accurate representation. For godsake, we announce our Harry Potter houses like it means something, looking to the great sorting hat of the sky to give us a coherent sense of self. So I’m not looking for a television show to solve this crisis or give us an illumined path toward a rebuilt society. Billionaires are profiting off the hundreds of thousands of Covid-19 deaths and the mass unemployment and tech titans are using the power vacuum to remake the world according to their vision and the only people who can get grocery delivery are the ones who know how to install a bot and I don’t know how to install a bot so I can’t get Cheez Its. So don’t tell me how great I’m doing or sell me some fantasy of self-improvement. Bring back the dystopia. Because right now I can’t stand being lied to. Jessa Crispin is a Guardian US columnist