A painterly touch is a fun way to cover up the grey that is now ubiquitous in almost every lockdown hair story. Simply draw on strands using makeup crayons in highly pigmented brights. Feeling audacious? Try Bleach London’s semi-permanent Super Cool Colours (£6.50, bleachlondon.co.uk) all over. They don’t last long – just a few washes – so they are perfect for commitment phobes and those who have to go back to work somewhere serious. Hairstylist Julien d’Ys originally created this Moschino SS20 ode to Picasso using proper paint, but remember: that’s runway, not reality. Unless you want crunchy hair, there is no need to be quite so literal. 1. KVD Vegan Beauty Technicolour Crayon Set £26, debenhams.com 2. Gucci Eyebrow Pencil £23, harrods.com 3. MAC Retro Matte Liquid Lipcolour £19, maccosmetics.co.uk 4. Clarins SOS Primer £27, clarins.com 5. Rimmel Wonder’Ink Liquid Eyeliner £6.99, feelunique.com Some people find wearing SPF a bore, but I use it all year round, rain or shine, barefaced or made-up, outdoors or indoors… Contrary to popular belief, you do need SPF indoors. UVB rays (the ones that cause burning) can’t penetrate windows, but UVA rays (the ones that cause premature ageing) can. So, unless you live in a windowless room, I’d suggest slapping it on. Still I will admit that finding a good everyday option is tricky. Most SPFs I’ve tried make me look as if I’ve been dusted in flour. Others are so matt they make everyone – regardless of ethnicity – look devoid of life. And they interfere with your makeup, too. So my roster of recommendations is limited. Recently, however, I’ve been wearing this glorious number by Skinceuticals, the clinical skincare brand. I think it may just be my favourite SPF yet. Don’t let the ‘SPF 50’ fool you, it’s not heavy - quite the opposite, in fact. The texture is so airily light that it goes on like a dream. And it then totally disappears, leaving not a tinge of grey in sight. Instead, you are left with a dewy finish that works with or without makeup. The formula includes tranexamic acid and niacinamide. These two powerful ingredients fight hyperpigmentation and discolouration, meaning it’s goodbye to dark spots and uneven skin. The kick you’ll get from your newly luminous skin will make wearing this SPF a joy. Skinceuticals Advanced Brightening UV Defense Sunscreen SPF 50, £45, skinceuticals.co.uk Recovery service If you’ve been overdoing it with acids and peels, or your skin is stressed out, this cream, fortified with soothing peptides and ceramides, is your calm in the midst of the storm. DeliKate Recovery Cream, £69, katesomerville.com More than skin deep A powerful multitasking serum that brightens your skin, minimises the look of pores and resurfaces its texture. And it’s gentle enough for sensitive skins. Malin & Goetz, Resurfacing Face Serum, £58, spacenk.com Orange juice This foaming mask has a high concentration of vitamin C. After 15 minutes your luminous complexion will explain why editors love this French pharmacy brand. SVR Masque C, £30, lookfantastic.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.