More than three-quarters of black, Asian and minority ethnic doctors are worried about contracting coronavirus in the course of their work, according to a survey that highlights the continuing lack of protection for frontline NHS staff. Doctors said poor access to personal protective equipment, insufficient training on how to fit masks and lengthy waits for virus testing left them in fear of catching the virus and passing it on to those they lived with. The Royal College of Physicians (RCP) found 48% of all doctors who responded to its survey were either concerned or very concerned for their health, a figure that rose to 76% among BAME doctors. Nearly two-thirds were worried about passing the virus on to others at home. “Things are nowhere near what we need,” said Prof Andrew Goddard, president of the RCP. “People assume everyone’s feeling OK on the frontline and that morale is good, but the survey shows people are worried about it all. The PPE remains a significant issue. Testing has got better, there are still concerns, particularly around delays in getting the results back.” Goddard added: “Concern is very high among BAME doctors and we should not be surprised given the awful situation we’ve had with the deaths of healthcare workers and people in social care from BAME backgrounds. The fact that we’re so reliant on the BAME workforce in the NHS and social care, and the fact that the workforce is so worried about their health, is something we need to wake up to.” The survey findings come after the chair of the British Medical Association, Dr Chaand Nagpaul, urged government to investigate why BAME health workers were contracting the virus in disproportionate numbers. Under guidance set out by NHS bosses, hospitals are now looking to move BAME staff off the frontline for their own safety. A third of doctors have been off work with illness during the epidemic, most with confirmed or suspected Covid-19. Of more than 1,500 doctors who completed the survey, a fifth had positive tests for the virus and 39% reported a suspected infection. The epidemic has so far hit London the hardest with 42% of respondents saying they had taken time off since the outbreak reached the UK. Despite renewed efforts to increase supplies of PPE, 16.5% of doctors who responded to the survey reported situations in the past two weeks when they could not get the protective equipment recommended by Public Health England. A third said they had not received “fit testing” to ensure their masks were protecting them properly, with 37% adding that they did not feel confident checking their own PPE. With the rapid expansion of testing over the past six weeks, more healthcare workers have been checked for the virus, but 5% of doctors surveyed said they were still unable to get a test themselves and nearly a fifth could not secure tests for people in their households who developed symptoms. Four per cent said they could still not get tests for their patients. Those who did get tested often had to wait days for their results. Only 17% of the doctors heard back within 24 hours, with 38% waiting up to two days, a fifth waiting two to three days and 14% hearing nothing for at least four days. NHS staff are supposed to have a personal assessment of their risk of contracting coronavirus, but only 18% of the doctors who responded to the survey said they had received such an assessment, leading the RCP to say employers must now make them a priority. “One of the challenges we’ve got is that lots of groups are working on risk assessment tools. We’ve got to have a consistent approach across the NHS and social care sector so we’re not worried one group is getting a different assessment than others,” said Goddard.