Police in Japan have arrested the man suspected of carrying out an arson attack last year that killed 36 people, after officers waited 10 months for him to be treated for serious burns. Shinji Aoba was arrested on murder and arson charges over the attack on the Kyoto Animation studio in western Japan, which sparked an outpouring of grief from anime fans around the world. Police had been forced to wait until Aoba had recovered from serious burns sustained in the attack, as well as restrictions caused by the coronavirus outbreak, until they could arrest him. On Wednesday, TV footage showed the suspect strapped to a stretcher as he was carried into a police station. Aoba, 42, is accused of entering Kyoto Animation’s main studio via an unlocked front door on the morning of 18 July armed with two containers thought to have contained petrol. He allegedly doused the entrance with the liquid before setting it on fire with a lighter. About 70 people were inside the studio at the time. It is Japan’s deadliest blaze since 2001, when a fire in Tokyo’s Kabukicho entertainment district killed 44 people. Some employees managed to flee the studio, but others attempting to escape to the roof of the three-storey building found their exit delayed by a door that survivors said had been difficult to open. Many of the dead – 22 women and 14 men mostly in their 20s and 30s – died from carbon monoxide poisoning. Thirty-three people were injured. Aoba, who reportedly told police he had targeted the studio because it had plagiarised his work, sustained severe burns on his face, torso, and arms and legs, and was unconscious for weeks. He is reportedly unable to walk or eat without assistance. Kyoto Animation said it expected Aoba to be prosecuted “to the maximum extent” under the law. It said in a statement: “We have no further words for the suspect ... Our fallen colleagues will never return, and our wounds will never heal.” The studio, known by its fans as KyoAni, is well known outside Japan for its role in producing popular TV anime series, including The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya, K-ON! and Violet Evergarden. The fire shocked anime fans around the world, and prompted tributes from the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, and Apple’s chief executive, Tim Cook, who tweeted: “Kyoto Animation is home to some of the world’s most talented animators and dreamers – the devastating attack today is a tragedy felt far beyond Japan. “KyoAni artists spread joy all over the world and across generations with their masterpieces.”