For four decades, children have sniggered at the first line of the Anthony Burgess novel Earthly Powers, regarded as the most deliberately provocative opening in 20th-century fiction: “It was the afternoon of my eighty-first birthday and I was in bed with my catamite when Ali announced that the archbishop had come to see me,” Burgess wrote. With the use of the word “catamite”, the term for a passive boy recipient of homosexual intercourse, the sentence flew in the face of homophobic norms and also implied pederasty. But newly discovered papers reveal the polymath and former Observer writer had created different versions of this “arresting opening” for a book he hoped would establish him as a literary heavyweight. Researchers preparing for an online celebration of the novel’s publication in 1980 have uncovered rival first lines, including the alternative phrases: “It was the siesta-time of my eighty-first birthday”, and “our Moroccan butler announced that the Archbishop of Malta had come to see me”. The lost reference to Malta reflected an ongoing battle with censorship, according to Professor Andrew Biswell, director of the International Anthony Burgess Foundation in Manchester, where the new documents were found. “This is all new, but it makes sense because the opening chapter takes place in 1971, when the real-life Archbishop of Malta was Mikiel Gonzi. Burgess had spoken out against the strict regime of Maltese state censorship, encouraged by Gonzi and the Catholic Church, which had banned a number of his own books, along with novels by Ian Fleming, Doris Lessing and Angela Carter,” said Biswell. In 1973 Burgess published an inflammatory public lecture, Obscenity and the Arts, and the Maltese government responded by confiscating his house on the island. The property was eventually returned to him after he leaked the story to the Guardian, but he left Malta, never to return. It is now clear his work on Earthly Powers, nominated for a Booker Prize when it eventually came out a decade later, had begun back in 1970, just ahead of the international notoriety that followed the release of Stanley Kubrick’s shocking film A Clockwork Orange, based on an earlier novel. Yet Earthly Powers is the book Burgess spent longest on, and it is the novel he cared most about, according to Biswell. “He talked about writing a novel of Tolstoyan or Dickensian scope and he carried the typed manuscript around from place to place, finally finishing it in the South of France,” he said. The book was hotly anticipated by publishers and the subject of a bidding war that ushered in the era of blockbuster fiction. “It was like a dress rehearsal for the great book publishing dramas of the 1980s, with Burgess revelling in his role in the spotlight,” said former Faber executive Robert McCrum. “I was offered publication rights from a rather shady literary agent, who was in Burgess’s pocket. I can remember an unwieldy typescript littered with Tippex corrections. It all got rather wild and I had to conceal from Faber (which had never participated in anything so vulgar as an auction) the sums that were being thrown around.” Hutchinson won the day with a counter bid of an unheard-of £40,000. He talked about writing a novel of Tolstoyan or Dickensian scope and carried the manuscript around from place to place. “When William Golding’s Rites of Passage pipped Earthly Powers at the Booker ceremony a year later, it was a strange kind of poetic justice. Not that Burgess saw it that way, of course. He threw a hissy fit and refused to leave his suite at the Savoy,” recalls McCrum. The novel did, however, win a prestigious French prize for best foreign novel and it sold 100,000 hardback copies in America alone. Kirk Douglas, the star of Burgess’s favourite film Paths of Glory, even wanted to put it on as a one-man show on Broadway, but performance rights had already been sold to an Australian company. Work on the vast Burgess personal archive began after Liana, Burgess’s Italian translator and second wife, left the papers to the foundation on her death in 2007. The newly discovered Earthly Powers pages also reveal the author wanted another title for the work. Burgess hoped to call it The Instruments of Darkness, a quote from Shakespeare’s Macbeth, but this idea was abandoned when another writer, Alfred Price, brought out a history of radar with that title in 1977. Burgess’s final manuscript is titled The Prince of the Power of the Air, but in an early draft he calls the novel Not Peace but a Sword. The contract for the British edition, meanwhile, refers to the book as Absolute Power. The new papers will go online anthonyburgess.org/earthly-powers later this year, alongside a series of podcasts and an online public annotation project, aiming to solve the puzzles in the novel’s final text.