They are familiar to everyone: cheerful children’s rainbow drawings in countless windows, and notices explaining closure or new entry rules in shop doorways everywhere. Soon some of them will be in the national collection after the V&A made a public callout for homemade signs created during the lockdown. Brendan Cormier, a design curator at the V&A, acknowledged that the signs were ubiquitous. “We could be deluged,” he said. “There is also the risk with a public callout that you don’t get anything. I don’t think you ever get quite the number you’re hoping for. We’re asking for patience from people … it might take us some time to sort through them and decide which are the most useful and relevant for us to take.” It will be for the public to decide which signs they want to nominate, with the museum deliberately not setting out nuts-and-bolts criteria. “The idea is to get a snapshot of the world under lockdown,” said Cormier. “Some signs will resort to humour but then some of them will be incredibly prosaic and boring – and we need to reflect that. “Some of the signs will be from businesses that have experienced tragedy in different ways, so we need to be sensitive to that as well.” The rainbow drawings celebrating NHS workers will be heading to the collection of the V&A Museum of Childhood, in Bethnal Green, which has closed for a £13m revamp and is due to reopen in 2022. “The global pandemic has sequestered children in their homes,” said Gina Koutsika, the museum’s director. “Across the UK, inspired by global projects and encouraged by their teachers and parents, they have been crafting rainbow images to hang in their windows. “Bringing cheer to others in what is a disconcerting and potentially frightening time, this is exactly the kind of project to build creative confidence that the new Museum of Childhood is exhorting in its audiences.” Cormier said the drawings and signs were among the objects the museum should be collecting at the moment. “We are tasked with creating a record of our times. We’re not a social history museum, but here we are talking about a medium – pen and paper, graphic design, illustration – that speaks to the V&A’s collection.” It is part of a wider rapid-response collecting strategy and online series that the museum has launched called Pandemic Objects, exploring how things such as bread flour and toilet roll have taken on new, eye-widening importance. Cormier called it “an organically growing project” and did not yet know how many lockdown objects would be collected. “We did have a debate about what is a significant number. I don’t think you can collect any less than 50 to have any kind of impact.” Members of the public are encouraged to submit images of drawings and homemade signs via the email address homemadesigns@vam.ac.uk. The V&A is among a number of museums that have issued public callouts for coronavirus objects. The Museum of London is collecting objects together with first-hand testimony to will help capture life in the capital under lockdown for future generations. Beatrice Behlen, a senior curator at the museum, said: “This is a major moment in the capital’s history and we want to collect a range of objects, from clothing to hair clippers, from diaries to memes, that reflect the physical and emotional response of Londoners to Covid-19.” The BFI, meanwhile, is collecting lockdown videos, from Joe Wicks’ high-energy PE lessons to Boris Johnson’s “mild symptoms” video tweet and a TikTok film recreating a daily commute in the shower.