Remember 3D? That thing where you paid more for films to look worse? During its rebirth, around the late 00s, it tainted the majority of mass-market films, regardless of genre or suitability, adding a murky filter and a hefty surcharge to the cinema experience. For me, bar a handful of rare examples (Gravity and The Great Gatsby perhaps), it was a gimmick that was used best when viewed as such. The self-serious worlds of Avatar and Harry Potter weren’t bettered by the addition of a third dimension yet the relentless shock tactics of horror films such as Final Destination 5 and Piranha 3D brought an added layer of fun to films that were already well aware of their silliness. I’ve had similar feelings about Netflix’s decision to make certain shows and films interactive, transforming traditional narratives into choose your own adventures, allowing us to make decisions about where the plot might go with a collection of multiple-choice scenarios. Prior to Netflix’s first example of this, 2017’s Puss in Book: Trapped in an Epic Tale, similar technology was best implemented on the DVD release of Final Destination 3, which used the franchise’s ever-present fear of a gory demise as added motivation for making the right choice, as we were handed control at various key moments. Spoiler: death was behind every door. Like the best uses of 3D, it worked because the film itself was as schlocky as the tech, one of the many reasons why I felt that the streamer’s grandest interactive experiment, Black Mirror’s internet-breaking Bandersnatch movie, was such a letdown. Despite some rather tiresome in-jokes, it was a humourless and portentous time-waster and the ability to make token decisions along the way felt more like a distraction from what was otherwise an almost parody-level example of the show at its very worst. Now while it’s unlikely to cause even a fraction of the rabid Reddit detective attention aimed at Bandersnatch and its many rabbit holes, the unhyped new release of an extended special of Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt showed for me how much fun the technology can be when paired with something more befitting. It’s a throwaway experience but one that’s fully cognisant of this, poking fun at the format while providing what would have been a perfectly entertaining episode of the sitcom without the ability to pick whether Kimmy’s BFF Titus goes to the gym or takes a nap. The show, a manic, Tina Fey-created comedy about what happens to a woman after she’s saved from a cult, was once one of the platform’s biggest brags, a slick and inventive critic-pleaser that might not have matched 30 Rock’s awards haul but provided the many fans of that show with a comforting continuation of sorts. It shared the same fast pace and expansive pop culture vocabulary while also touching, lightly, on often audaciously dark issues of trauma and recovery. By the time it ended last year, it had fully exhausted the novelty of its premise but even a weak episode was still more imaginative than most sitcoms on a good day and so the arrival of a frenetic new special, at a time when we’re hungrier than ever for immersive distraction, is opportune. Kimmy, embodied as ever with exhausting effervescence by Ellie Kemper, is getting married to English royalty and we join her as she’s picking her dress (do we want it to be fun or fancy?). Her fiance, Frederick, is played by Daniel Radcliffe, an actor who has often struggled to find his place post-wizarding world but his frantic energy works well here, playing a man whose background isn’t quite as “peculiar” as Kimmy’s (“You win,” he tells her) but who shares a surprising amount of similarities with her (even though she is “commoner trash” compared to him). Three days before the wedding, Kimmy finds a book in her backpack that suggests that there might be another secret bunker, sending her on a multiple-choice quest to West Virginia. After the success of Bandersnatch at the end of 2018, Netflix was forced to briefly pause its umpteenth victory lap the following month when Choose Your Own Adventure publisher Chooseco threatened legal action. The case has yet to conclude but there’s a sly jab at the company during this, their biggest interactive offering since, as Kimmy’s book The Mystery of the Mysterious Spy is a “Pick Your Own Journey”, a joke reminiscent of 30 Rock’s unlicensed Janis Joplin biopic featuring the memorable song Break Another Little Chunk of My Lung. That moment, when characters pause or fill time until you make up your mind can feel clumsy in a drama yet in a sitcom, especially one as otherworldly as this, it’s far less of a distraction. When applying interactivity to comedy, one also starts to question the motivation behind a decision, whether it’s to progress the story or lead to farce (at one point, at a rural bar, we get to decide whether Titus knows the words to Lynyrd Skynyrd’s Free Bird or pretends to). It’s fun to explore both rationales and after going down enough dead ends, you realise that basing your choices on Kimmy’s inherent goodness is the way to go. The tech works here because storytelling was never a major selling point of the show, the jokes were, so handing over responsibility to us doesn’t feel like a creative sacrifice and branching out the story just allows for more one-liners and while they don’t all land, a quick flip back or forward allows you to find something funnier instead. There’s a lot here to unpack, a consuming activity to easily while away some considerable time, and who doesn’t have plenty of that right now? The Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt: Kimmy vs The Reverend is available on Netflix now