During the coronavirus crisis, Channel 4’s scheduling boss, Kiran Nataraja, has developed a professional ritual around the hit show Gogglebox. The programme, which features ordinary people watching television at home, has not only beaten its own records for same-day viewing on Channel 4, but it has also continued to grow nearly every week of the lockdown. “Every week when I look at the overnight figures, I think: ‘Can it get any bigger?’” she says. “It has been extraordinary.” Streaming services have benefited from locked-in audiences. BBC iPlayer had the busiest day in its history last month, while Netflix, now worth more than the oil giant ExxonMobil, is booming. But the phoenix-like return to prominence of terrestrial television – and not just news – has been just as remarkable. The Repair Shop, a show in which craftspeople carefully restore family heirlooms, has hit highs of 6.7 million since moving to primetime on the BBC. James Graham’s Quiz became event television for ITV; its show Saturday Night Takeaway has also reached all-time highs. Even younger viewers, who are notoriously difficult for broadcasters to attract in the age of streaming, have been watching more. The BBC says that viewers are watching 44% more linear channels compared with this time last year. Among younger viewers, the figure is 67%. Channel 4 have seen increases of younger viewers watching not only their comedy programmes, but also shows you might not expect, such as Location Location Location. Many of the shows that have done well are ones that feel safe and heartwarming. The BBC’s controller of programming and iPlayer, Dan McGolpin, says The Repair Shop’s move to primetime was coincidental, “but it turned out to be exactly what people need at the moment, something very therapeutic and with a lovely tone”. Escapism has also been a trend, from Race Across the World on BBC Two to Channel 4’s Escape to the Chateau, even though we can’t leave our houses. Nataraja says: “It feels counter-intuitive, but actually you want to be seeing the world.” While the internet has connected millions through social media and Zoom pub quizzes, television has provided the basis for the widest shared moments. The clap for carers has been broadcast on BBC One, ITV, Channel 4 and Channel 5 every Thursday for the past four weeks, something unheard of in British television. “I can’t watch clap for carers without crying,” says Nataraja. “My sister is a respiratory consultant in a hospital in Birmingham, so she’s frontline. It’s an incredible thing, that joy of a shared experience that television can bring.” The yearning for shared moments is also turbo-charging entertainment shows. Britain’s Got Talent had its biggest launch for three years when it returned a couple of weeks ago. “The sense that you are doing the same as other people becomes more important when you can’t actually connect with them in the ordinary way,” says Rosemary Newell, ITV’s director of programming strategy. The way some formats have carried on, albeit in adapted form, may also have tapped into the desire for a form of national unity. The BBC’s Have I Got News for You superimposes guests on to the set; Graham Norton interviews stars from their homes rather than the sofas; while Steph McGovern has been presenting a show from her own house (although that has ended after McGovern announced that her family needed their space back). “Seeing presenters who are presenting from home, or guests who are calling in from home, you do get that sense that everyone’s in this together,” says McGolpin. “Although we are all distanced at the moment, we still want to feel like we’re relating to other people and going through things that other people are going through. Those shows are providing that role for people.” While demand is high, schedulers now face the challenge of filling the airwaves throughout a lockdown with no clear end date. Landmark dramas have been delayed, live sport cancelled. The next casualty may well be soaps, which are already airing less frequently to preserve episodes. “It will be very, very challenging when they dry up and I know the teams are are keen as they possibly can be to go back into production,” says Newell. “We hope that a hiatus will be minimised, but inevitably there will be a period, I’m sure, where we don’t have the soaps.” Sure enough, it was announced on Friday by Kevin Lygo, the head of ITV, that Emmerdale will run out of episodes at the end of May if things do not change, while Coronation Street will get to that point in June. If filming can resume, some at-risk actors may not take part until it is safe for them to do so. “I don’t want Ken Barlow to get sick on my watch,” said Lygo in a talk for the Edinburgh TV festival. Popular shows such as Love Island also may not return this summer, due to logistical problems in setting up production abroad, along with concerns of reflecting the national mood. The lockdown has caused 100 BBC productions to suspend filming, which will have a knock-on effect on the schedules. Repeats, they warn, are inevitable, but they will be carefully selected. BBC One has been showing more classic comedy (“It’s the thing that people want at the moment” says McGolpin), while ITV plans to air special strands, alongside compilations and unseen footage (to “try to make repeats greater than the sum of their parts”, says Newell). Channel 4 is looking at lockdown specials on arts and crafts – a new Grayson Perry art programme began last week – and comedy specials recorded from home, but it will also focus on its own history, with a special night looking back at each decade the channel has been on air, accompanied with a poll of viewers. Schedulers see their channels playing a specific role in the national effort. “The world has been tipped on its head at the moment,” says Nataraja. “You need to think that there’s life beyond this.”