I shared a flat and rental payments with my partner until March when the relationship ended and he moved out. The fully paid-up tenancy lasts until mid June and the notice period is two months, so if I don’t want it to roll over, I need to give notice now. Due to social distancing rules, I don’t know if I’ll be able to move house in June, but equally I can’t afford to keep on paying the rent by myself. I have offered the landlord a reduced monthly rate between June and August, after which I will move out if lockdown is lifted. The landlord, a multi-national corporation, is adamant that I must pay the full market rate if I stay, even though they are unlikely to find a new tenant during the pandemic. I’m faced with the prospect of having to move out while being uncertain as to how I’m going to view, sign up to and move into somewhere new with the social distancing regulations in place. MD, London There will be many couples in a similar position, especially as lockdown puts pressure on relationships. The government has urged landlords to compromise if their tenants’ financial circumstances change during the pandemic, but this is guidance only and so there is no legal obligation on landlords to agree. Shelter housing adviser Andy Parnell suggests that you pay as much as you can with or without the landlord’s agreement. “If the landlord doesn’t agree to reduce the rent or to delay payments, the tenant should keep them updated on how much they can pay, and how they plan to make up the costs in the future,” he says. “This could help persuade their landlord or letting agent to come to an agreement. And if the landlord considers eviction or takes legal steps to recover unpaid rent, the court involved may take the tenant’s efforts to resolve the situation into consideration.” You can’t be evicted in June because when a fixed-term tenancy agreement comes to an end, the tenant usually still has the right to occupy the property under a periodic rolling tenancy without signing a new rental contract, until the landlord takes legal action to end it. “The tenant can end the rolling tenancy simply by serving written notice as required by their contract,” says Parnell. “In contrast, the landlord usually has to serve written notice and then apply to court for a possession order and a bailiff warrant to evict them. Under the new coronavirus legislation, most landlords now need to give three months’ notice as a minimum and, as court proceedings have been temporarily suspended, landlords won’t be able to carry out evictions even when notices have expired.” If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions