It was Boris Johnson who used the term “unlockdown” at the last prime minister’s questions; it was presumably sources in government who encouraged newspapers to think that giddy headlines about “freedom” reflected what he was about to announce. God knows, plenty of us are in the market for anything remotely hopeful. But in the wake of the mixed messages and bungling that blurred into the prime minister’s statement on Sunday, millions are likely to be feeling yet more anxiety. Notwithstanding its rather forced delivery and the surfeit of diagrams and scales, what he said could perhaps have been worse. But Johnson had already undermined his words by his own actions, or lack of them. Promises of a “world-beating system” for testing and tracking, and plans for quarantining new arrivals at airports, only underlined the fact that these things have yet to materialise. And at the dread moment that the screen was filled with green and yellow and the baffling words ‘Stay alert’, his context overwhelmed him. Here, inevitably, was yet another reminder of dire incompetence at the top. We all know the litany of failure so far, from the tilt into “herd immunity” and the delayed lockdown, through the early abandonment of testing efforts and all those failures on PPE, to the belated realisation about what was happening in care homes. But other symbols of wrong turns, oversights and misplaced priorities are still arriving on a regular basis. The last 10 days have brought even more: the revelation that Downing Street’s scientific advisers had warned the government to tell people not to shake hands on the same day that Boris Johnson bragged about doing so “with everybody” at a hospital full of coronavirus patients, followed by news that 400,000 medical gowns flown in from Turkey did not meet UK standards. Last week was the first time I felt my anxiety about the crisis being superseded by anger. Johnson’s latest bursts of triteness – suggesting that Covid-19 is like a “mugger”, and then comparing the crisis to an “alpine tunnel” – were still rippling through social media. Then, on Wednesday, the front page of the Times carried a story about a “senior government source” suggesting that workers who had been furloughed were in danger of becoming “addicted” to the scheme, and Matt Hancock’s striking use of the verb “wean” as an expression of how people might be removed from it. Not long before, the senior Tory backbencher Graham Brady had claimed that “in some instances it may be that the public have been a little bit too willing to stay at home”. Here was a familiar Tory voice of impatience and condescension, once again breaking through the patina of solidarity with the public. There were echoes of an infamous passage of the free-market manifesto Britannia Unchained, written by five Tory MPs, four of whom are now ministers: “Once they enter the workplace, the British are among the worst idlers in the world.” Whatever its recent feints towards communitarianism and economic activism, the Conservative party seems unable to shake off its attachment to a vision of go-getting utopia, and its resultant contempt for a public that looks to the state for help and fails to match up to its ideal. This credo, of course, took hold in the Conservative party during the leadership of that era-defining grocer’s daughter, Margaret Thatcher. Under David Cameron and George Osborne, the same basic beliefs endured, while the party once again chose its leaders from the ranks of the wealthy and entitled. The result was Thatcherism taken away from its petit bourgeois roots and revived by public schoolboys whose determination to hack back the state was made all the more zealous by both arrogance and ignorance of how most people live. The results are now plain to see: after a decade of austerity we went into this crisis in a state of disastrous social fragility; and the innate Tory distrust of collectivism and state intervention – which Johnson shares, whatever his rhetoric – has surely been a big part of the reason it has been so badly handled. So too has been the classic officer-class trait of inattention to detail. As George Orwell put it back in 1941: “Probably the battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton, but the opening battles of all subsequent wars have been lost there.” To that, the Conservatives would doubtless retort that they have just resoundingly won yet another election and are way ahead in the polls, something reflected by conversations I have recently had with many people who still give the government the benefit of the doubt. Part of the explanation lies in the way that crises usually favour incumbents, in their opening stages at least. Self-evidently, the Labour party is a long way from any political recovery. But there are also bigger, deeper factors at work. In England in particular, there is a strand of the national culture expressed by the mixture of hectoring optimism and insularity of the rightwing press, and reducible to the idea that the supposed British way of doing anything is necessarily the best. Even now, 21st-century politics is still less about hardened matters of success and failure than these expressions of culture and history, and the sides they force people to take. Britain was led into the disaster of Brexit by people successfully sowing the ludicrous idea that subjecting ourselves to self-harm would somehow awaken the Blitz spirit and revive past glories. Amid Friday’s juxtaposition of the 75th anniversary of VE day and a deepening sense of national crisis, as well as solemn remembrance, there was inevitably some of the same stuff. These things play into deep elements of the English psyche, shot through with the lingering traces of deference and always ready to be manipulated by Tory politicians. For the last week or so, I have been rereading England’s Dreaming, Jon Savage’s history of both punk rock and the social malaise of Britain in the mid-to-late 1970s. Some of its most vivid passages are about the Queen’s Silver Jubilee of 1977, which I can just about remember as a carnival of rictus grins. He writes about “an elaborate covering of the social cracks”, and, in the celebrations, “a concentrated dose of all the unappealing traits – snobbery, insularity, xenophobia – that rendered England’s continued claim to be a world power meaningless”. Back then, affected national exceptionalism and streets festooned with flags could not smooth over Britain’s decline; now, though the Daily Mail has been offering souvenir VE Day pull-outs, and sales of union jack bunting last week reached record levels, we will sooner or later have to confront the fact that we have not just the highest death toll in Europe but a broken social settlement. The point is not to diminish the heroic aspects of our past, but to finally focus on the realities of the present. We cannot go on like this, with deep inequalities of race and class constantly exploding before our eyes, the need for food banks extending into the distance, and voices at the top willing us back towards the very social and political dead end that ensured the virus has had such a disastrous impact. In the great surge of spontaneous collective action that has greeted Covid-19, there are the seeds of something better, but we should not underestimate the obstacles in the way: nostalgia, mythology and the banalities of politicians desperate to manipulate such things in their own interests as their failures become inescapable. • John Harris is a Guardian columnist