Some people found giving birth during lockdown baffling and isolating, whereas others were just overjoyed. Since Britain went into lockdown on 23 March, more than 50,000 babies have been born. Among those is the “healthy baby boy” born to Boris Johnson and his fiancee, Carrie Symonds, who join other new parents in bringing up a newborn under coronavirus restrictions. From a contender for the first baby born in lockdown to an expectant mother with coronavirus symptoms, parents share their experiences of having babies under lockdown. “I think we have a frontrunner up in Scotland for one of the first babies born during lockdown,” says Chris Brady, 33, from Coatbridge near Glasgow, whose son Flynn was born at 9.06pm on 23 March, just 30 minutes after Boris Johnson’s speech to announce the lockdown ended. As Brady’s wife, Debbie, 32, went into hospital just before the lockdown started, he was able to stay with her and their new son for six hours after the birth, giving Debbie time to rest. But when the time came for Brady to go home, his wife decided to leave too. “It was a bit scary being away from the hospital with a six-hour-old baby in case anything went wrong, but it’s what Debbie wanted and I wouldn’t have slept being away from them,” says Brady, adding that leaving the hospital at 3am, in the first hours of the lockdown, was like walking into the end of the world. And while he and hairdresser Debbie, who are also parents to 11-year-old Sean, feel lucky to have a smiling newborn to brighten their lockdown days, it is heartbreaking for them that Flynn’s grandparents, aunties and uncles cannot meet him. “We understand the reasons why. The last thing we want is to have wee Flynn or anybody else’s health deteriorate over a wee meet and greet.” Instead, he has been introduced to the world via social media and video calls. Brady is glad to have been furloughed from his job as a gas engineer so he can look after Flynn and help Sean with his homework. “It’s great to have more time with the kids,” he says. “We’re just lucky, I think.” The week Caitlin Price-Stephens spent on the postnatal ward, alone with her newborn twin girls, was one of the toughest of her life. After giving birth to Cassidy and Coralie on 1 April, their father, Tom, was only allowed to spend two hours with them before they were separated. “We didn’t even get to say goodbye, I just got wheeled away, the twins on the bed with me,” says Price-Stephens, an HR director from London. “I remember sitting in the hospital crying, not knowing what to do. He was just gone and I didn’t know when I’d see him again.” Price-Stephens, 35, thought they would be in hospital for a day or two, but their stay became longer after the twins developed jaundice. And with no visitors able to help care for two sick babies, she relied completely on the staff. “The midwives and support staff did the best they could, and some went above and beyond,” she says, but with staff shortages and redeployments to other departments “there were many occasions when both twins would be screaming, hungry, covered in vomit or with dirty nappies, and I had to choose which one to care for and which to leave to cry. The feeling of watching your sick baby scream, begging for you to pick them up, is something I’ll never be able to erase.” Mother and babies have been home for about three weeks. “I will always feel sad that my husband missed the first week,” says Price-Stephens. “When we finally got home, the girls were already little people that I knew and he didn’t. But it’s a relief to be safe at home now with two healthy babies.” After having a fit at home in Surrey, Maria Novelli, 37, was rushed to hospital with eclampsia and gave birth to Isabella on 27 March via an emergency caesarean section. “It was a bit of a blur for me,” she says. “She was six weeks premature and in the neonatal intensive care unit at St Peter’s hospital in Chertsey for two days. Due to coronavirus I was only allowed to see her for one hour, twice a day, and had to wear an apron, mask and gloves,” she says. Access for Novelli’s partner, Philip Rose, 37, who works for London Undergroun, was even more restricted. “He was there for the C-section and allowed one hour of skin-to-skin with Isabella but that was it. He wasn’t allowed to see us for the 13 days we were in hospital. It was really hard but the staff were amazing.” Mila, who is nearly six weeks old, was born on the day the prime minister announced the lockdown. “There were mixed emotions,” says her 31-year-old mother, Suprina Dhillon, in Hagley, Worcestershire. “We were excited to get the time to bond with her but sad our family wouldn’t be able to visit.” Dhillon, along with husband, Dav, 33, who works for a bank, say they were nervous going into hospital for their third baby. “The Russells Hall hospital in Dudley felt very quiet and eerie,” she says. “Midwives weren’t wearing face masks but everyone was overly sanitising things. “We have two boys, Roman, five, and Nico, three, and after a miscarriage last year we were elated to be having Mila. I’m Sikh and Asian so normally lots of people would come round but it’s been nice not to have to share her.” Dhillon’s mother supports them at weekends. “Mum’s self-isolated herself away from my dad and brother who are key workers distributing PPE [personal protective equipment],” she says. “There’s no way she could have survived lockdown not coming to see the children. She’s been our lifeline.” Like many others, they have not been able to register Mila’s birth. “I booked an appointment but got a call saying they were putting everything on hold,” she says. “We’ve had one visit from our midwife and are constantly in touch, but we’ve not been to the doctors yet, but as it’s my third I’m slightly more relaxed. “Even though we’re in lockdown I’m still on cloud nine. Mila’s a beautiful distraction.” Helen, 43, from Exeter was always going to do it alone. “Solo parenting was the plan so in a sense the hospital restrictions washed over me,” she says. “I was the unicorn patient who didn’t fear rumours that birth partners might be banned as I was never bringing one anyway.” Obi was born on 4 April at Royal Devon and Exeter hospital, where the midwives wore PPE. “The staff were wonderful and terribly uncomfortable under their masks, which were worn non-stop for four hours at a time,” says Helen. Despite expecting to bring up Obi on her own, Helen has found lockdown frustrating in unexpected ways. “I knew what to expect but this was different,” she says. “People were wonderful by dropping off food but the practical help, like coming to hold the baby, was now banned.” Her midwife, alarmed at her exhaustion, asked her to come to the hospital. “There were a lot of tears,” says Helen. Life has become easier after reaching out to her dad. “I can now say it is immeasurably easier with a second person. There are naps and food. For now, I am not doing it on my own.” After losing five babies and having two rounds of IVF in their six years of trying to conceive, Rae was born on 23 March to Laura Hardman a baker, and her husband, Rob, a producer. Both are 35. “She arrived on the same day the lockdown was announced by the government,” says Hardman, in Cheadle Hulme, Greater Manchester. “After Rae was delivered, me and the other mothers on the ward sat and watched Boris’s speech.” Rae was born four weeks early by planned caesarean. The placenta wasn’t functioning well and there were restrictions to her growth. “I’m actually glad in a way as I think things would have been more strict at the hospital if she had been born on her due date,” she says. “We’ve been weighing her on our kitchen scales and they’re happy with her weight.” The hardest part of the lockdown for Hardman is not being able to see her parents, who live in Dorset. “That’s been the most upsetting part for me,” she says. “Everyone’s been so excited for this pregnancy. Rae’s been longed for and now nobody can meet her, it’s been quite tough. Thank god for FaceTime.” Hardman is looking forward to lockdown ending but has experienced some upsides being stuck at home. “It’s been a blessing in disguise to have the extra time to bond with her,” she says. “It can be up and down. Some days we’re thankful no one’s knocking on the door – at the same time I really want people to meet her and do normal things like take her to a cafe.” After a straightforward third pregnancy, Janey Burr was surprised to wake up on her due date with coronavirus symptoms. She immediately began to self-quarantine, but as her breathing worsened throughout the day, she went to hospital where she had a chest X-ray, antibiotics and a test for Covid-19. “As the first suspected pregnant Covid-19 admission in the hospital, the care I received was amazing. Everyone was brilliant,” says Burr, a research nurse, who was looked after by staff from the infectious diseases and obstetrics teams in her own isolated room. “They monitored my bump a lot as they were worried I would go into labour.” The test came back negative and Burr, 37, was diagnosed with pneumonia secondary to pregnancy-related immunosuppression. “What ridiculous timing,” she says. “It was so bizarre. It just came and went out of the blue. It doesn’t feel like it actually happened.” She was discharged after 48 hours with hopes for the baby to stay put for as long as possible to give her a chance to recover, but after a few days at home, her waters broke and Flora was born on the morning of 23 March. That night, as lockdown was announced and Burr cuddled her daughter, she wondered what it all meant. “For a second I thought I was going to be locked down in hospital. And then I thought it would be quite nice if I could stay – have my own room with people bringing me food and looking after me so well. But they did kick me out eventually.” She is now back home in Oxford with her husband, Pete, and their two sons Albie, 18 months, and Wilf, three. “As a nurse, I feel extremely guilty that I’m not working right now,” says Burr. “But I know every patient will be getting the same level of incredible care I received on my last two hospital visits. So thank you, it doesn’t seem enough, but it is meant with every fibre of my being.”