The performance of the Austin-Healey 100 should be measured by distance rather than by speed. It is, of course, a fast car capable of more than 100 mph, and with vivid acceleration; but it is more a fast tourer than a competitive sports car. It is a comfortable means of swift, safe transport and a delight to drive. On normal English roads, even when the traffic is heavy, it will travel 50 miles in an hour with no strain on its driver. On my first journey in a car lent by Messrs Looker, I travelled 275 miles in six hours with no hint of fatigue. Although it is possible when changing gear to produce a roar from its exhaust which clouds the brows of traffic policemen and sets small boys cheering it is not essentially a noisy car. It cruises sweetly between 60 and 80 mph with plenty of surplus power for overtaking. In overdrive top it achieves 80 mph at only 3,000 rpm, which is an ideal engine speed. It is pre-eminently a good holder of the road and this virtue is most apparent on the typical winding English country road. With no squeal from the tyres or lurch of the body it will go round corners at 50 mph, and this ease in cornering is a rare experience for anyone who normally drives a saloon and is used to changing down for every corner marked with a continuous white line. Above all, this is a comfortable car. An older person might find it difficult to enter, but, once in, the driving position could scarcely be improved. The suspension is hard and the two seats soft. One sits low on the road, on a level with the transmission shaft, back and thighs well supported and legs out straight. The field of vision is wide and as the steering wheel is almost vertical it permits no slovenly driving position. Hood and sidescreens keep out all draughts, and without them the windscreen provides full protection, unless deliberately lowered to enjoy the exhilarating rush of air on the face. My only complaint is the gear change, which does not seem crisp enough, and on the car I took out it was almost impossible to locate reverse gear at the first attempt. The car is powered by a 2 ½-litre four-cylinder engine with twin carburettors. It uses a gallon of petrol every 25 miles or so and it costs, with overdrive and heater, £1,210 (including tax).