“Look, we even marked the border on our blanket,” laughs Sabrina. And indeed; just below the barrier tape a black line divides the cloth in half. Lying on one half is Sabrina, from Basel; on the other, Davor from Wiesbaden. We are in Riehen, the rich suburban community of Basel. Getting as comfortable and as close as possible at the border to Lörrach, Germany, 18 April. It is the first time that the two of them have seen each other since the border was closed a good six weeks ago. The Covid-19 pandemic caused Switzerland and its surrounding countries to close their borders mid-March. Only people who work in another country and companies transporting goods are now allowed to cross the borders at the few crossings that are still open. Sabrina Schaub from Basel, Switzerland, and Davor Crnko from Wiesbaden, Germany. It is a warm spring day. Riehen is famous for its cherry trees, thanks to the mild climate of the Rhine plain. And on these cherry trees, which are in blossom on both sides, the border guards have attached barrier tapes which now mark what is accessible. These tapes also trace the border lines which were reinforced with barbed wire during the second world war. Take pictures of us, it’s good if this becomes known For the people on both sides, these restrictions are a serious disturbance, as the border has hardly been noticed in recent decades. Friendships exist across borders, as do families and lovers. “Take pictures of us,” says Sabrina. “It’s good if this becomes known.” An untenable situation for her. Davor arrived today to see his girlfriend. It takes three and a half hours to drive from Wiesbaden, and he will return in the evening. Sergio Cannavo, an Italian from Switzerland, Sami Kirkbes, a German-Pole from Germany, and David Chabo Aramäer, an Israeli from Germany. Leonie Hirn, from Switzerland (in the white shirt) and Janina Wagner, from Germany, Kreuzlingen, 4 April. Despite everything, the mood is good on this friendly day. Along the barrier tape several groups of people have arranged to meet: separated families, friends, other lovers. A group of young men has set up camping chairs on both sides of the barrier. All three are from Lörrach in Germany, the neighbouring community of Riehen. One of them is studying in Basel. This is the only place they can meet and drink beer together. Diethard, from Germany, and his girlfriend Sibel, from Switzerland. The border stretches up the hill. A bit further up the edge of the forest, I meet Diethard (on the German side) and his girlfriend Sibel (on the Swiss side). Sibel, also a German citizen, works in a clinic in Switzerland: “If I were to officially go over to Germany, I would first have to be in quarantine for two weeks. That’s impossible.” Friends meeting along the barrier tape at Riehen, 25 April. Now and then an army helicopter flies along the unclear border, making sure the rules are obeyed on the ground. There soldiers reinforce the border guards. If a couple gets too close to each other on the border, the guards usually turn a blind eye. Swiss-German couple meeting at the border, Riehen, 25 April. This is not the case everywhere. Further east on Lake Constance are Kreuzlingen (Switzerland) and its sister city of Constance (Germany). They have grown together completely. In some places, the fence erected by the Swiss during the second world war to prevent Jewish refugees or German opposition members from crossing the border still exists. Josephina, living in Arbon (Switzerland), and Josef, living in Singen am Hohenwil (Germany), can only come together at the closed border. They meet here three times a week. They have been a couple for 30 years. Since the border is shorter and clearer here than at Basel, it was easier to close it again in the wake of the pandemic. Shortly after the closing of the border, I meet Katarina from Frauenfeld, in Switzerland, and Ivo, a student from Konstanz. Three times a week they meet at the border, also to exchange tenderness; they met in Croatia only last New Year. Katarina, living in Frauenfeld (Switzerland), and Ivo, living in Konstanz (Germany), can only meet at the closed border, three times a week. Katarina and Ivo have been a couple since last New Year’s Eve. After a second fence was erected, they cannot kiss any more. Here, physical closeness was a thorn in the side of the Swiss law enforcement officers: a week later, when I saw the two of them again, kissing was no longer possible. A second fence was raised two metres away from the first, under strong protest from the local population. Now Katarina and Ivo can only look into each other’s eyes. A separated family meeting at the barrier tape, Riehen, 25 April. But they still have it good: along the Italian and French borders, such meetings were always out of the question, because in Italy and France – unlike in Switzerland and Germany – strict curfews prevented this. With the flattening of the corona curve, demands are now being made to open the borders again. Not only families and couples want their normal relationship back, but also the trades that usually do good business on the other side. Another couple chat through the wire, Kreuzlingen, 4 April.