Pressure, of course, turns coal to diamonds and here we have four of them – some a little rougher cut than others, perhaps, but diamonds nevertheless. The four 15-minute dramas that comprise Isolation Stories (ITV) have all been created under lockdown. Written since we were first forced to beat a collective retreat into our homes – wait, let me consult the historical record to see how long this strangely elastic time has officially endured – 43 days ago, they were cast, filmed, directed and edited remotely, and up on our screens, within seven of the most unsettling weeks in living memory. A further programme, Isolation Stories: Behind the Scenes, on ITV on Thursday 7 May, shows the process of atomised programme-making in more detail, but, in essence, the actors (and sometimes their families) filmed themselves, and the directors watched the footage on mobile phones and gave advice remotely. Surmounting the technical and practical difficulties would be reason enough for plaudits, but the results themselves are so good that they make me want to call for an 8pm clap for the arts sometime (not a Thursday, obviously. I wouldn’t want to encroach on actual life-savers’ time). That said, there is something incredibly emotionally restorative and mentally uplifting – as there has been, we must assume, since the dawn of human time – about stories that reflect and make at least narrative sense of our experiences. Especially new ones, and especially as they unfold. Once we might have done it in a cave or round a campfire. Now we do it over laptops and iPhones with someone to instruct on how to adjust the lighting, but the principle, the appetite, the need remains the same. Each of the four dramas crystallises a particular aspect of the lockdown experience. The first has Sheridan Smith, herself heavily pregnant in real-life and self-isolating, as a heavily pregnant, self-isolating woman named Mel. We learn her story through a deft series of drafted and deleted videos to friends and family, which reveal that she is carrying an unwanted baby by a man she hadn’t known was married until he returned to his wife. Loneliness and the disorientation caused by the enforced pause we are all experiencing are beautifully showcased. As is the difference a small, simple act of kindness can make. Mel calls a long-lost friend whose number she didn’t realise was even still in her phone and leaves an emotional message. The woman to whom the number has been reassigned calls her back to offer support. The last few minutes of the quarter hour are unconvincing (Mel ignores the clear implication that a violent partner has cut off the woman’s call and instead does a volte-face on her attitude to life and the baby) and take a slightly disappointing turn into sentimentality just as it looks as if the story is deepening into an examination of sisterhood. But I suspect that at the moment Sheridan Smith says she wants to play out with a song, you just get (further) out of her way and let her. But, apart from the distasteful sense that the domestic abuse issue had been crowbarred in to tick a box, it was a belter. Mike and Rochelle (which airs on Wednesday) doesn’t put a foot wrong for its 12 glorious minutes, with Darren Boyd playing a self-obsessed, hypochondriac actor (I know, I know – insert your own joke here) called Mike in emergency session with his friend/therapist, Rochelle (Angela Griffin). Wonderful performances from both of them, with Boyd managing to keep the infuriating Mike just bearable enough to let the late emergence of his better side be entirely convincing. It is a neat encapsulation of the relationship between those who hunker down in a crisis and have to cope with those whose natural inclination is to suck all available resources dry and then move on for more. These were the only two, alas, available for preview. But the other two episodes star Eddie Marsan and David Threlfall, and Robert Glenister alongside his actor son Tom – rounding out a lineup that must reckon not just among the most talented but also – important now – the safest hands in the business. There is no reason to expect any letup in quality, and, as such, Isolation Stories shall fairly stand as the first televisual jewel in the Covid-era crown. • In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.org