As one of the thousands of UK citizens arriving at Heathrow in April, I think the notion that we begin quarantining individuals now is risible (95,000 have entered UK from abroad during coronavirus lockdown, 13 May). Apart from the obvious point that our transmission rates are worse than almost anywhere else, the government has so far not shown even a basic ability to manage arrivals. On my flight from JFK, we were handed new border control forms, and required to fill in a wealth of contact-tracing detail, including addresses, multiple phone numbers, second contacts, airline seat number, etc. All very useful – but when I asked at passport control where I should hand the form in, I was told “downstairs”. No one asked for the form, and the person seated outside customs had never heard of it. I persisted: upstairs in departures none of the sparse staff had any idea about the contact-tracing form. I still have it.Chloë StarrGainford, County Durham • I am hugely concerned by the government’s decision to allow domestic cleaners to return to work. While it is undoubtedly nicer for the middle classes to have their homes cleaned for them rather than cleaning them themselves, domestic cleaners travel from house to house, with no PPE, touching every surface, and using the same cleaning equipment in successive houses. This is a clear virus transmission risk, and seems reckless at a time when people who are not cleaners are only allowed to meet those from other households outdoors and at a distance. At the beginning of the lockdown my entire family was infected with Covid-19 by our cleaners. They had cleaned the house of someone who was at that time showing no symptoms, but who later tested positive in hospital. As they were unaware they had been infected, the cleaners then travelled around many other homes, touching all the surfaces, until they themselves came down with symptoms. However, during that time many other households had been infected. The cleaners were, in effect, superspreaders of the virus.Name and address supplied • England and Scotland are heading for a fish war and the River Tweed has become the UK’s latest “hard border”. The MP for (English) Berwick-upon-Tweed, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, has emailed we cabin-fevered constituents inviting us to “resume angling from Wednesday May 13”, apparently unaware that by order of Fisheries Management Scotland the Tweed and its tributaries – even on the English bank – remain closed while the Scottish lockdown lasts. With the Tweed a pleasant walk from my door, I am tempted to take up the invitation armed with a copy of her email in case I am challenged.David BanksCrookham, Northumberland • I live alone. If I go and meet my son and his partner in the park, I am breaking the rules as you must now meet only one person from another household. However, if they come and meet me, that is OK, as there is only one of me. You couldn’t make it up, but they just have.Wendy RitsonTaunton, Somerset • I suggest that Philip Davies takes a mop and bucket and visits his in-laws as a cleaner. They might even be grateful for help with dusting and polishing! It would give quicker and simpler access than having them pretend to put their house up for sale, as he suggested in his letter (13 May).Gill FarlamRottingdean, East Sussex• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters