What were you hoping for?Jon Hamm. First impressions?He seemed very genuine and instantly got the conversation flowing. What did you talk about?Spaced, paintings, yoga, essential oils, photography, skateboarding, music festivals, favourite bands, how much he loves being an uncle, travelling, punctuation, gardening… We were talking for a long time. Any awkward moments?Loads. Good table manners?Exquisite. He somehow managed to make eating a bunless burger with his hands look graceful. How long did you stay on the call?I think it was seven hours! Best thing about Rydian?I definitely wasn’t expecting my date to dance for me, but he did a whole Lady Gaga routine, which was very impressive. Did you introduce him to your housemates?I live alone, so no. He did meet some of my plants, though. Describe Rydian in three wordsAffable, inquisitive, amazing dancer. What do you think he made of you?Alcoholic hippy, probably. Any connection issues?I struggled to get on to the call initially, and Zoom did try to kick us out after 40 minutes, but we reconnected on my work account and were fine from there. Until 1.30am. And... did you swap numbers?We did. So that he could show me his vegan lockdown baking creations and I could show him various empty shelves in supermarkets where there should be smoky bacon crisps. How did the call end?He was raiding his dad’s booze cabinet and drinking things that went out of date 20 years ago. I think that’s when we decided things had gone too far. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I wouldn’t have tried to do half-moon pose after half a bottle of rum. Marks out of 10?A very solid 8. It was one of the funniest nights I’ve had in a long time. Would you meet again in person?If he’s ever in Manchester. What were you hoping for?Mostly for a fun experience, but if a friendship and/or relationship comes out of it, then cool. First impressions?Very good. Pretty smile, and she seemed happy. Loved the artwork behind her. What did you talk about?Our own art and art in general, and she watched my skateboarding documentary, Rolling. Music, what kind we’re into. We watched a Lady Gaga music video together. Any awkward moments?Not awkward, but it was hilarious when Rachel did my tarot card reading and the card was Death. On the plus side, it had a picture of a handsome knight on, so I figured that was very me. Good table manners?Rachel got her food first and waited for me to get mine before starting, which was very sweet of her. How long did you stay on the call?Six and a half hours, I think. Time flies when you’re having fun. Best thing about Rachel?She’s great fun. I felt comfortable to be myself and have a proper laugh. Did you introduce her to your housemates?No, I was happier to be alone. Describe Rachel in three wordsFun, pretty, artsy. What do you think she made of you?I reckon she thought I was funny, if a bit crazy. I’d like to think she really enjoyed the evening. Any connection issues?When Zoom cut out, I had to frantically share my email address, so we could set up a new call. And... did you swap numbers?Yep. How did the call end?“Oh, it’s 1.30am.” If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I would not have drunk any of that weird alcoholic rum cordial called Shrub. Its best before date was 1999. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again in person?I’d like to, yeah. I’d love to visit Manchester properly. She’s very welcome to visit Cambridge, too. • Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. We would especially love to hear from art or fashion students graduating in the UK this summer: email us this weekend, with Class of 2020 in the subject line.