When Paris workers returned to their offices after the coronavirus lockdown they discovered the crisis had caused unforeseen collateral damage … dead and dying pot plants. For eight long weeks as everyone followed the strict order to stay home, the indoor ferns and figs, the philodendrons and rubber plants were left unwatered, untended and mostly forgotten in the larger scheme of a deadly pandemic. As a result, when the confinement was lifted 10 days ago, the offices and apartments abandoned by second home-owners who had left the city, were full of plants that had one foot in the compost bin. Now an enterprising business is offering to rescue, replace and revive the ailing greenery. Merci Raymond, whose aim is to make cities greener and more ecological using plants, has set up a “hospital” to bring weedy flora back to life. Hugo Meunier, founder of the company - named after his 87-year-old farmer grandfather - said the plant hospital proposed to “buy” the ailing greenery, mostly for a symbolic sum, so they could be saved. “Originally we were planning to pick them up, but there’s been such a response to the plant hospital we’ve had to set up pick-up points,” Meunier told the Guardian. “If it’s a plant that has value we will pay more, but often it’s a symbolic amount, and we offer to replace them at a reasonable cost. “Obviously, people had much more important things to worry about during the lockdown, but it’s depressing to come back and find the plants dying. And it’s good psychologically for people to think we will try to do something for the plant,” he added. Meunier said those with lockdown-sick plants were invited to submit an online form and he and his colleagues would try to revive them with “water, care and sun”. Meunier launched Merci Raymond five years ago after completing his studies in Paris. Having grown up near Toulouse he said he loved living in the the capital but felt city-dwellers needed more nature and countryside in their daily lives. The company now has 20 employees and collaborators and has been involved in numerous ecological projects around France, including a major greening-up of a housing estate in one of Paris’s troubled suburbs. The scheme in Grande Borne, inspired by a similar initiative in Detroit in the US, involved locals in workshops and the creation of shared community garden areas and allotments. “I’m proud to think we’re contributing in our small way to the green revolution movement in our cities,” Meunier said.