Ten years ago I did three months of self-isolation. I wasn’t well, had had a terrible breakdown and could barely leave the house. Company was overwhelming, work impossible. So I sat and figured out a new way to live. The episode was excruciating, but much good came out of it. Crisis is opportunity. We learn from mistakes. Failure enables us to succeed better. All the old cliches, of course, but the reason cliches are cliches is that they are often true. I was able to gradually restore bits of my life and see if they were good for me. Work, yes. Overtime, no. Family, yes. Friendships, yes. Worrying, no. FOMO, no. Duty, no. Shoulds, no. This is the opportunity we have now, individually and collectively. It’s a huge chance to do some things better, to start anew. If this period has taught us anything, it’s that life is short, too short to fritter away at someone else’s behest, but just about long enough if you can find out what makes you tick and stick to it. Many of you appear to agree. Last week we asked you: what will you take from lockdown into your new life? A selection of answers are below in the “what we heard” section. They are well worth reading. But before that, herewith the usual eclectic mix of viral and non-viral Upsiders from the past week: New Zealand’s light at the end of the tunnel. Lithuania’s plan for a great summer outdoors. Concrete hopes for a Covid treatment. The carers who moved into their care home to save the residents. And take a look at our series Hope in a Time of Crisis. Away from the pandemic this week: The suburb that gave citizenship to its bees. How to avoid using Amazon. Turning fishing net jetsam into hats, chairs, even bikes. Totally random, gratuitous quiz of the week. (Can you beat 8 out of 20?) More good news on the environmental front, with a record-breaking coal-less run in UK power generation. Good news for your pension, too: Covid may have obliterated stock markets in March but they bounced back in April. We salute efforts by our cousins at PositiveNews to crowdfund the distribution of their feel-good mag to healthcare workers across Britain. We love the notion of “suspended shopping” in Italy, a variation on the “pay it forward” idea, reported here by NPR. And CSM had a decent piece about the prospects of Covid-19 bringing about rapprochement in the Middle East. We had a full mailbag this week after we solicited ideas for what to take forward with us out of lockdown. Jane Currie was philosophical What I want to retain from lockdown is this sense that every breath is precious, that every breath of our children is precious, ditto our friends and everyone who is vulnerable. Jonathan Bennett wrote a long screed from Virginia. The gist was in his final paragraph: Look at the abundance you have and [if] you have some extra, give to someone who doesn’t. Learn to cherish what you do have, not whine about what you don’t, because, I promise, there are tens of millions out there who would kill for a tenth of what you have. Be grateful. Some people right now can’t even afford to do that. Paul Kirkley mused on what travel might look like post-lockdown: Flying should be made VERY MUCH more expensive, so that it starts to reflect the true cost to the environment, and cuts the amount of flying to the bare essential, in order to achieve a severe reduction in carbon emissions. The budget airlines are quite correct in saying that keeping middle seats empty will have no realistic effect on social distancing: IT WON’T. And quite correct in saying that it will make their business model impossible: GOOD. And quite correct in saying that it would make flying much more expensive: IT SHOULD. Sarah Chalmers has been out and about in the wilds around Harrogate: I have learnt that the Nidd Gorge, which is half a mile from my house and where I run each day, is a beautiful, tranquil place teeming with birds and wildlife and, as I now have the time to see, ever changing day on day. I take a photo or video the sounds every day and will continue to do so throughout the year and after lockdown so I have a record to remind me of what is on my doorstep. Chris is using the period of illness to become healthier: I knew that my daily two-mile brisk walk was helping to keep my type 2 diabetes under reasonable control. With the lockdown, instead of the walk I resurrected my exercise bicycle in the kitchen. Doing a total of eight miles after meals has dramatically reduced the post-prandial glucose spikes, measured by my 14-day flash glucose monitor. If the predicted Hba1c score is confirmed by my six-monthly blood test, the doctor will probably want to reduce my medication. My blood pressure has also improved. And finally, do laugh along with the Reijans family and their domestic Olympics, which include toilet roll jenga, pot lid table tennis, and who can put on the most T-shirts in a minute. (Editor’s note: all toilet rolls were responsibly sourced.) We love this idea: a scheme enabling people to support the local businesses they love. Local Support Vouchers aims to help independent cafes, restaurants and shops across the UK stay afloat during the pandemic by letting people buy vouchers ready to use when they reopen.