Beijing’s rubber-stamp parliament is to vote to move forward with a national security law for Hong Kong, in an unprecedented push that many fear will result in silencing critics of the government in the territory. The legislation, which would bypass the semi-autonomous territory’s legislature as well as widespread opposition to such measures, comes on Thursday after years of controversial government-proposed measures aimed at bringing Hong Kong more in line with Beijing’s wishes. Mass demonstrations have erupted in response to each of these plans over the decades, bringing them to a halt, as well as solidifying civil society and laying the foundation for future protests. These are the key moments of resistance in Hong Kong’s history: After the handover of Hong Kong to Chinese control in 1997, the former British colony was meant to pass laws that would prevent treason, secession, sedition, subversion and other acts against the Chinese central government. The requirement is enshrined in a provision, article 23, of Hong Kong’s de facto constitution, known as the basic law. In early 2003, the government proposed a national security law, prompting fears that overly broad definitions of national security on the mainland would be established in Hong Kong, threatening freedom of speech, the press and assembly. Barristers said the law went beyond what was required by article 23, while others worried about expanded powers given to the police and draconian measures that would put security above civil liberties. On 1 July, as the government tried to push the legislation through, an estimated half a million people took to the streets in the largest protests since the handover. They called for the law to be stopped and for the chief executive Tung Chee-hwa to resign. The bill was eventually shelved. The secretary of security who had pushed the legislation resigned, and two years later, Tung stepped down in the middle of his second term, citing health problems. In 2012, the education bureau of Hong Kong proposed a “moral and civic education” curriculum to be implemented in all public schools by 2016. Guidelines distributed to teachers in a handbook called the China Model criticised multiparty democracies and described the Communist party in glowing terms. Critics argued the curriculum was an attempt to brainwash students. Jiang Yudui of the pro-Beijing China Civic Education Promotion Association said at the time, according to local media: “A brain needs washing if there is a problem, just as clothes need washing if they’re dirty.” Organisers said at least 90,000 people came out to oppose the plan. Protesters occupied government headquarters for 10 days, with some going on hunger strike. Demonstrators chanted slogans such as “No thought control”. The law gave rise to a group of student leaders, including the pro-democracy activist Joshua Wong, who was 15 at the time. Wong notes that even though the plan did not go forward, Hong Kong education has been compromised in other ways, including the revision of textbooks and most recently a question in a history exam that Beijing took issue with. The patriotic education plan was also shelved. In 2018, education officials said there were no plans to reintroduce the plan but that the government was looking into ways of implementing it “in a way Hong Kong people can accept”. Hong Kong’s basic law says that election of the territory’s chief executive, who is chosen by an election committee by universal suffrage, is the “ultimate aim”. In 2007, Beijing pledged that Hong Kong’s 7 million people would be able to cast a ballot for their chief executive election in the 2017 election. But in 2014 the standing committee of China’s legislature, the National People’s Congress, which has ultimate authority over interpretation of the basic law, said any candidate would first need majority support from an election committee comprised of pro-Beijing delegates. Only vetted candidates who “love the country” could run. Calls for “real universal suffrage” spawned what became known as the Umbrella movement, an occupation in central Hong Kong as well as other areas of the city that lasted for 79 days in 2014. Last year, the Hong Kong government proposed amendments to its extradition law that would allow those wanted by Chinese authorities to be sent to mainland China. Proponents of the bill, prompted by a murder that took place in Taiwan, said the changes were key to ensuring the city does not become a haven for criminals. Critics said it was a backhanded way of giving the government a way to extradite critics and political opponents to China. The proposal, which has now been shelved, gave rise to the longest and most volatile protest movement the territory has seen. The demonstrations, which have included both peaceful rallies and marches as well as violent clashes with the police and fights between residents as well as vandalism, are now approaching their one year anniversary.